Vision of the Glorious Man

In the third year of Cyrus king of

Persia a message was revealed to Daniel, whose name was called Bel- teshaz zar. The message was true, but the appointed time was long;a and he understood the message, and had un- derstanding of the vision. 2In those days I, Daniel, was mourning three full weeks. 3I ate no pleasant food, no meat or wine came into my mouth, nor did I anoint myself at all, till three whole weeks were fulfilled.

10

4Now on the twent y-four th day of

the first month, as I was by the side of the great river, that is, the Tigris,a 5I lifted my eyes and looked, and behold, a certain man clothed in linen, whose waist was girded with gold of Uphaz!

6His body was like ber yl, his face like

the appearance of lightning, his eyes like torches of fire, his arms and feet like burnished bronze in color, and the sound of his words like the voice of a multitude.

7And I, Daniel, alone saw the vi-

sion, for the men who were with me did not see the vision; but a great ter- ror fell upon them, so that they fled to hide themselves. 8 Therefore I was lef t alone when I saw this great vision, and no strength remained in me; for my vigor was turned to frailty in me, and I retained no strength. 9 Yet I heard the sound of his words; and while I heard the sound of his words I was in a deep sleep on my face, with my face to the ground.

Prophecies Concerning Persia and

Greece

10Suddenly, a hand touched me, which made me tremble on my knees and on the palms of my hands. 11And he said to me, “O Daniel, man greatly beloved, understand the words that I

10:2 three full weeks. This period of time refers to Daniel’sobservanceofthePassoverandtheFeastof UnleavenedBread,whichtookplaceduringthefirst month of the year (Ex. 12:1–20).

10:6 his face like the appearance of lightning. The description of this man is very much like Ezekiel’s description of the glory of God (Ezek. 1:4–28) and John’s description of the risen Christ (Rev. 1:9–20).

10:13 the prince of the kingdom of Persia. This princecannotbeahumanrulerbecausetheconflict referredtohereisinthespiritual,heavenlyrealm,as theallusiontotheangelMichael(alsoreferredtoas aprince)makesclear.Thisprince,therefore,mustbe
