speak to you, and stand upright, for I have now been sent to you.” While he was speaking this word to me, I stood trembling.

12 Then he said to me, “Do not fear,

Daniel, for from the first day that you set your heart to understand, and to humble yourself before your God, your words were heard; and I have come because of your words. 13But the prince of the king- dom of Persia withstood me twenty-one days; and behold, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me, for I had been left alone there with the kings of Persia. 14Now I have come to make you understand what will happen to your people in the latter days, for the vision refers to many days yet to come.”

15 When he had spoken such words

to me, I turned my face toward the ground and became speechless. 16And suddenly, one having the likeness of the sonsa of men touched my lips; then I opened my mouth and spoke, saying to him who stood before me, “My lord, because of the vision my sorrows have over whelmed me, and I have retained no strength. 17For how can this servant of my lord talk with you, my lord? As for me, no strength remains in me now, nor is any breath left in me.”

18 Then again, the one having the likeness of a man touched me and strengthened me. 19And he said, “O man greatly beloved, fear not! Peace be to you; be strong, yes, be strong!”

So when he spoke to me I was strengthened, and said, “Let my lord speak, for you have strengthened me.”

20 Then he said, “Do you know why

I have come to you? And now I must re- turn to fight with the prince of Persia;

10:1 a Or and of great conflict

10:4 a Hebrew Hiddekel 10:16 a Theodotion and Vulgate read the son; Septuagint reads

a hand.

understoodasasatanicfigurewhowastosupervise theaffairsofPersia,inspiringitsreligious,social,and political structures to evil. The apostle Paul refers to “spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places” (Eph. 6:12). The prince of Persia apparently sought to detain the angel so that Daniel would be prevented from hearing more of God’s revelation (vv. 12–14). Michael. Michael seems to be one of the most powerful angels. He is mentioned three times in the Old Testament, all in the Book of Daniel (v. 21; 12:1), and twice in the New Testament (Jude 9; Rev. 12:7).

10:20 with the prince of Persia. Persia was under
