mound, and take a for tif ied cit y; and the forcesa of the South shall not with- stand him. Even his choice troops shall have no strength to resist. 16But he who comes against him shall do according to his own will, and no one shall stand against him. He shall stand in the Glori- ous Land with destruction in his power.a

17 “He shall also set his face to enter with the strength of his whole king- dom, and upright onesa with him; thus shall he do. And he shall give him the daughter of women to destroy it; but she shall not stand with him, or be for him.

18After this he shall turn his face to the coastlands, and shall take many. But a ruler shall bring the reproach against them to an end; and with the reproach removed, he shall turn back on him.

19 Then he shall turn his face toward the fortress of his own land; but he shall stumble and fall, and not be found.

20“There shall arise in his place one who imposes taxes on the glorious king- dom; but within a few days he shall be destroyed, but not in anger or in bat- tle. 21And in his place shall arise a vile person, to whom they will not give the honor of royalty; but he shall come in peaceably, and seize the kingdom by in- trigue. 22 With the forcea of a flood they shall be swept away from before him and be broken, and also the prince of the covenant. 23And after the league is made with him he shall act deceitfully, for he shall come up and become strong with a small number of people. 24He shall enter peaceably, even into the rich- est places of the province; and he shall do what his fathers have not done, nor his forefathers: he shall disperse among them the plunder, spoil, and riches; and he shall devise his plans against the strongholds, but only for a time.

11:17thedaughterofwomen.AntiochusIII’sdaugh- ter Cleopatra was given in marriage to Ptolemy V EpiphanesofEgyptinordertodestroyorundermine Egypt, but Cleopatra sided with her husband over her father.

11:18–19 the coastlands . . . his own land. Antiochus III undertook a vigorous campaign into Asia Minor andtheAegeanregion.TheRomanLuciusCornelius Scipio defeated Antiochus. Having lost all that he had gained, Antiochus returned to his own land, where he was defeated and killed while trying to plunder a temple.

11:21 a vile person. Antiochus IV Epiphanes seized the throne through treachery and later defiled the temple in Jerusalem (v. 31; 9:27).

11:29 he shall return and go toward the south. After learningthatPtolemyVIandPtolemyVIIhadformed
