25“He shall stir up his power and his courage against the king of the South with a great army. And the king of the South shall be stirred up to battle with a ver y great and mighty army; but he shall not stand, for they shall devise plans against him. 26 Yes, those who eat of the portion of his delicacies shall destroy him; his army shall be swept away, and many shall fall down slain.

27Both these kings’ hearts shall be bent on evil, and they shall speak lies at the same table; but it shall not prosper, for the end will still be at the appointed time. 28 While returning to his land with great riches, his heart shall be moved against the holy covenant; so he shall do damage and return to his own land.

The Northern King’s Blasphemies

29“At the appointed time he shall re- turn and go toward the south; but it shall not be like the former or the latter. 30For ships from Cyprusa shall come against him; therefore he shall be grieved, and return in rage against the holy cov- enant, and do damage.

“So he shall return and show regard for those who forsake the holy cov- enant. 31And forcesa shall be mustered by him, and they shall defile the sanctu- ar y fortress; then they shall take away the daily sacrifices, and place there the abomination of desolation. 32 Those who do wickedly against the covenant he shall corrupt with flattery; but the peo- ple who know their God shall be strong, and carr y out great exploits. 33And

11:15 a Literally arms 11:16 a Literally hand

11:17 a Or bring equitable terms

11:22 a Literally arms 11:30 a Hebrew

Kittim, western lands, especially Cyprus

11:31 a Literally arms

aunionagainsthim,AntiochusreturnedtoEgyptin

168 b.c., but he was driven out by the Romans.

11:31abominationofdesolation.Antiochusdefiled

thesanctuarybysacrificingapigonthealtar.Heput

a stop to the daily sacrifices, and he set up an image

of Zeus in the holy place. Jesus said that a similar

thing would happen just prior to His return (Matt.

24:15).

11:32thepeoplewhoknowtheirGod.Thebooksof

MaccabeesrecordthestoryofMattathias,thefather

of five sons, who refused to offer profane sacrifices

and killed the king’s agents. He and his sons then

fled to the mountains and began the famous Mac-

cabean revolt.

11:32 Know God Through His Word—The highest

knowledge to which men and women can attain is

personal knowledge of God (Jer. 9:24). One of the
