Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Themes of the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1957)

I

When we speak of the day and age in which the Doctrine and Covenants was given to the world we are speaking about a period of American history when the western border of the United States was at the Mississippi. Thus, when the brethren went to Independence, Missouri, they went to a land designated in the Doctrine and Covenants as being on the "borders by the Lamanites." (D&C 28:9.) While keeping in mind that Americans were constantly on the move westward, let us analyze the background picture of that day. That period had been prepared for the message of the Prophet; it had been prepared for the imprint of the restored gospel. The Lord did not send the gospel here to earth without first bringing about certain conditions favorable to its establishment. He repeatedly states in the Doctrine and Covenants:

For behold the field is white already to harvest; and lo, he that thrusteth in his sickle with his might, the same layeth up in store that he perisheth not, but bringeth salvation to his soul. (D&C 4:4.)

The field was white and ready for the harvest. In other words, things had been prepared beforehand for the message of the gospel. It was then time to reap.

Before analyzing the historical background of the Doctrine and Covenants, we should understand that Mormonism, in the mind of Joseph Smith, was not to be merely a church—a religious body. There would have been no reason for giving the Law of Consecration as the economic foundation of the new system the Prophet envisioned if we were to have only a religious organization. The fact is that Joseph Smith hoped to develop a program by which the people of God could properly care for every need of life within the framework of the gospel. The Law of Consecration was to be the economic foundation of the society of Zion.

The great social program of the gospel—the emphasis the Church places on such things as education, recreation, marriage and the family—also implies that Mormonism is something more than just a religious organization. Thus, as we look at the historical background into which the gospel was introduced and see how the Lord prepared society for his message, we will go into areas other than the religious and analyze the moving trends and developments that took place in these areas as well as that which took place on the religious scene.

The period of time between 1820 and 1845 is known to some American historians as the period of the Second American Revolution. The first American Revolution, we know, was essentially political in nature. It was that revolution in which we gained our political independence. By contrast, the Second American Revolution consisted of an internal revolution within the very roots of society. It was a social revolution and consisted of a revolt on the part of the individual against the restraining customs and traditions of that day and age. It is noteworthy that the period of the so-called Second American Revolution corresponds almost exactly with the period of Joseph Smith's active participation on the stage of history. Let me read you a statement or two by representative thinkers of the period.

Orestes A. Brownson, who was a prominent thinker of that era, said:

No tolerable observer of the signs of the time can have failed to perceive that we are, in this vicinity at least, in the midst of a very important revolution; a revolution which extends to every department of thought [Note how broad this revolution is. It extends to every department of thought.], and threatens to change ultimately the whole moral aspect of society. Everything is loosened from its old fastenings, and is floating no one can tell exactly whither. (Boston Quarterly Review, III, pp. 265-323.)

Probably the foremost of all spokesmen of this period was Ralph Waldo Emerson, who gives his evaluation of this revolutionary era from 1820 to 1845 by saying:

No one can converse much with different classes of society in New England, without remarking the progress of a revolution. Those who share in it have no external organization, no badge, no creed, no name. They do not vote, or print, or even meet together. They do not know each other's faces or names. They are united only in a common love of truth and love of its work. They are of all conditions and constitutions.

Then, continuing his analysis of that turbulent day and age, he made this comment:

This spirit of times is felt by every individual with some differences, to each one casting its light upon the objects nearest to his temper and habits of thought; to one, coming in the shape of special reforms in the state; to another, in modification of the various callings of men, and the customs of business; to a third, opening a new scope for literature and art; to a fourth, in philosophical insight; to a fifth, in the vast solitudes of prayer. In all its movements, it is peaceable and in the very lowest, marked with a triumphant success. (Ralph Waldo Emerson, The Dial, I, pp. 1-4.)

From these statements we can see that there was a revolution in the very fiber of society—a revolution, we might say, in the very hearts and minds of men. It was a period of awakening. I think if we had to say one thing about that period to characterize this turbulent, fomenting era, we could use the word "awakening." Emerson stated that, "The key to the period appeared to be that the mind had become aware of itself.

"There grew a certain tenderness on the people not before remarked. It seemed a war between intellect and affection. Men grew reflective and intellectual. There was a new consciousness. ("Historical Notes of Life and Letters in New England.")

This awakening on the part of many of the people caused them to revolt against the old social, religious, economic and political forms to which they had previously been accustomed. Consequently, that day and age became a period of division and conflict. In the words of Emerson, it was an age of "severance, of dissociation, of freedom, of analysis, of detachment, ... [of] universal resistance to ties and ligaments once supposed essential to civil society." Emerson went on to say that the young men of this new generation were born with knives in their brains. As a result of the influence of these awakening forces, old forms of authority in church and state, and every other area of society, fell, as experiment became credible and antiquity grew ridiculous. (Ibid.)

Well, what has all this to do with preparing the way for the gospel of Jesus Christ? Those of us who have been on missions have more than once knocked on a door and heard the satisfied comment, "I belong to such-and-such a church and do not want to hear anything about your message." Such a comment is supposed to put an end to the conversation; it indicates that they are satisfied with that which they have and do not want to make inquiry into anything else. It is very hard to preach the gospel to people who are steeped in tradition, to people who are willing to accept that which they have and not seek for anything further. Is this not right?

For a people to be really prepared for the gospel of Jesus Christ, they must be awakened and must analyze that which they have; and as Jeremiah said, they must say, "Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profit." (Jeremiah 16:19.) They have got to have this awakening first. People must be cognizant of the fact that their religion is not satisfactory, that its teachings are not in harmony with the great laws of the gospel as revealed in holy writ.

The revolutionary period about which we are speaking came about as a result of such an awakening. Many people were scrutinizing everything in existence; they were ready to cut themselves off from every organization, to cast tradition to the wind, to cease believing that which had been given unto them by their fathers. Emerson called it an age of individualism. This was true to such an extent that several times people who, upon being informed by an existing society that they were about to be excommunicated, asserted their individuality and in a ceremony all of their own, excommunicated the society first—beat it to the draw.

During the second quarter of the nineteenth century people manifested an intense desire to search for new ideas; and here again we have a very significant thing. There were individuals traveling from one part of the country to the other, seeking to learn of and understand every social experiment that was being tried. It was a period of utopianism, a period when men by the hundreds were endeavoring to formulate the basis of a new society—endeavoring to reorganize society after a more perfect pattern. It was a period of time when travelers from Europe and America were swarming over the country. Alexis de Toqueville came over here, made a detailed study of American society, and then went back to France and wrote a three-volume work called Democracy in America. Harriet Martineau, a very remarkable English woman, also came over and wrote a two-volume work called Society in America. There were other prominent Europeans and Americans such as Frances Trallope and Washington Irving who analyzed American society and published their findings.

One writer, reporting the intense effort that was made to study every social experiment that took place in America, said:

The generation was exposed to a continual close-up without having learned to appear before the camera. Never before was the surface of life so exposed to the gaze of the public and the future. Never before in America were people so much out of their homes and on the move. Never before were there so many travelers to observe them, with so easy a market for their observations when put into print. Never had the busy reporters of the newspapers been so numerous and so alert to catch the mass or the individual in some unusual pose, some amusing gesture. (Carl Russell Fish, The Rise of the Common Man, p. 137.)

You can imagine how the story of the Angel Moroni and of the restoration of the gospel would be spread abroad in such a situation, where people had this intense thirst for knowledge. Everything was turned toward an analysis of American life, particularly to that which was unusual, to the extent that people would even trudge hundreds of miles (as many of them did) to study some existing social phenomena. They would then go home and write about it and publish it to the world. No wonder the message of Mormonism spread far and wide like wildfire.

The period between 1820 and 1845 was also a time when people were up and out of their homes to a great extent. Never before in the history of America has there been so large a part of our population on the move to different sections of the country. Alexis de Toqueville observed:

In the United States a man builds a house in which to spend his old age, and he sells it before the roof is on; he plants a garden, and leaves it just as the trees are coming into bearing; he brings the field into tillage, and he leaves other men to gather the crop. (Democracy in America, II, p. 164.)

Think for a moment about the early history of Mormonism in light of this migratory trend. In 1830 the Church was restored in New York, and in the next seventeen years it moved successively into Ohio, Missouri, Illinois; and finally it spanned the great American desert to the West. It probably could not have done this without the migratory trend which was so much a part of American society in that day. True, the Saints had the spirit of the gathering, but the Lord went further and broke down the barriers, so that as the people became converted to the gospel it was easy for them to leave their homes and go to Zion; and they did so by families and even by communities. The "Kirtland Camp" was a good example of the people being willing to pick up and leave for other sections of the country. Thus, this migratory trend made it easier for the Prophet Joseph Smith to establish a particular area as the center place of gathering and to have people leave their homes, farms, and everything else and move to that particular area.

We should keep in mind that the society of Zion is actually a true society; I would even go so far as to say that in theory it is a perfect society. Just as the gospel is true religiously in that its principles are consistent with eternal verities as they pertain to man's spiritual development, so also is the program of the gospel socially and economically true. These principles, too, are in harmony with eternal truth, so that the society of Zion in every respect is the ideal type of society. It is patterned after celestial society.

Now, let us look at how the Lord prepared the minds of the people in that day and age to seek out such a society as He was then restoring. We have already noted that this period was an era of utopianism—a period when many experiments were being carried on, wherein people were attempting to devise a new social, economic and religious framework for society. For example, Emerson's associates in and around Boston set up Brook Farm as such a scheme. Prior to this, Robert Owen, the great English philanthropist, came over here to set up his ideal scheme of society. When he went to Washington to lecture on his views for a new orientation of society, he had the President, the President-elect, Supreme Court Justices, and members of Congress listening intently as he told them how he was going to completely make over society and give the world a new system of social organization. Owen established his new society at New Harmony on the banks of the Wabash River. Many people from all over America endeavored to emulate it. As a result, there were several more such experiments of this kind developed throughout the land. These and other forms of social experiments combined to make this period one in which the quest for a perfect society was foremost in the minds of men. One writer makes this comment:

The wholesale reconstruction of society has, of course, figured frequently in the propaganda of revolutionaries, but in America during this era the idea assumed a totally different guise. Confident that men would follow the right if only the right were clearly shown to them, reformers who believed in a total reconstruction of social institutions pinned their faith upon model communities. ... Once successfully established, a model community would be imitated far and wide until at length—and perhaps at no great length—society would be transformed in its image. ... Sometimes referred to as "utopian socialism," it is more accurately described as "communitarianism," for it undertook to use the model community as a lever for the wholesale reform of society—not merely in the economic sphere, but in education, morals, and social life generally. (Arthur E. Bestor, Jr., "The Ferment of Reform.")

With so many people searching all over for such an ideal society, what would have happened had the Saints been allowed to set up the Lord's program for a perfect society in Jackson County, Missouri, during the lifetime of the Prophet? If only they and others would have recognized what they actually had for the world, and had they been allowed intelligently to establish the society of Zion, they could then have said to others, "Come look! Here is that for which you are seeking.

"To such an extent was the quest for a perfect society a part of the social urge of that day that Emerson said in 1844 that every thinking man in New England had his own particular plan of a true and a perfect society and carried it around in his coat pocket. Another writer made the following statement on the subject:

They [these many reformers] all started from the premise of perfectibility [That is, they all sought for the perfect society.], and perfection had not been achieved. Instead of dropping their major premise, however, they spent their energies in hunting for the true mode of reform. Hence the number and variety of these schemes for making over the world. (Ralph Volney Harlow, Gerrit Smith, Philanthropist and Reformer, p. 100.)

The quest for a perfect society was associated with an intense thirst for news that was so much a part of that day; and as a result newspaper men and European travelers were continually visiting the communitarian societies of the day. They would study such communities as those that had been established by the Shakers, the Rappites, the Zoarites, and others, then report to the public their findings. Had the society of Zion been established in Missouri under the Law of Consecration and Stewardship, America and Europe would have been readily aware of its success.

To show how this quest for a perfect society prepared the way for the Lord's program, let me refer you to a specific case. Before they joined the Church, Sidney Rigdon and Isaac Morley became obsessed with the idea, along with others, that in order to live true Christianity it was necessary to pattern society after that system mentioned in the first chapters of the book of Acts, where the Saints had all things in common. In their effort to establish such a Christian community, Rigdon and Morley set up an organization which they called the "Family." In this organization they followed the prevailing man-made concept of what it means to have all things in common. For example, everyone wore everyone else's shirts, shoes, etc. The first one up in the morning was often the best dressed that day. In writing of this group, John Whitmer commented that the disciples were going to destruction very fast, not understanding the scriptures in their true light.

But despite their failure to understand how to set up and to practice the true form of Christian society, these people prepared the way for the establishment of the Law of Consecration. During the winter of 1831, shortly after the Prophet Joseph had arrived in Ohio, one of the first things he did was to go to this group of people and reason with them about correct economic principles. In his Journal, the Prophet comments:

The plan of "common stock," which had existed in what was called "the family," whose members generally had embraced the everlasting gospel, was readily abandoned for the more perfect law of the Lord. (DHC I, pp. 146-147.)

It is significant that Joseph Smith did not have to convince these people that they should have a new orientation of their economic practices based upon the law of the Lord. He only had to clarify correct principles by revelation. Here we see the correlation between such preparatory developments and the revelation of heavenly truths. When we study the Law of Consecration in the Kirtland area, let us keep in mind that the way was prepared beforehand for the development of the Lord's program.

There is also another lesson to be learned while we are on this subject. John Whitmer reported that one of the reasons the people failed in their effort to practice the Law of Consecration in Missouri was that too many of the early converts who went there expected to find a system of having all things common like Rigdon and many others with similar aspirations throughout the United States had been trying to set up. In many of these societies everyone put all they had into one community fund or pool, and then they all had equal access to the goods of the community. Of course, everyone was expected to work and contribute to the community fund; but such a system allowed those who were idle to have access to the goods of the community while not contributing very much. So it was that many of the early converts who went to Missouri thought they could go and live off the labor of others. They did not see that there was a difference between the ways of the world and the Lord's program. They needed to study the revelations instead of following the prevailing theories of men. We today very often find ourselves in error, as they were, on many points of doctrine and belief because we do not understand what the Lord, instead of men, says on a subject.

Men were also prepared in the area of religious thought for the restoration. Even more preparation went into this area than in the other areas we have thus far discussed tonight. The period between 1820 and 1845 was intensely and increasingly a religious area. It was a period when John Humphrey Noyes could seriously nominate Jesus Christ for Presidency of the United States and of the world.

From 1820 on, religious sentiment grew apace. Hundreds and thousands of people who had not previously been affiliated with a church went to listen to one revival preacher after another. Whole cities were being converted to Christ. In 1825, the American Tract Society was organized, and by 1831 it had twenty-seven vice presidents and thirty-six directors. In one year it distributed 65 million tracts. The American Missionary Society was organized in 1826. This society had 113 missionaries working in the state of New York alone. Then there was the American Sunday School Union which was organized for the children in 1827; it was not long before it had thousands and thousands of young people recruited. One writer, while speaking of these various organizations in light of the general religious spirit of the day, made this comment:

The Bible and the Tract Societies were organized most effectively for carrying on a continuous, systematic attack upon the wicked and their sins. And the national organizations of these societies, their state organizations, the local branches in the counties, cities, and towns were all intimately tied in with the evangelical churches. It would be difficult to imagine a more effective device for keeping up a constant, inescapable propaganda. (Harlow, op. cit., p. 50.)

We have had several great revivals in American history from the colonial period to the present, but in the religious annals of America, the year 1831 is known as the year of the Great Awakening. Never before nor since has America been so genuinely interested in religious topics.

Here again we should note the correlation of these developments with the restoration of the gospel. The Church was organized in 1830, and by 1831 its missionary program was getting underway. Thus, the message of the gospel was given to the world at a time when people were most interested in such topics; and this, at a time when there was also an intense thirst for knowledge of interesting happenings. Nor should we forget that there was also an awakening on the part of the people to a realization that their former beliefs and practices were inconsistent with the Bible. This awakening definitely effected the religious as well as the social, economic, and political spheres of society.

One prominent minister of that day with whom Latter-day Saints are most familiar was Alexander Campbell. His views were certainly in harmony with existing trends that were leading to a breakdown of all dogmas and to a quest for the pure Christian faith and doctrine. "We are convinced, fully convinced," he emphatically declared, "that the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint of modern fashionable Christianity." (The Christian Baptist, I, p. 33.) "The 'signs of the times,' " he wrote on another occasion, "indicate some wonderful revolution in the state of the world." (Ibid. VI, p. 517.) Basing his conclusions upon the awakening then taking place in the minds of men and the anticipation of a new revelation that accompanied this awakening, he inquired:

Do not the experiences of all the religious—the observations of the intelligent—the practical result of all creeds, reformations, and improvements [and the expectations and longings of society] warrant the conclusion that either some new revelation or some new development of the revelation of God must be made, before the hopes and expectations of all true Christians can be realized, or Christianity saved and reform the nations of the earth? We want the old gospel back [that is, the true Christian church] and sustained by the ancient order of things; and this alone, by the blessing of the Divine Spirit is all that we want, or can expect, to reform and save the world. (The Christian System, p. 7.)

The so-called Campbellite movement asserted as its basic argument the fact that Christianity had departed from the true concept of the gospel, and that, hence, the world needed a restoration of the ancient order of things. Campbell went so far as to argue that a restoration of divine authority was necessary in order to have the true church again on earth. In 1830 he ceased the publication of a paper that he had been publishing for some time, entitled The Christian Baptist, and commenced a new organ that he called The Millennial Harbinger. The thing he most emphatically stressed in the prospectus of this new paper was the need for a restoration of the ancient order of things, that is, the original Christian doctrine and organization and the millennium. But what is even more significant as a preparation for the coming forth of the Book of Mormon is that to epitomize the above objectives Campbell headed the prospectus with the passage of scripture then being fulfilled by the coming of the Angel Moroni to Joseph Smith. To quote:

And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,

Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come:... (Revelation 14:6-7.)

Alexander Campbell could not have better prepared the people to accept the story of the restoration of the gospel through the instrumentality of the Angel Moroni had he tried intelligently and knowingly from the beginning to do so. The whole emphasis in that paper was to the effect that we need a new revelation—a new revelation of the ancient Christian gospel in our day and age. Thus it was that people who came under his influence far and wide were looking for a new revelation; they were looking for the coming of an angel with the gospel.

The state of expectancy in the religious world was such that many thousands of people were yearning for the primitive gospel. The words "reformation," "restoration," and the "ancient order of things," were in the air. This was particularly true in the Campbellite movement. One historian, while referring to the work of Walter Scott, an associate of Alexander Campbell, wrote:

He contended ably for the restoration of the true, original, apostolic order which would restore to the church the ancient gospel as preached by the apostles. The interest became an excitement.... The air was thick with rumors of a "new religion," a "new Bible." (A. S. Hayden, Early History of the Disciples' Church in the Western Reserve.)

It is easy to see why Sidney Rigdon and others who had belonged to the Campbellite movement readily accepted the message of the restored gospel. And the work performed by these men in preparing the people's minds for a restoration of the true Church of Christ was not overlooked by the Lord. In Section 35 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord said:

Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you my servant Sidney, I have looked upon thee and thy works. I have heard thy prayers, and prepared thee for a greater work. Thou art blessed, for thou shalt do great things. Behold thou wast sent forth, even as John [the Baptist], to prepare the way before me, and before Elijah which should come, and thou knewest it not. (D&C 35:3-4.)

As John the Baptist prepared the way before Jesus, Sidney Rigdon prepared the way before the restoration of the gospel in our day and age. I am sure that he did not realize the full significance of the work in which he was engaged, but under the enlightening influence of the Spirit of the Lord he and others prepared the minds of men for the coming of the gospel.

Nor was such a preparation limited to those associated with the Campbellite movement; it was not a localized thing, but was widespread throughout America. In fact, these awakening aspirations to get back to the true Christian religion and even to anticipate a restoration of the same were widely manifested throughout eastern Canada, England, and Europe, as well as the United States.

To show that this quest for new revelation was a part of other men's aspirations, let me quote, first, from Emerson. In his famous "Divinity School Address," delivered before the senior class in Divinity College, Cambridge, Massachusetts, July 15, 1838, he pointed to the perverse condition of the Christian world, stating: "Historical Christianity has fallen into the error that corrupts all attempts to communicate religion." He then admonished them to "cast behind you all conformity, and acquaint men at first hand with Deity," declaring: "And it is my duty to say to you that the need was never greater of new revelation than now." Emerson concluded his address by expressing his hope for a modern prophet of God in the following words:

I look for the hour when that supreme Beauty which ravished the souls of these Eastern men, and chiefly of those Hebrews, and through their lips spoke oracles to all time, shall speak in the West also. The Hebrew and Greek Scriptures contain immortal sentences, that have been bread of life to millions.... I look for the new Teacher that shall follow so far those shining laws [of spiritual communion] that he shall see them come full circle; shall see their rounding complete grace....How better could one express the desire for a prophet capable of ushering in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times—of pursuing spiritual truth until he sees it "come full circle"?

Another great New Englander, Theodore Parker, expressed similar hopes and expectations. Like Emerson and others he recognized the corrupt condition of man-made creeds and dogmas in the Christian world and expressed his resentment against them. While reminiscing in his later life on the events of his earlier career as a minister, he said:

I knew well what we had to expect at first; for we were committing the sin which all the great world-sects have held unpardonable—attempting to correct the errors of theory and the vices of practice in the Church.... But I knew that I had thoroughly broken with the ecclesiastical authority of Christiandom; its God was not my God, nor its scriptures my word of God, nor its Christ my Savior; for I preferred the Jesus of historic fact to the Christ of theologic fancy. Its narrow, partial, and unnatural heaven I did not wish to enter on the terms proposed, nor did I fear, since earliest youth, its mythic, roomy hell, wherein the tribune of God, with his pack of devils to aid, tore the human race in pieces forever and ever. I came to preach "another Gospel," sentiments, ideas, actions, quite unlike what belonged to the theology of the Christian Church. (Theodore Parker's Experiences as a Minister.)

Parker asserted that there was but one true religion and that all other forms were merely based upon men's opinions of the permanent word of Christ. He expressed his views in an address entitled "Transient and Permanent." Therein he represented man-made dogma as being transient or passing; and voiced his hope that the true and permanent faith and doctrine of Christ might be restored. To quote a part of this address:

Let then the transient pass, fleet as it will, and may God send us some new manifestation of the Christian faith, that shall stir men's hearts as they were never stirred; some new word, which shall teach us what we are, and renew us in the image of God; some better life, that shall fulfill the Hebrew prophecy, and pour out the spirit of God on young men and maidens, and old men and children; which shall realize the word of Christ and give us the Comforter, who shall reveal all needed things.... God send us a real religious life, which shall pluck blindness out of the heart, and make us better fathers, mothers, and children! a religious life that shall go with us where we go, and make every home the house of God, every act acceptable as a prayer. We would work for this, and pray for it, though we wept tears of blood while we prayed.

There were others who, like Campbell, Emerson, and Parker, sought for a restoration of true Christianity. For the sake of time I shall not quote other examples, but turn to an analysis of this awakening desire for a new revelation as it was associated with those who came into the Church during the lifetime of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Brigham Young related on more than one occasion his sentiments during the period before he became acquainted with the restored gospel. "My mind was opened to conviction, and I knew that the Christian world had not the religion that Jesus and his Apostles taught," he explained. "I knew that there was not a Bible Christian on the earth within my knowledge." (Journal of Discourses, V, p. 75.) On another occasion President Young spoke of the feelings of his brother Joseph Young during these early years. He said:

My brother Joseph, before "Mormonism" came to us, was a man of sad heart, seeking to find in the Bible the principles of eternal life. He once said to me, "Brother Brigham, there are no Bible Christians upon the face of the earth, and I do not see any possible escape for the human family. According to the writings of the Old and New Testaments, all must go to perdition." I do not suppose that he had a smile on his countenance for years. (Ibid., VIII, p. 129.)

In a similar way Wilford Woodruff was awakened to a realization of the apostate condition of the Christian world. He later said:

I did not join any church, believing that the Church of Christ in its true organization did not exist upon the earth, but when the principles of the everlasting gospel were first proclaimed unto me, I believed it with all my heart, and was baptized the first sermon I heard, for the Spirit of God bore testimony to me in power that it was true. (Ibid., IV, p. 99.)

On another occasion President Woodruff referred to his early life and the conditions surrounding his entrance into the Church, stating:

The whisperings of the Spirit of the Lord for a space of three years taught me that the Lord was about to set up his Church and Kingdom in the earth in the last days, in fulfillment of promises made by ancient prophets, and apostles, who spoke as they were moved upon by the inspiration of Almighty God. While in this state of mind I went with my brother Azmon to Richland, Oswego County, New York. We bought a farm and commenced business. In December, 1833, two Mormon Elders, viz., Ezra Pulsipher and Elijah Cheney, came into our town and stopped at our house. Elder Pulsipher said he was commanded by the spirit of the Lord to go into the north country, and he and Elder Cheney had walked from Favins, via Syracuse, nearly sixty miles, through deep snows, and our house was the first place he felt impelled to stop at. He appointed a meeting at the school house which I attended, and on hearing him preach I felt that his sermon was the first gospel sermon I had ever heard in my life. I invited these elders home and spent the night in conversation and in reading the Book of Mormon. I was thoroughly convinced it was a true record of the word of God. My brother Azmon and myself offered ourselves for baptism, and on the thirty-first day of December, 1833, Elder Pulsipher went with us to the creek and baptized us. (Leaves From My Journal, p. 84.)

Dr. Willard Richards, prior to the time he read the Book of Mormon, became "convinced that the sects were all wrong, and that God had no church on earth, but that He would soon have a church whose creed would be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, and from that time kept himself aloof from sectarian influence, boldly declaring his belief to all who wished to learn his views." (DHC, II, p. 470.)

Examples like these I have cited could be multiplied to prove over and over again that God prepared the minds of many who were receptive to his Spirit, that they might be prepared in part or in full for the coming of the gospel. A classic example is found in the case of Parley P. Pratt's mission to Toronto, Canada. One evening in April, 1836, Heber C. Kimball and others entered the home of Brother Pratt, whereupon Brother Kimball announced the following prophecy: "Thou shalt go to Upper Canada, even to the city of Toronto, the capital, and there thou shalt find a people prepared for the fulness of the gospel, and they shall receive thee, and thou shalt organize the Church among them, and it shall spread thence into the regions 'round about, and many shall be brought to the knowledge of the truth and shall be filled with joy; and from the things growing out of this mission, shall the fulness of the gospel spread into England, and cause a great work to be done in that land." (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 130-131.)

Shortly thereafter Brother Pratt arrived in Toronto but was unable to find a place where he could preach to the people. Finally, he knelt down outside the city and asked God to open the way that he might find these people for whom he was searching. Upon going back into the city he overheard a widow woman saying to one of her friends that she felt impressed to invite the preacher from the United States to preach in her large front room. And so it was that Brother Pratt found a place to deliver his message to the people. But the most remarkable thing about his mission was yet to come. In a letter to his friends in Kirtland, Parley P. Pratt shortly thereafter explained what transpired the following Sunday. To quote:

Afternoon I went to a Mr. Patrick's house to meeting, where many had been wont to assemble to search the scriptures; they had discovered the corruptions of Christendom, and were diligently searching for truth. A few hours were spent in searching into the nature of the baptism of the Holy Ghost, with its several gifts. The result of the investigation was, they felt the need of prophets and apostles to organize them, and minister the ordinances and spirit to them. Some said, "Let us be agreed and ask for God to commission us by revelation." Others said, "It might be that the Lord had already commissioned apostles in some parts of the world, and if he had, it must come from them."During this time I had listened in silence: sometimes crying and sometimes smiling—my heart burning within me. Some one at length observed, that a stranger was in the room, who might wish to speak. I said I should be glad to speak on the subject in the evening: liberty was granted, and an appointment made: after which they kneeled down and in tears confessed their naked, destitute, situation; praying to God to pity and relieve them. (Messenger and Advocate, II, pp. 317-318.)

The thoughts expressed in that closing prayer were: "O Lord, we have neither apostles, visions, angels, revelations, gifts, tongues, ordinances, nor a Christian ministry; we acknowledge that we are destitute of everything like the pattern of the true Church, as laid down in thy holy Word, and we pray thee to send whom thou wilt." It need not be said that many who had, as Brother Pratt recognized, "been in so wonderful a manner prepared" came into the gospel fold. (Autobiography, pp. 142, 150.)

The work spread from this group throughout the whole area. So great was the interest that Brother Pratt reported:

I preach, read and converse to people all day and all night; sometimes the morning sun is dawning upon us before we have thought of rest; and generally the clock strikes twelve before we retire." (M. A., op. cit.)

Among those who embraced the gospel were such stalwarts as John Taylor, Mary and Martha Fielding (The first of these sisters became the mother of President Joseph F. Smith and the grandmother of our present Joseph Fielding Smith.), Theodore Turley, and others.

Just as Heber C. Kimball foretold in his prophecy, the work spread from Toronto to England. Many of these people had relatives and friends in England to whom they wrote about the gospel. Parley P. Pratt and John Taylor also addressed lengthy letters to be published or circulated throughout England. There, also, a similar awakening was in process. When the missionaries later went to that land, people thronged to them by the hundreds to hear the message.

The experiences of Wilford Woodruff at Herefordshire, England, is another classical example of how God prepared the minds of the people for the message of salvation. While preaching to large assemblies in the town of Hanley, Brother Woodruff relates that "the spirit of the Lord rested upon me, and the voice of God said to me, 'This is the last meeting that you will hold with this people for many days."' Shortly thereafter he went before the Lord and inquired what he should do and where he should go. "The answer I got, "he says, "was to go to the south." This he did; and after traveling for two days he arrived at Herefordshire. There he found that a company of over six hundred men and women had broken off from the Wesleyan Methodists and "were continually calling upon the Lord to open the way before them and send them light and knowledge that they might know the way to be saved." (Leaves From My Journal, pp. 77-79.) He was shortly hereafter to baptize all these people, with the exception of one solitary person.Such conversions as the elders were able to make in the early days of the Church do not come about except the people are prepared and waiting for the message. That Joseph Smith, while out in the isolated regions of New York and Pennsylvania, could register the fact that such preparations had been made for the reception of the message God had given him to deliver to the world is a marvel indeed. Consider again the words of the following revelation, given at a time when persecution was heavy upon the Prophet and not so much as one convert had been made outside of the Smith family. Even Oliver Cowdery hadn't as yet come to see Joseph, and Martin Harris had failed in his full support of the work; yet the Lord said:

Now behold, a marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of man.

Therefore, O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength, that ye may stand blameless before God at the last day.Therefore, if ye have desires to serve God ye are called to the work;

For behold the field is white already to harvest; and lo, he that thrusteth in his sickle with his might, the same layeth up in store that he perisheth not, but bringeth salvation to his soul. (D&C 4:1-4.)

I see that our time is running low. It's like the judge said as he sentenced a convict to life, plus ninety-nine years: "I guess that is about all the time there is." May the Lord bless you in your study of this very important volume. Thank you.
