Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Themes of the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1957)

II

YE MAY BECOME GODS

Tonight I would like to discuss with you the topic of man and his relation to Deity, as revealed in the Doctrine and Covenants. B. H. Roberts coined a word which aptly fits the philosophy of Mormonism. That word is "eternalism." According to Mormon philosophy, there is an embryo of life within man that is eternal. A revelation on the subject states:

Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be. (D&C 93:29.)

Thus, man is as old as God, in that the basic element of life within him was never created and, in fact, cannot be created.

The elements which surround us have a similar relationship to time in that they had no beginning and can have no end. The Doctrine and Covenants states that "the elements are eternal." (D&C 93:33.) If you combine these basic assumptions—the eternal existence of intelligence, the power of intelligence to act rightly, and the eternity of matter to be acted upon—and view these assumptions in light of an intelligent entity's ability to acquire truth and utilize it for purposes of progressive development, you have Joseph Smith's fundamental concept of life, its purpose and possible destiny. In achieving that destiny, man may become even as God, the supreme intelligence. The Prophet explained this concept of man and his relationship to God on more than one occasion. In the "King Follett Discourse," he said:

I have another subject to dwell upon, which is calculated to exalt man; but it is impossible for me to say much on this subject. I shall therefore just touch upon it, for time will not permit me to say all. It is associated with the subject of the resurrection of the dead, namely, the soul, the mind of man, the immortal spirit. Where did it come from? All the learned men and doctors of divinity say that God created it in the beginning; but it is not so: the very idea lessens man in my estimation. I do not believe the doctrine; I know better. Hear it, all ye ends of the world; for God has told me so; and if you don't believe me, it will not make the truth without effect. I will make a man appear a fool before I get through, if he does not believe it. I am going to tell of things more noble.

We say that God Himself is a self-existing being. Who told you so? It is correct enough; but how did it get into your heads? Who told you that man did not exist in like manner upon the same principle? Man does exist upon the same principles. God made a tabernacle and put a spirit into it, and it became a living soul. (Refers to the Bible.) How does it read in the Hebrew? It does not say in the Hebrew that God created the spirit of man. It says, "God made man out of the earth and put into him Adam's spirit, and so became a living soul." (DHC, VI, p. 310.)

Another fundamental factor we need to keep in mind is that as living entities we are living in a living universe. I do not know how often I have repeated the word "living," but suffice it to say that we are living in a universe, the component elements of which are endowed with varying degrees and kinds of life. This fact is very well stated by President Brigham Young, who said:

Life in various proportions, combinations, conditions, etc., fills all matter. Is there life in a tree when it ceases to put forth leaves? You see it standing upright, and when it ceases to bear leaves and fruit you say it is dead, but that is a mistake. It still has life, but that life operates upon the tree in another way, and continues to operate until it resolves it to native elements. It is life in another condition that begins to operate upon man, upon animals, upon vegetation, and upon minerals when we see the change termed dissolution. There is life in the material of the fleshly tabernacle, independent of the spirit given of God to undergo this probation. There is life in all matter, throughout the vast extent of all the eternities; it is in the rock, the sand, the dust, in water, air, the gases, and, in short, in every description and organization of matter, whether it be solid, liquid, or gaseous, particle operating with particle....

Now let some of our philosophers tell us how much empty space there is, and where it is, in all the eternities that exist, or in other words, where life is not. (Journal of Discourses, III, p. 277.)

For general purposes of definition, the Prophet divided matter in our living universe into two divisions: (1) the grosser elements out of which our physical bodies and our material world are made, and, (2) a kind of matter that we called spirit matter. The Doctrine and Covenants defines spirit in the following statement:

There is no such thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure, and can only be discerned by purer eyes;

We cannot see it; but when our bodies are purified we shall see that it is all matter. (D&C 131:7-8.)

On another occasion the Prophet explained that "spirit is a substance; that it is material, but that it is more pure, elastic and refined matter" than that which goes into the composition of our physical bodies. (DHC, IV, p. 575.) Thus we can add to our knowledge of spirit matter that besides being more pure and refined it is more elastic than grosser matter.

Another important factor that we should take note of is that in some sense, not fully understood by man, spirit and light have a basic relationship with each other. Some, if not all, forms of light may actually be classified as spirit. The Doctrine and Covenants explains one aspect of the relationship between light and spirit by stating that "whatsoever is light is Spirit." (D&C 84:45.) The reference in this particular statement, however, is not to sunlight or to artificial light as spirit, but to that more pure and refined light that quickens the life within men. As Orson Pratt once explained:

... there are a great many kinds of light besides the light which shines from the sun, moon or stars, or for some artificial light that may be created on the earth. There is, for instance, the light of the Spirit of God, by which the elements are controlled and governed; that is in all the elements, it matters not whether beneath or above the surface of the earth. (Journal of Discourses, XVI, p. 336.)

It should not be supposed, however, that spirit only consists of this more pure and refined light. There is a gradation of elements within what we term the realm of spirit, just as there is in the physical realm with which we are now associated. Said Orson Pratt of that gradation as it exists in the realm of light:

We endeavor to distinguish between the natural and the spiritual light, but is there any such thing as drawing a line of distinction between the two? Who can do it? Where is the man or philosopher that can tell the distinction, and where one ends and the other begins? (Journal of Discourses, XV, p. 232.)

Section 88 probably contains the most significant statement we have on the full relationship of light to spirit. While referring to the light of Christ as that spirit which proceeds forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space, it states that through the agency of this spirit Christ,

...is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made.

As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof by which it was made;

As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made;

And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you stand. (D&C 88:7-10.)

Let me emphasize that in its relationship to the sun the light of Christ is here said to be "the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made," and, we might add, the power by which it will remain a brilliant orb giving off light and energy. Parley P. Pratt supported the above view when he declared of the light of Christ: "It is, in its less refined existence, the physical light which reflects from the sun, moon, and stars, and other substances, and by reflection on the eye, makes visible the truths of the outward world." (Key to Theology, 9th ed., p. 47.) Benjamin F. Johnson made the following report of Joseph Smith's teachings, stating that the Prophet taught

... that light and life and spirit were one; that all light and heat are the "Glory of God," which is His power, that fills the "immensity of space," and is the life of all things, and permeates with latent life, and heat, every particle of which all worlds are composed; that light of spirit, and [physical] matter, are the two first great primary principles of the universe, or of Being; that they are self-existent, co-existent, indestructible, and eternal, and from these two elements both our spirits and our bodies were formulated. (Letter of Patriarch Johnson to George S. Gibbs.)

If "light, life and spirit" have a basic relationship with each other, and man's spirit body is organized out of some refined form of "light or spirit," this explains why Orson Pratt spoke of "the light that enters into the composition of the spirit of man." (Journal of Discourses, XVII, p. 327.) Thus, were a righteous spirit to appear unto man he would appear in a blaze of resplendent glory above the brightness of the sun. "That is the only way he can appear," the Prophet explained (D&C 129:6.), the obvious reason being that a spirit personage has a body composed of some form of pure, refined light. While speaking of the demise of James Adams, Joseph Smith again explained:

Spirits can only be revealed in flaming fire or glory....

Patriarch Adams is now one of the spirits of the just men made perfect; and, if revealed now, must be revealed in fire; and the glory could not be endured....

The spirits of the just are exalted to a greater and more glorious work; hence they are blessed in their departure to the world of spirits. Enveloped in flaming fire, they are not far from us.... (DHC, VI, pp. 51-52.)

Parley P. Pratt made a similar statement that gives additional information on some related aspects of the subject. To quote:

The good spirits, in the superlative sense of the word, are they who, in this life, partook of the Holy Priesthood and of the fulness of the gospel.

This class of spirits minister to the heirs of salvation, both in this world and in the world of spirits. They can appear unto men, when permitted, but not having a fleshy tabernacle, they cannot hide their glory. Hence, an unembodied spirit, if it be a holy personage, will be surrounded with a halo of resplendent glory, or brightness above the brightness of the sun.

Whereas, spirits not worthy to be glorified will appear without this brilliant halo, and although they often attempt to pass as angels of light, there is more or less of darkness about them. (Key to Theology, p. 115.)

A good example of the fact that Lucifer has lost this glorious brilliance is found in the book of Moses. You recall that the pre-mortal Christ, in the office and power of the Father, had previously appeared to Moses; and His glory was so bright that Moses had to be transfigured in order to abide His presence. Had this transfiguration not taken place, Moses testified, "I should have withered and died in his presence." But when Satan appeared shortly thereafter, Moses inquired of him:

...where is thy glory, that I should worship thee?

For behold, I could not look upon God, except his glory should come upon me, and I were strengthened before him. But I can look upon thee in the natural man. Is it not so, surely? (Moses 1:13-14.)

Nevertheless, Satan can manifest an artificial kind of brilliance in appearing unto men; he can appear as an angel of light. Section 128 of the Doctrine and Covenants contains a report that he so appeared on one occasion, in an effort to deceive the Prophet Joseph Smith. During this manifestation, the voice of Michael, the Archangel, was heard detecting the devil.

Another thing we should mention about spirit matter before discussing man and his relationship to God is that spirit matter can be endowed with a high degree of intelligence. This is no doubt what Patriarch Johnson had reference to when he stated that the Prophet taught "that light, life and spirit were one"—that life has a basic relationship to spirit matter.

Parley P. Pratt also gave expression to this fact when he spoke of spirit as "endowed with the attributes of intelligence, affection, moral discrimination, love, charity, and benevolence pure as the emotions which swell the bosom, thrill the nerves, or vibrate the pulse of the Father of all." (Key to Theology, p. 99.) While discussing the "intellectual attributes" of spirit matter on another occasion, Elder Pratt stated:

Let a given quantity of this element, thus endowed, or capacitated, be organized in the size and form of man, let every organ be developed, formed, and endowed precisely after the pattern or model of man's outward or fleshly tabernacle—what would we call this individual, organized portion of the spiritual element?

We would call it a spiritual body, an individual intelligence, an agent endowed with life, with a degree of independence, or inherent will, with the powers of motion, of thought, and with the attributes of moral, intellectual, and sympathetic affections and emotions.

We would conceive of it as possessing eyes to see, ears to hear, hands to handle; as in possession of the organs of taste, of smell, and of speech.

Such beings are we, when we have laid off this outward tabernacle of flesh. (Journal of Discourses, I, p. 8.)

Since we have a spirit world organized out of pure element, endowed to a degree with some kind of intelligence and associated in a similar relationship to this physical world as our spirit bodies are to our physical bodies, this earth must be a living orb. There is associated with it a spirit world organized out of spirit that controls and gives organization to the physical materials. The life element within the earth is certainly not on a par with that which is within man or the animal kingdom; and it may be a different kind of life element, but the fact nevertheless remains that the earth is a living orb. Consider the following from the Doctrine and Covenants:

The earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom, for it filleth the measure of its creation, and transgresseth not the law—

Wherefore, it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall die, it shall be quickened again, and shall abide the power by which it is quickened, and the righteous shall inherit it. (D&C 88:25-26.)

If the earth is going to die it must now be alive. After it dies, it is going to be quickened again; that is, made again a living orb, except that it will then be raised to celestial glory and intelligence that celestial beings may dwell upon it.

There is another scripture that teaches us that the earth is a living orb capable of exercising certain intelligent functions. It is found in the account of Enoch's vision, as recorded in the book of Moses. To quote:

And it came to pass that Enoch looked upon the earth; and he heard a voice from the bowels thereof, saying: Wo, wo is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone forth out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?

And when Enoch heard the earth mourn, he wept, and cried unto the Lord, saying: O Lord, wilt thou not have compassion upon the earth? (Moses 7:48-49.)

Here we learn that this good old earth of ours has at least enough native intelligence to perceive and revolt against the wickedness of men. I do not think that the earth necessarily spoke the Queen's English or used a particular language. But at least there was the transmission of intelligent thought from this living orb to God.

One of the great principles of eternal truth in the Doctrine and Covenants is the following declaration: "All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence." (D&C 93:30.)

What does it mean for truth and intelligence to be independent in their respective spheres? What prerequisite conditions must exist to bring life to a condition of independence? What are some of the standards organized life must comply with to be independent? Let me mention a few of these conditions and standards.

First, law governing the various spheres of life must exist with all its immutable requirements. That law is ordained and enforced by God. Said a revelation concerning the universe with its many kingdoms of life:

All kingdoms have a law given;

And there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom.

And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions. (D&C 88:36-38.)

Second, requirement is that such law must be known by the life that is to be governed by it.

Third, the principle of free agency must exist—the right for life to obey or disobey a prescribed law.

Fourth, an element of opposition is necessary. Lehi tells us in the Book of Mormon that "it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things" in order for righteousness to be brought to pass. (2 Nephi 2:11.) The Lord confirms this fact in the Doctrine and Covenants by stating: "And it must needs be that the devil should tempt the children of men, or they could not be agents unto themselves." (D&C 29:39.)

Finally, there must be mature and intelligent obedience to the laws governing life. If the right to choose is used to violate law, the penalty prescribed for such disobedience must be enforced; and the given element of organized life then comes under the penalty of that broken law and is no longer free or independent. If it obeys the laws governing its sphere of existence it is preserved and sanctified by the same.

These great principles apply to all forms of truth and intelligence throughout the vast extent of our living universe; each degree and kind of life must become independent within its particular sphere if it is to exist. There is no exception; the principle applies to God as well as to the lowest form of organized life. The living elements of the universe must have sufficient intelligence to discern and abide by the laws God has ordained to govern them. They are not determined in their movements but have an element of free will, and they must willingly obey such laws as pertain to their spheres of life. Here was might note that the march of science may slowly but surely be vindicating the truths revealed by the Prophet Joseph Smith. For example, the late Sir Arthur Stanley Eddington's New Pathways in Science gives reason to believe that strict causality does not apply to the material world as previously thought by scientists. In their movements, for example, electrons do not follow a determined course, but exercise a significant element of indeterminacy. (See Chapter III on "The Decline of Determinism.")

Let us now say a word about God as a celestial being; and then we can discuss his relationship to our living universe. When Christ appeared to the Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple, "his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun." (D&C 110:3.) You recall, also, that in the First Vision the Prophet "saw a pillar of light...above the brightness of the sun"; and in the midst of that light, he stated, there were "two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description." (Joseph Smith 2:16-17.)

Many of us think that if we are wicked we will go into a lake of fire and brimstone or be confined to dungeon #4, on grate #16, there to cook and stew forever. In other words, we associate hell with fire and heat. On the other hand, we associate heaven with a nice, quiet, cool and shady place. But on this subject the Prophet taught:

God Almighty Himself dwells in eternal fire; flesh and blood cannot go there, for all corruption is devoured by the fire. "Our God is a consuming fire." When our flesh is quickened by the Spirit, there will be no blood in this tabernacle. Some dwell in higher glory than others.

...Immortality dwells in everlasting burnings.... All men who are immortal dwell in everlasting burnings. (DHC, VI, p. 366.)

Too often as Latter-day Saints we are willing to consider only the physical attributes of God—that he is a being with a tangible body of flesh and bones in whose physical image man was created. But we need to look further into the subject. Let me give you another statement from Joseph Smith to show that God is something more than a physical being—that he is a glorified celestial being dwelling in a concentration of light and heat to the point of blazing glory. In this statement the Prophet describes a vision he beheld, as follows:

I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. (Teachings of Joseph Smith, p. 107.)

Parley P. Pratt also explained that God, as a great celestial being, "sits enthroned in the midst of all His creations, and is filled and encircled with light unapproachable by those of the lower spheres." (Key to Theology, p. 47.)

Let us not come to the conclusion that the fire here referred to is merely fire in the sense that we know it. This is not the case. The Doctrine and Covenants teaches us that this eternal fire, which is the same thing as God's glory, is a concentration of light and truth within a celestial being to a point of brilliance above the brightness of the sun. Section 93 states that Jesus progressed in the acquisition of celestial truth and light to where he "received a fulness of the glory of the Father." (verse 16.) This section also teaches us that light and truth is intelligence, which is God's glory. That is, the glory which shines above the brightness of the sun is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth. This is the true meaning of the statement, "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth."(D&C 93:36.)

Were a person capable of coming into the presence of a celestial being, he would note that celestial glory manifests itself in the attributes of pure intelligence—love, peace, enlightenment of mind, etc. One of the best descriptions we have of a celestial being where this fact is brought out is given by Oliver Cowdery as he recounted the visit of Moroni to Joseph Smith.

While continuing in prayer for a manifestation in some way that his sins were forgiven, endeavoring to exercise faith in the scriptures, on a sudden a light like that of day, only of a purer and far more glorious appearance and brightness, burst into the room. Indeed, to use his [Joseph Smith's] own description, the first sight was as though the house was filled with consuming and unquenchable fire. This sudden appearance of a light so bright, as must naturally be expected, occasioned a shock of sensation, visible to the extremities of the body. It was, however, followed with a calmness and serenity of mind, and an overwhelming rapture of joy that surpassed understanding, and in a moment a personage stood before him.

Notwithstanding the room was previously filled with light above the brightness of the sun, as I have before described, yet there seemed to be an additional glory surrounding or accompanying this personage, which shone with an increased degree of brilliancy, of which he was in the midst; and though his countenance was as lightning, yet it was of a pleasing, innocent and glorious appearance, so much so, that every fear was banished from the heart, and nothing but calmness pervaded the soul. (Messenger and Advocate, February, 1835.

Note that when Joseph Smith finally penetrated the veil through faith and the heavenly visitor was able to make his appearance, the Prophet first experienced a sudden shock due to the brilliant glory that was manifest. Yet this shock was followed by a calmness and serenity of mind and an overwhelming rapture of joy resulting from the influence of those celestial forces of light and truth upon the Prophet's body and mind. The less refined light and heat of fire as we know has no such effect upon a person. These were more pure and refined celestial powers of light and truth, and as such they manifested themselves in the attributes of intelligence.

When you come away from a marvelous sacrament or testimonial meeting where the Spirit of God has partially lifted you out of the realm of the material into God's glorious realm of spiritual light and truth, every faculty of your being is quickened. You are calm and serene and possess your soul in peace; there is an enlightenment of mind and of understanding as to the principles of life and intelligence. All of this comes as a result of the influence of these spiritual powers of light and truth that God extends unto us when we are humble and call upon his name in faith. The glory of God is a concentration of such intelligent spiritual forces to the point of blazing brilliance. Can we comprehend what it would be like to dwell in God's presence under such an influence and that eternally? Can we understand the joy and intelligence associated with His presence? I do not think we can.

For a mortal man to come into His presence, God must first act upon that man's body, filling it to a degree with His glory, else man would be consumed by the presence of God. This is what we refer to as the doctrine of transfiguration. When Moses saw the Lord, the scripture informs us that "the glory of God was upon Moses, therefore Moses could endure his presence." Later, that great prophet of ancient Israel bore testimony, stating that God's "glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him." (Moses 1:2, 11.) The Doctrine and Covenants bears a similar testimony:

For no man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God.

Neither can any natural man abide the presence of God.

(D&C 67:11-12.)

Now let us get to the subject of God and our living earth and the universe. We have mentioned that God, as a glorified being, has centered in his presence spiritual light or substance known to us as the light of Christ. This light proceeds forth from "the presence of God to fill the immensity of space." (D&C 88:12.) In its less refined existence, it is the light of the sun, moon and stars. "It is, also, in its higher degrees," says Parley P. Pratt, "the intellectual light of our inward and spiritual organs, by which we reason, discern, judge, compare, comprehend and remember the subjects within our reach." (Key to Theology, p. 47.)

Spirit substance or light, then, exists in many degrees of refinement. Through its operations, organized life in the various sphere and degrees throughout the universe is quickened and governed, each type of life receiving that quantity and degree of light that is suited to its nature. To again quote Parley P. Pratt: "Its inspiration constitutes instinct in animal life, reason in man, vision in the prophets." (Ibid.) The clearest scriptural statement on the subject is as follows:

And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—

The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things.

(D&C 88:11-13.)

Just how the light of Christ quickens the life within all things we do not know, any more than we know how sunlight in acting upon plant life causes the process of photosynthesis. "Do you or I comprehend how that light is connected with all things?" inquired Orson Pratt. "No. These are lessons which we have got to learn in the future, when we ascend in that scale of knowledge and intelligence now possessed by celestial beings." (Journal of Discourses, XVII, p. 325.)

In the councils of heaven it was ordained that all powers of life, light and spirit were to be extended from God to this world through Christ and his law. For this reason the spirit substance or light that emanates from God's presence to quicken and govern all forms of life is known to us as the light of Christ. It comes to us from the Father through him. He is the light and the life of the world, the resurrection and the life. He is the light that shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not.

As this light emanates from Christ throughout the universe, it acts upon the light that goes into the composition of all forms of organized spirit bodies to quicken and give them life. Said Orson Pratt of this principle as it operates in the lives of men:

We need the help of the Lord, in some measure, in our researches, to learn anything; we need the influence of the Spirit of God to quicken the light that is within us, for light cleaves to light, and the Spirit of God is light, and it cleaves unto the light that enters into the composition of the spirit of man; and when we keep his commandments the Lord is ever ready and willing to quicken the judgment, inform the mind, and lead us along in our thinking and reflecting powers. (Journal of Discourses, XVII, p. 327.)

The same principle is no doubt true when it comes to the influence of the light of Christ on all forms of organized life in our living universe. While referring to Section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants, Orson Pratt explained that this revelation

... shows very plainly that light is the principle and law by which everything is governed. ...

The principle of life by which we are able to move, think and reason; the principle of motion and of power is a principle of light. And there seems to be a connection or relation between these principles that govern the motion of living beings and the light that proceeds forth from the sun. But we do not understand that relation. God has told us that it is the law by which everything is governed; and we cannot find a law throughout universal space, but what light has something to do with it. But we do not know in all cases how it operates. We do not know, for instance, how light operates in making a blade of grass grow out of the earth. We cannot understand how particle comes to its particle, how it is organized in a certain form and finally produces the complete blade of grass. We do not know how this is carried on, but the Lord has told us that it is done by the principle of light.... Light is the cause and the power by which everything is governed. (Journal of Discourses, XV, p. 231.)

While, as Brother Pratt explained, we do not know how light emanating from God's presence quickens and controls all things, we do know that light and its associated attributes of intelligence have a mutual attraction each toward its kind. The Doctrine and Covenants states that "intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light." (D&C 88:40.)

Here we have a key for understanding how God creates and controls all things. That He is able to do so seems to depend upon at least four basic factors: (1) some form of intelligence is associated with all forms of matter and degrees of life throughout the universe; (2) all truth and intelligence and hence all life must be independent in its particular sphere; (3) light cleaves to light, truth to truth and intelligence to intelligence; (4) and, upon this latter principle the light of Christ, in emanating from God's presence throughout space, unites and interacts intelligently with the organized light or spirit substance in the many forms of life and matter throughout the universe to quicken and govern them.

Here also is the key to the omnipresence and omniscience of God. Through this intelligent spirit substance, which actually becomes a part of His celestialized person, He is in constant communion with the whole of His creations and has communicated back to Himself a knowledge of all that is going on throughout His vast domain. Thus, the above revelation states:

He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever. (D&C 88:41.)

Here is another marvelous statement. The Doctrine and Covenants teaches us that, "The elements are the tabernacle of God; yea, man is the tabernacle of God, even temples." (D&C 93:35.) A celestial being is inseparably associated with that spirit, light or substance that emanates from celestial spheres to fill all space and to permeate all things. Hence, such a being can be said to be in and through all things. Said Orson Pratt:

The great Architect of the Universe did not construct the magnificent machinery of nature, and endow the materials thereof with certain fixed powers, and then withdraw Himself, or step aside to see the mighty fabric operate. Unintelligent materials are incapable of being endowed with any kind of powers, much less with the wise and intelligent powers that characterize the workings of the universe. God is every moment in nature, and every moment acts upon nature, and through nature, the same as the spirit of man acts in, and through, and upon the tabernacle of his body. If God should withdraw himself from nature, or should cease to act upon it, that portion of it without life or intelligence, (if there be any such portion) would immediately cease all action: and while thus apart from nature, no laws could be given to it which could be obeyed; no gravitative or cohesive tendencies could be exerted upon it; no chemical combinations or organic operations could be performed; or in other words unintelligent nature would be entirely dead, and no voice or power could awake it, or have the least effect upon it, without entering into it, and operating upon it, and through it. It is only living and intelligent substances that hear, and understand, and obey a law. And if unintelligent nature appear to act and obey a law, it is not in reality the acts of nature, but the operations of a living, intelligent substance inhabiting nature.... All the grand and magnificent movements of the universe as a whole, and all the minute and imperceptible operations of its particles, are the continued effects of the living, moving, all-powerful substance diffused through the whole. (The Seer, II. p. 227.)

Now that we have said something about God and his relationship to the universe, let us turn to an analysis of man in his background setting.

We should always keep in mind that before birth into mortality we existed as individual spirit personages. On the subject of what was then the nature of our form and stature, the Doctrine and Covenants states that,

... that which is spiritual [is] in the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit

of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every creature which God has created. (D&C 77:2.)

From this statement we learn that in general the physical organization of our temporal bodies is directed by and conforms itself to the stature of the spirit. The Book of Mormon also teaches us that this is the case. As the pre-mortal Christ appeared to the brother of Jared, He said:

Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ....

Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; ... and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the

flesh. (Ether 3:14, 16.)

From what the Lord here says it is evident that were one able to see Christ's fully developed physical body alongside of His spirit body they would appear to be identical as to form and stature. This is also true with man, so far as something does not impede the development of the physical body or cause it to be deranged.

But before our organization into a spirit body, what was the state of our existence? The life within man goes back in time before our organization as spirit personages.

The Doctrine and Covenants declares that basically "man is spirit"; not that man is a spirit, but that he is spirit. (D&C 93:33.) The life element within him is organized spirit, with its inherent attributes of intelligence. "Ye were also in the beginning with the Father;" the revelation declares, "that which is Spirit, even the Spirit of truth." (verse 23.) Again, it states that the basic element of life within man is "intelligence, or the light of truth." This is the central, eternal principle of life or ego that "was not created or made, neither indeed can be." (verse 29.) Note that in one verse the eternal life element is called "the spirit of truth" and in another it is referred to as "the light of truth." There is no contradiction here, since light is actually spirit. Both the "light of truth" and the "spirit of truth" are synonymous with intelligence, the eternal life element of man.

To explore this subject a little further, let me refer to several statements from Joseph Smith and those who were personally acquainted with his teachings. The first one is from the Prophet. He said:

Is it logical to say that the intelligence of spirits is immortal, and yet that it [intelligence] had a beginning? The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end. (DHC, VI, p. 311.)

In this statement the Prophet explained that intelligence is the eternal life element in organized spirit personages. There is some indication that this intelligence is inherently associated with spirit matter. For example, Parley P. Pratt declared that intelligence is "an inherent attribute of the eternal element called spirit." (Journal of Discourses, I, p. 258.) This idea may also be deduced from a statement by Brigham Young as follows:

There is an eternity of life, from which we were composed by the wisdom and skill of superior Beings....

The life that is within us is a part of an eternity of life, and is organized spirit, which is clothed upon by is tabernacles, thereby constituting our present being, which is designed for the attainment of further intelligence. (Ibid., VII, pp. 284-285.)

Finally, here is a statement from Orson Pratt:

There was dwelling in each of the tabernacles of Adam and Eve a personage of spirit, formed of more refined materials than flesh and bones—materials that were intelligent, immortal, and eternal....

The spirits that dwelt in our first parents were capable of thinking, feeling, understanding, perceiving, acting, possessing a will and a judgment: in other words, they were a part of that great substance of life or spirit, which fills the immensity of space, that is in all things, and through all things. (Ibid., pp. 254-255.)

These statements seem to imply that intelligence or life is inseparably connected with spirit matter. It may be for this reason that the Prophet is reported to have taught that "life and light and spirit were one." In other words, life or intelligence is an inherent attribute of spirit matter; and, since intelligence is the "light of truth" or the "spirit of truth" and since "truth shineth" (D&C 88:7.), light also has a basic relationship to spirit.

We need to keep in mind that all forms of truth and intelligence must exist independently within their various spheres of existence. The intelligence or light of truth that now makes up the life element of man was, then, independent within its sphere before it was organized into a spirit body. And being independent, it had to be individual. It was separate and apart from all other forms of intelligence; it had life within itself and was thus individual, regardless of what form or shape it may have had. This point is important. Individuality is associated with all intelligence by virtue of the fact that it must be independent within its sphere. If it is independent it must be separate and apart from other forms of intelligence. And it must have had the power to direct its own course of action. These factors gave individuality to intelligence regardless of the outward form each such intelligence may have had.

The elements composing man's spirit body did not become organized of themselves. They were brought into intelligent union by God; and that organizational process was carried out through the principles of procreation. Thus, man is in a literal sense the offspring of God, just as the Apostle Paul declared. (See Acts 17:29.) On another occasion Paul wrote: "We have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live?" (Hebrews 12:9.)

Jesus himself taught us to pray to "Our Father which art in heaven"; and when he told Mary to go and tell the apostles of his resurrection, he said: "Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God." (Matthew 6:9 and John 20:17.) Christ was the firstborn of the Father in this pre-mortal life. (Colossians 1:15; Hebrews 1:6; D&C 93:21.) That is why John speaks of Him as "the beginning of the creation of God." (Revelation 3:14.)

The plan to clothe man's spirit body with a physical tabernacle was based upon the eternal truth that "spirit and [grosser] element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy; and when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy." (D&C 93:33-34.) Though man as a spirit personage was a highly endowed being, he was not then constituted to receive a fulness of joy. He did not have the capacity to express himself in many ways, nor was he in a position to develop within himself the celestial principles of light and truth to an eternal fulness. Only through union with the grosser elements could these deficiencies be overcome. But it should be remembered that the fulness of joy referred to in the above scripture cannot come with the union of spirit and flesh in mortality; it can only come in that association of spirit and body which comes through celestial resurrection. Only then is it possible for man to receive a fulness of joy. When and if he receives such a fulness he will be a being like unto our Father in heaven—a personage of glory, in whose person there has been developed spiritual powers of light and truth to an eternal fulness.

In light of the guiding principles pointed out above, the gospel plan provides for the realization of two essential programs, the first of which is to give man a physical tabernacle; and the second is to provide the means of developing within that physical body the powers of celestial light and truth to an eternal fulness. The way ordained to carry out these two aspects of God's eternal scheme is through birth—birth into a physical body and a second birth into the kingdom of God. Through the latter birth, the light and truth necessary to make man a celestial being is to be gradually developed within him. This fact the Lord explained to Adam when the latter asked: "Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water?" To answer inquiry, God explained the plan of salvation, stating:

That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory. (Moses 6:59.)

As the acquisition of a physical body is contingent upon birth into mortality, so entrance into the kingdom of heaven is contingent upon a second birth. Through the latter birth, the Lord explained to Adam certain elements of spiritual light and truth would begin to abide and be developed in man. Said the Lord:

Therefore it is given to abide in you; the record of heaven; the Comforter; the peaceable things of immortal glory; the truth of all things; that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things, and hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment.

(Moses 6:61.)

When these powers are developed to a fulness in man, they make him a celestial being. The realization of this fact is the purpose of the gospel plan. Thus the Lord concluded the above explanation by stating:

And now, behold, I say unto you: This is the plan of salvation unto all men, through the blood of mine Only Begotten, who shall come in the meridian of time.

(Moses 6:62.)

The plan of salvation as the Lord explained it to Adam was, then, to provide a program for God's spirit children to come to earth and obtain a physical body. Before receiving that body they were highly endowed beings possessing spirit bodies composed of a pure, elastic, refined and intelligent substance called spirit or light. They lived in God's presence with all its brilliance and glory. It was ordained that entrance into a physical body would draw a veil over their past lives and envelop them in a world where God's glory is not manifest. They would be here to prove themselves and, among other things, see if they would seek after and yield obedience to spiritual powers extended to them from God, that by the development of such powers within themselves they with their physical bodies might be raised in the resurrection to enjoy celestial glory.

Do you see the relationship between this great plan and the first principles of the gospel? Birth into mortality is the key to the acquisition of a physical body. But when Adam received his second birth, he "became quickened in the inner man." (Moses 6:65.) Spiritual powers, then, began to operate within his life. These powers, as Paul said to the Hebrews, are "the powers of the world to come." (Hebrews 6:5.) They are administered unto men through the Holy Ghost, after we have been baptized and received the laying on of hands. They are given unto us that we might develop within ourselves the necessary powers and principles that will give us a celestial resurrection in the world to come. Here is why Paul promised the saints at Rome: "For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his [Christ's] death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection." (Romans 6:5.) For this reason also, John expressed the hope that when Christ "shall appear, we shall be like him." (I John 3:2.)

The Doctrine and Covenants explains this promise by stating: "Ye who are quickened by a portion of the celestial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness." (D&C 88:29.) I take this to mean that those who receive the gospel and, as Adam, are quickened in the inner man through its celestial powers will come forth to receive a fulness of these powers of light and truth in the resurrection.

This also is what Section 76 is pointing out when it declares, "That through the power and manifestation of the Spirit, while in the flesh, they [i.e., the Saints] may be able to bear his presence in the world of glory." (D&C 76:118.) So you see the importance of getting the powers of the gospel in our lives as we live here on earth.

The Latter-day Saints have a hymn that says of Christ:

He marked the path and led the way,

And every point defines,

To light and life and endless day,

Where God's full presence shines.

Christ marked the path to the acquisition of these great spiritual powers of truth and light in their fulness—to a realm of endless day where God's full presence shines.

The Apostle John bore testimony that Christ received not this fulness of glory at first, but received grace for grace until he received a fulness. He went from one level of spiritual development to a higher one until "he received a fulness of the glory of the Father." To receive a fulness of the glory of the Father is to so develop in obedience and in the intelligent application of the powers of the gospel to where the fulness of these powers of light and truth that are centered in the Father might also be developed within you. Jesus attained unto this state of fulness and could therefore testify that all power in heaven and in earth had been given unto him.

After giving us John's testimony concerning Christ and His development to where He received a fulness of the glory of the Father, the same revelation states:

I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness.

For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace. (D&C 93:19-20.)

Let me emphasize that the Lord wants us to know how to worship and to know what we worship. He wants us to understand that true worship is the development of celestial powers within ourselves until we can receive them to a fulness as Jesus did. How are we to do this? We have the answer in the following declaration:

He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things. (D&C 93:28.)

Because God has developed within himself these powers of light and truth to an eternal fulness, he is a spiritual as well as a physical being. Man may also be such a spiritual being in the resurrection. In recognition of this fact, the Doctrine and Covenants says of men: "For notwithstanding they die, they also shall rise again, a spiritual body." (D&C 88:27.) A resurrected body is a spiritual body because it has no blood flowing through its veins, but instead a substance of pure, refined and intelligent spirit is the quickening action of life within such a body. Note how the Lord in the following passage explains his work in developing man to the point where in the end he becomes such a spiritual being:

For by the power of my Spirit created I them; yea, all things both spiritual and temporal—

First spiritual, secondly temporal, which is the beginning of my work; and again [commencing with man's mortal creation], first temporal, and secondly [in the

resurrection] spiritual, which is the last of my work—

(D&C 29:31-32.)

Man was first created as a spiritual being. Then in mortality he became a temporal being. But his final destiny is to become again in the resurrection a spiritual being. Thus, in the resurrection, his body will be brought forth from the grave, purified, refined and endowed with celestial powers to where, as grosser element, it will take upon itself similar qualities of light and intelligence as the spirit body was in possession of before it came to earth. In other words the whole will then become spiritual.

According to the Doctrine and Covenants, this good old earth of ours is also going through a period of temporal existence. (See D&C 77:6.) Before its creation, its spirit world existed, as did our spirit bodies prior to the creation of our physical tabernacles. We may even have dwelt upon that spirit world in the presence of God in our pre-mortal state. Parley P. Pratt seems to indicate that this may have been the case. (See Key to Theology, 9th edition, p. 52.) Anyway, our earth is now going through a probationary state. We have already pointed out that in this probationary state "the earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom, for it filleth the measure of its creation, and transgresseth not the law." Since the earth is obedient to that law, the revelation continues, "it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall die, it shall be quickened again, and shall abide the power by which it is quickened, and the righteous shall inherit it." (D&C 88:25-26.)

We can see from this statement that the earth, within the realm of its existence, is going through a similar plan as man and will be sanctified thereby and made a celestial orb. The physical elements of the earth were given a birth when the waters rolled back and land appeared; it was baptized in the days of Noah; and it will be baptized and sanctified by similar powers as the Holy Ghost administers unto men when Christ appears in his glory and the spirit is poured out upon all flesh. Following the millennium, the earth will die—its spirit world will be separated from the elements of the physical earth; and as a result the physical elements will disintegrate. The power of the resurrection will then act upon the essential or basic physical elements that now compose our mortal earth and unite them with the spirit world. The whole will then be made spiritual and filled with the glory of God.

The Doctrine and Covenants refers to a celestialized orb as being "like a sea of glass and fire." (D&C 130:7.) Such orbs are like unto fire in their brilliance because of the concentration of light and truth that is associated with them. They may be likened unto a sea of glass because all corruptible elements formerly associated with their existence in mortality will be eliminated or purified to where the whole, like man's resurrected body, will become spiritual.

As Orson Pratt once said, "God, Himself, will light up the world with His glory, making of it a body more brilliant than the sun that shines in yonder heavens." (Journal of Discourses, XIV, p. 236.)

Such glorified spheres can no longer be opaque orbs, but are filled with intelligent powers to where they shine like the suns and stars in the universe. Said Brigham Young of the earth's destiny as a celestial orb:

This world, so benighted at present, and so lightly esteemed by infidels ... when it becomes celestialized, it will be like the sun, and be prepared for the habitation of the Saints, and be brought back into the presence of the Father and the Son. It will not then be an opaque body as it now is, but it will be like the stars of the firmament, full of light and glory; it will be a body of light. John compared it, in its celestialized state, to a sea of glass. (Journal of Discourses, VII, p. 163.)

Orson Pratt also referred to the destiny of our earth in the following words:

Who, in looking upon the earth as it ascends in the scale of the universe, does not desire to keep pace with it, that when it shall be classed in its turn, among the dazzling orbs of the blue vault of heaven, shining forth in all the splendours of celestial glory, he may find himself proportionably advanced in the scale of intellectual and moral excellence? Who, but the most abandoned, does not desire to be counted worthy to associate with those higher orders of beings who have been redeemed, exalted, and glorified, together with the worlds they inhabit, ages before the foundations of our earth were laid? O man, remember the future destiny and glory of the earth, and secure thine everlasting inheritance upon the same, that when it shall be glorious, thou shalt be glorious also. (Ibid., I, pp. 333-334.)

Such a concept does not necessarily mean that orbs such as our sun are inhabited by celestial beings. It is true that we liken the three principle degrees of glory to the light of the sun, moon and stars, respectively. But this is only to be taken as an analogy, for the stars are in reality—many of them—greater orbs than our sun. The moon certainly is not a terrestrialized planet; and, likewise, the sun may not actually be a celestialized orb. You recall that when the Father and the Son appeared in the First Vision that radiance associated with them shone above the brightness of the sun. Orson Pratt expressed his views on the matter as follows:

Although the light of the sun is very glorious, it will not begin to compare with that of this earth, when it becomes celestial and eternal and is lightened by the presence of God the Father. It is doubtful whether the children or mortality on other worlds will ever behold the light of this earth, after it is made eternal, unless they happen to catch a glimpse of it by vision. God dwells in a world of light too glorious for mortal eyes to behold, unless aided by the Spirit of the living God. (Journal of Discourses, XIX, pp. 290-291.)

What Brother Pratt says here may be true. On the other hand, we should note that Joseph Smith taught that the great Creator has placed bounds and limits upon light. The Prophet's "Egyptian Alphabet and Grammar" tells us that there has to be "the right degree of light ... cheering the faces of millions of planets." Thus, according to the divine "governing principle of light," there are bounds set that some of the "component parts of light ... may not pass." As "the bounds of the ocean" are set by law, "so God has set the bounds of light lest it pass over and consume the planets."

It is interesting to note that a few years ago the California Institute of Technology and the University of California made a statement to the effect that "sixty miles above the earth exists a hithertofore unknown layer of oxygen molecules which mysteriously change the wave lengths of the sun's deadly untra-violet rays to infra-red rays." Were this not so, "life might vanish from the face of the globe under the bombardment of ultra-violet radiation from the sun." (Ralph Dighton, "Life on Earth 'Hangs' on Unseen Ray of Light," Deseret News, November 1, 1949.)

This statement is interesting in light of what Joseph Smith said of light having certain bounds and limits lest it pass over and consume the planets. There may be other means by which the full light from the sun and stars is not permitted to be seen by men on earth. We are told that a veil has been drawn to keep us out of God's presence. If so, the glorious spheres we see shining in space could be celestialized spheres with only a part of their light being allowed to be seen by men. We should also keep in mind that there are such things as terrestrial and telestial spheres which in their own right shine with a degree of glory that is beyond the mind of man to comprehend. Each celestial earth is in reality a great Urim and Thummim. Such is the case with the orb on which God dwells. (See D&C 130:7-8.) Of our earth in its future celestial state, the Prophet Joseph wrote:

This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom, or all kingdoms of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it; and this earth will be Christ's. (D&C 130:9.)

I believe that this statement can only be properly understood when we remember that the glory to be associated with celestialized spheres is a concentration of intelligences to a point where the light associated with that intelligence shines above the brightness of the sun and acts to give light and life to all things in the universe. In like manner, the light of Christ in emanating from the presence of God to fill immensity of space communicates back to God a knowledge of all that is transpiring throughout his domain. By its agency all things are visibly before Him; He is even aware of the sparrow that may fall.

Our time is up. I hope you will weigh carefully the subject that has been before us. The Lord has commanded us to search diligently that we may be more perfect in theory, in principle, and in doctrine. May the Lord bless us that all may continue to do this, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ, Amen.
