Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Themes of the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1957)

III

THE SOCIETY OF ZION

So far as the Doctrine and Covenants is concerned, that which the world terms "Mormonism" is not a Sunday religion. The gospel does not limit itself to the realm of inculcating spiritual truth into the lives of its people so that regardless of what they might meet with through the week they will still maintain a high spiritual equilibrium. It endeavors to do much more than this.

In his life's work, the Prophet Joseph endeavored to establish a society. I would like to call it the "society of Zion"—a society so sufficient and so complete within itself that it could take care of every need of man. There would be no reason whatsoever for giving the Law of Consecration as an economic program for the Latter-day Saints if the Lord did not expect that through this Church program men were to carry out their total economic pursuits. When viewed in this light, Mormonism ceases to be merely a Sunday religion.

The Prophet not only endeavored to define correct religious principles but correct social principles also. Then, too, he gave us an economic law suited to the ideals of the society of Zion. And, finally, he gave by revelation the constitution of a political government capable of governing the world in righteousness. Tonight I would like to discuss the society of Zion with particular emphasis upon the Law of Consecration.

The foundation of the society of Zion rests upon the principle of covenant. After returning to Kirtland from Missouri, Joseph Smith made a statement in which he referred to this fact, stating: "It was my endeavor to so organize the brethren that they might eventually be independent of every encumbrance beneath the celestial kingdom by bonds and covenants of mutual love and mutual friendship." (DHC, 1, p. 269.) I would like to have you think of that. It was his endeavor to so organize the brethren that they might eventually be independent of every encumbrance beneath the celestial kingdom by bonds and covenants of mutual friendship and mutual love.

Here, then, is the basis of the society of Zion—the element of covenant, the fact that men and women have developed within themselves enough maturity that they, by their own free volition, will choose to support such a program as it offers and will dedicate their lives, uniting themselves with their brethren and with their God upon the basis of mutual covenant. We call this covenant baptism. In Section 22 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord made a statement at the time the Church was organized concerning the ordinance or the covenant of baptism. It had to do with the fact that people had been baptized into the Church previous to its organization, and after its organization the Lord required them to be re-baptized and then confirmed members of the Church. So by way of explanation He said:

Behold, I say unto you that all old covenants have I caused to be done away in this thing; and this is a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning. (D&C 22:1.)

"Even that which was from the beginning." In other words, baptism has been ordained and practiced from the beginning. This in and of itself is an interesting subject that we will not have time to treat; but the thing that concerns us at this time is that baptism is a new and everlasting covenant.

Too often in the Church we get the idea that the new and everlasting covenant is only the covenant of marriage. Eternal marriage is a new and everlasting covenant, but each covenant within the gospel is separate and of itself a new and everlasting covenant. Besides this we speak of the total program—the gospel of Jesus Christ, the composite of all covenants pertaining to the gospel—as the new and everlasting covenant. Thus, we enter the system through the principle of covenant. When we receive of the priesthood, we receive it upon the basis of covenant. In Section 84 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord makes this statement:

And also all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord;

For he that receiveth my servants receiveth me;

And he that receiveth me receiveth my Father;

And he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him.

And this is according to the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood.

Therefore, all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved.

But whoso breaketh this covenant after he hath received it, and altogether turneth therefrom, shall not have forgiveness of sins in this world nor in the world to come. (D&C 84:35-41.)

I do not think we can understand the full meaning of this statement unless we see it in light of the Law of Consecration. We only inherit all that the Father has through the celestial system of consecration. When we enter the celestial kingdom we are then privileged to draw upon the full wisdom, power and wealth of God for the development of the stewardship over which we might be placed. This is what it means to be a joint heir with Christ in inheriting what the Father has. So long as we consecrate ourselves to Him we can draw upon all that He has to perform the tasks that are ours to perform. This applies to men who bear the priesthood in mortality as well as to those who bear these powers and rights in the celestial kingdom.

All these provisions are a part of the covenant that pertains to the Melchizedek Priesthood. Should a person desecrate this covenant and turn completely away from it there is no forgiveness for that sin, worlds without end. I take it that such a person will never have a right to the exercise of that priesthood in the celestial society; if he attains unto the celestial kingdom he will be a servant and not an heir therein.

Here, then, we see the nature of the covenant system so far as the Melchizedek Priesthood is concerned. There is no particular or specific covenant associated with receiving the Aaronic Priesthood except as a member of this covenant system we are bound by the other covenants that pertain to it. Nevertheless, the Lord does emphasize that those in the Aaronic as well as those in the Melchizedek Priesthood should be acquainted with and should obey the covenants of the gospel. For example, in Section 107 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord, talking about the various duties and responsibilities of those who are members of the Church, particularly members of the priesthood, said:

And again, verily I say unto you, the duty of a president over the office of a deacon is to preside over twelve deacons, to sit in council with them, and to teach them their duty, edifying one another, as it is given according to the covenants.

And also the duty of the president over the office of the teachers is to preside over twenty-four of the teachers, and to sit in council with them, teaching them the duties of their office, as given in the covenants.

Also the duty of the president over the Priesthood of Aaron is to preside over forty-eight priests [that is a bishop], and sit in council with them, to teach them the duties of their office, as is given in the covenants.

(D&C 107:85-87.)

The Lord continues by giving a similar charge to those bearing the Melchizedek Priesthood.

When we come into the economic phase of the society of Zion, we find that those who enter the Law of Consecration do so "with a covenant and a deed which cannot be broken." (D&C 42:30.) Entrance into the Law of Consecration is purely voluntary, but in entering the system a person does so with a covenant that he will serve God and sustain his program here upon the earth. Finally, there is the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, the very basis of the home in this society.

There is yet one other point. We have the idea inherent within the program that when a person sustains another in an office or a position of responsibility he covenants by the uplifting of hands not just to allow that person to function in that office but to uphold and to sustain him therein. Actually the act of sustaining people in the Church is an act of covenant making.

Therefore, by mutual bond and mutual covenant the Church is united together, not by the principle of force or cohersion. It is all free will and free grace, as John Taylor used to say. It is like Section 121 of the Doctrine and Covenants, which says:

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;

By kindness, and pure knowledge [I should like to emphasize that idea of getting pure knowledge.], which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—

(D&C 121:41-42.)

Persuasion is the principle of government in the Church; and the union within the Church is based upon this element of covenant.

In order to build a covenant society it is necessary to have certain supporting factors associated with it. People just do not get together and say, "I am a completely free person, completely free individual in every respect," and then unite themselves with their brethren and their sisters to the extent that they should to support such a social organization unless there is some positive incentive or motive for doing so. There is something unique behind the Church program. When the Lord says that you should pay one-tenth of your income as tithing, there is something prompting the person to do it voluntarily without the element of force coming in. When the bishop says he would like to have you work on the welfare farm, there is something in the system that prompts people into activity, and they give of their time freely to support the program. This is true in all the programs or phases of the work in this particular society. So it is not only necessary to give people complete freedom but to induce them to utilize their lives in mature decisions to support the program that the Lord would have them support.

I would like to talk about some of the supporting factors in the society of Zion probably in a little different way than you people have heard these things discussed before. In doing so, I would like to give this thing a social twist rather than a religious twist. First of all, you have the idea of love. Love is a tremendously cohesive factor; it is a uniting force. People who have the element of love within themselves have an attractive power that unites them with others and allows them to influence the lives of others. The Lord gave this famous little section, Section 4 of the Doctrine and Covenants, to Joseph Smith, Sr., in which He said:

And faith, hope, charity and love, with an eye single to the glory of God, qualify him for the work.

(D&C 4:5.)

Section 12 of the Doctrine and Covenants is another revelation where the need of love is emphasized. It says:

And no one can assist in this work except he shall be humble and full of love, having faith, hope, and charity, being temperate in all things, whatsoever shall be entrusted to his care. (D&C 12:8.)

In discussing the subject, the Prophet Joseph Smith once made a rather significant statement along this line. I would like to read it to you:

If a skillful mechanic, in taking a welding heat, uses boric, alum, etc., and succeeds in welding together iron and steel more perfectly than any other mechanic, is he not deserving the praise? And if by the principles of truth I succeed in uniting men of all denominations in the bonds of love, shall I not have attained a good object? (DHC, V, p. 499.)

This is a very pertinent question. You can work on steel and you can work on stone; but when it comes to working with the greatest thing of all, human character, and having the power through truth to unite people together in the bonds of love and fellowship, you have really accomplished that which is of the greatest importance in life. You people who have been out in the mission fields know that the first thing you note about a Mormon congregation there is not how quiet they are in Church. The first thing you note is that when you walk through the door you get a handshake that is really warm and thrilling. This is the first thing an investigator notes. They may be meeting in a beer hall where they have to sweep the cans out or where they have to clean up cigar butts from the party the night before, but there is a radiant spirit there. They often have their deficiencies in environment but the first thing that most people investigating the Church recognize is this wonderful spirit of Mormonism, this spirit of love and friendship and mutual congeniality. This is a wonderful thing.

This leads us into this second basic support of the covenant society, and I would like to label it as "friendship." Friendship is associated with love. In fact it may be considered as a forerunner to the principle of love. The Prophet Joseph Smith made a wonderful statement on the purpose of friendship as follows: "Friendship is one of the grand fundamental principles of 'Mormonism.' [It is designed] to revolutionize and civilize the world, and cause wars and contentions to cease and men to become friends and brothers." (DHC, V, p. 517.) When we get a peaceful society established throughout the earth, it will be because friendship has come into the picture in developing the Lord's program here upon the earth.

In addition, we also have the basic principles of the gospel as the means by which people can attain unto the elements of friendship and love and unite together on a correct basis of social union. The spirit of the gospel itself radiates friendship and love. In order for people to come together and be sufficiently united in supporting a covenant society, they must see eye to eye in their faith; they must be united on a common basis. So the principle of faith itself becomes a social principle; it produces a common denominator upon which to unite. Having come to the unity of the faith, we can develop a program in which people support and sustain the society of Zion upon the principle or basis of covenant.

In Alma 32 we have probably the greatest discourse that has ever been given on the principle of faith. You can say what you want about Paul's famous statement in Hebrews, chapter 11, but great as it is, and I certainly have respect for it, Alma approaches a definition of faith which Paul does not quite reach. In this chapter, Alma defines faith by stating:

... faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true. (Alma 32:21.)

I would like you to note these qualifications. You hope for things which are not seen but which, nevertheless, are true. You cannot do as the Indians did when the settlers sold them gunpowder and told them that if they would bury it they would get a gunpowder tree. Those things in which you have a faith and a hope must be true.

But behold, if ye will awake and arouse your faculties, even to an experiment upon my words, and exercise a particle of faith, yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you, even until ye believe in a manner that ye can give place for a portion of my words. (Alma 32:27.)

Alma then compared the word of God to a seed. He declared that if they would plant this seed in their hearts it would begin to develop within their souls. And as it began to develop it would enlighten their minds and bear witness within their hearts that it was a true seed. Said Alma:

O then, is not this real? I say unto you, Yea, because it is light; and whatsoever is light, is good, because it is discernible, therefore ye must know that it is good;...(Alma 32:35.)

In our day we have discovered the secrets of the atom. I would like to apply this discovery to the same situation that Alma was talking about. He said that faith is not to have a perfect knowledge; therefore, if you have faith you have faith you hope for things which are not seen, but which are true. The atomic scientists or nuclear physicists in our day and age were desirous of releasing the power of the atom. They had faith that it could be done, and they hoped for things which they had not seen but which they felt were true and which proved to be true. By allowing this hope to work in their minds they accumulated evidence, so they could find the laws upon which the release of atomic energy is based. They first had faith, but after they made the experiment, there was a release of power. They then had knowledge.

So it is with faith in spiritual truths; those who gather and apply the evidence of spiritual laws are able to release the power of spirit and truth within their lives. This is the basis upon which we gain testimony. Going back to a previous discussion, we talked about God as a celestial being and about man as having a need to be born again into a newness of life, whereby these spiritual powers that are reposed in their fulness in God are finally developed to their fulness in man. The principle of faith is the initial principle by which spiritual light and power is released in the life of man. If you read Section 93, in which the Lord is talking about going from grace to grace, from one stage of spiritual development to another until you ultimately come to the point where you receive them in their fulness, you will recognize that he is endeavoring to point this great truth of spiritual growth out to us. As members of the Church we actually should be spiritual scientists. We ought to so learn the laws of spiritual truth and so apply them that we have a spiritual explosion in our mind every day or two. In this way we can continually grow in the knowledge of the Lord through the principle of revelation.

Those who perform this type of experiment are taught by divine agencies. They are taught by the same teacher, even the Holy Ghost. They can come as individuals to a unity of faith; and having come to a unity of the faith, they can, by the spiritual truth that they receive, realize and know, as they know that they live, that this is God's program. With this type of testimony and this type of knowledge, they are willing, if necessary, to give their life for the gospel. Being thus willing to give their lives for God's work, they ought also to be willing to live for the gospel and to support this convenant program.

Therefore, faith, besides being a principle of spiritual development, is also a social principle—a principle that prompts people to support this covenant society that the Prophet Joseph Smith was instrumental in restoring.

You have heard a lot about the principle of repentance, sermon after another. The principle of repentance, besides being a religious principle, is also a social principle. I like the evaluation that Emerson gave to the principle of repentance and its importance in promoting union with others. Said he:

What is the use of the concert of the false and the disunited? There can be no concert in two, where there is no concert in one. When the individual is not individual, but is dual; when his thoughts look one way and his actions another; when his faith is traversed by his habits; when his will enlightened by reason, is warped by his sense; when with one hand he rows and with the other backs water, what concert can be? ("New England Reformers.")

We cannot come to a unity of the faith either with God or with man until the principle of repentance is operative in our lives. We must be at peace with ourselves before we can properly unite by covenant with our brethren in the society of Zion.

Baptism, as we have said, is the initial covenant of Zion's covenant system. But baptism is also a social principle and is the very basis of the society of Zion. The covenant that Alma administered to his people at the waters of Mormon indicates that baptism involves the responsibility of being brothers through friendship and love in more than just a religious way. Alma said:

... Behold, here are the waters of Mormon (for thus were they called) and now, as ye are desirous to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light;

Yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even until death, that ye may be redeemed of God, and be numbered with those of the first resurrection, that ye may have eternal life—

Now I say unto you, if this be the desire of your hearts, what have you against being baptized in the name of the Lord, as a witness before him that ye have entered into a covenant with him, that ye will serve him and keep his commandments...? (Mosiah 18:8-10.)

I would like you to note that service to God is here emphasized as service to our fellow men—helping those who are in need of help. Baptism ceases to be merely a religious principle. It encompasses the practical application of loving your brother, of supporting and sustaining a program that will uplift those who are in need of being uplifted, of visiting the sick, of even consecrating of your time and your talents to the program of the gospel and also of your economic means to the program of the Church.

Probably one of the most important principles which unites the people together is the gift of the Holy Ghost, as conferred by the authority of the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood. From the time Plato wrote his Republic to the modern day there have been hundreds of people who have endeavored to unite the people together into a united society; and invariably they have had to use the principle of coercion in some form to succeed. In formulating the plan for his ideal republic, Plato started out to give men their free agency; but to get the people to support it he finally concluded that he would have to institute the principle of coercion. Thus, he is referred to as the father of totalitarian thought.

Modern communism goes back for some of its basic theory to Plato, because its advocates feel that you cannot build a united society without the principle of force. In the gospel, however, we have something which other people do not have. We have a principle which they know nothing about—a principle which will unite the people and bring them together into a system of unity without exercising the principle of force in some way. This factor is of all things most important in developing the society of Zion upon its covenant foundation. Here is where spiritual powers—particularly those made available through the gift of the Holy Ghost—come into the picture. John Taylor once said of the uniting powers within the society of Zion:

There is no adhesive principle sufficiently powerful to unite the people of any portion of the earth, similar to the one that has sprung forth in our day and right among this people; if there is anything of that sort abroad in the world, I am not acquainted with it. Then it follows, as a natural consequence, that if there is nothing to unite the people together they are deficient in some principle, doctrine, faith or practice. Philosophy has not united the people together; politics has never done it; no social principles have ever accomplished it. (Journal of Discourses, X, pp. 124-125.)

One of the most meaningful statements on the effects of the Holy Ghost in the lives of men is the following one by Parley P. Pratt. After referring to the fact that man is in the physical image of God and thus has every organ and attribute in embryo as possessed by our Father in heaven, he said:

The gift of the Holy Ghost adapts itself to all these organs [i.e., of the human system] or attributes. It quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases, enlarges, expands, and purifies all the natural passion and affection, and adapts them by the gift of wisdom to their lawful use. It inspires, develops, cultivates, and matures all the fine toned sympathies, joys, tastes, kindred feelings and affections of our nature. It inspires virtue, kindness, goodness, tenderness, gentleness, and charity. It develops beauty of person, form and features. It tends to health, vigor, animation and social feeling. It invigorates all the faculties of the physical and intellectual man. It strengthens and gives tone to the nerves. In short, it is, as it were, marrow to the bone, joy to the heart, light to the eyes, music to the ears, and life to the whole being.

In the presence of such persons one feels to enjoy the light of their countenances, as the genial rays of a sunbeam. The very atmosphere diffuses a thrill, a warm glow of pure gladness and sympathy, to the heart and nerve of others who have kindred feelings or sympathy of spirit. (Key to Theology, p. 100.)

Here, then, is the key to true brotherhood; here is the key to a current social union; here is the key to developing the necessary spontaneity on the part of those who receive this blessing, so that they, without force and without coercion, will pay their tithing, work on the welfare project and do all else necessary to support the society of Zion. Spiritual forces emanating from God through a living priesthood become the key to developing a perfect system of social union, and that actually is what we have in this program that we call the gospel of Jesus Christ. To again quote John Taylor:

I preach the gospel to the world. What is it? Force, tyranny, and oppression? No, it is all free grace, and it is all free will. Is anybody coerced? Did anybody coerce you, Latter-day Saints? Are any of you forced to continue as a Latter-day Saint if you do not want to? If you think you are, you are all absolved today. We know of no such principle as coercion; it is a matter of choice. The principle that I spoke of before—that is, men receive the Holy Ghost within themselves—is the cementing, binding, uniting power that exists among the Latter-day Saints. (Journal of Discourses, XXIII, pp. 63-64.)

Some time ago we talked about Section 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants, wherein the Lord made this statement:

All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence. (D&C 93:30.)

Let us look at that statement in light of the Lord's ideal in supporting and establishing this society of Zion. All truth is independent in its sphere to act for itself as is all intelligence; otherwise there is no existence. In order to rightly and properly exist, man, along with all truth and intelligence, must be independent; and to be independent a person must first of all love his free agency. Second, there must be law ordained governing him in the particular sphere of his existence. Third, there is need, as Lehi says, for opposition in all things. Fourth, there is the need on the part of the individual to maturely choose to support that law which governs him in his particular sphere of life.

The Lord desires that we should be independent. On the other hand, the society of Zion is also to be founded upon the principle of independence through mutual covenant and mutual love. In Section 78 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord, after giving some instructions on the principles of consecration and stewardship, made this comment:

Behold, this is the preparation wherewith I prepare you, and the foundation, and the ensample which I give unto you, whereby you may accomplish the commandments which are given you;

That through my providence, notwithstanding the tribulation which shall descend upon you, that the church may stand independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world. (D&C 78:13-14.)

Here, then, is the ideal the Lord would like us to attain—to develop in the practice of the principles of the gospel to where as individuals and as a society we can be independent above every other creature beneath the celestial kingdom. But we should keep in mind that to be fully independent, as the Lord would have us be, all must develop the economic aspects of the covenant society by putting into operation the Law of Consecration and Stewardship. We will now consider some of the basic principles of this system of economics.

First, the Law of Consecration must have a particular and unique environment in order to properly function. Like a fish out of water, it would perish except for this native environment. We have referred to the component elements that make up this environmental setting here tonight. They consist of true and living faith, of repentance, of real brotherhood through mutual covenant, and of the enlightening and unifying powers of the Holy Ghost. B. H. Roberts once made the following statement regarding the Law of Consecration and the necessary background environment to make it a workable economic system:

This plan of "consecration and stewardships," and community use of surplus increment does not begin with the community and through the community or state seek to reach the individual. While not ignoring the value of institutions, of the necessity for favorable conditions, and machinery, it does not put its whole trust in institutions or arbitrary regulations for the successful accomplishment of its purposes.

It comes first to the individual with the message of repentance from evil-heartedness; with an appeal to turn to righteousness. It teaches the individual that by repentance, accompanied with true and holy faith in God, man may attain to forgiveness of sin, to consciousness of renewed innocence, lost through transgression, and to the possession of the divine Spirit. This last adds to his own strength, in some degree, the strength of God. Through its influence he is guided to all truth, taught a knowledge of the things of God, receives the testimony that Jesus is the Christ; by it he is reproved for his errors; commended for resisting evil; prompted in uncertainty. By courting this influence, and yielding to its counsels, he is purified in heart; is purged of his lust and his selfishness; loves his neighbor as himself, and is ready to seek other's rather than his own good.

It is with an element such as this—cleansed and purified by such a process, and thus made fit for the Master's use—that the plan revealed through Joseph Smith proposes to deal. ("Economic Aspects of the Career of the Mormons, " pp. 22-23.)

I would like you to keep this in mind: The Law of Consecration will not function without this necessary environment. It must have it.

When the Church, after having failed to live the Law of Consecration in Jackson County, was driven from that choice land, they moved into Far West. While they were there the Prophet was still endeavoring to get the people to recognize the difference between the economic program of God with its spiritual background and that of the world. He gave a sermon recorded by Edward Stevenson in which he made the following comment:

Brethren, we are gathering to this beautiful land to build up Zion; zion, which is the pure in heart. But since I have been here I have perceived the spirit of selfishness. Covetousness exists in the hearts of the Saints which is not becoming to those who have received the gospel. Here are those who begin to spread out buying up all the land they are able to [get] to the exclusion of the poor ones who are not so much blessed with this world's goods, thinking to lay foundations for themselves, only looking to their own individual families and those who are to follow them. Now I want to tell you that Zion cannot be built up in any such way. We are called out from this world to learn God's ways, to become one, looking each to his brother's interest and his welfare, the widow, the fatherless, and poor without distinction. I see signs put out, beer signs, speculative schemes are being introduced. This is the way of the world, Babylon indeed, and I tell you in the name of the God of Israel, if there is not repentance with this people and a turning from ungodliness, covetousness, and self-will, you will be broken up and scattered from this choice land to the four winds of heaven. For the Lord will have a people who will serve him and keep his commandments humbly, each one seeking his neighbor's welfare, to preach the gospel, gather the poor, and aid them, and build up a holy city unto our God. (Edward Stevenson, Autobiography, pp. 40-41.)

We hope and pray for the second coming; we sometimes talk about the redemption of Zion, but you can put it down as a sure thing that the redemption of Zion, which must precede the second coming, will never come about until there are sufficient people within this Church who are willing to humble themselves and to receive the spirit of the gospel and support this covenant system under the Law of Consecration and Stewardship. The Lord has made it plain to us that the redemption of Zion must precede the second coming. In Section 105 of the Doctrine and Covenants He also pointed out that Zion must be founded upon the Law of Consecration and Stewardship, otherwise He cannot receive her unto Himself. (See D&C 105:1-5.) We must live it; we must eventually attain a point of spiritual excellence and of brotherhood to where we are capable and willing to enter into this system and enjoy the blessings of the gospel economically as well as socially and religiously.

Now let me say a word or two in the remaining time about the mechanics of the Law of Consecration. The mechanics of this law are relatively simple. It has to be simple, I think, in order to be practical in the lives of people who do not spend a great deal of their time analyzing and studying the program. The first step is that of consecration. In Section 42 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord makes this statement regarding the principle of consecration.

And behold, thou wilt remember the poor, and consecrate of thy properties for their support that which thou hast to impart unto them, with a covenant and a deed which cannot be broken.

And inasmuch as ye impart of your substance unto the poor, ye will do it unto me; and they shall be laid before the bishop of my church and his counselors, two of the elders, or high priests, such as he shall appoint or has appointed and set apart for that purpose.

And it shall come to pass, after they are laid before the bishop of my church, and after that he has received these testimonies concerning the consecration of the properties of my church, that they cannot be taken from the church, agreeable to my commandments,...

(D&C 42:30-32.)

The first phase, then, is this principle of consecration in which we recognize in a practical sense the fact that the earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof. We consecrate all that we have unto the Lord through his instrument, the Church of the society of Zion. Let me here make it very plain that there is no such thing in the consecration program as private property. I want to qualify that just a little later but technically there is no such thing as private property. When a person consecrates his property to the Lord, it belongs to the Lord. It is given to him with a deed and a covenant that cannot be broken. In Section 104 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord is talking about this subject, as follows:

And again, a commandment I give unto you concerning your stewardship which I have appointed unto you. Behold, all these properties are mine, or else your faith is vain, and ye are found hypocrites, and the covenants which ye have made unto me are broken; And if the properties are mine, then ye are stewards; otherwise ye are no stewards.

(D&C 104:54-56.)

Consecrated properties belong to the Lord, and men are stewards or managers of the Lord's property. Otherwise their covenants are vain and they cannot be stewards.

The second step in this economic system is that of delegating stewardships to each worthy man within the system. Every man is to be made a steward over his own property or that which he has received by consecration, as much as is sufficient for himself and family. Said a revelation:

Wherefore,let my servant Edward Partridge, and those whom he has chosen, in whom I am well pleased, appoint unto this people their portions, every man equal according to his family, according to his circumstances and his wants and his needs.

(D&C 51:3.)

Here we see that there were certain rules of judgement to be set up in delegating stewardships. For example, a person with a large family would certainly need a larger stewardship than a man with a small family. This is not a program whereby the community is going to come in and take over the family responsibilities. The husband himself must assume these responsibilities, but the community does stand responsible to see that he has a sufficiently large stewardship so that he can care for his family and loved ones. So a person having a larger family would then, in the normal course of delegating stewardship, receive a larger stewardship.

If a person were a farmer, he might be delegated forty, sixty, eighty, or whatever acreage he needed. However, suppose a person were going into one of the professions which took a lot of economic backing to get started and properly established. You would have a difference of circumstance, and the Law of Consecration provides that such circumstances are a decisive factor in the delegation of a stewardship.

If a person had the desire to educate his children so that they could achieve and attain a particular position in life, here again the stewardship system is flexible enough not to give it to him, but to give him the wherewithall to discharge those particular responsibilities. The Prophet Joseph, in a letter to Edward Partridge, explained that in the delegation of stewardship we, should not enter into the particulars of things but be rather liberal, and I will explain why a little later. Liberality more than being stringent in these things should be the guiding principle.

After a person has been delegated a particular stewardship, the next thing that concerns him is the matter of surplus property or wealth within the storehouse. Suppose a wealthy person joined a stewardship system and had more property than he knew what to do with before he consecrated it to the Lord. It might be wise and discreet not to delegate back to him in the way of a stewardship all that he had consecrated. Thus, there is a surplus left within the storehouse.

There is another way surplus property is accumulated in the storehouse. After each individual has been made a steward over his own particular stewardship, he is to manage it freely by his own wisdom, intelligence and frugality. Having done so, at the end of the year, he is to turn into the storehouse by annual accounting with the bishop all that he has over and above that required to support and sustain his family on a comparable economic level with the general community. Therefore, the surplus of each stewardship is continually coming into the storehouse. This form of surplus is continually building up in the storehouse as a community fund.

After having consecrated your property, that which is left over no longer belongs to you; you cannot receive it back. After having turned in the surplus from your stewardship, it no longer belongs to you as an individual either. But since this particular system is decentralized and the community property belongs to the given community, a steward has an equal voice with other stewards in the community in determining how the community shall use these funds.

Community surplus is to serve the interests of both the community in its needs and the individual in certain of his needs. In Section 42 the Lord designated what was to be the use of community property so far as community need is concerned. To quote:

And again, if there shall be properties in the hands of the church, or any individuals of it, more than is necessary for their support after this first consecration, which is a residue to be consecrated unto the bishop, it shall be kept to administer to those who have not, from time to time, that every man who has need may be amply supplied and receive according to his wants.

Therefore, the residue shall be kept in my storehouse, to administer to the poor and the needy, as shall be appointed by the high council of the church, and the bishop and his council:

And for the purpose of purchasing lands for the public benefit of the church, and building houses of worship, and building up of the New Jerusalem which is hereafter to be revealed—

(D&C 42:33-35.)

When it comes to the individual steward, here again the storehouse has an important role to play. In Section 82 the Lord made it plain that each individual was to receive benefits from the storehouse to assist him in developing his own stewardship. This section was given to a specific and limited group of men—not the whole Church—who were functioning under the principles of consecration and stewardship, but since they were organized "according to the laws of the Lord" (verse 15.), the instructions here given certainly apply to the fuller program in which each man is to be steward. The Lord said:

Therefore, I give unto you this commandment, that ye bind yourselves by this covenant, and it shall be done according to the laws of the Lord. Behold, here is wisdom also in me for your good.

And you are to be equal, or in other words, you are to have equal claims on the properties, for the benefit of managing the concerns of your stewardships, every man according to his wants and his needs, inasmuch as his wants are just—

And all this for the benefit of the church of the living God, that every man may improve upon his talent, able to venture out into business with that support and counsel behind them; and as a result, they have been that every man may gain other talents, yea, even an hundred fold, to be cast into the Lord's storehouse, to become the common property of the whole church. (D&C 82:15-18.)

In these instructions, the Lord is simply saying, "Here you have a surplus of property and wealth in the storehouse. Each one of you has the right equal with his brother to draw upon this community wealth for the development of your own personal stewardship, that it might become more efficient and thus more productive."

The Lord's plan is not one to rob man of his incentive to achieve. In fact, just the opposite is the case. As a steward you have the right to draw upon the storehouse to develop and expand your stewardship. Since you have continually turned over to the storehouse all of your surplus wealth, there must be some way to get funds to develop and expand. This plan is not a stagnant one where the individual or the community cannot grow. Just the opposite is the case. It calls for a system where each steward has the wealth of the community to draw upon for the development of his stewardship.

Of course a system must be established so that each steward has an equal voice in the use to be made of the community funds. Some regulations and restrictions have to be set up. One person cannot draw out an excessive amount except by the consent of others in the system. This is what the Lord was explaining in the following statement:

And all moneys that you receive in your steward-ships, by improving upon the properties which I have appointed unto you, in houses, or in lands, or in cattle,

or in all things ... shall be cast into the treasury as fast as you receive money, by hundreds, or by fifties, or by twenties, or by tens, or by fives....

And let not any among you say that it is his own; for it shall not be called his, nor any part of it.

And there shall not any part of it be used, or taken out of the treasury, only by the voice and common consent of the order.

And this shall be the voice and common consent of the order—that any man among you say to the treasurer: I have need of this to help me in my stewardship—

If it be five talents [dollars], or if it be ten talents [dollars], or twenty, or fifty, or a hundred, the treasurer shall give unto him the sum which he requires to help him in his stewardship—

Until he be found a transgressor, and it is manifest before the council of the order plainly that he is an unfaithful and an unwise steward.

But so long as he is in full fellowship, and is faithful and wise in his stewardship, this shall be his token unto the treasurer that the treasurer shall not withhold.

But in case of transgression, the treasurer shall be subject unto the council and voice of the order.

And in case the treasurer is found an unfaithful and an unwise steward, he shall be subject to the council and voice of the order, and shall be removed out of his place, and another shall be appointed in his stead.

(D&C 104:68, 70-77.)

It is plain that there are certain checks associated with this system. The treasurer who knows how much money is in the treasury could not give to one steward an excessive amount without being subject to action by the council of the order. Each steward is also to give an account of his stewardship periodically, which would mean that his accounts would be audited to show the production of his stewardship, how much he had turned into the storehouse as surplus, and the funds he had drawn out.

We sometimes refer to the law of tithing as a law only requiring one tenth of one's annual income while the Law of Consecration would require it all. If we cannot give one tenth, we say, how can we arrive at a point where we can consecrate all that we have. This is an unfair argument in many ways. Consecrating one's all is only the first step. You then receive a stewardship according to the size of your family, your circumstances, etc. This stewardship may even be larger in some cases than the initial property turned over to the bishop by consecration. Finally, a steward has the right to draw from the storehouse—the community bank—in developing and expanding his stewardship. Thus, a righteous and industrious steward has the backing of the whole community behind him. Talk about incentive to achieve and here it is. Many a worthy financial venture has failed or had to be given up because the private individual did not have the financial backing to accomplish his job. But if the individual steward can show cause for developing such a worthy project and the council of the order sees it will be a worthy and profitable venture, the funds of that community are available in accomplishing the task. And with these available funds the individual steward would certainly have the benefit of the wisdom and experience of those on the council of the order to assist him in the task at hand.

I know several men who, because they lacked the financial backing to carry out a worthy endeavor, could not achieve the end they sought to achieve. On the other hand, I have some friends who, when it came to starting out in life on their own, had the financial backing of their father or family to draw upon. They have been successful and are now benefactors to the communities in which they live. The value of a system giving such economic backing and such wise leadership to a community is apparent. It takes money to make money. It takes economic support for a person to utilize his talents to the fullest extent.

This is the system of society that exists in the celestial kingdom. There each free and mature individual binds himself by covenant to the heavenly system. He consecrates his all to God and receives back a stewardship commensorate with his needs and his ability to manage. He then has the right to draw upon the wealth, power and intelligence of that society in developing and expanding that stewardship. This is the system of progressive union that God would have us institute. In doing so, we need to get over our selfish tendencies and be willing to love our neighbors and seek their interests even as we would have them seek our own interests and welfare.

Satan would have us be selfish and self-centered. When he made his proposal before the Grand Council in the pre-mortal world he sought to pervert this wonderful system of consecration. "I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it;" he said to the Father, "wherefore give me thine honor." (Moses 4:1.) He did not want to consecrate by giving the honor and glory unto the Father. He was selfish and self-centered and wanted the honor and glory himself. He wanted the Father to give him the power to create the world and carry out his own plan so that he could take the honor and glory for doing something he did not have the power to do himself. But Christ proposed to abide by the heavenly system; and in his acceptance of these great principles he said: "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever." (Moses 4:2.)

So the Father gave Christ a stewardship, and that stewardship involved the creation and redemption of this world. To accomplish this task, Christ could and did draw upon the power and intelligence of the Father. Of this fact He bore witness when He said: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise." (John 5:19.)

In recognition of Christ's stewardship, the Father centered all powers of life, light and truth to be given to this world in Christ. That power which quickens all things is thus called the "light of Christ"; the priesthood is technically called the "Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God"; and the plan of redemption and sanctification for man on earth is called "the gospel of Jesus Christ."

On the other hand, when Christ finishes his work of redemption he will present this sanctified world to the Father in recognition of the principle of consecration. In doing so, the Father will be exalted in glory and likewise the Son. The Prophet Joseph explained this principle in referring to the heavenly system of becoming heirs of God. He said of the righteous:

... They shall be heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. What is it? To inherit the same power, the same glory and the same exaltation until you arrive at the station of a god, and ascend the throne of eternal power, the same as those who have gone before. What did Jesus do? Why, I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out His kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that He may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt Him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation, and I will take His place, and thereby become exalted myself. So that Jesus treads in the tracks of His Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all His children. (DHC, VI, p. 306.)

Here, then, is the heavenly system of society; and it must be duplicated here on earth. In Section 105:5 the Lord declared: "Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself." The Lord's program of bringing those worthy and willing to abide by celestial law into this divine system of union was referred to by Enoch when he said to the Lord: "And thou hast taken Zion to thine own bosom, from all thy creations, from all eternity to all eternity." (Moses 7:31.) The conclusion to be drawn from these two statements is, first, that the Zion on earth cannot be built up except through a practice of the principles of consecration and stewardship; and, second, only those worthy and willing to abide by this law will inherit the celestial system of union. No person unworthy of living the Law of Consecration will ever be an heir in the celestial kingdom. May we ever keep these points in mind and seek to learn the laws of celestial union I pray in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.
