Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Themes of the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1957)

IV

THE GOVERNMENT OF GOD

Tonight I would like to talk about the political kingdom of God. I have more than one reason for wanting to discuss this subject. First, I do not believe that we can properly understand the Doctrine and Covenants' view on the redemption of Zion, the second coming, and the ushering in of the millennium unless we understand it from this particular viewpoint. This is probably the first and foremost reason I have for discussing it with you tonight.

Second, it is simply a matter of general information. I find that too often people in the Church think that the Prophet Joseph Smith was merely a religious teacher. They look at the Church as merely a Sunday religion and when someone talks about the Welfare Program or some other aspect of the gospel not fully religious in nature, they begin questioning the judgment and the authority of the brethren on these particular things and wonder why the Church should take an interest in such things. So it is good merely to have a broader orientation of the gospel program as the Lord intended it to function in this the dispensation of the fulness of time.

Third, I have been particularly interested in this field, and I will have the privilege tomorrow of going to Logan and giving a talk before the Utah Academy of Sciences, Arts, and Letters on this subject. It is a subject which is interesting to those people who are interested in Church history and the Prophet's fuller concept of Mormonism. Not too much is known about it, and not too much has been said about it. But there have been new developments in the way of historical findings in the last few months that have thrown quite a lot of light on this particular subject, and, since it has been my main interest, I have been the vanguard, so to speak, of these particular developments.

It was a mighty vision that filled the mind of Joseph Smith, the Mormon prophet. "I intend to lay a foundation," he said, "that will revolutionize the world." He went on to say that it is not by the sword or by the gun that this kingdom will roll on. The power of truth, he said, is such that eventually the nations of the earth will have to obey the gospel program in all its aspects.

I have already indicated that the Prophet by no means intended to establish merely a Sunday religion but was interested in establishing a full and complete society with spiritual, economic, and political aspects. Last time we said something about the fact that the society of Zion is based upon the principle of covenant. The Prophet said it was his endeavor to so organize the brethren that the Church might eventually be independent of all other creatures beneath the celestial kingdom by bonds and covenants of mutual love and mutual friendship. In Section 78 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord, after speaking of the principles pertaining to the Law of Consecration and Stewardship, made this statement:

Behold, this is the preparation wherewith I prepare you, and the foundation, and the ensample which I give unto you, whereby you may accomplish the commandments which are given you;

That through my providence, notwithstanding the tribulation which shall descend upon you, that the church may stand independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world. (D&C 78:13-14.)

Last time we discussed this particular passage, but I did not read the next verse. I would like to do that tonight. The Lord tells us in this verse why it is necessary for the Church to develop its economic program to the point that the Latter-day Saints as a body of people can become independent. The reason is a political one. He said:

That you may come up unto the crown prepared for you, and be made rulers over many kingdoms, saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Zion,... (D&C 78:15.)

Here the Lord makes it plain that the development of the society of Zion's economic principles is prerequisite to that day when, as Daniel prophesied, the kingdoms and the dominions and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven will be given to the saints of the most high God. Therefore, the development of the society of Zion in its social and economic aspects is somewhat prerequisite to the ushering in of the political kingdom wherein Christ will be crowned King of Kings and Lord of Lords and the Saints will have political responsibilities in the earth.

In Section 65 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord, by way of revelation, says something about the kingdom of God. It is a short revelation and I would like to read most of it:

Hearken, and lo, a voice as of one sent down from on high, who is mighty and powerful, whose going forth is unto the ends of the earth, yea, whose voice is unto men—Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.

The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth ... until it has filled the whole earth.

Yea, a voice crying—Prepare ye the way of the Lord, Prepare ye the supper of the Lamb, make ready for the Bridegroom.

Pray unto the Lord, call upon his holy name, make known his wonderful works among the people.

Call upon the Lord, that his kingdom may go forth upon the earth, that the inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days to come, in the which the Son of Man shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth.

Wherefore, may the kingdom of God go forth, that the kingdom of heaven may come,...

(D&C 65:1-6.)

The purpose of this latter-day program is to so prepare the way for Jesus so that he can come and accept the leadership of his kingdom which previously has been developed among the children of men. Therefore, we are to pray that the kingdom of God might come and be united with the kingdom of God here upon the earth.

This revelation makes reference to the stone being cut out of the mountain without hands. The reference is to the second chapter of Daniel in which Daniel, while interpreting Nebuchadnezzar's dream, speaks of these great world kingdoms or governments, world powers which would be established from the time of Nebuchadnezzar down to the modern period in which we now live. You recall that Nebuchadnezzar had a dream in which he saw an enormous figure which had a head of gold, a chest and arms of silver, a belly and thighs of brass, legs of iron, and toes and feet of iron and clay.

Daniel gave the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's dream, stating that the Babylonian kingdom was symbolized by the head of gold on this great image; and after him another kingdom would arise inferior to the Babylonian kingdom. It would be likened unto the chest and arms of silver. This was the Persian Empire. He then said that a third kingdom would arise which would still be inferior in some respects to the previous kingdoms. This was the Grecio-Macedonian Empire. Coming on down through the parts of the body and their symbolism in the ruling powers of the earth, we come to the Roman Empire which was symbolized by iron and eventually divided, as the two legs from the body are divided, at Rome and at Constantinople.

Finally, we bring the thing down to this modern era when the influence of the so-called Holy Roman Empire had dwindled away and had come to a complete end with the French Revolution of 1789. The development of modern-day national kingdoms came after that. After interpreting this dream to this point, Daniel said, "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be...left to another people." (Daniel 2:44.) He goes on to say that this kingdom shall be likened unto a stone which shall be cut out of the mountain and that when these modern-day kingdoms would eventually, because of the judgments of God, be disintegrated and destroyed, the stone representing the kingdom of God in the latter-day shall roll forth out of the mountain and fill the world.

The point which I would like to make is that Church leaders from Joseph Smith to the present have interpreted this modern-day kingdom that God would set up as both a church and a state. For example, John Taylor once said:

Was the kingdom that the Prophets talked about, that should be set up in the latter times, going to be a Church? Yes. And a state? Yes, it was going to be both Church and State.... (Journal of Discourses, V, pp. 23-25.)

While referring to the "grand panorama of kingdoms" portrayed in Nebuchadnezzar's dream, Orson Pratt pointed out that the kingdom of God of the latter-days would include a political government. In referring to that dream he said: "It was a prophetic scenery, reaching to the latter times, showing him how man-made governments should be destroyed, and how the divine government should succeed and triumph, and have universal and everlasting dominion on the earth." (The Seer, II, p. 310.) And Brigham Young commented:

The kingdom that Daniel saw will push forth its law, and that law will protect the Methodists, Quakers, Pagans, Jews, and every other creed there ever was or ever will be, in their religious rights.... The kingdom that Daniel saw will actually make laws to protect every man in his rights, as our government does now, whether the religions of the people are true or false. (Journal of Discourses, II, p. 189.)

Let us take another line of reasoning on this subject. We believe that we are living in the dispensation of the fulness of times—in the day of restitution of all things—when all things will be properly restored to their true order and gathered together in Christ. In an editorial on the "Government of God," the Prophet once reasoned that it is impossible to gather all things together in Christ unless political power is brought under jurisdiction of the priesthood. (See DHC, V, p. 64.)

Another fact that we should consider is that the Prophet Joseph Smith, by holding the keys of this dispensation, by virtue of that position, held the right to lay the foundation of this dispensation through revelation. If he did fulfill his mission he must then have laid the foundation for the government of God, as well as for the society of Zion in its spiritual, social, and economic aspects. In other words, if the Prophet would have failed to lay the foundation for a political government that will one day fill the earth he would not have completed his mission here on earth; he could not clearly claim to stand at the head of the dispensation of the fulness of times in which dispensation all things are to be gathered together in Christ.

This new political organ that the Prophet developed shortly before his death, as the nucleus of the political kingdom which Daniel saw, was organized March 11, 1844, just a few weeks before the time of his martyrdom. This organization was called by several names. The Prophet, in initially organizing it, called it a Special Council; and then later he called it the General Council. We also find it referred to by those who were members as the Council of Fifty and the Council of the Kingdom. The latter term is derived from a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith which gave the constitution of this new political organ. In the revelation it makes this statement; giving the name of this particular kingdom, it says: "The kingdom of God and its laws and justice and judgments is in my hands."

One of the members of this particular body made this definition or comment relative to this kingdom and its nature. He says:

This council alluded to is the municipal department of the kingdom of God set up on earth, and from which all law emanates, for the rule, government, and control of all nations, kingdoms, tongues, and people under the whole heavens; but not to control the Priesthood but to counsel, deliberate, and plan for the general good and upbuilding of the kingdom of God on earth. (John D. Lee, A Mormon Chronicle, I, p. 80.)

I would like you to note that this political organ was to be the municipal department of the kingdom of God—the political phase of the total program. Thus, the term "kingdom of God" has a broader meaning than is usually given to it when we speak of it only as the Church. For example, Brigham Young once explained by first referring to the organizations of the Church and then declaring:

This is what we are in the habit of calling the Kingdom of God. But there are further organizations. The Prophet gave a full and complete organization of this kingdom the spring before he was killed.... The kingdom of God will protect every person, every sect and all people upon the face of the whole earth in their legal rights; I shall not tell you the names of the members of this kingdom, neither shall I read to you its constitution, but the constitution was given by revelation. The day will come when it will be organized in strength and power. (Journal of Discourses, XVII, p. 156.)

The prophecy is made by both Isaiah and Micah that during the universal reign of peace known as the millennium the law will go forth from Zion and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. In that future day when the kingdom of God is fully established in the earth there will be two great centers of religious, economic and political power—the city of Zion in America and the Jerusalem of Palestine. On the governmental powers in the first of these two cities, Orson Pratt said:

The law for the government of all nations will go forth from Zion as the laws for the government of the United States now go forth from Washington. Zion will be the seat of government and her officers will be far more respected, and have far more influence, than those of any government on the earth; all nations will yield perfect obedience to their command and counsels. (The Seer, II, pp, 266-267.)

It is evident that the Prophet thought considerably about the development of this future kingdom. He told Heber C. Kimball on at least two occasions that there would be these two poles of government with a central organ over both of them. In other words there would be two centers of power and a presiding organ over them. It is my opinion that this central organ will be located in the city of Zion.

Having said this much by way of general definition, let me say a little more about the nature of this political kingdom. In the political concept of this government we go back to the Constitution of the United States. The Latter-day Saints, I think, of all people have not only a healthy and a wholesome respect for the Constitution, but they have a unique and a very prophetic view of its mission in the earth. John Taylor considered the Constitution as "the entering wedge for the introduction of a new era, and in it were introduced principles for the birth and organization of a new world." (Journal of Discourses, XXI, p. 31.) He felt that there were heavenly inspired principles in the Constitution and that it had been developed and would be thereafter an opening wedge for a whole new era for freedom, of protection of the inalienable rights of mankind.

Orson Pratt made this statement, and here we get a prophetic view regarding the Constitution. He says that the Constitution of the United States is "a stepping stone to a form of government infinitely greater and more perfect—a government founded upon divine laws, and officers appointed by the God of heaven." (Ibid, VII, p. 215.) First, we see the general concept that the United States government had been established first as an opening wedge so that the principles of liberty and freedom might be introduced into the earth. Secondly, it had a divine purpose, and it would be maintained until such time as we developed a higher form of government which he calls this theocratic government of God.

On a later occasion, Orson Pratt made a statement in which he combined these two ideas—this entering wedge concept and this stepping stone idea—in the following statement:

The Lord had a hand in framing [the] Constitution. Why did not the Lord, at the time, introduce a perfect government—a theocracy? It was simply because the

people were not prepared for it.... They were far from being prepared for the government of God, which is a government of union.

But will the government of the United States continue forever? No, it is not sufficiently perfect; and, notwithstanding it has been sanctioned by the Lord at the time when it was suited to the circumstances of the people, yet the day will come ... when the United States government, and all others, will be uprooted and the kingdoms in this world will be united in one, and the kingdom of God will govern the whole earth.

The nucleus of such a government is formed [I would like you to note that it was already in existence when he made this statement.] and its laws have emanated

from the throne of God....

It was for this purpose, then, that the republic was organized upon this continent, to prepare the way for a kingdom that shall have dominion over all the earth to the ends thereof. (The Seer, I, Oct., 1853, pp. 147-148.)

Here is a marvelous concept of the United States Constitution, not only associating it with divine inspiration in its initial formation but also bringing it into a program of God for ushering in a peaceful and a progressive world order under the jurisdiction of the priesthood of God.

In that day and age when the nations of the earth beat their swords into plow shears as Isaiah prophesied, the Prophet Joseph Smith said that "all nations would learn by adopting the God-given Constitution of the United States as a Palladium of liberty and Equal Rights." (Benjamin F. Johnson's letter to George F. Gibbs, p. 8.)

In that day and age when the government of God is established it will utilize the basic foundation of the Constitution of the United States. When the millennial kingdom is ushered in and Christ is the reigning King of Kings and Lord of Lords, the Constitution, expanded to where it fills the role of a world government and is placed under the jurisdiction of the priesthood, will be the political organ of the millennial reign.

Evidently there were some clarifications necessary in this whole program, as Brigham Young stated that, "The Prophet gave a full and complete organization of this kingdom the spring before he was killed."

Now, let me talk just a moment about the Church and state affiliation here. Just as soon as we talk about politics in church, immediately a tingle goes up the spine and the hair stands straight up in back; and we have a lot of people wondering whether this is right or proper. They are willing to believe in the meekness and lowliness of Jesus, but they are not quite willing to believe in giving the Lord, through his priesthood, the right to direct in all the affairs of men. We have not quite gotten around to that particular idea; and that is one reason I am talking about this tonight. I do not know whether I am going to be mobbed for having done it, but I would like to talk about it to show you as nearly as I can from what information is available what we know about the Lord's program as revealed in the Doctrine and Covenants and through other latter-day revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Those who have spoken on this particular subject have maintained that the political kingdom and the Church are two different organizations. I would like you to keep that in mind. Even during the millennium there will be a separation of church and state despite the fact that the priesthood of God has something to say about politics.

Brigham Young often spoke of the kingdom as growing out of the Church. I hope that this does not confuse you. We have already noted the fact that this political kingdom would have jurisdiction over the world but would not control the priesthood in its particular functions and responsibilities. When the nucleus of this proposed kingdom was first organized, Brigham Young noted that it had several men as members who were not even members of the Church, yet they were members of this particular organ that the Prophet developed. That this was right and proper, Brigham Young explained, stating:

A man may be a legislator in a body which will issue laws to sustain the inhabitants of the earth in their individual rights and still not belong to the Church of Jesus Christ at all. And further, though a man may not even believe in any religion it would be perfectly right, when necessary, to give him the privilege of holding a seat among that body which shall make laws to govern all the nations of the earth and to control those who make no profession of religion at all; for that body would be governed, controlled and dictated to acknowledge others in those rights which they wish to enjoy themselves. (DHC, VII, p. 382.)

This is a unique idea. Here we find a political program which will bring into its organization good men of the earth who are not members of the Church, men of the earth who will be given political authority, men of the earth who may not even be believers in any form of religion. Others have made statements on this particular subject; among them was George Q. Cannon, who in his day was probably the intellectual of the Church. He went back to the Prophet Joseph Smith to get his ideas and concepts on the relationship between the Church and this political organ, stating:

We are asked, Is the Church of God, and the Kingdom of God the same organization? And we are informed that some of the brethren hold that they are separate.

This is the correct view to take. The Kingdom of God is a separate organization from the Church of God. There may be men acting as officers in the Kingdom of God who will not be members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. On this point the Prophet Joseph gave particular instructions before his death and gave an example, which he asked the younger elders who were present to always remember. It was to the effect that men might be chosen to officiate as members of the Kingdom of God who had no standing in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Kingdom of God when established will not be for the protection of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints alone, but for the protection of all men, whatever their religious views or opinions may be. Under its rule, no one will be permitted to overstep the proper bounds or to interfere with the rights of others. (DHC, VII, p. 382.)

After the martyrdom of the Prophet, we find in Church history the statement that George Miller and Alex Badlam wanted to call together the Council of Fifty and organize the Church, and they were told that the Council of Fifty was not a Church organization. It was composed of members irrespective of their religious faith and organized for the purpose of consulting on the best manner of obtaining redress of grievance from our enemies and to devise means to find and locate some place to live in peace. The work of organizing the Church belonged to the priesthood alone. I think we need to get this church and state relationship pretty well in mind. Benjamin F. Johnson, who was a member of this political body, points out other factors that are important in noting the separate and distinct nature of the two bodies. He pointed out that even though Joseph Smith and the Quorum of the Twelve and other leading brethren in Nauvoo at that time were members of this particular body, still all the constituted authorities of the Church were not members of it. Presidents Sidney Rigdon, William Law, William Marks, the High Council, and the presidents of quorums were not members of this council. In other words, it was not necessarily a spiritual body.

I am sure you are all familiar with the Prophet's so-called "last charge." The Prophet was meeting at that time with members of the so-called Council of Fifty; and a record of this last charge was given to us by Benjamin F. Johnson. Brother Johnson makes this comment:

He [the Prophet] stood before that association of his select friends, including all the Twelve, and with great feeling and animation, he graphically reviewed his life of persecution, labor, and sacrifice for the Church and the Kingdom of God, both of which he declared were now organized upon the earth, the burden of which had become too great for him longer to carry, that he was weary and tired with the way he had so long borne, and he then said with great vehemence, "And in the name of the Lord, I now shake from my shoulders the responsibility of bearing of the Kingdom of God to all the world, and here and now I place that responsibility with all the keys, powers and privileges pertaining thereto upon the shoulders of you, the Twelve Apostles, in connection with this council; and if you will accept this, to do it, God shall bless you mightily and shall open the way; and if you do not do it, you will be damned." (Johnson to Gibbs, op. cit., p. 10.)

Here again the Prophet is distinguishing between the two bodies, implying that they were separate and distinct by their nature.

The fact that the political kingdom was to be under the jurisdiction of the priesthood, however, implies that it had some relationship with the Church. That relationship can be best explained by noting that basically the priesthood is the kingdom of God; that is, that whenever the priesthood is on earth the kingdom of God is here. The Prophet on one occasion made such a clarification. But the law of the priesthood fully developed pertains both to the Church and a state. Thus, we can say that the priesthood has two functioning organs to carry out its purposes in the earth. One is the Church which pertains specifically to those who embrace the gospel in its religious, social and economic aspects. The other is the government of God which has the sole function of establishing political law and maintaining individual rights in the area of its jurisdiction.

Even though the two organizations are to be separate and apart from each other, we should keep in mind that the Church must be established before the political organ can be developed.

Let me give you a statement by John Taylor in which he talked about this political kingdom in relation to the Church and the need for first developing the society of Zion in its religious, social and other aspects before the political government could be set up.

We talk sometimes about the church of God, and why? We talk about the Kingdom of God [i.e., this envisioned political order], and why? Because before there could be a kingdom of God, there must be a church of God, and hence the first principles of the gospel were needed to be preached to all nations, as they were formerly when the Lord, Jesus Christ and others made their appearance on the earth. And why so? Because of the impossibility of introducing the law of God among a people who would not be subject to and guided by the spirit of revelation. Hence the world has generally made great mistakes upon these points. They have started various projects to try and unite and cement the people together without God; but they could not do it. Fourierism, Communism—another branch of the same thing—and many other principles of the same kind have been introduced to try and cement the human family together. And then we have had peace societies based upon the same principles. But all these have failed, and they will fail because however philanthropic, humanitarian, benevolent, or cosmopolitan our ideas, it is impossible to produce a true and correct union without the spirit of the living God....

Hence Jesus told his disciples to go and preach the gospel to every creature, baptising them in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost and said, "Lo, I am with you always even to the ends of the earth."

It was by this cementing and uniting spirit that true sympathetic fraternal relations could be introduced and enjoyed. (Journal of Discourses, XVIII, p. 134.)

The people must first believe in revelation and live the principles by which revelation can be a real thing. There needs to be an organization sufficiently strong and united to be an ensign to the people of the earth and to be capable of supporting a political law. When God has developed his people in a program of union and of brotherhood and love and strength to this position, then he will be able to introduce the political law and usher in the millennial reign.

We have made reference to the fact that this political kingdom was to be a theocracy. I would like to say a word or two about this idea of political government and the principle of theocracy. Most generally when we look at a theocratic government we look at something that is rather oppressive in which the people are bound down by superstition or by the various religious beliefs that they embrace. Brigham Young made this particular evaluation between the theocracy of God and the theocracies of men:

What does the world understand theocracy to be? A poor, rotten government of man, that would say, without the shadow of provocation or just cause, "Cut that man's head off; put that one in the rack; arrest another, and retain them in unlawful and unjust dress while you plunder his property and pollute his wife and daughters; massacre here and there." The Lord almighty does nothing of that kind, neither does any man who is controlled by his Spirit. (Journal of Discourses, VI, pp. 346-347.)

The government of God as a political theocracy was considered a perfect government. We talked last time about a perfect economic law. If this thing emanates from God and is actually a heavenly system, it must, by virtue of that fact, be a perfect system. So also the political government is of God. The theocratic government which the Prophet envisioned and for which he laid the foundation will be a theocracy and will be a perfect system. Orson Pratt makes this comment on it:

There is a nucleus of a government, formed since that of the United States, which is perfect in its nature. It is perfect, having emanated from a Being who is perfect. The nucleus of such a government is formed, and its laws have emanated from the throne of God, and it is perfect, having come from a pure foundation. (Journal of Discourses, VI, pp. 346-347.)

We said something relative to the fact that when the day comes that kingdom and dominion and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven is given to the Saints, and the elders of Israel step forth to save the Constitution and initiate the law of God; in that day the Constitution of the United States will be the basis of this political kingdom. Brigham Young made this statement on it:

As a theocratic republic, the government of God will be controlled upon the same basis in part as that of the government of the United States; and it will govern and protect in their rights the various classes of men, irrespective of their different modes of worship. (Ibid., V, pp. 329-330.)

Here, then, we see another idea in regard to this whole thing. You might ask the question: How could a political organ formulated upon the pattern of government as given in the Constitution be theocratically interpreted and at the same time be very much like the government that we are now familiar with?

I would like to answer that question with this statement. When the United States Constitution was formulated at the Philadelphia Convention of 1787, there was absolutely no intention whatsoever of organizing a government to be controlled or to be affiliated with political parties. The idea of theocracy itself rules out the idea that we utilize the political party as instruments for placing men in political positions and thereafter controlling them. If we are going to do it through the principles of theocracy, there is no need for this device that has grown up and that is a perversion, if I can say it that bluntly—a perversion of the initial concept of government as founded by the Founding Fathers. There is no need of this perversion, then, in installing men in political office. I want to make that definitely plain if I can. Let me give you a statement by Brigham Young on this particular idea and then we can devise a means by which we can see the proper concept. He says:

But few, if any, understand what a theocratic government is. In every sense of the word, it is a republican government, [i.e., a government which represents the interest of people and representative in its nature], and differs but little in form from our National, State, and Territorial Governments; but [and here is the difference] its subjects will recognize the will and the dictation of the Almighty.... [I would like to emphasize that: Its subjects will recognize the will and dictation of the Almighty.]

The constitution and laws of the United States resemble a theocracy more closely than any government now on earth. Even now the form of government of the United States differs but little from the Kingdom of God. (Journal of Discourses, VI, p. 342.)

Now, let me go back and reconstruct an idea or two if I can. We have the kingdom of God growing out of the Church. We have two separate organizations—the Church and the political kingdom. The kingdom of God in many respects is similar to the government of the United States. If you want to go back further you find that the Lord inspired the formation of the government of the United States and that it has a divine role; and it will continue to have a divine role and will be established under the kingdom of God as the political organ of the millennial reign of Christ.

I shall now explain how this relationship can be properly brought about. In other words, how can the political kingdom grow out of the Church and still be separate from the Church? Let me give you an example in our own organization of government today. In a sense the federal judiciary grows out of the executive office by virtue of the fact that federal judges are appointed and do not come into being as judges except by the appointment of the President of the United States, with the consent of the Senate. In this respect, the federal judiciary could be said to grow out of the executive office; but after the person is appointed, there is what we call a constitutional separation between the executive and the judicial functions of government; so, they are separated in the functions by constitutional provisions which imply that one shall not infringe upon the other.

So also in a government much like the government of the United States a theocracy could grow out of the Church if we gave the proper priesthood councils the authority to appoint men to political office, with the consent of the people, thus doing away with the need for this thing which we call a political party and giving the priesthood of God, through inspiration and revelation, the right to nominate men to political office with the consent of the people in much the same way we do in introducing men to Church office today.

If we were to do this and thereafter separate constitutionally the Church and the state, we would have the political kingdom as Brigham Young reiterated over and over again growing out of the Church. Yet the Church and state could be two separate bodies.

On the fact that the Constitution was originally devised to function without political parties, E. E. Schattachneider, an authority on the development of the role of the presidency and party government, said that the Founding Fathers held a "legalistic concept of government incompatible with a satisfactory system of party government." Instead, he pointed out that the Fathers purposely devised an instrument of government in such a way that "the parties would lose and exhaust themselves in futile attempts to fight their way through the labyrinthine framework of the government, much as an attacking army is expected to spend itself against the defensive works of a fortress." (Party Government, pp. 6-10.)

James Madison—the "Father of the Constitution"—also makes the above point very plain. Madison is the author of the "Federalist No. 10." I might just say a word about what the "Federalist No. 10" is. When the Constitution was written in the Convention of 1787, the next project was to get the people of the various colonies to accept the Constitution as their system of government. In order to get them to accept of it, a fellow by the name of John Jay in New York induced Alexander Hamilton to assist him in writing a series of articles explaining what the Constitution was—explaining its benefits and why the people should accept it. Later James Madison was invited to write some of these articles. These articles are known today as the Federalist Papers and they are the most complete and comprehensive commentary that we have on this inspired document which we call the Constitution of the United States.

The most quoted in all the essays in the Federalist Papers is Madison's "Federalist No. 10." In this particular document Madison is writing about the benefits of the new political government that they had devised, and in introducing this article he made this statement: "Among the numerous advantages promised by a well-constructed Union, none deserve to be more accurately developed than its tendency to break and control the violence of faction." After making that statement he went on to explain that this government would allow man to have his free agency; it would allow liberty, and it would allow the differences that would come from liberty. If I have my liberty and you have yours, under this particular freedom we are free to develop ourselves. You develop one interest and another interest. I become affiliated with one faction or group, and you may become affiliated with another faction or group. It is not long before we want to control government in our interest. So we have the origin of a political party.

Madison says that one of the unique things about this federal government is its power to break and control factions and not to allow them to control government. He said that it does it in several ways: First, on the federal level we have what we call a separation of powers horizontally—we have the judiciary; we have the executive; we have the legislative body. Secondly, in our federal system we find that we have what we call a vertical separation of powers—we have the federal level of government, the state level, and the local level. Any particular body and any particular faction might by one means or another gain control of the local level. You people that lost out in the recent election here in Ogden might take this as an example, but it is pretty hard for a group to so organize itself that on the state level it controls the judiciary, the executive, and the legislative functions. It is extremely hard for them to control all of them so that they can both make law, interpret law, and execute law in their own particular interest.

If we raise this thing to a higher level, it is pretty hard for a party or a group of people getting together because of their own interests to control not only the local and state governments but to control the three phases of federal government in their interests so that they can on the federal level make law, interpret law, and execute law in their interests. So the federal system is much like, you might say, the opposing fortress against which an army is supposed to spend its strength. People are given their free agency. They are able to organize themselves and to have different interests, but when they come against the framework of the government as was devised by the Founding Fathers, then it is pretty hard for parties to control government.

Now it is true that they have done so to some extent. I do not say this with any animosity toward the good Democrats in the audience, but probably the point where they most fully controlled all phases and facets of government was back in 1936, when President Roosevelt, having control of the executive and control of the legislative, endeavored to pack the Supreme Court so that he could interpret the law and get his program through. This may have been either good or bad; I am staying out of the political squabble, but either good or bad this is one incident where a party controlled all phases and facets of government in its own particular interest.

The Constitution, then, is not compatible with party organization. It was the concept of the Prophet Joseph Smith and it was voiced by George Q. Cannon that in that day and age when the kingdom of God supports the Constitution, it will restore the Constitution to its primary concept. It will restore it to the concept that was formulated in 1787, under the inspiration of God working in the minds of the Founding Fathers.

The revelations that the Lord has given in the Doctrine and Covenants concerning the Constitution of the United States are significant in this light. Let me turn with you to Section 98 of the Doctrine and Covenants and read what the Lord said about the Constitution:

And that law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind,... (D&C 98:5.)

Who does it belong to? All mankind! Is it limited, so far as the Lord is concerned, just to America? Is the intent of the Lord in preparing those men to raise up and to formulate the Constitution merely to establish a local document? He says it was expected to be established for all mankind.

In Section 101 of the Doctrine and Covenants this same idea comes again to us by the revelation of the Lord:

According to the laws and constitution of the people, which I have suffered to be established, and should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles;

That every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment. (D&C 101:77-78.)

The Lord is interested in maintaining individual rights. The Lord was not interested in establishing a government that is merely, you might say, the reflection of the majority will. From this standpoint, the government of the United States was not devised to be the subject of majority opinion. The Constitution was devised to maintain individual rights. This is the basic reason for which the Lord established it—"that every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity," as he says, "according to the moral agency which I have given unto him." (D&C 101:78.)

He goes on to make this comment in Section 98:

Therefore, I, the Lord, justify you, and your brethren of my church, in befriending that law which is the constitutional law of the land;

And as pertaining to law of man, whatsoever is more or less than this, cometh of evil. (D&C 98:6-7.)

I think we have got a pretty good declaration of what the Lord means by the law of the land: "Whatsoever pertains to more or less than this cometh of evil." The old Articles of Confederation probably came to evil. They did not have the necessary things about them to establish a just and a secure government which would, to the extent that they wanted, guarantee the rights of men. So in this respect it would come unto evil. When we say, on the other hand, that we should develop a socialistic program that will regiment and control the individual's economic aspects of life to the extent that a person is told by government what he shall do, then this also comes of evil. I think that this is very significant where he says, "Whatsoever is more or less than this, cometh of evil." This concept is a part of the revelation of the Lord for establishing a just and a secure government, uncontrolled by popular opinion, uncontrolled by a majority party, dedicated solely to the guarantee of the inalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. I think this was the intent that the Lord had in mind in establishing this Constitution.

The project of developing the kingdom of God politically is actually and should be considered as a joint project between members and non-members alike. We should keep that in mind. We have talked about the fact that there were non-members in this initial organ that the Prophet Joseph Smith devised and that the concept was that non-members could be appointed to political positions—even non-members who had no religion at all. It is in this light that the Quorum of the Twelve wrote an article to the Church in which they gave a call to the nations of the earth to come and assist in the development of this political kingdom. This is what they said; I think, if I recall, this came out in 1847:

Come then, ye Saints; Come then ye honorable men of the earth; come then ye wise, ye learned, ye rich, ye noble, according to the riches and wisdom and knowledge of the Great Jehovah; from all nations, and kindreds and kingdoms, and tongues, and peoples and dialects on the face of the whole earth, and join the standard of Emmanuel, and help us build up the Kingdom of God, and establish the principles of truth, life, and salvation....

The Kingdom of God consists in correct principles; and it mattereth not what a man's religious faith is; whether he be Presbyterian, or a Methodist, or a Baptist, or a Latter-day Saint or "Mormon," or a Catholic, or Episcopalian, or Mohammedan, or even pagan, or anything else, if he will bow of the knee and with his tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ, and will support good and wholesome laws for the regulation of society, we hail him as a brother, and will stand by him while he stands by us in these things; for every man's religious faith is a matter between his own soul and his God alone; but if he shall deny Jesus, if he shall curse God, if he should indulge in debauchery and drunkedness, and crime; if he shall lie, and swear, and steal; and if he shall take the name of the Great God in vain, and commit all manner of abominations, he shall have no place in our midst. (Millennial Star, Vol. 10, pp. 81-88.)

The idea here is to eliminate everything of a telestial nature, and this, I think, brings us again to the subject of what the millennial reign will look like. For years we have been praying in the Lord's Prayer:"... thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven." Here we have probably prayed in faith, but I think we have probably prayed also in darkness. When the kingdom of God is established in fulfillment of the Lord's Prayer, there will be members and non-members of the Church alike in this body. Brigham Young made this statement: "If the Latter-day Saints think when the Kingdom of God is established on earth, that the inhabitants of the earth will join the church called Latter-day Saints they are egregiously mistaken...." (Journal of Discourses, XI, p. 275.)

To find how the will of God is done in heaven, let me turn with you here to Section 76 and show you what the Lord says. Section 76, you know, is the section dealing with the three degrees of glory and one talks about the human family in eternity and the government of the human family in eternity. I would like to point out here that there is a gradation of individuals and gradation of societies in the hereafter—a gradation from the celestial kingdom extending clear down to at least the telestial kingdom. He says concerning those of a telestial nature:

These are they who shall not be redeemed from the devil until the last resurrection, until the Lord, even Christ the Lamb, shall have finished his work.

These are they who receive not of his fulness in the eternal world, but of the Holy Spirit through the ministration of the terrestrial;

And the terrestrial through the ministration of the celestial.

And also the telestial receive it of the administering of angels who are appointed to minister for them, or who are appointed to be ministering spirits for them; for they shall be heirs of salvation. (D&C 76:85-89.)

If the will of God is done in heaven, then the celestial society of God is introduced and developed to the point that, as a highly progressive and intelligent people, it holds the reign of government over all other people. It also holds the responsibility of ministering to people in lesser forms of society, and so the will of God in heaven is not to force all to come into the celestial kingdom. When His will is done here upon the earth, there will be men who will even be members of His kingdom politically who are not members of His Church. Brigham Young said this very bluntly. He said that during the millennium there will be men who will say, "Yes, I know that you are Jesus Christ; yes, I know that this is your Church, but I will be damned if I will serve you." I quote Brigham Young; I seldom swear unless I am quoting one of the brethren. This is his statement as to what the will of God on earth would be.

When the millennium is ushered in, when Christ comes, that which is of a telestial nature will be consumed, will be destroyed, by the brightness of his coming. It will leave here upon the earth all those who are capable of living both a celestial and a terrestrial law.

This is a rather broad topic. Tonight I merely wanted to introduce it to you so that we might get a broader view of this program of the Lord and that we might also see some of these teachings in the Doctrine and Covenants in a broader perspective. It was a great vision that filled the Prophet's mind. This was part of the work that he did. It was, you might say, the unfolding from time to time of one aspect of Mormonism after another to the point that before his death he developed and laid the foundation for this the dispensation of the fulness of times in which all things, religious, economic and political will be gathered together in Christ here upon this earth.

Let me give one closing statement here in relation to all that we have said the last two meetings about this covenant system and about the need of the world to accept of God's program—not only of the people of the Church to accept of God's program, but of the world to accept of it that they might have established a political kingdom capable of guaranteeing unto them inalienable rights of liberty, etc. In the light of all this philosophy the Lord made a very important statement here in Section 49 of the Doctrine and Covenants:

Wherefore, I say unto you that I have sent unto you mine everlasting covenant [i.e., this gospel program], even that which was from the beginning.

And that which I have promised I have so fulfilled, and the nations of the earth shall bow to it [They will give it as a covenant system the right to direct them in their affairs.]; and, if not of themselves, they shall come down, for that which is now exalted of itself shall be laid low of power. (D&C 49:9-10.)

Here is an ultimatum on the part of the Lord that the nations of the earth will accept of this program, including the right of this covenant system to direct in the affairs of man; and if they do not accept of it, they will come down. Next week I shall discuss the "coming down" part.

May the Lord bless you in the meantime.

Note: A fuller explanation of this political kingdom and the role it played in the Mormon movement can be found in Hyrum L. Andrus' Joseph Smith and World Government, published by Deseret Book Company, March, 1958.
