Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Themes of the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1957)

V

A VOICE OF WARNING

Tonight I would like to discuss the topic with you, "The Doctrine and Covenants, as a Voice of Warning." In Section 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants, which is the preface for the book, the Lord begins by making this statement:

Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the voice of him...whose eyes are upon all men; yea, verily I say: Hearken ye people from afar; and ye that are upon the islands of the sea, listen together.

For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated.

And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed.

And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days. (D&C 1:1-4.)

The Doctrine and Covenants, then, begins on a note of warning. I do not know that we can find any time in history when the Lord has revealed a dispensation of the gospel but what he has accompanied that message of the gospel with a message of warning and a prediction of judgment and justice if the people reject the message that he gives unto them. So it was in the days of Noah, so it was in the days of the Lord's ministry on earth, so also it is in our own day and age. In Section 5 of the Doctrine and Covenants, in a revelation given through the Prophet to Martin Harris, we read:

For a desolating scourge shall go forth among the inhabitants of the earth, and shall continue to be poured out from time to time, if they repent not, until the earth is empty, and the inhabitants thereof are consumed away and utterly destroyed by the brightness of my coming.

Behold, I tell you these things, even as I also told the people of the destruction of Jerusalem; and my word shall be verified at this time as it hath hitherto been verified. (D&C 5:19-20.)

This is quite a statement. The world today has two alternatives: one of repentance and embracing the program of God, and the other of suffering the consequence of their iniquitous acts until the judgment and the justice of God will be executed to the point that they will be cleansed from the earth to prepare for his millennial reign.

In Section 112 the Lord gives us another statement regarding the future judgments that were to come upon the earth:

Behold, vengeance cometh speedily upon the inhabitants of the earth, a day of wrath, a day of burning, a day of desolation, of weeping, of mourning, and of lamentation; and as a whirlwind it shall come upon all the face of the earth,... [Note the universal concept here. It indicates that we were going to have a universal period of international conflict and destruction among the people of the earth.]

And upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord;

First among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house, saith the Lord. (D&C 112:24-26.)

There are some people who maintain this part of the prophecy as being still in the future. The revelation was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1837. It may be that the judgment and the persecution that came upon the Church thereafter, at least in part, fulfilled this statement that the Lord was first going to houseclean in his own backyard before he did anything else.

We may be looked upon as rather pessimistic souls if we always look to the gloomy side of things. I would like to give what we may call a philosophy of judgment and of destruction—a kind of a wholesome philosophy of judgment and destruction, if it can be labelled as such. First, let me turn back to the Preface of the Doctrine and Covenants, which the Lord gave by way of forewarning. I think it indicates clearly that the Lord does not delight in bringing down judgment and destruction upon his children.

Wherefore, I the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments;

And also gave commandments to others, that they should proclaim these things unto the world; and all this that it might be fulfilled, which was written by the prophets—(D&C 1:17-18.)

This statement brings out the idea that the Lord would forewarn the earth. Knowing what was coming as a natural consequence of the acts of men, He instituted at this point the gospel as the only program of peace religiously, socially, economically, and eventually politically in the earth, so that He left that generation and subsequent generations without excuse by giving them first the program by which they might avert the destructions which would result. Next, He endeavored through the proclamation of this message to forewarn them and return them to the program of peace. This is part of this philosophy of destruction as the Prophet gave it to us. A statement from the Book of Mormon also is pertinent to this topic. Nephi is talking about the ushering in of a better way of life, ushering in the millennial reign—this society of God that would alleviate the stress among men, exalt the poor, give the earth to the meek, and do away with the haughtiness and arrogance of the world:

And I would, my brethren, that ye should know that all the kindreds of the earth cannot be blessed unless he shall make bare his arm in the eyes of the nations.

(1 Nephi 22:10.)

God's ultimate intent and desire in this period of judgment is to bless and to exalt the human family. Sometimes He has to do it through judgment and justice if He cannot do it through love and through persuasion. There are some social, economic, and political systems—in fact, most all of them in the earth today—which in some way infringe upon the growth and development of the individual.

I have a very good friend who was teaching at one of the universities in India. She happened to be associated with me in my doctoral work at Syracuse University and had read my dissertation a couple or three times. She knew pretty well what was in it—what it said about the worth of the individual. I got a letter from her not long ago and she was telling me about the society over there in India—how so very often the people were bound down by superstition and tradition and by things detrimental to the development of personality. She commented, after telling me about this, that these people need to know about Joseph Smith. This comes from a non-Mormon, a very prominent and eminent lady from New York—prominent enough that when Anthony Eden came over here in the interest of the British government she was asked to be at a reception for him. She was looking to the Latter-day Saints as an ideal people because of the philosophy they have, because of ideals they have, and because of this great program of Zion.

At any rate, there are a lot of societies so set in their principles and so oppressive and coercive that before there can be a better day, the elements of judgment and justice must be used to loosen things up so the people can be free to embrace better ideas. Thomas Jefferson, in the Declaration of Independence, made a statement to the effect that people are prone to suffer as long as suffering can be endured rather than change the forms to which they are accustomed. This is certainly true. People become accustomed to some form or type of society and will suffer under this type of thing so long that suffering ceases to be a virtue, rather than overthrow the thing and get something better.

The Lord in our day and age wants to bless the inhabitants of the earth and he is doing it by the outpouring of knowledge and truth. Eventually He will do it by the destruction of man-made governments, man-made religious systems, and other types of man-made systems, so that the light of the gospel and its glorious influence upon the individual might be universally felt in the human family. This is Nephi's philosophy of judgment as it is to apply to the latter days. I would like to analyze with you some of the means by which the Lord controls and manages the affairs of men. We talked about God as a great celestial being—a person whose physical tabernacle is so filled with light and truth or intelligence that this light and truth is concentrated to a point of blazing glory. We have also talked about how God is a physical entity who can be everywhere present by the influence of his Holy Spirit, so that, as Paul says, he is not far from every one of us, for in him we live and move and have our being. In this respect, then, all life in the universe, all organized life in some manner is dependent upon these celestial life-giving forces that come from the presence of God. Therefore, John could say that Christ is the true light that enlighteneth every man that cometh into the world.

In other words, man could not think, concentrate, or produce the wonders that he does in modern science except as his mind is operated upon by spiritual forces emanating from God. Orson Pratt made this statement:

We need the help of the Lord, in some measure, in our researches, to learn anything; we need the influence of the Spirit of God to quicken the light that is within us, for light clingeth to light, and the Spirit of God is light, and it cleaves unto the light that enters into the composition of the spirit of man. [Note that there is some union between the Spirit of God as a highly refined and spiritual light and that light that goes into the composition of the spirit of man to make human existence possible.] (Journal of Discourses, XVII, p. 327.)

When we analyze what the scriptures have said about the influence of the Spirit of the Lord upon man, we find that it has a marked influence upon his life. For example, the Doctrine and Covenants states that the Spirit of the Lord "leadeth to do good—yea to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously." (D&C 11:12.) In Mosiah 2:36 we find that under the influence of the Spirit of the Lord people were blessed, prospered, and preserved. It led them to be submissive, meek, humble, and to be full of love. We also find that while filled with the love of God, men grow in the knowledge of that which is just and true and do not desire to injure one another but to live peacefully.

The influence of the Lord is one of peace, tranquility, enlightenment of mind, social union and brotherhood. That is why we said that it was so important in establishing a covenant society for people to have the gift of the Holy Ghost. The Spirit of the Lord, according to the Book of Mormon, is also synonymous to the spirit of liberty; so, if the spirit of liberty burns in the heart of men, then it comes or is directly associated with the Spirit of the Lord. (See Alma 61:15.)

On the other hand, by way of contrast, the withdrawal of this type of influence from the lives of men has an opposite effect. According to Mosiah, it gives us a sense of guilt, or pain and anguish resulting in feelings of insecurity, anxiety, and uncertainty. Nephi gives us this particular definition of what it does when the Spirit of the Lord is withdrawn. He says that when the spirit ceases to strive with men, then comes speedy destruction. It is noteworthy that when the Spirit of the Lord withdrew from both the Nephite and the Jaredite nations because of their iniquity, civil war and conflict broke out to the point that they were eventually destroyed. For example, in the book of Ether we have this statement by Moroni:

...the Spirit of the Lord had ceased striving with them, and Satan had full power over the hearts of the people; for they were given up unto the hardness of their hearts, and the blindness of their minds that they might be destroyed; wherefore they went again to battle. (Ether 15:19.)

Man in every respect is dependent upon God. If we are going to talk about a latter period of judgment, conflict, and wars, that period of judgment and justice on the part of God must come because men have through their wickedness rejected the Spirit of the Lord in their lives. Having rejected it, it is withdrawn. As it is withdrawn, animosity, hate, international conflict, and eventually war and destruction break out. I think the two examples we have already cited of the Nephite and Jaredite nations are examples of the result—civil war on the part of both of them.

The developing conflict, as pointed out by the Prophet Joseph Smith, would, first of all, transpire here upon the American Continent and would be part of this modern period of war and destruction. In Section 63 of the Doctrine and Covenants, a revelation in August,1831, is this statement:

I, the Lord, am angry with the wicked; I am holding my Spirit from the inhabitants of the earth.

I have sworn in my wrath, and decreed wars upon the face of the earth, and the wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every man. (D&C 63:32-33.)

In a letter to a man by the name of Seaton, an editor in Rochester, New York, the Prophet Joseph Smith, in January, 1833, referred to this revelation; and this is what the Prophet had to say about the whole thing relative to the coming Civil War that he, through prophecy, knew was close at hand upon the American continent. He said:

The Lord declared to His servant some eighteen months since, that He was then withdrawing His Spirit from the earth; and we can see that such is the fact, ... and destruction to the eye of the spiritual beholder [not to the natural but to the spiritual beholder] seems to be written by the finger of an invisible hand, in large capitals, upon all most everything we behold. (DHC, I, p. 314.)

You will note that here the Prophet Joseph is applying this same principle to world society in general, and more particularly to American Society, because he followed this statement up with a declaration as follows: "And now I am prepared to say, by authority of Jesus Christ, that not many years shall pass away before the United States shall present such a scene of bloodshed as has not a parallel in the history of our nation." (DHC, I, p. 315.)

Here, then, is the basic cause of the Civil War. Here is the basis of the conflict that eventually centered on the slave issue, the economic issues and the political issues. The basis of this conflict had its origin in the withdrawal of the Spirit of the Lord from the lives of the people in that day.

Let me give you two or three statements further on this particular subject to show you the concept in more detail as it is given not only by the Prophet but by others who were associated with him.

"The Spirit of God will also dwell with His people, and be withdrawn from the rest of the nations," said an editorial in the Times and Seasons, in April, 1842. As a consequence, said Jedediah M. Grant while quoting the Prophet's words: "There should be blood upon the face of the whole earth, except among the people of the Most High." (Journal of Discourses, II, pp. 146-147.)

Charles W. Penrose, one of the great minds of Mormonism, also indicated that so far as the people of Zion were concerned, the influence of the Spirit of the Lord would prompt them to "progress in arts. sciences, and everything that would promote happiness, union, and establish in strength righteousness and everlasting peace." On the other hand, he declared that the "Spirit of God" would be "withdrawn from" the world resulting in an "increase of confusion, doubt, and horrible strife," until "fear would take hold of the hearts of all men." (Millennial Star, September 10, 1859.)

Let me go back to the period when the Prophet Joseph Smith made these declarations and show by a few statements the change that came over American society between 1830 and 1835. In our first discussion here with you people we indicated that there was a general preparation on the part of the earth for the message of the gospel. From that standpoint the Spirit of the Lord was working in the lives of many men and in doing so was prompting them to be prepared for the message of the gospel. On the other hand there is another trend developing right at this period of time. This period seems to have marked the crest of the preparatory developments that were made for the restoration of the gospel. It was like a wave coming over a rock and the water goes down on both sides. In other words, before the early 1830's there seems to have been preparatory forces that operated in the lives of men to where they were awakened to seek for that which the Lord was restoring through Joseph Smith. After the early 1830's, however, another underlying factor, which led to conflict and civil strife, started to develop.

Let me read what Emerson had to say. I think probably he sums these developing trends up about as well as anyone, and, having been right on the scene and interested in the developments of society at his day, he is pretty authentic in his report. He makes the comment that, while

... the thoughtful and virtuous manifested a deeper belief and reliance on spiritual facts, there was in all the practical activities of New England ... a gradual withdrawal of tender consciousness from social organizations. (Emerson, "New England Reformers.")

In other words, the forces of union and good will within the society of his day were ebbing away while those who were generally repentant and humble manifested a deeper reliance on spiritual truth. Here, then, was this disintegrating trend that finally led to the Civil War.

In the first week of September, 1835, a man by the name of Hezekiah Niles decided to tabulate the trend of conflict in his day, and in one week he clipped from the newspapers here in America five hundred articles dealing with items reporting acts of violence and disorders throughout the country. And then, in appraising this changing situation, he made this comment: "Society seems everywhere unhinged and the demons of 'blood and slaughter' have been let loose upon us. The character of our countrymen seems suddenly changed." (See Schlisinger, The Age of Jackson, p. 210.) The change was a change toward inter-conflict with the forces that were promoting life and cooperation; and brotherly union had begun to ebb away, and, as a result, hate and animosity and conflict developed in American society.

The period of time between 1789, when we got the American Constitution, and 1830 is known in American history as the era of nationalism. It was a period of time when there was a good deal of cooperation politically, economically, and religiously. It was a period of time when the religious cooperation was such that the Presbyterian and the Congregational churches almost united because of the sentiment of cooperation among them. The period from 1830 to 1860, however, is known as the period of sectionalism in America. It eventually led to the outbreak of Civil War. Beginning with the period of the 1830's you had this transitional change right when the Prophet Joseph Smith said that the Spirit of the Lord was being withdrawn from the nations of the earth and from America because of their iniquity. During that period of time there was a loosening of the cords of society; there came the development of radical abolitionism here in America. There had been abolitionist movements previous to 1830, but about 1830 there was a change in tone and an intense radicalism took over in the abolition movement which fanned the flames of discontent and animosity and hatred among the people.

On the other hand, on the southern scene, the South up to about 1830 had had an apologetic attitude about the institution of slavery; however, when you get to the 1830 period you see that things changed. They began justifying it; and eventually under the developing spirit of the times they not only justified it but endeavored to build a Greek democracy founded upon slavery and almost completely departed from the sentiments of Jefferson and others who were dominant spokesmen for the equal rights of men.

This change is significant because of the fact that the Spirit of the Lord was being withdrawn from the day and age when the Saints themselves became the recipients of the era of hate and animosity that was developing. For example, Harriet Martineau, a prominent English woman, came to America and wrote a two-volume work entitled Society in America. She noted the developing trend toward the growth of hate and persecution. This is what she said about it:

Hatred is not too strong a term for this sectional prejudice. Many a time in America have I been conscious of that pang and shudder which are felt only in the presence of hatred. I question whether the enmity between the British and the Americans, at the most exasperating crisis of the war [the War of 1812] could ever have been more intense than some that I have seen flashing in the eyes, and heard from the lips, of American's against fellow citizens in distant sections of their country. (Martineau, Society in America, I, p. 185.)

This was not just animosity between the North and the South, but also between the East and the West, and, in general, between the various sections and divisions of the American nation. I personally do not think that we can understand Mormon history unless we understand it in light of these developing trends. When we see what went on in Missouri, these things must be seen in this background. When we see the failure to support law and order in America, as it pertained to the Latter-day Saints as a persecuted group of people, we must explain such things, at least in part, in this particular background.

Nor was the development of such trends limited to America. I was interested in noting that the general trend of development toward war and international conflict existed not only in America but in Europe at this particular period. For example, two writers on modern political thought, in a work called Western Political Heritage, made this comment concerning the change in the temper and the tone of society on the European scene:

There was a change of temper... on the continent. In politics, Fichte, in Germany, had given the philosophic groundwork for that ruthless nationalism of which Hitler became the legitimate heir. Hegel, in his dialectic process of evolving reality from the world of the spirit, nevertheless talked in terms of the conflict between thesis and antithesis as the nature of the historical process before the synthesis of their resolution of forces. In the European world that was to dominate human history for a considerable period, the fundamental doctrine of liberalism, i.e., the natural identity and harmony of self-interest, gave place to a world of struggle which Nietzche has described in terms of reputiation of the Christian morality through the philosophy of "Superman." The intellectual climate in a great part of the world was changing, ... emphasizing ... the more direct and animalistic qualities of human nature...including the for power. (Western Political Heritage, pp. 167-169.)

This type of thing, then, was characteristic not only here in America, but also throughout the world. In its modern derivation we come down to the international period of struggle and of chaos where brute force is actually the only power that is recognized, and the moral forces of society seem to have been withdrawn to a great extent.

On the American continent it had its effect in lawlessness and in disorder and in persecution, in short, in disregard for the rights of the individual. Under its influence the Mormon people could be driven from pillar to post and could be robbed and plundered of their goods, and government sat by and did nothing about it.

Harriet Martineau wrote of several such situations throughout America, and this is what she said:

It is notorious that there is a remarkable failure in this department of political morals among certain parties in the United States. The mobbing events of the last few years are celebrated; the abolition riots in New York and Boston; the burning of the Charleston Convent; the bank riots at Baltimore; the burning of the mails at Charleston; the hanging by lynch-law at Vicksburg; the burning alive of a man of colour at St. Louis; the subsequent proceedings there toward the students of Marion College; and the abolition riots at Cincinnati. Here is a fearful list! (Martineau, op.cit., I, pp. 174-175.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith made a similar statement, applying it to the coming of civil strife in America if it were not checked. To quote:

... If the wicked mob who destroyed Charleston Convent, and the cool, calculating religious lookers-on who inspired their hearts with deeds of infamy, do not arise, and redress the wrongs, and restore the injury four-fold, they, in turn, will receive the measure they have meted out, till the just indignation of a righteous God is satisfied. When will man cease to war with man, and wrest from him his sacred rights of worshiping his God according as his conscience dictates? Holy Father, hasten the day! (DHC, II, p. 465.)

So it was upon this basis that the Prophet Joseph Smith issued the doctrine or the edict that if the American nation did not cleanse itself and execute justice in behalf of the Latter-day Saints, that this developing trend toward disintegration and civil conflict would ripen into civil war. Here, then, is the basis of his viewpoint regarding the imminence of the American Civil War. For example, he wrote to John C. Calhoun, the dominant political figure of the South in his day, stating:

Although you may wink to the priest to stigmatize, wheedle the drunkards to swear, and raise the hue-and-cry of "Imposter! false prophet! G—D—old Joe Smith!' yet remember, if the Latter-day Saints are not restored to all their rights and paid for all their losses according to the known rules of justice and judgment, reciprocation and common honesty among men, that God will come out of His hiding place, and vest this nation with a sore of vexation: Yea, the consuming wrath of an offended God shall smoke through the nation with as much distress and woe as independence has blazed through with pleasure and delight. Where is the strength of government? Where is the patriotism of a Washington, a Warren, an Adams? And where is a spark from the watch-fire of '76, by which one candle might be lit that would glimmer upon the confines of democracy? (DHC, VI, p. 158.)

This is the concept of the Prophet Joseph Smith. This thing could ripen into civil war, and the Latter-day Saints were a good example of the negligence of government in curtailing the disintegrating trends toward animosity, hate, and civil strife. The view of the Latter-day Saints is clear. The Prophet Joseph did not, out of the clear blue sky, without any understanding, interpret the situation, but with a knowledge that the Spirit of the Lord is a vital factor in the lives of men. With this type of knowledge as a guiding principle, he could speak prophetically of the future.

There is another intersting aspect of this problem that we should cover. In Section 45 of the Doctrine and Covenants we have this statement given to the Church in March, 1831. These are the instructions of the Lord regarding the early movements of the Church toward the West:

Ye hear of wars in foreign lands; but, behold, I say unto you, they are nigh, even at your doors, and not many years hence ye shall hear of wars in your own lands.

Wherefore I, the Lord, have said, gather ye out from the eastern lands, assemble ye yourselves together ye elders of my church; go ye forth into the western countries, call upon the inhabitants to repent, and inasmuch as they do repent, build up my churches unto me. (D&C 45:63-64.)

Here is a direct warning for the Latter-day Saints to move west that they might, in doing so, avert the coming Civil War that was so imminent. They recognized that through the spirit of prophecy the war would come unless the people repented. In Section 42 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord makes this statement:

And even now, let him that goeth to the east teach them that shall be converted to flee to the west, and this in consequence of that which is coming on the earth, and of secret combinations. (D&C 42:64.)

Here again you see a direct statement indicating that the Saints should move west in order not to be embroiled in the coming conflict that would ripen into civil war her on the American continent. Thus the Prophet Joseph's concept of the West is rather interesting. Wilford Woodruff tells us about his first meeting with the Prophet in the year 1834. The date was clear back there in 1834, when the Saints were scarcely settled in Kirtland. At that time the Prophet assembled some of the brethren, including Heber C. Kimball, Brother Woodruff, Brother Young, the brothers Pratt and others who were prominent, and this is what he taught them:

This work will fill the Rocky Mountains with tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints, and there will be joined with them, the Lamanites who dwell in those mountains who will receive the gospel of Christ at the mouths of the elders of Israel, and they will be united with the Church and kingdom of God and bring forth much good. (Millennial Star, Vol. 54, p. 605.)

To those individuals who knew the gospel and knew the program of the Lord and the light of the prophecy of the day, the Church was not to maintain itself in the East. For example, when the Saints were beginning the founding of the city of Nauvoo, there on the banks of the Mississippi River, Heber C. Kimball, along with Sidney Rigdon and others, was coming up the river. This is the first time Heber C. Kimball had seen the place. As the boat came around the bend and they could see the beautiful situation upon which the city was to be built, Heber C. Kimball made this comment. He said: "It is a very pretty place but not long an abiding place for the Saints." Sidney Rigdon heard this and became infuriated, and when Brother Heber and others were in the presence of the Prophet, Sidney Rigdon took occasion to bring it up and said, "Brother Joseph, you tell Heber to quit prophesying evil about his people." Brother Heber grinned at him and said, "Brother Rigdon, I'll prophesy good about you all day long if you can get it." This is the comment, but this idea that the Church was moving west, I think, is rather a prominent thing. We should keep it in mind, particularly in correlating it with this prophetic picture of the disintegration of civil order in American society and the coming of a period of conflict upon the American nation.

At the time the Saints were about to leave, the Quorum of the Twelve wrote an epistle to the Church. There is one paragraph out of that epistle that we ought to note again—this concept of the westward movement of the Church and in light of the anticipated destruction that was coming upon the American continent:

The spirit of prophecy has long since portrayed in the Book of Mormon what might be the conduct of this nation towards Israel of the last days. The same spirit of prophecy that dwelt richly in the bosom of Joseph has time and again notified the counselors of this church of emergencies that might arise, of which this removal is one; and one, too, in which all the Latter-day Saints throughout the length and breadth of all the United States should have a thrilling and deliberate interest. (DHC, VII, pp. 478-479.)

About that period of time also Orson Pratt was back in New York settling up the affairs of the Church in that area in order to prepare the Saints to move west. He gave a farewell message in November of 1845, in which he referred to the facts associated with the Mormon persecution and the fact that the United States had not redressed them in their wrongs and had allowed them to be persecuted and killed. "Judgment is at the door," he declared, "and it will be easier to go now, than to wait until it comes." (DHC, VII, p. 516.) Four days afterward he convened a conference of the people in that area, at which time they passed several resolutions. One of these resolutions is as follows:

Inasmuch as the people and the authorities of the United States have sanctioned such proceedings, without manifesting any disposition to sustain us in our constitutional rights, but have rejected our many petitions to judges, governors, and presidents for the last twelve years, having hardened their hearts like Pharaoh of old, against the cries, of fatherless and the widow; that we now cease our cries, wipe away our tears, and prepare ourselves to "enter into our chambers and shut our doors about us for a little season until the indignation be overpast."

Resolved, that the Church in this city moves, one and all, west to the Rocky Mountains between this and next season, either by land or water, and that we most earnestly pray all our brethren in the eastern country to join with us in this determination, and carry it out effectively. (DHC, VII, pp. 520-521.)

This, I think, indicates a prophetic picture—the fact that the brethren were working under a knowledge of the coming conflict. It is little wonder that when the Saints got out West, Brigham Young, after the outbreak of the American Civil War, made this statement:

I heard Joseph Smith say, nearly thirty years ago: "They shall have mobbing to their hearts content, if they do not redress the wrongs of the Latter-day Saints...."

We are blessed in these mountains; this is the best place on the earth for the Latter-day Saints.... It has been designed, for many generations, to hide up the Saints in the last days, until the indignation of the Almighty be over. (Deseret News, XI, May 1, 1861.)

Here, then, we see the situation: The Latter-day Saints took practically no part in the Civil War and were out here in this secluded spot after having endeavored to warn the nation of what was wrong with the world. They were rejected and came here willingly because they had to. But on the other hand, they came here under Divine guidance.

Probably the key statement as to what the Latter-day Saints expected in the way of international conflict is given by the Prophet Joseph Smith in Section 87. We call it "the Prophecy on War." I would like to analyze it with you. The revelation was given Christmas Day, 1832, as a warning. We might look at it as probably one of the best Christmas presents the world could have received had they heeded the warning and thus averted the tribulation foretold. The Lord in this revelation makes this statement by introduction:

Verily, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls;

And the time will come that war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at this place. [South Carolina.] (D&C 87:1-2.)

If I read it right, the Lord here states that the Civil War, which was to begin at the rebellion of South Carolina, would be the beginning point for an era of warfare that would eventually involve all nations—war would be poured out upon all nations, beginning at this place. We need to broaden our view on this prophecy. Too often, I think, we narrow our concept down and say, "Well, the Prophet Joseph prophesied about the Civil War," and we let it go at that. Instead, he prophesied about the beginning of a period of international conflict that would begin with the Civil War but that would develop to world-wide proportions. In this respect the American Civil War is significant as a point of beginning for this international conflict of the latter days. This view of the prophecy on war is reaffirmed in the following statement by the Prophet:

I prophesy, in the name of the Lord God, that the commencement of the difficulties which will cause much bloodshed previous to the coming of the Son of Man will be in South Carolina.

It may probably arise through the slave question. This a voice declared to me, while I was praying earnestly on the subject, December 25, 1832. (D&C 130:12-13.)

Note that the latter-day period of judgment to precede Christ's coming commenced with the Civil War. That period of judgment was to involve all nations, but the American Civil War was to mark its beginning.

To show that the American Civil War did mark the beginning of our modern era of warfare, let me give you the testimony of several prominent writers who are not Latter-day Saints. B. H. Liddell Hart, in his book, The Revolution in Warfare, traces the origin of modern warfare to the American Civil War. Back in olden times wars were largely fought amongst combatants, with the civilian population having little to do in the matter. But since the Civil War period there has been developed on an international basis the concept of "total war." When we go to war now, we amass the whole nation and gear it toward the effort of war. Then we bomb the daylights out of men and women and children who have very little association with the war effort, but as we did at Nagasaki and Hiroshima, completely destroy innocent people because we want to bring the nation to subjection. This is what we call "total war," the effort to completely destroy a nation or to so cripple its complete population that it will have a direct effect upon its effort to make war. So Mr. Hart, in analyzing the American Civil War, made this comment concerning World War I:

... it developed the characteristics foreshadowed in the trend of ideas in the previous century ... [These trends resulted in a] degeneration of civilized standards of behavior. A large-scale landmark in the "Great Decline,"

was created fifty years before 1914—in the American Civil War. This was in many ways the prototype of modern "total war." (B. H. Liddell Hart, The Revolution in Warfare, pp. 72-73.)

He goes on to point out that this tendency toward total war had several manifestations. For example, we have Sherman marching across Georgia, destroying a sixty-mile strip across Georgia. He destroyed everything that came within his reach. Why? In order to affect the morale of the Southern forces.

Then there was Sheridan who marched through the Shenendoah Valley, heaping a destruction upon non-combatant people, that he might affect the morale and the spirits and the desire of the Southern forces to resist and to put up a fight. This type of thing has developed to a point today where, if we were to start another war, we would bomb the daylights out of the men, women, children, and everything else belonging to the foe. This development toward what we call "total war" goes back in large measure to the American Civil War. Mr. Hart, in his analysis, calls it a revolution of warfare. And he forcibly stresses the fact that the American Civil War is the beginning point for this international period of struggle and conflict.

Let me cite another prominent person who is reputed by some to be the greatest historical philosopher of all times—Arnold J. Toynbee. He studied about twenty-two civilizations in world history—studying their rise and their decline, what caused them to rise and what caused them to decline, and applied this knowledge to what we call Western civilization. That refers to European civilization and the countries which have been populated from the European civilization. In noting this decline in standards of warfare and the position of the American Civil War, he stated the American Civil War "marks an epoch in the history of warfare." Continuing, he said: "It saw the application of ... two new driving forces—Democracy as well as Industrialism—to an ancient social evil." In his analysis, Toynbee points out that the North won the war by applying its industrial power to the cause. The American Civil War also made popular the "compulsory recruitment of man-power for 'cannon-fodder,' which autocracies do not lightly attempt." Thus, Toynbee concluded, "It carried our Western Society a long step forward in the process of 'keying up' war and then making war a more terrible scourge than it had been in the past." (Toynbee, A Study of History, IV, pp. 141-142.)

Another prominent writer by the name of P. A. Sorokin, chairman of the Department of Sociology at Harvard University, in his book, The Crisis of Our Age, analyzed the deteriorating trends toward war and conflict in society. In tracing the development of wars and revolutions since the pre-Christian period, he made this statement:

... The war index for the eighteenth century falls slightly, and in the nineteenth—the golden age of contractualism, [that is, the idea of government by contract], and the zenith of sensate pre-Victorian and Victorian culture—slightly declines, making the nineteenth century as a peaceful era—almost as peaceful as the sixteenth. Toward the end of that period [that is, toward the end of the nineteenth century] the definite signs of the disintegration of sensate culture [our modern culture] and contractual society made their appearance—a process which assumed a catastrophic magnitude and tempo in the present century. Accordingly, the war indicator registers a unique uprising; for only one quarter of the period [that is, in the twentieth century] the figures exceed all the preceding twenty-five centuries with the exception of the third century B. C. in Rome. The Roman indicator ... is for the whole century; the twentieth century index is for twenty-five years—from 1900 to 1925. If to the European Wars of 1900 to 1925 we add all the subsequent wars up to the present time, the figures will eclipse even those of the third century B. C. If, further, we add to wars that will doubtless occur from 1940 [when he wrote the book] to 2000, the twentieth century will unquestionably prove to be the bloodiest and most belligerant of all the twenty-five centuries under consideration. (P. A. Sorokin, The Crisis of Our Age, p. 216.)

The point we need to note is that beginning with the latter part of the nineteenth century—the time of the American Civil War—the war indicator marks a definite and unique upswing which, in the twentieth century, has assumed catastrophic magnitude; and the end is not yet.

Here, then, we have the true light in which the prophecy on war should be viewed. It is a prophetic forecast of international conflict that will make a full end of all nations, all of which had its beginning at the American Civil War. Some of our "nit-wit" intellectuals ought to take this view of the Prophecy on War, instead of merely inferring that Joseph Smith prophesied of the Civil War in 1832, and could well have guessed that there would be such a conflict by analyzing the slave situation in America in light of the fact that South Carolina had already made the effort to rebel.

In analyzing the Prophecy on War, let me treat the things it refers to in chronological order. After giving an international orientation to what is to follow, it first speaks of the American Civil War, stating:

For behold, the Southern States shall be divided against the Northern States, and the Southern States will call on other nations, even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called ... (D&C 87:3.)

We know how thoroughly and completely this part was fulfilled. The Southern States did call upon other nations. They did call upon Great Britain, and Great Britain endeavored to assist them; and it cost Great Britain $15,500,000 in the Geneva Arbitration of 1872 to settle this whole matter because they interfered with our own domestic relations in America.

The next area of interest in this prophecy is treated in the fact that Great Britain, as it states, "shall also call upon other nations, in order to defend themselves against other nations; and then," it continues, "war shall be poured out upon all nations." (D&C 87:3.) Here, then, was the point when these developing trends were to reach the point of international conflict—when Great Britain called upon other nations to defend herself against other nations. Then war was to be poured out upon all nations.

There is a statement by Orson Hyde that pretty well shows how he viewed the Prophecy on War. This statement was made in May, 1862, at the beginning of the Civil War. He said:

You have scarcely read the preface of your national troubles. Many nations will be drawn into the American maelstrom that now whirls through the land; and after many days, when the demon of war shall have exhausted his strength and madness upon American soil, by the destruction of all that can court or provoke opposition, excite cupidity, inspire revenge, or feed ambition, he will remove his headquarters to the banks of the Rhine. (Millennial Star, XXIV, p. 274.)

The Prophecy on War indicates that the next scene of activities after the Civil War was expected to transpire in Europe. In that picture of developments Great Britain was to find it necessary to depart from her traditional position of "splendid isolationism," as it is termed, and unite with other nations against an opposing group of nations. This is saying quite a lot. To say that such a polarization would occur so that the nations of the earth would be separated into two opposing groups is quite a thing. Yet this is what the Prophecy on War clearly implies would happen. And, as they were becoming so divided, Britain was to call upon other nations to defend herself against other nations. Thereafter war was to be poured out upon all nations.

Let us take a closer look at that which happened on the European scene before World War I. Immediately after the close of the American Civil War the Franco-Prussian War occurred, in which struggle France was defeated and the recently united German states became the dominant political and military power on continental Europe. Because of the influence of Prussia on the German states and, among other things, because of the decline of liberal thought in Germany, there grew upon the German people a lust for power and a general disregard for the rights of others. There was a development of those factors Joseph Smith identified as being concomitants with the withdrawal of the Spirit of the Lord from the lives of men. All these factors, along with a general loosening of the cords of union among the nations, prompted the countries of Europe, principally, to commence a network of secret treaties and alliances that gradually divided Europe into two hostile groups who were increasingly suspicious of each other and thus commenced building up greater and greater armies and navies.

Finally, in 1909, at the instigation of Great Britain, the Allied and Associated Powers were formed in opposition to the Central Powers, which included Germany, Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Turkey. At the London Conference of 1909, Great Britain had called upon other nations to defend herself against other nations. "The greatest single underlying cause" of World War I, says Sidney Bradshaw Fay, in his The Origin of the World War, was this network of secret alliances that was largely responsible for making a world-wide struggle out of the incident that caused the struggle to commence. Said Fay:

In the crisis of July, 1914, it was not merely a question of Austria, Serbia and the Balkans; it was a question of the solidarity and prestige of the two groups of powers into which Europe had been divided.... It was stated more bluntly by Herr Zimmermann to the British Ambassador in Berlin on August 1, when he saw with excited regret that Germany, France, and perhaps England would be drawn into a war which none of them wanted: "It all came from this d—d system of alliances, which was the curse of modern times. (Sidney Bradshaw Fay, The Origin of the World War, pp. 34-35.)

I do not think you could state the proposition any clearer than does the Prophecy on War. Even as late as 1916 many of the world's wise men did not think the struggle then going on would become world-wide in scope. But at the very beginning of the conflict, when one nation after another was being brought into it, B. H. Roberts wrote an article concerning the current situation in light of the Prophecy on War. He then predicted that many nations would become involved involved in it and that it would be world-wide in scope. The interesting thing about this article is that between the time he wrote it and it went to press other European countries were drawn into the struggle so that the printers added a note to the article to this effect. Whatever one thinks about the Prophecy on War, B. H. Roberts demonstrated more practical insight into the existing developments of conflict than did the learned men of the day. Brother Roberts did so by studying a document given to men in 1832, more than eighty years before 1914. Those "intellectuals" who say that Joseph Smith could have fabricated the Prophecy on War out of a study of the historical picture of the early 1830's should look into these facts.

The next area of conflict mentioned in the Prophecy on War is as follows: "And it shall come to pass, after many days, slaves shall rise up against their masters, who shall be marshaled and disciplined for war." (verse 4.) There have been those who have said that the slaves here mentioned had reference to the American Negroes at the time of the Civil War. But note that these slaves are mentioned as revolting against their masters "many days" after either the commencement of the era of international conflict which occurred at South Carolina or many days after this international era of conflict had reached World War I in its developments. The Prophecy isn't clear on this particular point. If we take the developments mentioned in the Prophecy on War in chronological form, then it would be many days after the outbreak of World War that slaves were to rise against their masters. This is the interpretation that I prefer to take. But even if you take the other view—that slaves were to arise against their masters many days after the commencement of the Civil War—you cannot limit the meaning to events to transpire only in America. Remember that from the first sentence the Prophecy on War deals with things from an international point of view. We cannot limit it to that which happened in the Civil War.

In referring to the Prophecy on War, Brigham Young stated that it had reference "to African slavery on this continent, and the slavery of the children of men throughout the world." (Journal of Discourses, VIII, p. 58.) He did not limit the slaves mentioned therein to those in America. Let me go back in history and show you a background picture that I feel helps to explain the true meaning of this statement about slaves.

When western civilization became industrialized, there developed a tendency toward what we term economic imperialism on the part of the industrial powers. Economic imperialism is a term denoting the oppressive economic power that industrialized nations used against unindustrialized peoples. As a consequence of the industrialization of Europe and America, there was an effort on the part of industrial nations to reach out and to get control of sources of raw materials and also to get control of markets throughout the whole world. In the latter part of the nineteenth century we had a movement on the international scene to carve up the various unenlightened areas of the world and bring them under the subjection of one industrialized nation or another. If you take a map of Africa and look at it before 1850 and then look at it about 1890, within this brief period of time you will find that one after another of the nations of Europe desired to have raw materials from Africa and also desired to have the market that the nonindustrialized people provided, so they carved off areas over which they exercised control. So it was that the whole African continent was divided off into areas that came under the direct influence of one European nation or another.

This was also true with Asia to a large extent. Thus, there was a period of time when the dominant nations of the earth exerted a tyrannical force over the unenlightened peoples of the world. Since that day we have had a revolt against it. The whole nation of India, for example, revolted against British rule. We now have a revolt in the Middle East and Africa where slaves are arising against their masters. What is going on in Algeria today with regard to France? Slaves are rising against their masters. What is going on throughout the whole of Africa? Has not the British Commonwealth greatly diminished in its influence throughout the world? Why has it? Because of the revolt against the British rule of one group of unenlightened people after another to the point that they have revolted against their masters who, during this era of international conflict, are marshaled and disciplined for war. This type of revolt has been one of the greatest causes of conflict on the international scene today. It gives strength to the communist attack against the West and causes disunion among western countries themselves.

The next factor of conflict mentioned in the Prophecy on War has to do with that which is to take place in the Americas. It states that following the revolt of slaves against their masters "the remnants who are left of the land will marshal themselves, and shall become exceedingly angry, and shall vex the Gentiles with a sore vexation." (verse 5.) The remnants of the land are the modern-day seed of the Book of Mormon peoples. They, too, as the unenlightened peoples in Asia, Africa, etc., are to revolt against the dominant powers that hold them in subjection. We can expect to see an era of upheaval, revolt and disorder in South and Central America similar to that which is already underway in other sections of the earth; and this in the near future, as a secondary development following the initial rise of slaves against their masters.

In 3 Nephi chapter 3 read what the Lord has said about the remnant that shall be left in the land and the future period when disintegrating forces operating within gentile civilization shall have reached the point where it is probable that these less enlightened peoples could revolt against the oppression that they have felt. Said the Lord:

But if the Gentiles will repent and return unto me, saith the Father, behold they shall be numbered among my people, O house of Israel.

And I will not suffer my people, who are of the house of Israel, to go through among them, and tread them down, saith the Father.

But if they [the Gentiles] will not turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, I will suffer them, yea, I will suffer my people, O house of Israel, that they shall go through among them, and shall tread them down, and they shall be as salt that hath lost its savor, which is henceforth good for nothing but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of my people, O house of Israel. (3 Nephi 16:13-15.)

If the gentiles are to be salt that has lost its savor, it seems that the disintegrating forces undermining civil law and order would have, by the time that this prophecy is to be fulfilled, so caused the strength and union of the gentiles to degenerate that an unenlightened people such as the remnants of Israel here on the American continent could revolt against them and go through them as the lion among a flock of sheep. Here is another statement on this subject from the Lord himself:

And I say unto you, that if the Gentiles do not repent after the blessing which they shall receive, after they have scattered my people—

Then shall ye, who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, go forth among them; and ye shall be in the midst of them who shall be many; and ye shall be among them as a lion among the beasts of the forest, and as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he goeth through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver.

Thy hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off.

And I will gather my people together as a man gathereth his sheaves into the floor. (3 Nephi 20:15-18.)

The Lord places these developments in that day when world-wide conflict and destruction is to be poured out upon the nations of the earth, for he said:

And it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that the sword of my justice shall hang over them at that day; and except they repent it shall fall upon them, saith the Father, yea, even upon all the nations of the Gentiles. (3 Nephi 20:20.)

This statement places these events, as well as the general revolt of slaves against their masters, well into the period of international conflict foretold by the Prophecy on War. It is one more argument why we cannot tie these developments immediately into the American Civil War. They were to transpire "many days" thereafter.

There is one other statement in the Book of Mormon on these developments that I would like to quote. Here the Lord said:

And my people who are a remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles, yea, in the midst of them as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he go through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver.

Their hand shall be lifted up upon their adversaries, and all their enemies shall be cut off.

Yea, wo be unto the Gentiles except they repent; for it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Father, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots;

And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy strongholds;

And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy land, and thou shalt have no more soothsayers;

Thy graven images I will also cut off, and thy standing images out of the midst of thee, and thou shalt no more worship the works of thy hands;

And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee; [Places of worship were groves in ancient Israel.] so will I destroy thy cities.

And it shall come to pass that all lyings, and deceivings, and envyings, and strifes, and priestcrafts, and whoredoms, shall be done away.

For it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that at that day whosoever will not repent and come unto my Beloved Son, them will I cut off from among my people, O house of Israel;

And I will execute vengeance and fury upon them, even as upon the heathen, such as they have not heard.

(3 Nephi 21:12-21.)

If the Gentiles do not repent, including those on this land, these judgments will come upon them—judgments the like of which they have not heard.

In the final drama of this international era, the Lord states that all the incidents and conflicting elements that go to make up the era of conflict when fully developed will continue "until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations." (verse 6.) How long this final era or phase of things will continue is not made clear. But by the time the final act is played on this scene, Zion, as a society, will have developed her program to where she can assume the task of building a new world order based upon the Lord's program. In that day she will be the only stable society capable of maintaining law and order within her borders. Said the Lord of Zion and the world scene in that day:

And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God;

And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion.

And it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety.

And there shall be gathered unto it [Zion] out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another.

And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand.

And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from among all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy.

(D&C 45:66-71.)

The international situation that we are in today is a serious thing, very serious, and I think the program of the Church and our need to comprehend and understand it in relation to this situation should also be a serious thing on our part.

I pray that the Lord will bless us with enough intelligence to discern our duty to strengthen the cause of truth that these judgments might be averted if possible and, if not, so that Zion might nevertheless arise to fulfill the program of the Lord, and I do it in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
