Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 1 ( 1997)

A Divine Witness

The Book of Mormon was translated by the power of God through the Prophet Joseph Smith, who gave his life for this book. He was tarred and feathered and left for dead in Hyrum, Ohio; he was thrown in jail and mocked and ridiculed just for bringing the book into existence. And Joseph wasn't the only prophet who suffered for the sake of the book. Abinadi was burned at the stake. Enos prayed to the Lord with all of his heart that the book would come forth in this day. "Thy fathers have also required of me this thing," the Lord told Enos. "And it shall be done unto them according to their faith; for their faith was like unto thine" (Enos 1:18).

The prophets in Book of Mormon times wrote in the language of reformed Egyptian characters, but this is a book for our dispensation. Joseph Smith called the Book of Mormon the keystone to our religion, and then declared that "a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book" (Book of Mormon, Introduction).

If you know anything about building arches, you know that the keystone is the piece of stone that holds the arch up. The purpose of the Book of Mormon is to witness that Heavenly Father is our Father and that he is good to us and loves us; to witness of Jesus Christ; and to document how he has dealt with all of his people. This book is for you and me; it is written for members and nonmembers alike. If you learn to love it, this book will be the greatest power you have on your mission. If you learn to love the Book of Mormon and understand its teachings, you will then be able to testify of the book, and you will have great converting power. You will never be the missionary you were destined to be until you love and live this book. It is the key to your converting power. It is the key to your retaining power. It is the key of our dispensation.

The purpose of the Book of Mormon is fivefold. First, it stands as a second testament or witness for Jesus Christ. Second, it authenticates the Bible. Third, it shows the goodness of God to his children. Fourth, it makes people aware of the promises that God has made to his children. And fifth, it restores to earth many plain and precious truths that have been lost since the fulness of the gospel existed.

The first purpose, however, is primary. This book convinces people, both members and nonmembers, that Jesus is the Christ. "Come unto Christ, and be perfected in him" (Moro. 10:32) the scriptures invite. That is the purpose of the Book of Mormon. That is what you must know, that is what you must feel, that is what you must understand. That knowledge of the book must be radiating from your very being. This is one of the reasons that you are instructed to sup from these pages for thirty minutes every day.
