Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 1 ( 1997)

Loving and Sharing the Book

The Book of Mormon will never live in your life until you delight in the word of God. "Now, we will compare the word [the Book of Mormon is the word of God] unto a seed," Alma teaches in Alma 32:28. "Now, if you give place, that a seed may be planted in your heart. . . ." In other words, we take this seed, this word of God, this Book of Mormon, and put it in our hearts. (It might help to know that in Hebrew the word heart is leb or lebab, which interpreted means the center of the mind or the center of the soul, the decision-making center of your body.)

When we yield our hearts to the Lord, what are we doing? In essence we're saying, "All my decisions are the decisions you would make, Father. Not my will, but thy will."

Now back to Alma. If we give a place for the seed, which is the Book of Mormon, to be planted in our hearts (or in other words, all of our decisions will be made by the principles contained in the book), then "if it be a true seed, or a good seed, if ye do not cast it out by your unbelief, that ye will resist the Spirit of the Lord, behold, it will begin to swell within your breasts; and when you feel these swelling motions, ye will begin to say within yourselves--It must needs be that this is a good seed, or that the word is good, for it beginneth to enlighten my understanding, yea, it beginneth to be delicious to me" (Alma 32:28).

When the Book of Mormon lives in our lives, then we will be pure disciples of Christ with great converting power, fulfilling the destiny that President Ezra Taft Benson described so eloquently when he said, "I have a vision of homes alerted, classes alive, pulpits aflame, with the spirit of the Book of Mormon message. I have a vision of the whole church getting nearer to God by abiding the precepts of the Book of Mormon." (General Conference, October 1988)

President Benson has also said, "The Book of Mormon needs to become more central in our preaching, our teaching, and our missionary work" (Ensign, May 1986, pp. 5-6). He counseled us to flood the earth with the Book of Mormon, adding this call to action: "I challenge our mission leaders to show their missionaries how to challenge their contacts to read the Book of Mormon and pray about it. I challenge the homes of Israel to display on some of their walls, great quotations and scenes from the Book of Mormon." (General Conference, October 1988)

In early Church history, some missionaries returned from their missions and were reproved. "You have treated lightly the things you have received," they were told. "Which vanity and unbelief have brought the whole church under condemnation" (D&C 84:54-55). President Benson echoed this reproof when he told Church members that "the Book of Mormon has not yet, nor is yet the center of our personal study, and our preaching and our missionary work, and of that we must repent" (General Conference, April 1986)

"The Book of Mormon contains that portion of the Lord's word which is needed to prove the divinity of this great latter-day work, and which is needed to teach the basic doctrines of salvation to mankind" said Elder Bruce R. McConkie. (Ensign, June 1980, p. 56) And President Marion G. Romney said, during General Conference in 1960, that "The Book of Mormon is the most effective piece of missionary literature we have." President Ezra Taft Benson promised that "The Lord will manifest the truthfulness of it, by the power of the Holy Ghost." (General Conference, April 1986)
