Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 1 ( 1997)

A Powerful Tool of Conversion

It's important that you and I develop an abiding faith in the Lord's promise that if people will ask with a sincere heart, having faith in Christ, the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon will be given to them. (See Moro. 10:3-5.) Think about what it means to our investigators if they can accept the Book of Mormon in their lives: If the Book of Mormon is true, then Joseph Smith was a prophet. If Joseph Smith was a prophet, the First Vision really did take place. If the First Vision was reality, the priesthood was restored. If the priesthood was restored, the Doctrine and Covenants, Pearl of Great Price, and other scriptures are true. Not only that, but the Church, which was established by Joseph Smith, is true. And that's not all! We're led by true prophets of the Lord today. They will know all that when they accept the Book of Mormon.

This is what we must engrain in our very souls: The Book of Mormon is the tool that will retain converts better than any other thing. If we root the people to our sociality, or friendliness, or love, we root them to us instead of to Christ. That happens sometimes because missionaries are so loving and so good.

But that's exactly why we must put the Book of Mormon first. If we root them to that holy book of scripture, our converts will be retained long after we leave. I'm sure you've heard of converts who have left the Church as soon as "their" missionaries have been transferred. That doesn't happen when converts have come unto Christ, because coming unto Christ goes much deeper than simple friendship. You see, loving Christ is the essence of conversion. We are converted to Jesus Christ by the power of the Holy Ghost, which is felt as we study and pray about the Book of Mormon, because the Book of Mormon is a sure witness and testament that Jesus is the Christ. Any other root will wither.

When we root our converts in the love of the people or the love of the Church or the love of the sociality and friendships they feel at church, what happens the first time they feel a lack of love? They fall away. Can you remember a time in your life when you didn't feel loved? You felt lonely, sorry for yourself, maybe even physically sick. But when we are rooted in Christ and his love, we are rooted in something solid and secure, because Christ's love never changes; it's always there. The love of our Heavenly Father is the same.

The Book of Mormon plays a crucial role in rooting people to Christ. Every aspect of a person's testimony is anchored in place by the Book of Mormon. Think of that: every aspect of a person's testimony is held in place by what is found in the pages of the Book of Mormon.

The degree to which we effectively help people understand how the Book of Mormon fulfills the Lord's divine purposes is the same degree to which we will see them become convinced that Joseph Smith was a prophet. That's the same degree to which they will be committed to continually praying and studying the Book of Mormon. And soon they will see that the Book of Mormon does lead them to Christ. So you can see the purpose and power of the Book of Mormon, the keystone of our religion.
