Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 1 ( 1997)

Faith and Persistence

Now, we have the book and its power. We are beginning to see what we need to do to be the kind of missionaries that Christ would have us be. We need to be full of excitement, full of enthusiasm, full of love for the Book of Mormon.

Once we're well on the road to developing those characteristics, how are we going to find people to teach? Whenever we are deceived, whenever we are discouraged, we will lose our motivation; and when our motivation decreases, our work ethic also decreases or disappears.

When I worked on the Church Missionary Training Committee, I would train mission presidents during the mission presidents' seminar. In preparation for that training, I surveyed mission presidents already out on assignment and asked them what their main responsibility was. "Motivating missionaries is ninety-five percent of my work," they almost always replied. "Missionaries get discouraged, they get tired, they get worn out."

Guess why? Where were they rooted? Not in the Book of Mormon. Do you see how you can prepare now? You'll become so strong and so magnificent that the Lord will take you and use you because you're rooted to Christ. When another door slams, you'll say, "Great, let the door slam. Hit me. That will really give me a blessing, you know. Throw water on me, anything. I need the blessings." And if you have that kind of positive attitude, you'll be marvelous.

We should approach our work with the faith that if we persist in our efforts to find people to teach, the Lord will prepare a way for people to accept us. If we believe that, it will happen. If we doubt it, I promise you it will not happen, and we will have a difficult time finding investigators. But if we believe it can happen, if we believe with faith that we can baptize and that the book will bring people unto Christ, it will happen.

I testify to you that if you are exactly obedient, continuously, steadfastly, you will reap the harvest the Lord intended you to have. Plead with the Lord every day. Cultivate the power of discernment to know the will of the Lord, and to be led to those who are the elect of God.

Use the Book of Mormon effectively in your efforts to get people to listen to your message. Ask them, "If you knew there was another book written that talked about Jesus Christ and what he did, would you like to read that? You would? Well, I just happen to have five copies of that very book right here in my pocket."

It is so easy. Plead with the Lord to soften the hearts of the people and open their hearts, that they will receive you. Exercise your faith. The Lord promised that he would go before you to prepare the hearts and the minds of the people to accept the gospel. He said he would guide you to those he's prepared or will lead them to you. (D&C 84:85-88, 1 Ne. 4:6)

Here is one of the most beautiful parts of the process. If you've studied, if you've pleaded with the Lord, and if you're worthy and desire righteousness, things will come out of your mouth that you've never even known.

The other day I was speaking to a group, and afterwards a man came up to me and said, "That was the most profound statement I've ever heard in my life."

"What was?" I asked.

"When you said, 'Truth without testimony is hollow.'" He had it written down on a piece of paper.

"Wow," I said. "Who said that?"

"You did."

"When?" I asked.

"Just now, in that room."

"Can I write that down?" So I wrote it down, and now I'm sharing it with you. And why was I able to say that? Because the Lord inspires us; sometimes we don't even realize what we said! President Marion G. Romney once observed that he always knew when he had spoken by the Spirit because he learned from what he had said.

When we exercise our faith, the Lord will bless us. If our faith is sufficient, those beyond the veil, under the direction of Jesus Christ, will assist us in our missionary labors (see D&C 49:27 and Moro. 7:30-31). I believe that; I know it's true.
