Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 1 ( 1997)

Helping Investigators to Know

When you place a copy of the Book of Mormon, the investigator needs to feel your love so that you can both feel the Spirit. And after you've placed the book, always quietly pray in your heart and mind, "Is there something from the Book of Mormon that I could share with them that would touch their heart to bring them closer to God?" This needs to be in our minds every moment of every day. We never take that out of our minds. We never replace it with anything. Is there something from the Book of Mormon I could share with them that would cause them to want to change?

Of course, we first get a promise from them to read the book, and then we must schedule a follow-up visit. If we fail to get a follow-up visit, and then if we fail to follow up on the reading assignment, our investigator begins to think, "Don't tell me how much you want me to read this book. You asked me to read 1 Ne. 3:7, but you didn't even ask me the next time when you came whether I'd read it or not. And I stayed up late after bowling to read it! But you don't even care whether I read it or not."

When you mark those scriptures for your investigators to read, write it in your planner: "Friday 7 p.m, Anderson Family. 1 Ne. 3:7 and all of 2 Ne. 9." You can even write notes about why you made particular assignments: "They were interested in the Atonement of Christ, so we invited them to read 2 Ne. 9 and Alma 40. They also were very interested in faith, so we assigned Moro. 7. And of course we had them read Moro. 10:3-5."

Now we've placed the book and we're faithfully following up on reading assignments. Next, we must teach investigators what they must do in order to qualify themselves to know that it's true.

Many missionaries tell their investigators to "Pray about the Book of Mormon and you can know if it's true or not." But they leave out a crucial step. Our investigators must qualify themselves to receive an answer from the Lord. They must study and pray, and then the Lord will tell them it's true. We must learn that principle: Our investigators need to qualify themselves to receive their answer from the Lord.

This is how we help them qualify themselves. First, we ourselves must establish a pattern of reading the Book of Mormon regularly. We must have a special feeling about the book. We must have a clear understanding about Moro. 10:3-5 and explain that passage to our investigators in detail when we introduce the book.

We need to explain to them that when they're reading is when the Lord will testify to them it's true. They don't read all 531 pages and then say, "Okay, I've finished reading. Now I pray." It's an ongoing daily process to know that the Book of Mormon is true. Make sure investigators understand that they don't need to wait until they've finished reading to start asking! To help them understand that, read through Moro. 10:3-5 with them, discussing specifically the following things: How the hand of God brought the book forward originally; how it was prepared by the prophets; how it came forth through Joseph Smith; and how it might be possible that the Lord has prepared them to find the Book of Mormon.

When investigators begin to read the book, they rehearse what they've learned--how merciful the Lord is, how he's been involved in the affairs of the people, what the prophets have done. As they read, investigators will remember these things; they are then prepared to feel good as they read. Then we can explain to them that all good comes from a loving Heavenly Father and his beloved Son, Jesus Christ.

If our investigators are sincere after we've carefully followed these steps, things will begin to happen. They will ponder and pray about the contents of the Book of Mormon, and its teachings will become important in their lives. When Parley P. Pratt received the Book of Mormon, he said that he couldn't eat or sleep; all he wanted to do was read the book. Parley P. Pratt was sincere and qualified to receive an answer from the Lord. If our investigators are sincere, they'll ponder the contents of the Book of Mormon, and by means of the Spirit, they will agree with the teachings.

In Gal. 5:22, we read: "But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith."

When our investigators feel these things as they read the Book of Mormon, they'll feel the Spirit and know that the book is true. Sometimes our investigators are unfamiliar with the Spirit, and they need a little help identifying where these wonderful feelings come from.

"How do you feel when you read the Book of Mormon?" you might ask them.

"Good," they'll answer.

"All good comes from our Heavenly Father," you'll teach. "And those feelings are a witness that the Book of Mormon is true." The greatest tool we have to bring people unto Christ is the Book of Mormon.

Here are some things that our investigators will feel as they read: They'll understand the glorious truths; they'll recognize particular doctrines; they'll know that it's uplifting and inspired. We must not fail to teach our investigators to recognize the witness of the Spirit.

The teachings of the Book of Mormon are logical and rational. They correspond with the Bible in many ways, and we can use that as we teach investigators who are familiar with the Bible.

Have you ever taught or been with someone when they have taught about a gospel principle, and the investigator says, "Well, that's what I've always believed"? But when you ask them what church they belong to, you discover that particular church doesn't even teach the principle in question.

Why is that? Because we all came to this earth with knowledge gained from the pre-earthly existence. And when we hear it repeated here, our heart resonates to it. The elect of God hear these teachings, and they find the teachings appealing. They experience a spiritual uplift.

One of the greatest truths we'll ever teach people is that they are children of God the Father and that he has a plan that provides us eternal life and happiness. This is fundamental to the gospel of Jesus Christ and is taught in the first discussions. So many people in the world don't even realize this. And when we teach this to people and they pray about it, the Lord will tell them it's true; they'll receive answers and know that the doctrine is right.

Investigators tend to seek a sign when they are praying about the Book of Mormon. They want lights to go on three times in succession or a visitation from an angel or something like that. We must not look for incredible signs when we're seeking to discover truth, but we must recognize the signs from the Spirit. That's why we, along with our investigators, must understand Gal. 5:22 and recognize these signs.

The Spirit is the key. We must preach with love and concern, tenderly, and as Alma counseled his sons, with soberness--then it will be easier to have the Spirit. Do not contend, and do not Bible-bash. Simply teach the Book of Mormon. There are more than two hundred different sects in the world today that believe the Bible. Preach from the book that was brought forth for our dispensation, and let the Spirit bear witness of that book. Then the Spirit can also bear witness to the truthfulness of the Bible, as far as it is translated correctly. But the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon is the key, and we must help our investigators gain that knowledge.
