Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 1 ( 1997)

The Power of Working Together

Don't overlook the power of working with members. If you want extra power, delegation is a great tool for getting things accomplished. God the Father delegated the creation of the earth to his son, Jehovah, who with Michael and others organized this earth from material that had always existed. Then, under the direction of the Father, our first parents were created.

I believe in delegation; I believe that many hands make light work. If I were on a mission, I would work with members in the ward or branch I was serving in. I'd find five or ten people, and I'd develop relationships of trust with them. I'd visit them, get to know them, prove my righteousness and let them see my sincere desire.

Then I'd approach them. Every member is a result of missionary work, and most members have had a missionary experience. Share with these people or these families your own missionary experiences. Ask them to share their conversion story with you. Tell them about one of the people you've just recently converted. Tell them about the greatest work in the world. Tell them what a joy it is to work with people who are eager to hear about the gospel. Tell them how wonderful it is to be associated with people who are searching for the truth.

As we share these missionary experiences, the Spirit of the Lord will come upon us. Read Alma 6:6 and 3 Ne. 18:19-23 with these members, then invite them to help you with your work. Ask them to help you find people to teach, help you friendship and fellowship the people you are teaching now.

During a mission presidents' seminar in June of 1980, President Kimball promised Church members that if they would pray night and morning regarding their desire to see other people join the Church, the Lord would hear their prayers and soften the hearts of the people they associate with. Invite your member friends to pray every day for this blessing, and promise them that when they pray with all their hearts, with real intent, they'll see a difference as the hearts of their friends and associates are touched and softened.

I bear witness that the gospel of Jesus Christ is true. The Book of Mormon is the Lord's book--the book for our time to bless his children. We must learn to use it on a daily basis with everyone we teach, utilizing the commitment pattern. If you do that, I know the Lord will bless you.
