Dean Jarman, President of the Salt Lake University Second Stake.

This question suggests three sub-questions which, if answered, will give some solutions to the main question. These are: (1) What kinds of being are angels? (2) Can angels serve a guardian function in their ministry? and (3) Is there a guardian angel assigned to each individual?

Angels are personages who minister for the Lord in carrying out his work. Joseph Smith taught that all angels who minister to the earth are “Those who belong to it or have belonged to it.” The scriptures suggest there are at least five different kinds of persons who function as angels. There are the spirits of those who have not yet come to the earth, as was the situation when an angel taught Adam the principle of sacrifice (see Moses 5:6–8). Angels are also the spirits of those who have lived righteously on earth, have died, and are awaiting their resurrection. These individuals are referred to as “just men made perfect” (D&C 129:3). The visit of Gabriel to Zacharias and to Mary illustrates this kind of being.

Translated beings function as angels, as was the case with the appearance of Moses and Elijah on the Mount of Transfiguration (see Matt. 17:1–3). The Apostle John was translated and became “a ministering angel; he shall minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation who dwell on the earth” (D&C 7:6). Resurrected beings are a fourth kind of being to serve as angels. The appearances of Moroni and John the Baptist to Joseph Smith illustrate this type. And lastly, holy men living on earth occasionally are referred to as angels as they act as ministers for God. The appearance of angels to Lot to warn him of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah seems to fit this classification (see Gen. 19).

Once we realize that many kinds of individuals function as angels, we now ask if one of their functions is protective or guardian in nature. The scriptures suggest that angels do protect, warn, and strengthen mortals. Angels were used to warn Joseph to flee to Egypt (see Matt. 2:13); to bring food to Elijah (see 1 Kgs. 19:5–8); to make it possible for Peter to escape from prison (see Acts 12:17); to protect Daniel from the lions (see Dan. 6:22); to protect Nephi from his brothers (see 1 Ne. 3:29–31); and to loose the bands from Abraham when he was to be sacrificed (see Abr. 1:15).

Elder John A. Widtsoe mentioned that there have been many in this dispensation whose lives have been blessed through the ministry of angels. He said, “Undoubtedly angels often guard us from accidents and harm, from temptation and sin.

“They may be spoken of as guardian angels. Many people have borne and may bear testimony to the guidance and protection that they have received from sources beyond their natural vision” (G. Homer Durham, compiler, Evidences and Reconciliations, 3 volumes, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960, pp. 402–3).

Some have taught that righteous family members who die may continue to be an influence in the lives of their loved ones. President Joseph F. Smith said, “Our fathers and mothers, brothers, sisters, and friends who have passed away from this earth, having been faithful, and worthy to enjoy these rights and privileges, may have a mission given them to visit their friends and relatives upon the earth again, bringing from the divine presence messages of love, of warning or reproof or instruction, to those whom they have learned to love in the flesh” (Gospel Doctrine, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1959, p. 436).

It seems apparent that individuals or groups may be the recipients of the ministry of angels without being aware of their presence. Brigham Young taught on one occasion, “There is much in my presence besides those who sit here, if we had eyes to see the heavenly beings that are in our presence” (John A. Widtsoe, editor, Discourses of Brigham Young, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1951, p. 42).

Angels do serve a protective or guardian role. Their presence may or may not be seen or known. Loved ones who have died may also serve in the capacity of angels to comfort or warn.

The question can now be asked if there is a specific guardian angel assigned to each individual? There is nothing in the scriptures that suggests this to be the case. The writings of the General Authorities also state the answer to be no. Elder John A. Widtsoe said, “The common belief, that to every person born into the world is assigned a guardian angel to be with that person constantly, is not supported by available evidence. … In fact the constant presence of the Holy Ghost would seem to make such a constant, angelic companionship unnecessary” (Durham, p. 403).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote that “to suppose that either all men or all righteous men have heavenly beings acting as guardians for them runs counter to the basic revealed facts relative to the manner in which the Lord exercises his benevolent watchfulness over his mortal men” (Mormon Doctrine, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960, p. 341).

In summary, there is not evidence of a guardian angel assigned to every person; but angels have served a guardian role as they warn, protect, and strengthen those they have ministered to on earth.
