Russell M. Nelson, Power within Us ( 1988)

PREFACE

The older I grow, the more I appreciate the uniqueness of an individual life. Literally, no two people are alike. Each one has a specific genetic inheritance indelibly stamped upon every cell. Environmental influences from the company one keeps, and experiences that one endures, blend to enrich and educate the person who ultimately emerges from this marvelous experience we call life. If another can gain insight from my perspectives, I would feel justified in the publication of this volume.

As my name appears as author, I realize that, to a real extent, I am the product of others. From each wonderful person I have met, I have tried to acquire a measure of goodness. From the science of medicine and the discipline of surgery, I have learned the necessity of knowledge and of obedience to law if desired results are to be achieved. From sacred scriptures, I have learned divine law—the everlasting word of God—which is responsible for any component of my messages that may be timeless.

This is not an official publication of the Church. I alone am responsible and stand accountable for viewpoints expressed. As I consider the countless hours devoted to the preparation of each message, I have rendered such written effort where I am with what I have. Yet I recognize that imperfection is still apparent—a quality that is ever a part of me.

Pondering, praying, preparing, and proclaiming are important for an ordained apostle. Called by divine inspiration and revelation, he leaves the career of the world for which he has been initially educated and prayerfully submits himself to his Master, knowing that the Lord will use His servants to accomplish His will, even in their weakness. Messages that result are, in a way, comparable to letters penned earlier by Paul, John, or James. For their day and for their time, those writings represented the legacy of faith they chose to leave to their loved ones. In that spirit, this compilation of messages prepared—epistles written—is offered to those who seek the perspective of this fellow traveler among them.

In the final analysis, however, the written word is only an evidence of the real message that comprises the life of an individual. This thought I have tried to summarize in "My Message," a song I composed, the words of which are as follows:

Our God is my Maker; Parents dear are my guide; An angel wife my true love; Children choice are my pride. Our Lord is my Light; His endless truth, my law. My joy is in service to others; My message is—my life.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

To parents, one can never adequately return appreciation, no matter how thoroughly one might try. Marion C. and Edna A. Nelson have given much more than parenthood. They have provided priceless example. Brothers, sisters, friends, and colleagues have also done much to shape my soul. To my eternal companion, Dantzel, I offer my gratitude for her unselfish partnership. Never murmuring, always enduring, she has helped me to achieve goals that once seemed so distant, almost beyond our comprehension. To our ten children, and also to their partners, whom we love as our own, I express special gratitude as well. Their children, whom we gratefully love as our grandchildren, add a special dimension of joy and, at the same time, additional feelings of responsibility. Family members have been so patient and helpful.

My secretary, Helen R. Hillier, always cheerful even through the final draft, deserves special commendation. To Eleanor Knowles, I am grateful for careful and patient editorial review.

Even with deep appreciation for the help of so many, I personally bear responsibility for the content of this volume. Shortcomings, omissions, and deficiencies compared with the talents of others are clearly mine. Things of everlasting value surely emanate from Him whose servant I am. For His help, I am humbly grateful.
