Russell M. Nelson, Power within Us ( 1988)

Chapter 2

THREE STEPS TOWARD A MONUMENTAL LIFE

In the summer of 1986 a major focus of attention in the United States was the Statue of Liberty on her hundredth anniversary and the celebration of her remodeling. While most monuments are erected to people or specific events, this one is indeed unique. Lady Liberty commemorates an ideal. But this and other monuments can also teach us important lessons about life.

Those lessons are embraced in the words of the hymn "I'll Go Where You Want Me to Go." (Hymns, no. 270.) Within its text are several powerful commitments to action, including I'll go (where you want me to go), I'll do (thy will with a heart sincere), and I'll be (what you want me to be). By applying these concepts to personal development, each of us can help build a monumental life. Through the process of becoming, we may go, do, and be a living monument.

A monument requires a base to support the vertical shaft of its statement. The Statue of Liberty has a splendid eighty-nine-foot pedestal erected on a sixty-five-foot star-shaped base.

A monumental life also begins with a broad base of understanding. Three steps in the process of forging a monumental life from its base are neatly tucked in the verses of our song: I'll go, I'll do, I'll be. These three statements comprise the outline of my message.

I'LL GO

Step one is "I'll go." But before we go anywhere, it is well to consider where we have been. Life's journey did not start with our first mortal breath. Prior to our birth, we were with God as his spirit children. We walked with him, talked with him, and knew him. We each shouted for joy with the prospects of a journey to earth to gain a physical body and to experience unique challenges here. I suspect we were terrified, at first, when told we would forget Father, friends, and facts we formerly knew so well. I can believe we were calmed when informed that our Father in heaven would provide prophets and scriptures to guide us and a means whereby we could communicate with him through prayer and the spirit of revelation. Still, we may have been a bit insecure when we learned that faith—faith to believe the intangible—was the key to success in our journey. Faith was to be the critical component in our safe return to our Father in heaven. Few have had better insight than did Abraham, who recorded:

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them. (Abraham 3:22-25.)

Once here, the journey through life for each of us may include other travels in order to meet our personal rendezvous with destiny. Father Lehi and Mother Sariah departed from the wealth and security of Jerusalem and trekked for many days across hot desert sands to the eastern shores of the Red Sea. Then Lehi asked his sons to return to Jerusalem to get the brass plates of Laban. What did that assignment entail?

If we were to compare that to Utah and our situation today, we would have to walk a distance equivalent to that from Provo to St. George, Utah, approximately three hundred miles, across scorching sand, with no freeways, no air conditioning, no cold drinks. Then we would be asked to walk all the way back to Provo, tackle a tough assignment, and walk back to St. George. No wonder Laman and Lemuel murmured! That was the setting for this matchless statement of Nephi: "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." (1 Nephi 3:7.)

Nephi and his brothers eventually returned with the brass plates. Even Sariah had complained when her sons were required to make this long, hazardous journey. Shortly thereafter, Lehi told his sons to return once again to Jerusalem, this time to get Ishmael and his family. Perhaps each young man felt a bit better about it this time, knowing that there was the possibility he might be rewarded with one of the daughters of Ishmael to become his wife. This rugged discipline was but a prologue to Lehi's family's going subsequently all the way across what we now know as the Saudi Arabian Peninsula to its southeastern shore, where ships were to be built. And this challenge was but prelude to their ultimate destiny—to go across ocean waters to the promised land.

In fact, much of scriptural history reports requirements of the Lord's prophets and people to go to their particular proving grounds.

For David, his destiny with Goliath required that he go to the valley of Elah. (See 1 Samuel 17:19.)

Moses had to go to the heights of Sinai and to the depths of the Red Sea, whose waters had been parted by the power of the priesthood he bore. (See Alma 36:28.)

Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, and our early pioneer predecessors had to go from the eastern extremity of the United States to Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois and then across a hostile environment to "the mountain of the Lord's house" in the top of the mountains (see Isaiah 2:2; 2 Nephi 12:2), to a place we now know as world headquarters of the Lord's church.

All eight of my great-grandparents, individually converted to the Church in populous nations of Europe, had to leave their family and the comforts of home to go this new land and across its challenging terrain, eventually settling in the little town of Ephraim, Utah.

Each of us will have to go to unique testing grounds of faith. For some it may be abroad, or on missions, for preparation or assignment far beyond comforts of home, family, and friends. For others, particularly busy young mothers and fathers, their appointment with destiny is within the walls of home. Their enemy is neither the hot sands of the desert nor smoking guns of foes in pursuit, but heated efforts of the adversary to undermine their marriage and/or the sanctity of the family unit. For the monument of their life to rise from its pedestal of preparation to their appointed site of destiny, they must go where the Lord wants them to go. Wherever it is, each of us must go with the same faith that allowed us to leave our heavenly home in the first place.

I'LL DO

Step two is "I'll Do." These words remind me of the development of the song "I Am a Child of God." When lyricist Naomi W. Randall first composed the words to this hymn, they read, "Teach me all that I must know, to live with Him some day." Before he became president of the Church, President Spencer W. Kimball suggested that the word know be changed to do. In explaining why he wanted the change, he said, "To know isn't enough. The devils know and tremble; the devils know everything. We have to do something." (Church News, April 1, 1978, p. 16; emphasis added.)

As President Kimball implied, some foes of righteousness may actually know more than many of us. To know isn't enough. Even today, some very knowledgeable physicians still smoke cigarettes. They know better. Some Latter-day Saints who know about such divine laws as chastity, tithing, or honesty experience difficulty in doing what the law requires.

There are more things to do in life than time available in which to do them. That means choices need to be made. Choices are often facilitated by asking well-focused questions. Some may be thoughtfully tendered in prayer. Joseph Smith recorded his question: "My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join." The unexpected answer: "Join none of them." (JS-History 1:18-19.)

Such a question, asked with determination beforehand to do whatever is learned, will bring heavenly direction. For example, near the end of the Book of Mormon is this challenge: "If ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent [meaning you intend to do], . . . he will manifest the truth of it unto you." (Moroni 10:4.) Intent is an important part of the formula that precedes testimony, which brought many of us into the Church.

How did we get the Word of Wisdom? Joseph Smith first asked an important question. In answer to fervent prayer with intent to do the revealed will of the Lord, he received section 89 of the Doctrine and Covenants by revelation.

What preceded the vision of the redemption of the dead? President Joseph F. Smith pondered, not just read, the writings of Peter. (See D&C 138:1-5.) Pondering the scriptures is done with an inquiring mind.

What predated the revelation on the priesthood received by President Spencer W. Kimball in 1978? Extended meditation and intelligent inquiry, prayerfully posed in the holy temple.

Before we can start to do, we must ask, "What do I want to do?" Then we may properly select those activities that will help us do the things that are uniquely ours to do. That question involves our purpose and our destiny.

Can you summarize the goal of your life and state it in a simple sentence as did the Savior? He said, "My work and my glory—[is] to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

Counsel from President Joseph F. Smith was concisely stated: "The important consideration is . . . how well we can . . . discharge our duties and obligations to God and to one another." (Gospel Doctrine, p. 270.)

Should that concept not be part of our greatest goal, if we truly believe in God and believe that we are his children and are preparing to return to him? And if it truly is our objective, can there be any action appropriate for us to do other than to keep his commandments?

This was the plea of the Savior, who reported, "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 7:21.) Another writer so recorded this inquiry: "Why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?" (Luke 6:46.) James admonished: "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only." (James 1:22.) King Benjamin also confirmed this concept. He said, "If you believe all these things see that ye do them." (Mosiah 4:10.)

If the most important things in life are to know God and to keep his commandments, then heeding his prophets and abiding their teachings should be among our most important objectives. In a way, the very repetition of the teachings of prophets may have sounded monotonous throughout the years. The pleadings of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and Abinadi have not differed significantly from those of President Harold B. Lee, President Spencer W. Kimball, or President Ezra Taft Benson. Surely when measured by eternal standards, teachings of the prophets are more important and enduring than the latest findings of competent researchers, even if these findings are both discovered and taught by use of modern technology and teaching aids. Success is determined largely by individual desire to learn. When we crave learning as much as we want to satisfy pangs of hunger, we will achieve our desired objectives.

I was with Elder Mark E. Petersen in the Holy Land in October 1983, during his last mortal journey. Elder Petersen was not well. Evidences of his consuming malignancy were painfully real to him, yet he derived strength from the Savior he served. Following a night of intense suffering, exacerbated by pangs of his progressive inability to eat or to drink, Elder Petersen addressed throngs assembled at the Mount of the Beatitudes to hear his discourse on the Sermon on the Mount. After he recited "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness," he departed from the biblical text and pleaded this question: "Do you know what it is to be really hungry? Do you know what it is to really be thirsty? Do you desire righteousness as you would desire food under extreme conditions or drink under extreme conditions? [The Savior] expects us to literally hunger and thirst after righteousness and seek it with all our hearts!"

I was one of the few present on that occasion who knew how hungry and thirsty Elder Petersen really was. His encroaching cancer had deprived him of relief from physical hunger and thirst, so he understood that doctrine. He withstood the trial. He thanked the Lord, who lent him power to preach his last major sermon at the sacred site where Jesus himself had preached.

Counsel was given by another prophet, Jacob, who said, "Feast upon that which perisheth not, neither can be corrupted." (2 Nephi 9:51.)

Nephi declared: "If ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, . . . ye shall have eternal life." (2 Nephi 31:20.) Even though Elder Petersen had been deprived of full physical feeding, he continued to feast upon the words of his Savior. He endured to the end, and I know he earned that promised reward.

To facilitate your feast, may I share a personal pattern of scriptural study that may also be helpful to you? I have marked my LDS edition of the King James Version of the Bible to highlight enrichment material from three alternate translations. I have colored those little letters above the biblical text that draw attention to corresponding footnotes below, which I have also marked with colored dots. Those citations from Hebrew, I have marked with blue circles over both the cross-referenced superscript letter and the corresponding footnote entry below. The Old Testament comes to us primarily from the Hebrew or languages closely associated with Hebrew.

The New Testament comes to us primarily from the Greek. Thus, the alternate translation from the Greek often adds significantly to a better understanding of the New Testament. The little superscript letters and corresponding footnotes from Greek, I have marked with green dots.

For passages clarified by excerpts from the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, I have marked the superscript letters and corresponding footnote citations with red dots.

Now whenever I turn to a page of scripture, I can immediately spot special insights provided by this enrichment material. Importance of these enhancements was taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith, who said, "Our latitude and longitude can be determined in the original Hebrew with far greater accuracy than in the English version." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 290.)

I'LL BE

"To be" involves the process of becoming. The word becoming appears in the standard works in only nine verses of scripture. Two of those references pertain to the Lord's becoming who he was. (See Mosiah 15:3, 7.) A third verse pertains to the mortal body and its becoming spiritual and immortal at the time of the resurrection. (See Alma 11:45.)

All six remaining verses employing this word refer to the ongoing battle of the flesh becoming subject to the spirit. We feel this every day as carnal temptations of the flesh contend with our deeper desire for spiritual supremacy. (See Mosiah 15:5; 16:3; 27:25; Alma 12:31; 13:28; Helaman 3:16.)

In this real world of carnal competition for our fidelity, the process of becoming necessarily involves self-mastery—supremacy of the spirit over appetites of the flesh.

Our hymn tells us, "I'll be what you want me to be." Question: What does the Lord really want you and me to be? He has given us the answer definitely and repeatedly. In the Sermon on the Mount he taught his disciples, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." My little red dot at this quotation from Matthew 5:48 draws attention to the footnote, where I find an even stronger statement from the Joseph Smith Translation: "Ye are therefore commanded to be perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (JST Matthew 5:50; emphasis added.)

To his disciples in the Western Hemisphere, the resurrected Lord proclaimed this divine injunction: "I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect." (3 Nephi 12:48.)

How do we explain these similar but meaningfully different statements? Between the time of his Sermon on the Mount and his sermon to the Nephites, the sinless Savior had become perfected by his atonement. Perfect comes from the Greek word teleios, meaning "complete," and is derived from the Greek word telos, which connotes "to set out for a definite point or goal." It conveys the concept of conclusion of an act. Therefore, perfect in Matthew 5:48 also means "finished," "completed," "consummated," or "fully developed," and refers to the reality of the glorious resurrection of our Master.

Before his crucifixion, Jesus taught, "Behold, I cast out devils, and I do cures to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected." (Luke 13:32.)

His atonement provides that the body, once corruptible, now may become incorruptible. Our physical frame, once capable of death and decay, may now become immortal and beyond crumbling deterioration. That body presently sustained by the blood of life (see Leviticus 17:11) and ever changing may one day become sustained by spirit—changeless and incapable of death anymore.

Thus, the admonition to be perfect should not cause depression among us. To the contrary, it should bring us great joy and jubilation. The Lord knew that the procedure would be long and challenging, so he added this word of encouragement: "For verily I say unto you, they [the best gifts] are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do; that all may be benefited." (D&C 46:9; emphasis added.) Those who are really seeking to do his will are recipients of his blessings, for he knows the intent of our hearts.

As he concluded his ministry among the Nephites, Jesus issued this powerful challenge: "What manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Nephi 27:27.)

These two words, "I am," the simplest words in all scripture, appear in the New Testament in the Greek language as , which may be pronounced as ego eimi. In the original text of the Old Testament, "I am" is read in Hebrew as, which may be pronounced hayah.

Let our jargonal journey begin with John 8:58. Inquisitors once asked Jesus if he had seen Abraham. "Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am." (In the Greek text these two special words are ego eimi.)

My green dotted mark at superscript b before "I am" refers me to a green dotted footnote: "John 58b The term I AM used here in the Greek is identical with the Septuagint usage in Ex. 3:14 which identifies Jehovah."

So, let us cross-refer back to Exodus 3 and look for clarification. The scene is on Mount Sinai. A dialogue is taking place between Moses and the Lord. I presume Moses was suffering some kind of identity crisis (at verse 11) when he said unto God:

Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt? And he said, Certainly I will be with thee; and this shall be a token unto thee, that I have sent thee: When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain. And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them? And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you. (Exodus 3:11-14.)

In the Hebrew language of the Old Testament, "I am" comes from the word hayah. Translated into English, it means "to be," or "existence," and applies as well to the future as it does to the present tense. Indeed, this verse could be translated, "I will become what I will become." Here, to Moses the premortal Messiah is not only proclaiming one of His names, but also choosing a word that could literally imply the redeeming role He was yet destined to fulfill.

Two other facts about the word hayah are of interest:

Are there hints hidden in the deep meaning of God's reply, recorded in Exodus 3:14? We know the treasured truths that the Lord God Jehovah, creator of heaven and earth under the direction of the Father, revealed to Moses one of the Lord's special names. This word may have intimated his role in the eternal existence of man, including the inception of the breath of life into his nostrils, to man's potential immortality. All this was to be made possible through the atoning sacrifice for which he, Jesus the Christ, was to be sent to the earth to effect.

Now let us look at selected verses of the New Testament. First, Mark 14:61-62: "Again the high priest asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed? And Jesus said, I am." Next, John 4:25-26: "The woman saith unto him, I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things. Jesus saith unto her, I that speak unto thee am he."

In the King James Version, the last word of that verse, he, is printed in italics, meaning that King James translators added that word for clarification of meaning. In the Greek text, the sentence contains these two words: ego eimi (I am). The words of Jesus in this passage could be translated "I am [is] speaking to you."

Let us turn next to John 8:28: "Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me, I speak these things." Here again, King James translators added the word he after "I am" and italicized it to note their honest addition. But the Greek New Testament records: "Then shall ye know that ego eimi (I am)."

Yes, before Abraham was, Jesus was "I am"— hayah in Hebrew or ego eimi in Greek. Under the Father's plan, Jehovah—Creator, God of this world, Savior and Redeemer—was indeed "The Great I Am." Although the phrase "The Great I Am" does not appear in the text of the King James Version of the Bible, it is evident that the Prophet Joseph Smith understood this concept well. Three times he recorded this wording in the Doctrine and Covenants, in the first verse of sections 29, 38, and 39.

I'll conclude our scriptural sojourn by returning to the challenge of Jesus to us: "What manner of men ought ye to be? . . . even as I am." (3 Nephi 27:27.)

May we each be inspired by such an example and by great monuments, consider our living a monumental life, enlarge our pedestal of preparation, and then ultimately build on these three steps:

May we not be discouraged when imperfections of ourselves and of our loved ones seem more than we can bear. The Lord has told us, "Continue in patience until ye are perfected." (D&C 67:13.) Then we may be, as the Lord pleaded, "even as I am." We will be numbered among his elect and will be known of him at the glorious advent of his Second Coming. "There is no other way or means whereby man can be saved, only in and through Christ. Behold, he is the life and the light of the world. Behold, he is the word of truth and righteousness." (Alma 38:9.)

By so learning and living, our lives will become monumental, not only as a tribute to our own accomplishments, but also as an everlasting credit to him who created us. God bless us to go where he wants us to go, to do his will with a heart sincere, and to be what he wants us to be.
