Russell M. Nelson, Power within Us ( 1988)

Chapter 3

BEGIN WITH THE END IN MIND

What would you like said about you at your funeral? Or if you were to write your own eulogy and you could have only three sentences (no big flowery speeches, please), what would you want to say?

If I were to write what I hope might be said about me, those three sentences would include:

You may have already defined your goals. You may have even developed a system of priorities to give order to your interests and responsibilities. I applaud such discipline and think it is useful, but I believe that this ordering process may often be a little artificial. Rarely do we fragment the life we live. It is not possible to influence one facet of life without that affecting other aspects as well. So in my own experience I have preferred not to compartmentalize my interests, but to synergize them. Let me explain what I mean.

Nephi said, "I did liken all scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning." (1 Nephi 19:23.) He was advising us to weave the fiber of scriptural wisdom into the fabric of our own being.

King Benjamin taught this interrelationship: "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings, ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) As I ponder serving God, I recognize that I cannot serve him without first serving the children he has sent to bless our family. And as I ponder service to our children, I know I cannot serve them to the fullest without first serving and honoring my wife, the mother of those children. She is my highest priority. When we were married, we vowed that we would "seek . . . first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness." (Matthew 6:33; emphasis added.) Do you see how these goals and priorities all are indelibly intertwined? To say that your highest priority will be to your occupation or to your family or to the Lord is really much more difficult than it is to merge strengths and pursue those interests concurrently.

One of the most remarkable things about these three objectives is that they all have in common one requirement. That requirement is education. The educational process is crucial for success in each objective and is never ending.

SERVICE TO MY FELLOWMEN

First, with regard to service of worth to mankind, I am a heart surgeon—but that really doesn't tell the whole story. When I started medical school, we were taught that one must not touch the heart, for if one did, it would stop beating. But I also pondered the scripture that tells us that "all kingdoms have a law given . . . and unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions." (D&C 88:36, 38.) I believed sincerely the scripture that certifies that "when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:21.)

Knowing these scriptures while concentrating on the "kingdom" of and the blessing of the beating heart, I knew that even the function of this vital organ was predicated upon law. I reasoned that if the applicable laws could be understood and controlled, perhaps they could be utilized for the blessing of the sick. To me this meant that if we would work, study, and ask the proper questions in our scientific experiments, we could learn the laws that govern the heartbeat.

In 1949 our group of researchers presented at the American College of Surgeons the report of the first successful use of the artificial heart-lung machine in sustaining the life of an animal for thirty minutes, without its own heart powering its circulation.

In the decade of the 1950s, successes in the animal laboratory were extended to human beings. Now with many of those laws learned, the heartbeat can be turned off while delicate repairs are performed on damaged valves and vessels, and then turned on again—provided the laws are obeyed upon which that blessing is predicated. Over two hundred thousand open-heart operations are performed in the United States annually and many more worldwide, thereby extending life for many. But you should know that it was through the understanding of the scriptures, and "likening" them to this area of interest, that the great field of heart surgery as we know it today was facilitated for me.

A FINE FAMILY

Turning now from service of worth to my fellowmen, the second sentence that I hope may be said of me at my funeral would be that I had a fine family. That is really a subject near and dear to my heart, and I will not try to treat it broadly except to say that Sister Nelson has brought into our family ten beautiful children. We have tried to rear them consonant with an important scripture: "Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee." (Exodus 20:12.)

The importance of honoring parents extends beyond one's own father and mother. This scripture implies that we honor the father and the mother of children that might yet be born to us. We considered this implication while dating and in the early years of our marriage. But I fully understood that concept only later when I watched Sister Nelson cradle those children in her arms as they arrived one by one. Each time, she reassured herself and her newborn baby that no blessing had been withheld from that child because of any act of impurity in her life that could have deprived that infant of its full potential in any way. To honor father and mother means to honor fatherhood and motherhood and the divine provision for procreation and all that pertains to it.

Part of honoring parenthood is honoring children. There is a great temptation to believe erroneously that our children are our possessions. They are not. They are sons and daughters of our Heavenly Father. Their spirits are eternal, as are ours.

This lesson was brought forcibly to my attention many years ago when our youngest daughter was about four years of age. I came home from work one night to find my sweetheart very weary from a full day with nine children underfoot. My day had been heavy also, but I offered to get the children ready for bed. I began to give the orders to our little four-year-old daughter: take your clothes off, hang them up, brush your teeth, put on your pajamas, say your prayers, and so forth, commanding in a manner befitting a tough sergeant in the army. Suddenly she cocked her head to one side, looked at me with wistful eyes, and said, "Daddy, do you own me?"

Then I realized that I was using coercive methods on this sweet spirit, and that to rule children by command or force is the technique of Satan, not of the Savior. She taught me this important lesson. We don't own our children; we only have them for a brief season. As parents, it is our privilege to love them, to lead them, and then to let them go. The Lord said, "I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth." (D&C 93:40.) This we have tried to do.

Another aspect of our parental responsibility has been to be faithful to every duty we have been called to perform in the Church. Is this a paradox in priorities? No, it isn't. A scripture states: "Wherefore thy duty is unto the church forever, and this because of thy family." (D&C 23:3; emphasis added.) We have recognized that among the fine things we can do for our children is to be faithful to any Church call we have received. Experience gained in the Church strengthens our capacity to serve the public and our family.

FAITH IN GOD

The third sentence that I hope I may merit at my funeral service is that my faith in God was unshakable. I do have a deep and abiding faith in him and in his Son, Jesus Christ.

Education has increased that faith. I have spent some forty years in the study of one of God's greatest creations, the human body, and I know that this marvelous instrument is of divine origin. The anatomy, the physiology, the protective mechanisms, the healing powers—all are well constructed and function beautifully. It is as evident to me that they are the products of a divine Creator as it must be for an astronomer to reach the same conclusion in studying the endless phenomenon of the stars in the heavens.

Furthering our education need not challenge, but should increase our faith. In fact, we have a religious responsibility to educate our minds. We have been taught that "the glory of God is intelligence." (D&C 93:36.) We have a divine command to "obtain a knowledge of history, and of countries, and of kingdoms, of laws of God and man." (D&C 93:53.) Similarly, the Lord has exhorted us to "study and learn, and become acquainted with all good books, and with languages, tongues and people." (D&C 90:15.) The scriptures further admonish, "Learn wisdom in thy youth" (Alma 37:35), and "Teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom. Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you" (D&C 88:77-78).

STEPS IN LEARNING

We all understand the importance of education. Perhaps now we should consider how to learn. May I suggest four steps to facilitate the learning process.

The Lord could have told the brother of Jared. However, he left the brother of Jared to study it out in his own mind before proffering the solution. As a result, the brother of Jared selected sixteen stones and then asked the Lord to touch them so that they might provide the light.

That same concept was stressed in latter-day revelation, when the Lord told Oliver Cowdery, who wanted to help Joseph Smith translate the Book of Mormon, "You have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right." (D&C 9:7-8.)

Many of the revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants were given to prophets only after profound study and thoughtful, focused inquiry of the Lord. So it was with the Word of Wisdom, which was given through the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the revelation on the priesthood, given through President Spencer W. Kimball in 1978. Similarly, each of us will learn best with the spirit of inquiry.

SAFEGUARDS TO PROTECT US

Now may I offer important words of warning. Learning, if misused, can destroy our goals. Let us consider some safeguards to protect us from such an undesirable end.

First, our faith must be nourished. We must enrich that faith with scriptural study and with exposure to other fine books, such as books on art or music. We must nourish the gifts of the spirit on the same daily basis as we feed our physical bodies.

Second, we must choose our role models wisely. Before we endorse the teachings or actions of any individual, we should ask ourselves if that person's faith is strong enough to be worthy of emulation. If it isn't, we should be very discriminating in what we learn from such an individual. The Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price are the standards by which we should measure all doctrine.

Third, we should avoid the mysteries and doctrinal hobby horses. God has revealed all that we need to know for our exaltation. If we will be obedient to the revealed word, we can be patient with the unrevealed. That is why we don't use the terms "orthodox" and "unorthodox" in the Church. We either believe revealed truth or we don't believe it.

Fourth, we should avoid poisons of faith, such as sin and pornography, or barely abiding the letter of the law instead of embracing the ennobling spirit of the law. Remember, "The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life." (2 Corinthians 3:6.)

PREPARE FOR CHALLENGES

Many challenges have to be faced as we go through life. For example, we sometimes hear allegations that the Church is anti-intellectual. When people make such a statement, I am reminded of a common sight in the jungles of Africa. A bird, like the critic, will often perch on the uppermost part of an elephant and peck away at the hide of the stately animal, achieving temporary nourishment and a position of eminence by virtue of this association. While the elephant doesn't need the bird, the bird needs the elephant for its place of prominence. Though the bird may peck, squawk, and smear, the elephant steadily pursues its course in seeming oblivion to its parasitic passenger.

To the charge that the Church is anti-intellectual, we ourselves should be the greatest evidence to refute such an erroneous statement. Individually, we have been encouraged to learn and to seek knowledge from any dependable source. In the Church, we embrace all truth, whether it comes from the scientific laboratory or from the revealed word of the Lord. We accept all truth as being part of the gospel. One truth does not contradict another.

Some of the greatest intellectuals have been those with the strongest faith. Socrates felt that the unexamined life is not worth living, so nothing was exempt from his questioning. But he, with Immanuel Kant, had unwavering faith in God, freedom, and immortality. Socrates never doubted the will of his personal God. He believed so much in freedom that he tied his own self-responsibility to that freedom. So deeply did he believe in the doctrine of immortality of the soul that although he might have prolonged his biological life by choosing exile, he submitted with complete serenity to the death sentence of the Athenean court.

Louis Pasteur made this statement on his reception into the French Academy: "The Greeks have given us one of the most beautiful words of our language, the word enthusiasm, which means 'a God within.' The grandeur of the acts of men is measured by the inspiration from which they spring. Happy is he who bears a God within!"

Consider the Council of the Twelve today. Almost all of them hold baccalaureate degrees, and several have earned master's and doctor's degrees. I must add that educational attainments have not qualified them for their spiritual callings, but it does indicate that their own scholarly pursuits make them not only sympathetic to, but also supportive of, the divine decrees to gain knowledge.

We all must fortify ourselves against attacks on the leaders of the Church. They have never purported to be perfect or even close to it. In fact, the Lord described them as "the weak things of the world, those who are unlearned and despised." But, he continued, they will "thrash the nations by the power of my Spirit." (D&C 35:13.)

Under brutal attack by his critics, Joseph Smith said, "I never told you I was perfect—but there is no error in the revelations which I have taught—must I then be thrown away as a thing of nought?" (Words of Joseph Smith, p. 369.)

As we edify ourselves with education for the eternities, we must search the scriptures, liken them unto us, learn the law in the kingdom of our own activities, and use the standard works as literal standards of eternal excellence against which we measure every thought and deed.

Let us, then, each begin with the end in mind and shape our own destiny. Remember, the development of one's career, family, and faith in God is an individual responsibility, one for which each of us, individually, will be held accountable.
