Russell M. Nelson, Power within Us ( 1988)

Chapter 5

OBEDIENCE AND SACRIFICE

Obedience and sacrifice are similar in that they both bring forth the blessings of heaven, but the words have quite different meanings.

SACRIFICE

The word sacrifice comes from two Latin roots. The first root is sacer, which means "sacred." This root is found in other words familiar to us, such as sacrament, which means "sacred thought," consecrate, which means "with sacredness," and, in its nasal form, the word sanctify. The Latin word for priest is sacerdos, which means "sacred doer." The Saints who speak Spanish and Portuguese will recognize the similarity to the word sacerdocio, which is their word for priesthood.

The second half of the word sacrifice comes from the Latin root facere, which means "to do" or "to make." We recognize this same root in such words as factory, a place where things are made, and manufacture, which means to "make by hand" (man meaning "hand"). This is the same root form that we see in the word fact, which means "deed," something that "has been done." This comes from the Latin word factus, which is the past participle of the verb facere. We see this root form in the word benefactor, which means "good doer."

I mention the derivation of the word sacrifice because it literally means "make sacred." Through common usage, the meaning of the word has been altered over the years. Thus, today's dictionary defines the word to suggest that something is given up or lost.

In this context, some use the word sacrifice, I believe, somewhat inadvisedly to apply to "giving up" of one's gratuitous donations and service in the Church.

A quotation of President Brigham Young bears on this concept. He said, "Not one particle of all that comprises this vast creation of God is our own. Everything we have has been bestowed upon us for our action, to see what we would do with it—whether we would use it for eternal life and exaltation or for eternal death and degradation, until we cease operating in this existence. We have nothing to sacrifice: then let us not talk about sacrificing." (Journal of Discourses 8:67.)

The religious ordinance of sacrifice was instituted by God among men after the transgression in Eden:

Adam and Eve . . . called upon the name of the Lord, and they heard the voice of the Lord . . . speaking unto them. . . . And he gave unto them commandments, that they should worship the Lord their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord. . . . And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me. And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth. (Moses 5:4-7.)

It seems that every principle or ordinance of the gospel has satanic imitations. Abraham rendered this account:

My fathers, having turned from their righteousness, and from the holy commandments which the Lord their God had given unto them, unto the worshiping of the gods of the heathen, utterly refused to hearken to my voice; For their hearts were set to do evil, and were wholly turned to the god of Elkenah. . . . Therefore they turned their hearts to the sacrifice of the heathen in offering up their children unto these dumb idols, and hearkened not unto my voice, but endeavored to take away my life by the hand of the priest of Elkenah. (Abraham 1:5-7.)

Abraham was spared by the Lord and removed from the land of the Chaldeans to accomplish the Lord's purposes. (See Abraham 1:16.)

This memory certainly became poignant many years later when the patriarch Abraham was directed by the Lord to offer his son Isaac for a sacrifice on Mount Moriah. There, the meanings of sacrifice and obedience were merged in one act. Note these excerpts from his divine decree:

Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac. . . . Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I, my son. . . . So they went both of them together . . . and [Abraham] bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood. And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to . . . his son. And the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: . . . Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me. . . . [A ram was offered] in the stead of his son. Thou . . . hast not withheld thy son, thine only son. (Genesis 22:2, 7-13, 16.)

As this story is recorded, the word son is used repeatedly. It is easy to comprehend the teaching of Jacob that this action of Abraham and Isaac was "a similitude of God and his Only Begotten Son." (Jacob 4:5.) As we honor Abraham, we honor Isaac as well, for Jewish tradition holds that Isaac was no child, but a mature man who also knowingly and willingly obeyed. If so, this component of the similitude further typified the willingness and obedience that characterized the atoning sacrifice of the Savior of the world. The simile continues in that the journey from Mount Moriah back to their home in Beersheba, where life could be taken up again, took Abraham and Isaac three days, the same interval as that between the sacrifice of the Savior and his return to life as the resurrected Lord.

From the days of Adam to the time when the atonement was consummated, sacrifice by the shedding of blood was instituted by God among men. In addition to similitude of the eventual atonement, it taught them the reality that mortal life is dependent upon blood. The atoning sacrifice involved the shedding of blood, both in Gethsemane and on Calvary. This was required in order that the resurrected body might again live in the same bloodless condition as it was with Adam in its paradisiacal state prior to the fall.

The sacrificial rites involving the shedding of blood, which had been practiced from the time of Adam, were to prepare the world and its people for the supreme sacrifice of the Lamb of God. Thus, the atonement of the Lord fulfilled the law of Moses, which included blood sacrifice. "We are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. . . . For by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified." (Hebrews 10:10, 14.)

No longer do we think in terms of shedding blood or sacrificing animals. Rarely should we focus in terms of "giving up" time and means. Instead, we should now revert to the original meaning of the word—that we "make sacred." For us to sacrifice, we should "make sacred" every thought, every action, and our very character.

King David perceived the need for personal commitment in sacrifice when he said: "Neither will I offer . . . offerings unto the Lord my God of that which doth cost me nothing." (2 Samuel 24:24.) The giving of our time and means should not be the end in itself, but a means to the end of making ourselves sacred. Each, by living a saintly life, can present to the Lord one more sanctified soul to the honor and glory of his Creator.

OBEDIENCE

Next let us examine the word obedience, which means "to obey." The word obey has an interesting derivation. It also comes from two Latin roots. The prefix ob means "to" or "toward." The second half of the word is a form of the Latin word audire, which means "to hear" or "to listen." This root occurs in such words as audience, auditorium, audio—all pertaining to the process of listening. Literally, then, the word obey means "listen to."

Searching through the scriptures listed under the topic of obedience in the Topical Guide, I found that the majority of Old Testament citations stem from the Hebrew word shama, meaning "to hear intelligently." It applies to hearing the voice of God and being obedient to his word. The majority of the scriptures listed for the New Testament, however, do not carry that same application. (Wives obey husbands, children obey parents, servants obey masters, and so forth.) Interestingly, the citations from the Book of Mormon, largely from writings of the time of the Old Testament, predominantly carry the same emphasis on the earlier application: hearing or listening to the authoritative word of God and being obedient to it.

One cannot be obedient unless there is authoritative word to be heard. Speaking in a gospel context, that means there cannot be obedience without there first being knowledge of the word of God. Moreover, one cannot be obedient (or disobedient) to that word without exercising the divine gift of agency. Individuals are free to choose to obey the word of God or to disobey it. Their choice becomes their response, and it has moral value. Coercion has no place in the kingdom of God because it does not elicit moral action and is therefore contrary to his gift of agency.

Agency is not entirely free, nor is it a self-preserving gift. It must be earned and it must be protected. In choosing one's career, for example, one may select any occupation one wishes in order to earn the right to act freely in that occupation. I am not free to be a concert pianist because I have not earned that right. (I forfeited that option at age ten, much to the dismay of my mother.) For many years I did the work of a surgeon because I had earned the requisite knowledge and certification on which that freedom was based. Then, interestingly, with a few brief words from the prophets of God that I was to be sustained as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, I was free to give up the earned choice to be a surgeon, and to exercise my agency to obey the new call. Each of us is free to be obedient, and that choice each freely and consciously makes as an individual.

Each of us has not only been tested in the past, but will also face trials in the future. If a call comes to leave the comfort and convenience of present surroundings to serve elsewhere, will that call be greeted with the question, "When?" Eventually, two prophets will be called to Jerusalem, where they will be slain in streets sanctified not only by their service, but also by the service of their Savior. (See Revelation 1:14; D&C 77:15; Zechariah 4:11-14.) Our choice to serve must be an informed choice based on eternal truths, for we do not obey blindly, but because we can see. We faithfully follow God's eternal plan and honor our sacred role in it.

President Stephen L Richards said: "There are some, perhaps who may feel that it is subversive of individual freedom of thought and expression to be controlled by the interpretations of our leaders. I wish to assure them that any feeling of constraint will disappear when once they secure the genius and true spirit of this work. Our unanimity of thought and action does not arise, as some suppose, from duress or compulsion in any form. Our accord comes from universal agreement with righteous principles and common response to the operation of the Spirit of our Father. It is actuated by no fear except one. That is the fear of offending God, the Author of our work." (Conference Report, October 1938, p. 116.)

The word to be heard from divine authority is that Joseph Smith saw and heard God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, that he received revelations for the Church, and that he translated the Book of Mormon from engraved plates delivered to him by a heavenly being. All the doctrines that have emanated from these divine manifestations are those of the Church. One cannot accept some and reject others.

The destiny of Zion therefore depends on true education—not the education of worldly wisdom, but the education that has for its basis the incontrovertible truths of the knowledge of God and the glorious principles revealed by him in these latter days. Nothing in this world is of so much importance to us as obedience to the gospel of Jesus Christ. Inactivity may involve disobedience, but obedience must be preceded by faith as well as knowledge. "Whoso treasureth up my word, shall not be deceived." (JS-Matthew 1:37.)

May I review a few pages of medical history to show what a high price has been paid for scriptural illiteracy. I will first cite a few highlights of that history and then follow with relevant scriptural quotations.

Through nearly all but the most recent periods of recorded medical literature, the dogma had prevailed that infections were spread from one individual to another by means of air pollution. One of the earliest publications bears a dateline of 1690, when Robert Boyle of London wrote his "Experimental Discourse on Some Unheeded Causes of the Insalubrity and Salubrity of the Air." In 1772 John Evelyn reported his work entitled "Aer, and Smoake of London," noting that "thousands of infants suffocated every year by smoake and stenches which good policy might in great measure remove." Tenon reported in 1788 that in the HÃ´tel-Dieu in Paris, three to six patients occupied one bed. Surgical cases and women after childbirth were distributed three and four in the same bed.

Even in one of the major hospitals in the United States of America as recently as 1932, more than one patient occupied a bed at the same time. Yet, even by such an authority as Lord Lister (1867), air pollution was still blamed for infections! And in 1869 Simpson from Edinburgh and in 1875 Stimson from New York independently urged that hospitals be taken down and rebuilt every year or two.

Meanwhile, as Brigham Young and the pioneers were entering Salt Lake Valley in 1847, the Austrian physician Semmelweiss advanced the new idea that childbirth fever could be prevented by cleansing hands and linens. His report was greeted with furious debate and disbelief. Thanks to the work of Pasteur, Koch, and others, within the last century this concept changed. They demonstrated that disease can be transmitted directly from one infected person to another, and they proved that germs, and not air, were the means by which infections were spread.

Now, with this brief panorama of man's scientific struggle in your mind, may I invite your attention to the word of the Lord given to all mankind, even centuries before the time of Christ. As you read this, imagine a person with drainage from any infected wound:

And the Lord spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When any man hath a running issue [drainage] out of his flesh, because of his issue he is unclean. And this shall be his uncleanness in his issue: whether his flesh run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue, it is his uncleanness. Every bed, whereon he lieth that hath the issue, is unclean: and every thing, whereon he sitteth, shall be unclean. And whosoever toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even. And he that sitteth on any thing whereon he sat that hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even. And he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even. . . . And when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue; then he shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in running water, and shall be clean. (Leviticus 15:1-7, 13; emphasis added.)

Thus, in the scriptures the Lord clearly revealed in detail the procedures and importance of clean technique in the handling of infected patients.

In 1970 the United States Public Health Service published a monograph entitled "Isolation Techniques for Use in Hospitals," which is the standard for current hospital practice. The principles given in this document are the same as those cited from Leviticus. Further, on page 9 we read the following: "Handwashing before and after contact with each patient is the single most important means of preventing the spread of infection"—essentially the same message as that recorded in Leviticus over three thousand years ago!

How many mothers have needlessly perished? How many children have suffered because mankind's studies failed to include the knowledge of or obedience to the word of God? Whether one examines the annals of medicine or any other record of human life on this earth, the message is always the same: Know and obey the commandments, and you will earn the blessings of God; fail to obey the commandments, and grief necessarily follows.

How glorious will be the day when the enlightening message of our missionaries may be taken to the underprivileged nations of the earth so that the word of God can be heard and obeyed. Their people will be blessed by the prosperity that obedience will bring.

In our efforts to proclaim the virtue of obedience, we might unwisely teach with inappropriate emphasis. For example, many important facts and figures are sometimes cited to illustrate the great physical benefits that come from obedience to the Word of Wisdom. We know that cigarette smoking is the single most important preventable cause of heart disease, cancer, artery disease, and lung disease. But do we obey the Word of Wisdom because medical science affirms the physical benefits that follow?

To test that concept, what would be your response if, as a parent, you were told that your son should be obedient to the Word of Wisdom even if medical science had evidence (which it does not) to suggest that such obedience would be harmful to his health? What would you do? Would you follow the counsel of medical science, or would you listen to and follow the word of God?

What did Abraham do? There was nothing to suggest that the action God had directed for him would be beneficial to Isaac's health. Quite the contrary. Both Abraham and Isaac knew otherwise.

Or take another example. When the Israelites were being led by Joshua into the promised land, they were instructed to traverse the river Jordan. This meant 600,000 Israelite warriors and their families must be moved across a river so full that it was overflowing its banks. Their caravan was led by priests carrying the ark of the Lord. It was only when the soles of the feet of the faithful Israelites actually rested in the water that the waters were suddenly stopped and "heaped up" to allow them to cross an empty river bed. (See Joshua 3.) There was nothing to suggest that their obedience was to be beneficial to their physical health. They obeyed because of their faith in the word of God, and they were his people!

If we should focus on the physical, to the exclusion of the spiritual, benefits of obedience to the Word of Wisdom, then our sons and daughters could easily rationalize that "just one cigarette won't hurt" or "just one drink won't matter."

This is not the question. The question is one of faith. Either one has the faith to hear and obey the word of God and accept it as such, or one does not. "Without faith it is impossible to please him." (Hebrews 11:6.) Note these words of Mormon: "Wo be unto him that will not hearken unto the words of Jesus, and also to them whom he hath chosen and sent among them; for whoso receiveth not the words of Jesus and the words of those whom he hath sent receiveth not him; and therefore he will not receive them at the last day; and it would be better for them if they had not been born." (3 Nephi 28:34-35.)

Many have difficulty accepting the word of God because it comes from their contemporaries—their neighborhood bishops and local leaders who seem to be just ordinary men. Even the prophets of God are just ordinary men, but with extraordinary callings to communicate divine doctrine. We must have the faith to know that "his word [we] shall receive, as if from [his] own mouth, in all patience and faith." (D&C 21:5.) "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.)

It is particularly challenging to respond when the word of the Lord comes from one as close as one's father. I am inspired by the faith of Nephi. Lehi's family had traveled the hot desert sands of Palestine from Jerusalem to reach the eastern shore of the Red Sea, a distance that could have been as great as 250 miles. Then Lehi told his sons, Nephi and his brothers, that they must return to Jerusalem to obtain the plates of brass held by Laban. No wonder those brothers murmured when they contemplated more arduous and difficult travel under such hot and humid circumstances. It was in that setting that these words of faithful Nephi were uttered: "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." (1 Nephi 3:7.)

After the young men successfully accomplished this mission, they returned to their parents only to have Lehi give them the word of the Lord that they must return to Jerusalem again. Even their mother, Sariah, murmured on that occasion.

The challenge of obedience to the word of a contemporary prophet is not new. The Lord commanded Saul, through the prophet Samuel, to "smite Amulek, and utterly destroy all that [the Amalekites] have." Saul chose to rationalize. He spared Agag and the best of the sheep and other animals and the best of all that was good, and selectively destroyed only that which was vile and refuse. Then he deceitfully reported to Samuel that he had performed the commandment of the Lord.

Samuel said, "What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?" Saul indicated that he had spared these choice animals in order that they could be sacrificed unto the Lord. Then Samuel thundered that eternal truth: "Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry." (See 1 Samuel 15:1-23.)

The people in Samuel's time, like the people in our day, desired to be like their neighbors. When Samuel was the prophet, they pled with him to give them a king. Although Samuel, obedient to the counsel of the Lord, cautioned them against having a king, the people rejected this counsel. "And the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me." (1 Samuel 8:7.)

When we rationalize, reject, or rebel against the word of the prophets, we do it unto God. It is possible to discipline one's life to receive any blessing one is willing to earn. But those blessings may not come immediately, and they may inure to the benefit of others, even generations not seen.

The noble sacrifices of each nation's patriots have been a necessary prerequisite in order that the blessings of the gospel may be enjoyed in freedom by those who would come later.

The suffering and sacrifice of pioneers who built temples with a trowel in one hand and a rifle in the other enabled the blessings of the endowment to be conferred upon countless numbers who had died before and who would yet be born, long after the life of those laboring hands had passed from this mortal sphere.

The obedience and sacrifice of the Prophet Joseph Smith required his ministry to sanctify the cells of unworthy and unwarranted jails. On one of those occasions, just five years before his martyrdom, the Lord consoled the Prophet:

If thou art called to pass through tribulation; if thou art in perils among false brethren; if thou art in perils among robbers; if thou art in perils by land or by sea;

If thou art accused with all manner of false accusations; if thine enemies fall upon thee; if they tear thee from the society of thy father and mother and brethren and sisters; and if with a drawn sword thine enemies tear thee from the bosom of thy wife, and of thine offspring, and thine elder son, although but six years of age, shall cling to thy garments, and shall say, My father, my father, why can't you stay with us? . . .

And above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. (D&C 122:5-7.)

Then the Lord reminded Joseph: "The Son of Man hath descended below them all. . . . Fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever." (D&C 122:8-9.) That timeless perspective was precious to the Prophet.

The third Article of Faith states: "We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel." Christ's atoning act transcends the concept of time, affecting limitless numbers of souls for all eternity. It does so because of his choice and his preparation to be obedient to divine law.

Not even for God's Son could divine law be broken. This plaintive plea was spoken at the time of his atonement: "And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee; take away this cup from me: nevertheless not what I will, but what thou wilt." (Mark 14:36.) Later he cried out, "Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Mark 15:34.)

Through the love that he bore for his Son, God let the full weight of the atonement bear down on the Savior, that the victory over death might be his and his alone.

Eliza R. Snow caught the significance of this in these words that we often sing:

How great the wisdom and the love That filled the courts on high And sent the Savior from above To suffer, bleed, and die!

By strict obedience Jesus won The prize with glory rife: "Thy will, O God, not mine be done," Adorned his mortal life. (Hymns, no. 195.)

Christ's example of obedience and sacrifice becomes ours. How grateful we should be for the word of God and that we can choose to hear it and obey. We are privileged to offer sacrifice by making sacred the thoughts and deeds of our lives so that they might be more like his. In so doing, the blessings of heaven may be ours now and forever.
