Russell M. Nelson, Power within Us ( 1988)

Chapter 9

LOVE THY NEIGHBOR

The Lord's concern for the one is evident in many ways. In chapter 15 of Luke alone, three illustrations are given, all pertaining to the retrieval of one who is lost. The parables of the lost sheep, the piece of silver, and the prodigal son, all emphasize the anxiety our Lord has for each individual soul.

A statement of the Lord's prophet on the earth today conveys that continuing concern. The First Presidency recently said, "We rejoice in the blessings that come of membership and activity in this church, whose head is the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ." Those not receiving the blessings of full activity in the Church are invited to "come back and feast at the table of the Lord, and taste again the sweet and satisfying fruits of fellowship with the Saints." (Church News, December 22, 1985, p. 3.)

Sometimes in our zeal to do right, we may stumble over our own shoes. Our efforts to do good may be undermined unknowingly by labels we apply. Labels are important. We tag a special package "fragile." We name a beautiful flower a rose, notwithstanding the fact that "a rose by any other name would smell as sweet." (William Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet, Act II, scene 2.)

As we study the Old Testament, we learn the symbolic significance of names given to the great patriarchs. Abram, for example, had a name that means "exalted father." Just as he was getting used to that name, after ninety-nine years, the Lord changed it from Abram to Abraham, to indicate he would be more than an exalted father. He would become "a father of many nations." (See Genesis 17:1-5.)

Gabriel, magnified by many heavenly errands, bears a name that means "man of God."

The name Elijah, meaning "my God is Jehovah," has components of the names of both Elohim and Jehovah. Bearing a name signifying the Father and the Son, Elijah was the one entrusted with the keys "to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers." (D&C 110:15.)

A child who is slow of speech may speak with even less assurance if he is declared a stammerer by others. In fact, some evidence suggests that stuttering is aggravated merely by labeling one a stutterer.

Unkind words exchanged between people can injure deeply, especially if discourteous labels are applied in the process. People tend to become what is expected of them. Labels convey those expectations. Pigeons feel comfortable in designated pigeonholes, and mail may be categorized when sorted into labeled slots. But people can be offended when labeled or classified. Yet we are so prone to label one another. "Smoker," "drinker," "inactive," "liberal," "unorthodox" are but a few terms applied, as though our thinking could not separate the doer from the deed.

May I quote excerpts from a letter to illustrate how harmful such labels can be:

I'm an ex-Mormon. I've been "officially" out of the Church now for 6 months. . . . Despite everything, I loved the LDS Church. . . . I would just like the LDS people to know how an ex-Mormon feels and why I left the Church. . . . I found out that I was on the inactive list. . . . I was so hurt, I felt like my own church slapped me in the face. . . . It was when I needed the strength of the Church so much that it lost me. I had no visits from home teachers or visiting teachers, no calls from Relief Society. . . . I miss the Church. I miss the serenity I felt. . . . But as much as I miss it, I'm too afraid to go back. Too afraid of being hurt, too afraid of feeling "ugly and unpopular." (The Latter-day Sentinel, July 14, 1984, p. 2.)

In the eyes of God, all are his children. All are brothers and sisters. Millions who have joined the Church have witnessed to the Lord at the time of their baptism their willingness to take upon themselves his name and keep his commandments. Having entered the first gate, that of baptism, to embark along the strait and narrow path, members of the Church may progress along the way toward salvation and exaltation. But all are unique. We each progress at our own pace. Each is a choice soul, precious in the sight of the Lord, regardless of struggles from failure or challenges from unwise deeds. Many, if not most, of us will slip and fall somewhere along the way.

I hope we can teach every leader in the Church to love and lift all members, but especially those who have stumbled along this pathway. Leaders stand at a higher level of perception and can look back on those making the climb to see more clearly those in distress. "For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him that is alone when he falleth: for he hath not another to help him up." (Ecclesiastes 4:10.)

In the future, I hope we can lift more people back on the path. Prevention is better than treatment of any illness. When interviews disclose even the slightest symptoms of spiritual sickness, help rendered then may be most therapeutic. I believe this is what the Lord meant when he taught us, through his prophet, to "lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees; and make straight paths for your feet." (Hebrews 12:12-13.) For that correct path leads to the glorious gate that enables blessings of the priesthood to come into our lives, the gate of the temple. This is the ultimate reason for our membership in the Church, that we may enjoy all the blessings there for us and our families.

Obstacles along the way, such as habituation to tobacco or to stimulating drinks such as coffee and tea, need not raise artificial barriers to stand between us as brothers and sisters, or between an individual and the fulfillment of his or her own potential.

Years ago, for example, I was given a home teaching assignment to a special couple. A faithful, wonderful wife welcomed us to their home while her husband retreated to a small room filled with amateur radio equipment. But our concern for him was great enough to tolerate the dense smoke of his cigars as he reluctantly responded to our questions about the principles of radio operation. As our regular visits continued, earlier barriers became melted into bonds of a dear friendship. Our wives became fast friends too. The sweetness of his soul began to emerge. He refined his life. Now, over thirty years later, we look back on his distinguished service as a stake president, mission president, and temple president. And recently I had the great privilege of ordaining this dear friend of mine a patriarch.

Paul wrote to the Galatians: "Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness. . . . Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ. . . . As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the household of faith." (Galatians 6:1-2, 10.)

A wife grieves because of errant activities of her husband. Parents sorrow when their loved ones go astray. But scriptures hold great promise, particularly for those who have been taught the gospel earlier in life. "Train up a child in the way he should go," the proverb states, "and when he is old, he will not depart from it." (Proverbs 22:6.)

Job expressed hope with this analogy: "For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease. Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground; yet through the scent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant." (Job 14:7-9.)

That scent of water is the wonderful refreshment of love. Most who have separated themselves from full fellowship in the Church have done so not because of doctrinal disputations but because of hurt, neglect, or lack of love. Progress toward full participation in the blessings of the gospel needs no new programs, only new vision of love, which can be rendered best by friends and neighbors.

Someone asked the Savior: "Master, which is the great commandment in the law?" Jesus responded, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:36-40.)

Quick and easy ways to come back cannot be packaged at Church headquarters and delivered to local priesthood leaders. Love cannot be conveyed remotely, even with new technology. These two great commandments must be applied by leaders of the Church locally. The way to build the Church in each stake and mission is to "preach [the] gospel . . . and . . . cause [the] church to be established." (D&C 28:8.)

When that happens, great blessings of eternal worth will result, "for whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies. They become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham, and the church and kingdom, and the elect of God." The scripture promises further, "They who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord; for he that receiveth my servants receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth my Father; and he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him." (D&C 84:33-38.)

Such blessings of supernal significance are really worth our efforts, for ourselves and our neighbors. Priesthood quorums and the sisters of the Relief Society are an indispensable part of this preparation. Their agendas should be focused more on our Father's business of brotherhood and sisterhood and of blessings than on disputations.

Strength bonded in mutual commitment is envisioned in this passage from the Book of Mormon: "They were all young men, and they were exceedingly valiant for courage, and also for strength and activity; but behold, this was not all—they were men who were true at all times in whatsoever thing they were entrusted. Yea, they were men of truth and soberness, for they had been taught to keep the commandments of God and to walk uprightly before him." (Alma 53:20-21.)

In the church of our loving Lord, we all need each other. Paul explained this by likening the Saints to parts of the body: "If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? . . . And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you. . . . Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular." (1 Corinthians 12:15-16, 21, 27.)

As we fortify ourselves for our mighty redeeming tasks, may we heed this inspired prayer from the Book of Mormon: "O Lord, wilt thou grant unto us that we may have success in bringing [our brothers and sisters] again unto thee in Christ. Behold, O Lord, their souls are precious, and many of them are our brethren; therefore, give unto us, O Lord, power and wisdom that we may bring these, our brethren, again unto thee." (Alma 31:34-35.)

Let us unlabel our brothers and sisters. They are not strangers, "but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God." (Ephesians 2:19.) Let us all learn to love God and one another. Obedience to these two great commandments will crown our efforts with success. "Verily, thus saith the Lord, I say unto you, if those who call themselves by my name and are [trying] to be my saints, if they will do my will and keep my commandments . . . they may be prepared for that which is in store for a time to come." (D&C 125:2.)

That time will be glorious, especially when shared with all the sheep of the fold, with none lost. We shall bless the lives of our families, friends, and neighbors as we help them prepare for the great day of the Lord, which is nigh.
