Russell M. Nelson, Power within Us ( 1988)

Chapter 14

TEN COMMANDMENTS

Our turn on earth is so new—so exciting—so full of adventure. Sometimes it is difficult for us to realize that the world is pretty old and that the challenges we face are old too. We are newcomers on a very old stage. The plot of the drama is already well written. We enter, prepare for performance, and then brace ourselves for the final curtain call. Our turn on the stage of life's theater is now—a special and an exciting opportunity.

A monument in Chicago bears an inscription with a message something like this: "Time flies, you say? Alas, I know. It's Time that stays. It's only we who go."

Each of us enters the scene of mortality for a brief season. We are born. We grow. We encounter tests and trials. We win a few, lose a few, and then we pass on. We came to earth for two reasons: to get a body and to develop faith, which is sometimes best measured as the power of the spirit over the appetites of the body.

The bodies we came to receive have many physical appetites—for food, for drink, for exercise of all living systems. We like to see, hear, smell, touch, and taste. We hunger, we thirst, we crave affection, approval, and attention. These appetites are God-given—for our survival, for our protection, and for our joy.

In satisfying these appetites, we make choices. For example, on New Year's Eve, we may indulge in chips and dip, candy and cake, drink and doughnuts, and derive deserved discomfort. On New Year's morn, we resolve to make better selections and be wiser next time.

Our more important choices are those between right and wrong. Inasmuch as good and evil forces do exist in the world, it is not surprising that they compete most keenly in the arena of appetite—yes, in each of our many physical appetites. Many choices have moral implications. There are good and there are evil things that we may see. There are good and there are evil things that we may listen to. There are good and there are evil things that we may feel, eat, drink, or otherwise allow into our bodies. I would define moral in terms of commandments of God. Something is moral if it is in line with direction he has given. Something is immoral if it conflicts with his will.

It is important to know who we are, why we are here, and where we want to go. We must remember that we are sons and daughters of God. He created us; we did not create ourselves. And he didn't leave us alone. As a loving Creator, he gave us a book of instructions. We call that book scripture. We pluralize the word and call it scriptures because his commandments have been recorded in different volumes, many times and in many places. But the message of morality has always been the same.

The Ten Commandments comprise the great moral code of our society. They have been repeated over and over again. They were cited more than once in the Old Testament (see Exodus 20; Deuteronomy 5), reiterated in the New Testament (see Romans 13:9), written in the Book of Mormon (see Mosiah 13:12-24), and recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants (see D&C 42:18-28). We had better memorize them, just as we have learned the alphabet and multiplication tables.

The first four commandments pertain to our relationship with God, the remaining six to our relationships with fellow human beings. As we consider each of them, we might reflect not only on God the Giver, but also on Satan the opposer. All good in the world comes from God; all evil stems from Satan. As the evil one, Satan fights against each commandment and creates conflict in the minds of mortals on each of the ten. He further hopes that conflicting thoughts will be followed by deeds counter to divine commandments, thereby enslaving our souls and denying us blessings from heaven.

Our Creator identified himself before giving the Ten Commandments, so that there would be no question as to who was speaking. "I am the Lord thy God," he began.

This means that before we strive for dollars or degrees, power or position, our individual system of priority puts him where he belongs, as our loving Father—right on the top of our list. I hope you personally pray to him each day. " 'Ere you left your room this morning, did you think to pray?" (Hymns, no. 140.) If you didn't, repent! Fathers love to hear from their children, morning and night. Our Heavenly Father is no exception.

The children of Israel, to whom this commandment was originally given, had been making colossal statues of Pharaoh. So imbued were they with such practices that, when left on their own, they fashioned a golden calf and presumed to worship it.

Is this commandment still relevant in our day? It most certainly is. In one country I visited recently, for example, people kneel in worship before an object of their own creation. It has the body of a man and the head of an elephant. They call him Lord (Ganesh) and pray to him. In fact, in many of the most populous and poverty-stricken nations of the earth, images and statuary constitute the object of adoration of people in ignorance of this great second commandment. Their disobedience keeps them from the blessings of prosperity that God has promised to his faithful children.

The lips and tongue are among the many important organs in the body. Just as they play a role in tasting various foods and drinks we choose to take into our bodies, so they also communicate what we choose to give out from our bodies. Swearing and profanity are darkness in the language of the undisciplined. Such are symbols of the unlearned and evidences of a mind without better vocabulary.

Let us not offend people by unkind language and, most important of all, let us not separate ourselves from the love of God by taking his name in vain. I like these verses from Proverbs: "I will speak of excellent things; and the opening of my lips shall be right things. For my mouth shall speak truth; and wickedness is an abomination to my lips. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing . . . perverse in them." (Proverbs 8:6-8.)

In taking this commandment seriously, the early children of Israel compiled long lists of deeds that were not permitted on the Sabbath. The Savior came later to clarify that man was not created for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath was created for man. (See Mark 2:27.)

When I was a youth, I wondered just what activities were appropriate for the Sabbath. I read lists of dos and don'ts, all prepared by others. But now I have a much better understanding. I gained precious insight from two Old Testament scriptures. The first is from Exodus: "The Lord spake unto Moses, saying, . . . My sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that I am the Lord that doth sanctify you." (Exodus 31:12-13.) The other scripture is from Ezekiel: "I gave them my sabbaths, to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the Lord that sanctify them. . . . I am the Lord your God; . . . hallow my sabbaths; and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am the Lord your God." (Ezekiel 20:12, 19-20.)

Now I understand that my behavior on the Sabbath is my sign to the Lord of my regard for him and for the covenant under which I was born. If, on the one hand, my interests on the Sabbath were turned to pro football games or worldly movies, the sign from me to him would clearly be that my devotion would not favor the Lord. If, on the other hand, my Sabbath interests were focused on the Lord and his teachings, my family, or the sick, or the poor, and the needy, that sign would likewise be visible to God. Our activities on the Sabbath will be appropriate as we consider them to be our personal sign to him of our commitment to the Lord.

This is the first commandment listed with a promise. And you need to remember that sometimes parents may not fully understand why they counsel as they do.

May I relate a story to illustrate? Several years ago, I was commissioned to give an important lecture at a university in New York City. The night before the lecture, Sister Nelson and I were invited to dinner at the home of our host professor. During the course of the evening, he proudly introduced us to his beautiful twenty-one-year-old daughter, an honor student in medical school and an unusually attractive, gifted, and brilliant person. The next day, I gave my lecture, and we returned to our home with pleasant memories.

Some weeks later, the professor, in an obvious state of grief, called me on the telephone in Salt Lake City. I asked, "What is the matter?"

"Remember my daughter whom you met at our home?"

"Of course," I replied. "I'll never forget such a stunning young woman."

"Last night she was killed in an automobile accident! My wife and I are inconsolably beside ourselves. We needed to talk to someone, so we called you."

"Tell me about it," I said.

Then he related the circumstances. "Last night she asked permission to go to a dance with a certain young man. I didn't have a good feeling about it. I told her so and asked her not to go. She asked me why I felt that way. I simply told her that I was uneasy. Ours has been a close family, and she had always been an obedient daughter, but this time she said that if I couldn't give her a good reason to decline, she wanted to go. And so she did. At the dance, alcoholic beverages were served. Her escort drank a bit—we don't know how much. While returning home, he was driving too fast—missed a turn—and careened his car through a guardrail and into a reservoir below. They were both submerged and taken to their death."

I tried to interject my feeling of shared sadness, but he continued. "My grief is made worse because I had the distinct feeling before she left that trouble lay ahead. Why couldn't I have been more persuasive? If I had been more insistent, she would be alive today, and her pure life—so full of promise—would still be ahead of her. Now it is all over, and I have myself to blame."

Meanwhile, on my end of the phone, I felt helpless. But in the back of my mind, and as a father of nine lovely daughters, the message flashed across my mind: "Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee."

Parents are entitled to receive heavenly promptings for the protection of their children. Sometimes they can't explain good reasons for counsel they give. Inspiration is sometimes difficult to describe, but it is just as real as is communication from the spoken or written word.

Threats to a person's longevity and happiness may come in various forms. The harmful effects of tobacco, alcohol, tea, and coffee are widely known. Parents advise against their use because our Heavenly Father has forbidden them. (See D&C 89.) Drug abuse is another danger. Pushers of drugs may invade campuses or convenience stores, cunningly posing as friends. They would entice youth through appetites of the flesh to take into their bodies substances that would alter the mind. Addictions of the flesh become addictions of the spirit as well. Young people need to keep their minds and their bodies free from pollution and from bondage. They will be free, live longer, and be happier if they will so protect themselves.

Simple words—and not much temptation to break this commandment, you may add. But to clarify, in our day the Lord added, "Thou shalt not . . . kill, nor do anything like unto it." (D&C 59:6.) Do you think he could foresee our time, when mankind would disregard reverence for life and authorize abortion on a massive scale throughout the world? Of course he could. That is why he warned us again. Few acts could bring guilt and sorrow quite so surely as the shedding of innocent blood, regardless of the age of the victim. We need this counsel today, perhaps more than ever before.

Our Creator knew that our appetites for affection could escape control, so he protected us by giving this commandment. We may think we live in a more permissive society today than did people of former times, but I think it's only because we are actors on the stage of today.

A search of the scriptures teaches us important lessons on this subject. The word adultery—or its derivatives—appears in 113 verses of scripture. One-third of those references appear in the Old Testament, one-third in the New Testament, and one-third in scripture brought forth in modern day.

Adultery's companion sin, fornication, is also forbidden by the Lord. This word—or its derivatives—appears in the scriptures in 54 verses, again spanning all time. Nearly three-quarters of those references appear in the New Testament; 9 percent are in the Old Testament; and the remaining 17 percent are in the books of the triple combination.

These commandments against sexual sin are not from parents, teachers, school boards, doctors, or any mere mortal. They are from God our Maker—and the punishments of God will be delivered upon those who transgress. Transgressors will be accountable directly to him. The Lord said, "Every man may act in doctrine and principle . . . according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment." (D&C 101:78.)

When Jesus lived upon the earth, he taught a higher law, one limited not just to deed but to thought as well. He said, "Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart." (Matthew 5:28.) He was telling us not even to look at forbidden offerings that might tempt us at the table of sexual appetite.

Today, people are appropriately fearful of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, or AIDS. Generally, it is a sexually transmitted condition, most commonly encountered among those engaging in homosexual activity. Public health authorities forecast that within our lifetime, AIDS will become a plague that will sweep the earth unlike any other experienced in modern times.

Some have wondered, Is this a way the Lord has of punishing those who transgress the law of chastity, which forbids sexual relations outside the covenant of marriage? I don't know. But I do know of scriptural illustrations of the Lord destroying the wicked.

Why did the flood come at the time of Noah? Why did the Lord destroy Sodom and Gomorrah? Remember the interesting dialogue between the Lord and Abraham, who asked if these two cities could be spared if fifty righteous inhabitants could be found? The Lord agreed. Then Abraham engaged in an interesting exercise. He seemed to bargain with the Lord, inquiring, "How about forty-five righteous?" When he received a stay of destruction with that number, he plied the Lord with successive questions of forty, thirty, twenty, or ten righteous. The Lord even agreed to spare them—if ten righteous could be identified. But the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed, for the Lord rained down fire and brimstone upon them.

Another instance of guilt and punishment is recorded in First Chronicles, wherein David said to God, "I have sinned greatly," and then submitted himself for discipline. The Lord offered three choices, one of which David was required to make: either three years of famine, or three months to be destroyed by his foes, or three days of pestilence in the land, wherein the angel of the Lord would work destruction throughout all the coasts of Israel.

David made an interesting choice. He preferred not to fall into the hands of man, but to be dealt with by the Lord himself. He selected option number three. "So the Lord sent pestilence upon Israel: and there fell of Israel seventy thousand men." (See 1 Chronicles 21:1-14.)

Elijah prophesied that the people in his day would be destroyed because they walked in the way of sexual sin: "Behold, with a great plague will the Lord smite thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy goods." (2 Chronicles 21:13-14.)

Another reference involves the city of Capernaum, now but a desolate ruin of a once thriving community. Jesus said, "Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee." (Matthew 11:23-24.) So Capernaum, too, was cursed because of the iniquities of its people. Today it lies in ruin, silently signaling the power of God to bless or to punish, according to the faith of the people.

No, I don't think plague, punishment, and retribution upon the wicked are new. They are as old as the law that forbids sexual relations outside the covenant of marriage, either between the sexes or among the sexes.

One of the many tragedies of sin is that wickedness of the sinner may inflict misery upon innocent victims as well. Just as it occurs in war, so it can also occur with AIDS, when blameless marriage partners or clean children may become afflicted with the virus initially acquired through someone else's transgression.

That doesn't seem right, you say? No, it doesn't. But one thing is right: Each of us will be judged by the Lord when life on earth is completed. His judgment will be right; it will be merciful and just, and our eternal existence will be determined in accordance with our personal thoughts, deeds, and faith, and not by those of any other. As we protect ourselves by obedience to the law of chastity, we will be blessed by the Lord, now and forever more.

This commandment teaches us to honor others and reverence that which is rightfully theirs. The qualities of honesty, integrity, dependability, and trust are personal characteristics that are more valuable than material wealth.

A person who keeps this commandment does not accept the philosophy of obtaining something for nothing. The true follower of Christ pays for services rendered or goods received, and likewise renders service or goods in return for compensation received. This is an important reason why we oppose governmentally sponsored lotteries. For the few winners, there are losers—manyfold—and no one receives remuneration that was earned. As Elder Dallin H. Oaks recently stated, "That governments would tolerate gambling is regrettable; that governments would promote gambling is reprehensible." ("Gambling—Morally Wrong and Politically Unwise," Ensign, June 1987, p. 75.)

We must be certain our own consciences are free from guilt. We must not rob or steal or shoplift or "anything like unto it." We can be protected from the disease of greed, which seems to underlie these problems, through the divine commandment of tithing. It gives great security. If a person learns to be honest in financial dealings with God, that individual is likely to be honest elsewhere, and success in life will ensue.

As we are reminded of the Lord's commandment for tithing, think of your own compliance with this eighth commandment: "Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. . . . Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse . . . and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it." (Malachi 3:8, 10.) The law of tithing is a valuable key to the blessings of honesty and prosperity.

Nothing is more precious to an individual than his good name. Following the Civil War, a certain financial institution invited General Robert E. Lee to be its president at a handsome salary. The officers of the company explained that they didn't care about his service. They said, "What we want is your name." The great general replied, "Gentlemen, my name is not for sale."

Shakespeare wrote:

Who steals my purse steals trash. . . . But he who filches from me my good name Robs me of that which not enriches him And makes me poor indeed. (Othello, Act III, scene 3.)

Let us oft speak kind words to each other and about each other, and, in truth, always be obedient to the ninth commandment.

To this great directive, the Lord singled out, in addition, "thy neighbour's wife" and maidservant or manservant. This commandment reinforces commandment number seven, which forbids adultery. Knowing of our potential weaknesses, the Lord repeated the need for moral purity in at least two of the ten commandments, and did so to people of Old Testament, New Testament, and Book of Mormon times, as well as to us in our day. While society and governments grapple with problems of teenage pregnancy, abortion, sexually transmitted disease, and all the social ills associated with each, the teachings of our Creator ring loud and clear. They are as true now as they have ever been. They are as essential to happiness now as they were when first given. From Sinai's Mount, the Lord God thundered down these commandments, and he has repeated them over and over again to successive generations. Each person must develop the power of the spirit to be stronger than the appetites of the body.

Great rewards are promised. Instead of being tossed scraps with the taste of a crumb here or a morsel there, if we are obedient to the Lord's commandments we may feast continually at the banquet table of life. As our physical appetites and passions are controlled and these commandments are obeyed, incredible blessings will be ours. We will be healthier. We will be happier. We will find wisdom, even hidden treasures of knowledge. We will prosper in the land. And even more: To those who are faithful, he has promised that we shall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, exaltation, glory, and eternal lives. (See D&C 132:19.)
