Russell M. Nelson, Power within Us ( 1988)

Chapter 15

COVENANTS AND SIGNS

Isaiah 42:6 states: "I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles." Again, in our day the Lord identified his everlasting covenant as a light to the world: "I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people." (D&C 45:9.)

Scriptures reveal that our Heavenly Father has often used tokens or signs to guide and teach his people pertaining to covenants in his eternal plan for us. Often, references to these are repeated, even in different books of scripture. I would like to comment on ten of these unique events of scriptural history, past, present, and future, that link a covenant to a token or sign.

Covenant number one pertains to Noah, Enoch, the flood, and the rainbow: "I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you; . . . neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth. And God said, This [rainbow] is the token of the covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations: I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth. . . . And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant, which I have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth." (Genesis 9:9-11, 17.)

Later revelation enlarges the terms of this covenant, that the Zion of Enoch will return and the Lord will come again to dwell on earth. (See JST Genesis 9:17-25.)

The token of the rainbow is a visible and perpetual reminder of the three terms of this covenant.

The second covenant is known as the Abrahamic covenant. Note the words of God to father Abraham: "Thou shalt keep my covenant . . . thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations. This is my covenant, . . . Every man child among you shall be circumcised . . . and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you." (Genesis 17:9-11.)

Abraham first received the gospel by baptism (the covenant of salvation). Then the higher priesthood was conferred upon him, and he entered into celestial marriage (the covenant of exaltation). Finally he received a promise that these blessings would be offered to all of his mortal posterity. Included in the divine promises to Abraham were assurances that Christ would come through his lineage, that Abraham's posterity would receive certain lands as an eternal inheritance, that all nations of the earth would be blessed by his seed, and more. Since we are descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, generally through Joseph, we inherit these blessings. Those who are faithful to covenants made in the house of the Lord will receive an inheritance in the celestial kingdom.

Christ later revealed, "The [token] of circumcision is done away in me." (Moroni 8:8.) Latter-day revelation also confirms that this law was fulfilled in Christ. (See D&C 74:3-7.) But the Abrahamic covenant remains!

Covenant number three pertains to the Passover. These are the words of the Lord: "The blood . . . on the two side posts and on the upper door post . . . shall be . . . for a token upon the houses where ye are: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt." (Exodus 12:7, 13.)

The covenant of the Passover included a token rendered in faith, which spared the lives of firstborn sons.

Covenant number four pertains to the Sabbath day. For years we have been taught to keep the Sabbath day holy and have struggled for understanding and compliance with this law. Keeping the Sabbath day holy is a sign of a covenant with the Lord. He decreed: "Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that I am the Lord that doth sanctify you." (Exodus 31:13.)

That expression from Exodus was reiterated by the Lord through Ezekiel, who said, "Hallow my sabbaths; and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am the Lord your God." (Ezekiel 20:20.)

As I worked among the people of mainland China, I noted that their calendars, like ours, distinguish Sundays in red numerals while those for the other six days of the week are printed in black. On Sunday the shops are generally closed, and only emergency operations are performed in the hospitals. When I asked my medical associates why they regarded Sunday different from other days, they replied, "Because we have learned from Western culture that people seem to be more productive if they take Sunday off." When I asked if there were any religious significance to their special treatment of Sunday, my hosts indicated that they were not aware of any. What a glorious day it will be when these wonderful people are blessed for keeping the Sabbath day holy for the right reason. It is man's sign to God acknowledging that He is the Lord.

Covenant number five pertains to the Israelites, who crossed the waters of the Jordan when Joshua led them into that swollen river at flood time. They had complete faith that God would "heap up" the waters of the river Jordan as he had done earlier when the Red Sea was parted for Moses and his followers. After the people had successfully accomplished this act of faith, facilitated by a miracle from the Lord, they were commanded that a man from each tribe take a stone and erect a monument to signify this event. Joshua set up twelve stones in the place where the priests stood responding to the Lord's directive "that this may be a sign among you" (Joshua 4:6)—a sign of their covenant with the Lord, who delivered them in safety to their destination.

The sixth covenant pertains to the birth of Jesus Christ. Remember the prophecy of Isaiah often quoted at Christmastime: "Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel." Immediately preceding those words is this significant preamble: "The Lord himself shall give you a sign." (Isaiah 7:14; 2 Nephi 17:14.)

The Christmas message also contains this familiar passage: "For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger." (Luke 2:11-12.) The birth of the Son of God was a covenant made from before the foundation of the world. It had other celestial signs: "I give unto you . . . a sign at the time of his coming; for behold, there shall be great lights in heaven, insomuch that in the night before he cometh there shall be no darkness. . . . There shall a new star arise, . . . and this also shall be a sign unto you." (Helaman 14:3, 5; see also 3 Nephi 1:21-22.)

This wondrous event was heralded by wondrous signs given to both the old world and the new.

Covenant number seven is the atoning sacrifice and crucifixion of Jesus Christ. The most important event ever to occur in the history of this world was commemorated by heavenly signs. A prophet foretold a sign of his death: "The sun shall be darkened and refuse to give his light unto you; and also the moon and the stars; and there shall be no light upon the face of this land . . . for the space of three days, to the time that he shall rise again from the dead." (Helaman 14:20.) Eyewitness accounts of the awesome reality of those signs were recorded in other verses of scripture. (3 Nephi 8:3; 11:2.)

These seven covenants, tokens, and signs are all past history. The next three pertain to our day and to the future.

Covenant number eight pertains to falsehood. When the Savior was asked, "What shall be the sign of thy [second] coming?," he listed many signs. But the first one he mentioned was "Take heed that no man deceive you." (Matthew 24:3-4; JS-Matthew 1:5.) Then he warned that false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many, and that, "if possible, they shall deceive the very elect, who are the elect according to the covenant." (JS-Matthew 1:22; emphasis added.) That means that each of us, the elect of the Lord—the elect according to the covenant—will be subject to deceit and deception by those who would divert us from our commitment to follow the Savior. This word of warning hopefully is sufficient to the wise.

Covenant number nine: Each member of the Church is under covenant to walk in accordance with the commandments of God. Modern scripture reveals tokens that pertain to this covenant. Have you ever wondered why we kneel in prayer? Scripture answers: "Let him offer himself in prayer upon his knees before God, in token or remembrance of the everlasting covenant." (D&C 88:131.) The everlasting covenant is the gospel of Jesus Christ. (See D&C 66:2.)

Scripture affirms that the amen we offer at the close of a prayer is also a token of the everlasting covenant. When we audibly say "amen" at the conclusion of the remarks of one who has spoken, it may be regarded as a token of an eternal covenant. (See D&C 88:135.)

The tenth covenant is a multifaceted one, pertaining to the events of the last days and the great millennial reign of the Lord. Did you know the Book of Mormon is a sign of that covenant? The heading to chapter 29 of Third Nephi states: "The coming forth of the Book of Mormon is a sign that the Lord has commenced to gather Israel and fulfill his covenants."

News media have carried stories occasionally of incidents pertaining to the early history of the Church and the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. What these news accounts fail to report is that the Book of Mormon has come forth in fulfillment of prophecy, ancient and modern, and that it was translated by the gift and power of God, then pronounced as the most nearly correct book on the face of the earth. Reporters may also fail to note that it is a sign of the covenant of God to the world that the last days are forthcoming. We will be accountable not to news reports, but to this scripture: "Ye need not suppose that ye can turn the right hand of the Lord unto the left, that he may not execute judgment unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the house of Israel." (3 Nephi 29:9.)

The Lord listed other signs of his covenant to come again: "Ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars. . . . There shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes. . . . Iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. . . . This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." (Matthew 24:6-14.)

To the people on the American continent, the Lord added, "I give unto you a sign . . . that I shall gather in, from their long dispersion, my people, O house of Israel. . . . This is the thing which I will give unto you for a sign . . . that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel." (3 Nephi 21:1-4.) In that day there will be a marvelous work among the people. The lost tribes will return and the new Jerusalem will be built.

As a final prelude to the covenant of his coming, other signs will be seen: the sun will be darkened, the moon will be darkened, and stars will fall from heaven. (See Matthew 24:29-30; D&C 88:87, 93; JS-Matthew 1:33.)

We are a covenant people. Signs and tokens of God's covenants with us are all around. We have just reviewed ten of them, but there are more, yes, many more.

Know that the precious Book of Mormon is a sign of the last days. Those who serve as missionaries are fulfilling the sign of the covenant of God to Abraham that all the nations of the world will be blessed by his seed. Latter-day Saints are custodians of the priesthood and of the gospel of Jesus Christ. They will carry that word to the world not only for the salvation of the people, but also as participants in the sign that all nations of the earth shall hear the gospel message before covenant of the Second Coming.
