Russell M. Nelson, Power within Us ( 1988)

Chapter 16

LIFE AFTER LIFE

Some years ago I had a conversation with a book publisher who was interested in the topic of possible continuation of life after what we know as death. He asked if I could contribute stories from patients who had come close enough to death to experience the other side, and yet had survived to share those accounts. Sensing public interest in this subject, he would entitle the book Life After Life.

When I considered that request, I remembered many such incidents that had been whispered in confidence to me over the years. But those seemed too sacred to share in a worldly way, especially to the benefit of a commercial venture. Besides, what would be the validity of isolated stories of life after life without supporting testimonies of witnesses?

To me, much more logical and convincing would be a study of well-documented and carefully witnessed evidences of life after life. In fact, the activities of the living Christ in America followed his own resurrection from the dead. Many witnesses in many places have seen the risen Lord, before, during, and after his appearance to the Nephites. Among the recorded accounts are the following.

TO ASSOCIATES IN THE HOLY LAND

TO THE NEPHITES

John taught of this as well: "The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live." (John 5:25.)

In our day, additional scriptures have been added that attest to the ministry of the living Lord among the dead. (D&C 138.)

TO THE LOST TRIBES

TO THOSE OF THIS DISPENSATION

HIS WORK AND HIS GLORY

The resurrection of Jesus Christ is truly one of the most carefully documented events in history. I have mentioned many of those appearances, but others have been recorded.

Even more remarkable is the fact that his mission among men—the atonement, the resurrection—extends privileges of redemption from sin and a glorious resurrection to each one of us. In some marvelous way, fully comprehended only by Deity, this is his work and his glory—"to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

Teachers in the Church so instruct the old and the young. Sometimes the results are humorous. One leader shared this story with me:

As a little boy came home from Primary one day, his mother asked him what he had learned in class. He said, "My teacher told me that I used to be dust and that I would be dust once again. Is that true, Mommy?"

"Yes," the mother replied. "A scripture tells us so: 'For dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.' " (Genesis 3:19.)

The little boy was amazed at this. The next morning, he was scurrying around getting ready for school, looking for his shoes. He crawled under the bed. Lo and behold, there he saw balls of dust. He ran to his mother in wonder, saying, "Oh, Mommy—somebody's under my bed, and they're either coming or going."

NATURE OF THE RESURRECTION

Compounds derived from dust—elements of the earth—are combined to make each living cell in our bodies. The miracle of the resurrection is matched only by the miracle of our creation in the first place.

No one knows precisely how two germ cells unite to make one. Nor do we know how that resulting cell multiplies and divides to make others—some to become eyes that see, ears that hear, or fingers that feel glorious things about us. Each cell contains chromosomes with thousands of genes, chemically insuring identity and independence of each individual. Our bodies undergo constant rebuilding according to genetic recipes that are uniquely ours. Each time we take a bath, we lose not only dirt but also cells dead and dying, as they are replaced by a newer crop. This process of regeneration and renewal is but prelude to the promised phenomenon and future fact of our resurrection.

"If a man die, shall he live again?" asked Job. (Job 14:14.) In faith, he answered his own question: "For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God." (Job 19:25-26.)

At the time of our resurrection, we shall take up our immortal tabernacles. Bodies that now age, deteriorate, and decay will no longer be subject to processes of degeneration. "This mortal must put on immortality." (1 Corinthians 15:53.)

This great priesthood power of resurrection is vested in the Lord of this world. He taught, "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth." (Matthew 28:18.) Though he supplicated his Father for aid at the eleventh hour, the final victory over death was earned by the Son. These are his words: "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father." (John 10:17-18.)

This power he subtly proclaimed when he told the Jews: "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up. . . . But he spake of the temple of his body." (John 2:19, 21.)

The keys of the resurrection repose securely with our Lord and Master. He said: "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die." (John 11:25-26.)

But obedience to the commandments of God is requisite if one is to be resurrected with a celestial body. Our challenge is to learn those commandments and abide by them.

I thank God for his Son, Jesus Christ, and for Jesus' mission in mortality and his ministry as the resurrected Lord. He brought about his own resurrection. Testimonies of thousands, from both ancient and modern times, attest to the truth that the resurrected Jesus is the Savior of mankind. He brought about a universal resurrection. "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Corinthians 15:22.)

His sacrifice and his glory assure that "the spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time." (Alma 11:43.)

Gratefully and positively, I affirm that there is life after life, first in the spirit world and then in the resurrection, for each and every one of us.
