Russell M. Nelson, Power within Us ( 1988)

Chapter 17

MODERN PROPHETS SPEAK

Members of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles are sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators. Men of diverse backgrounds are called from the world to become special witnesses of the Lord. That transformation from work of the world to the ministry requires special power. That power must come from on high. Often the Lord has promised that blessing to those who qualify: "Unto as many as received me gave I power to do many miracles, and to become the sons of God; and even unto them that believed on my name." (D&C 45:8.)

The biographer of President Ezra Taft Benson recorded this event: "In the mid-fifties a young man working in Washington, D. C., became acquainted with Elder Ezra Taft Benson, then [United States] Secretary of Agriculture. After observing the Secretary function in his demanding, often controversial, post while trying to retain the dignity and deportment of an apostle, the man asked Elder Benson how he managed to handle everything. Elder Benson replied, in words to this effect, 'I work as hard as I can and do everything within my power. And I try to keep the commandments. Then I let the Lord make up the difference.' There, in a nutshell, lies the formula to President Benson's life and to his success." (Sheri L. Dew, Ezra Taft Benson: A Biography, pp. vii-viii.)

President Benson attributes much of his success to the power of prayer. He has written: "All through my life the counsel to depend on prayer has been prized above almost any other advice I have ever received. It has become an integral part of me—an anchor, a constant source of strength, and the basis of my knowledge of things divine." (Come Unto Christ, p. 27.)

Similar testimony of the power of prayer is borne by President Gordon B. Hinckley. When sustained in 1961 as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, he made these remarks: "I am subdued by the confidence of the Lord's Prophet in me, and by the expressed love of these, my brethren, beside whom I feel like a pygmy. I pray for strength; I pray for help; and I pray for the faith and the will to be obedient. I think that I need—and I feel that all of us need—discipline, if this great work is to roll forward as it is ordained to do." (Conference Report, October 1961, pp. 115-16.)

President Thomas S. Monson also expressed the efficacy of prayer coupled with faith as a means by which power may be acquired: "The successful leader . . . recognizes that the greatest force in this world today is the power of God as it works through man. He takes comfort from the very real assurance that divine help can be his blessing. He is, through his faith, a believer in prayer, knowing that prayer provides power—spiritual power, and that prayer provides peace—spiritual peace. He knows and teaches . . . that the recognition of a power higher than man himself does not in any sense debase him; rather, it exalts him." (Be Your Best Self, p. 116.)

President Howard W. Hunter speaks of faith and prayer as protectors against temptation: "With faith, and prayer, and humility, and sources of strength from an eternal world, we are able to live unspotted in the midst of a world of temptation." (Conference Report, October 1976, p. 23.)

Elder Boyd K. Packer has described as "the choicest pearl" the opportunity to be guided by the Spirit of the Lord. He writes: "There is great power in this work, great spiritual power. The ordinary member of the Church, . . . having received the gift of the Holy Ghost by confirmation, can do the work of the Lord." (That All May Be Edified, p. 342.)

As do other Brethren, Elder Marvin J. Ashton adds the importance of humility: "Humility is not a weakness—it is a strength. I have often heard First Presidency members say, 'God cannot answer our prayers unless we are humble servants.' " ("A Seventy Is a Servant," special training session for the Seventies, September 29, 1987, p. 3.)

That same spirit of humility is evident in a statement of Elder L. Tom Perry. The power of testimony is evident in his expression: "My testimony had its roots in the teachings of two wonderful parents who believed in and lived the gospel. With that sure foundation, I have been able to add the overwhelming witness of the scriptures and the experiences of day-to-day striving to keep my activities in harmony with gospel principles. With such a foundation, it was not difficult to feel the power of the Holy Spirit burning within me that Jesus is the Christ, and that we are engaged in his work.

"How simple our testimonies become when we discover that righteous living begets happiness, and unrighteous living begets pain and sorrow.

"The greatest mystery to me in the whole plan is why I was honored to fill a position in the Council of the Twelve. As I travel to the stakes of Zion, I continually find greater talent in leadership, administration, teaching skills, speaking, and also those with more knowledge of the scriptures than I possess. My only comfort is that I cannot conceive of anyone having a stronger witness that God lives, and that Jesus is the Christ, than I have burning within my soul. This is the special witness which I feel forms within me a driving obligation to bear it to the world, in order that all men and women everywhere may have the same joy and comfort I experience in this special knowledge of the Savior." (Personal communication to the author, March 1988.)

Interestingly, Elder David B. Haight sounded a similar theme in a conference address: " 'I need thee; O I need thee; Every hour I need thee!' . . . The weight of this new calling and the responsibility to which you have . . . sustained me would be overwhelming were it not for my knowledge of the Savior. I have prayed daily for a deeper understanding of the Master as I prepare for this sacred responsibility." (Conference Report, April 1976, pp. 29-30.)

Elder James E. Faust cited his views in preparing for service to the Lord: "With faith in the Lord and humility, a priesthood leader may confidently expect divine assistance in his problems. . . . Brethren, we can learn, we can study, we can comprehend the basic things we need to know as members of God's holy priesthood. We can learn the giant truths and teach them with intelligence and understanding to those who come to learn. We can also lean upon the strengths of others whose talents are greater than our own." (Conference Report, October 1980, pp. 51-52.)

Elder Neal A. Maxwell also expressed the linking of humility with the obtaining of divine power: "Is there not deep humility in the omnicompetent Christ, the majestic Miracle Worker, who acknowledged, 'I can of mine own self do nothing' (John 5:30)? Jesus neither misused nor doubted his power, but he was never confused about its source, either. Instead, we mortals—perhaps even when otherwise modest—are sometimes quite willing to display our accumulated accomplishments, as if we had done it all by ourselves. Hence this sobering reminder: 'Say in thine heart, . . . remember the Lord thy God: for it is he that giveth thee power' [Deuteronomy 8:17-18]." (BYU Speeches of the Year, 1986-87, p. 55.)

The thoughts of Elder Russell M. Nelson are amply exposed in this volume and need not further be quoted in this chapter. He echoes and sustains these inspired thoughts of his esteemed associates with whom he labors in love.

Elder Dallin H. Oaks offered this profound observation regarding the unique path of preparation that preceded his calling: "As I prayed and pondered the significance of this calling, I was also filled with gratitude that our Heavenly Father would call me to this position, where I can use my experience and spend all my time for the rest of my life in his service. I have had an unusual combination of professional and Church experiences. For many years I have felt a strong sense of stewardship in respect to those experiences. I have been convinced that I was being prepared for further service. Many times I prayed that when the time came, I would be able to recognize the work for which I had been prepared, and be able to be an instrument in the hands of the Lord in performing it." (BYU Devotional and Fireside Speeches, 1984-85, p. 8.)

Dependence on the Lord was also stressed by Elder M. Russell Ballard when he was called to the Quorum of the Twelve: "I understand the source of the call. . . . This is our Heavenly Father's church. The errands that I have been sent on to act in the name of the Lord enable me to witness to you today that I know, as I know that I stand before you, that Jesus is the Christ, that he lives. He is very close to this work and very close to all of us who are asked to perform the work throughout the earth in his name." (Conference Report, October 1985, p. 99.)

When Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin was first called to be a General Authority, he summarized the roots of his faith: "My life really is anchored to the testimony that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ. I honor the priesthood that I bear, and I have seen its great power in healing the sick. I know that the Lord's Spirit does whisper to his servants, and it is up to us to listen to these whisperings." (Ensign, May 1975, p. 103.)

Modern prophets have spoken, each in his own way, but with themes that are essentially superimposed. These scriptures summarize so well their testimonies:

"Men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness; for the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves." (D&C 58:27-28.)

"Those who desire in their hearts, in meekness, to warn sinners to repentance, let them be ordained unto this power. For this is a day of warning, and not a day of many words. For I, the Lord, am not to be mocked in the last days. Behold, I am from above, and my power lieth beneath." (D&C 63:57-59.)

"Thy servants may go forth from this house armed with thy power, and that thy name may be upon them, and thy glory be round about them, and thine angels have charge over them." (D&C 109:22.)

Living servants of the Lord do go forth armed with such might and power. They are mighty in speech and in spirit. What they are is the result of their continuing desire to be faithful, humble, prayerful, disciplined, and submissive servants. They are well informed regarding doctrines of Deity. Indeed they exemplify this enlightening verse of scripture: "Seek not to declare my word, but first seek to obtain my word, and then shall your tongue be loosed; then, if you desire, you shall have my Spirit and my word, yea, the power of God unto the convincing of men." (D&C 11:21.)

The potential for that divine power is within us. It awaits the grasp of each willing child of God.
