ELIZA R. SNOW'S GRAPHIC DESCRIPTION OF THE TEMPLE AND ITS
DEDICATION--HOSANNAS TO GOD--HIS GLORY FILLS THE HOUSE.

The erection of the Kirtland temple was a leading characteristic of the work of the last dispensation.

It was commenced in June, 1833, under the immediate direction of the Almighty, through his servant, Joseph Smith, whom he had called in his boyhood, like Samuel of old, to introduce the fullness of the everlasting gospel.

At that time the saints were few in number, and most of them very poor; and, had it not been for the assurance that God had spoken, and had commanded that a house should be built to his name, of which he not only revealed the form, but also designated the dimensions, an attempt towards building that temple, under the then existing circumstances, would have been, by all concerned, pronounced preposterous.

Although many sections of the world abounded with mosques, churches, synagogues and cathedrals, built professedly for worship, this was the first instance, for the lapse of many centuries, of God having given a pattern, from the heavens, and manifested by direct revelation how the edifice should be constructed, in order that he might accept and acknowledge it as his own. This knowledge inspired the saints to almost superhuman efforts, while through faith and union they acquired strength. In comparison with eastern churches and cathedrals, this temple is not large, but in view of the amount of available means possessed, a calculation of the cost, at the lowest possible figures, would have staggered the faith of any but Latter-day saints; and it now stands as a monumental pillar.

Its dimensions are eighty by fifty-nine feet; the walls fifty feet high, and the tower one hundred and ten feet. The two main halls are fifty-five by sixty-five feet, in the inner court. The building has four vestries in front, and five rooms in the attic, which were devoted to literature, and for meetings of the various quorums of the priesthood.

There was a peculiarity in the arrangement of the inner court which made it more than ordinarily impressive--so much so that a sense of sacred awe seemed to rest upon all who entered; not only the saints, but strangers also manifested a high degree of reverential feeling. Four pulpits stood, one above another, in the centre of the building, from north to south, both on the east and west ends; those on the west for the presiding officers of the Melchisidec priesthood, and those on the east for the Aaronic; and each of these pulpits was separated by curtains of white painted canvas, which were let down and drawn up at pleasure. In front of each of these two rows of pulpits, was a sacrament table, for the administration of that sacred ordinance. In each corner of the court was an elevated pew for the singers--the choir being distributed into four compartments. In addition to the pulpit curtains, were others, intersecting at right angles, which divided the main ground-floor hall into four equal sections--giving to each one-half of one set of pulpits.

From the day the ground was broken for laying the foundation for the temple, until its dedication on the 27th of March, 1836, the work was vigorously prosecuted.

With very little capital except brain, bone and sinew, combined with unwavering trust in God, men, women, and even children, worked with their might; while the brethren labored in their departments, the sisters were actively engaged in boarding and clothing workmen not otherwise provided for--all living as abstemiously as possible so that every cent might be appropriated to the grand object, while their energies were stimulated by the prospect of participating in the blessing of a house built by the direction of the Most High and accepted by him.

The dedication was looked forward to with intense interest; and when the day arrived (Sunday, March 27th, 1836), a dense multitude assembled--the temple was filled to its utmost, and when the ushers were compelled to close the doors, the outside congregation was nearly if not quite as large as that within.

Four hundred and sixteen elders, including prophets and apostles, with the first great prophets of the last dispensation at their head, were present--men who had been "called of God as was Aaron," and clothed with the holy priesthood; many of them having just returned from missions, on which they had gone forth like the ancient disciples, "without purse or scrip," now to feast for a little season on the sweet spirit of love and union, in the midst of those who had "tasted of the powers of the world to come."

At the hour appointed, the assembly was seated, the Melchisidec and Aaronic priesthoods being arranged as follows: West end of the house, Presidents Frederick G. Williams, Joseph Smith, Sr., and William W. Phelps, occupied the first pulpit for the Melchisidec priesthood; Presidents Joseph Smith, Jr., Hyrum Smith and Sidney Rigdon, the second; Presidents David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdry and John Whitmer, the third; the fourth pulpit was occupied by the president of the high-priest's quorum and his councilors, and two choristers. The twelve apostles were on the right, in the highest three seats; the president of the elders, his two councilors and clerk in the seat directly below the twelve. The High Council of Kirtland, consisting of twelve, were on the left, on the first three seats. The fourth seat, and next below the High Council, was occupied by Warren A. Cowdry and Warren Parrish, who officiated as scribes.

In the east end of the house, the Bishop of Kirtland--Newel K. Whitney--and his councilors occupied the first pulpit for the Aaronic priesthood; the Bishop of Zion--Edward Partridge--and his councilors, the second; the President of the priests and his councilors, the third; the President of the teachers, and his councilors, and one chorister, the fourth; the High Council of Zion, consisting of twelve councilors, on the right; the President of the deacons, and his councilors, in the next seat below them, and the seven presidents of the seventies, on the left.

At nine o'clock, President Sidney Rigdon commenced the services of that great and memorable day, by reading the ninety-sixth and twenty-fourth Psalms; "Ere long the vail will be rent in twain," etc., was sung by the choir, and after President Rigdon had addressed the throne of grace in fervent prayer, "O happy souls who pray," etc., was sung. President Rigdon then read the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth verses of the eighteenth chapter of Matthew, and spoke more particularly from the last-named verse, continuing his eloquent, logical and sublime discourse for two and a half hours. At one point, as he reviewed the toils and privations of those who had labored in rearing the walls of that sacred edifice, he drew tears from many eyes, saying, there were those who had wet those walls with their tears, when, in the silent shades of the night, they were praying to the God of heaven to protect them, and stay the unhallowed hands of ruthless spoilers, who had uttered a prophesy, when the foundation was laid, that the walls should never be erected.

In reference to his main subject, the speaker assumed that in the days of the Saviour there were synagogues where the Jews worshipped God; and in addition to those, the splendid temple in Jerusalem; yet when, on a certain occasion, one proposed to follow him, withersoever he went, though heir of all things, he cried out in bitterness of soul, "The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man hath not where to lay his head." From this the speaker drew the conclusion that the Most High did not put his name there, neither did he accept the worship of those who paid their vows and adorations there. This was evident from the fact that they did not receive the Saviour, but thrust him from them, saying, "Away with him! Crucify him! Crucify him!" It was therefore evident that his spirit did not dwell in them. They were the degenerate sons of noble sires, but they had long since slain the prophets and seers, through whom the Lord had revealed himself to the children of men. They were not led by revelation. This, said the speaker, was the grand difficulty--their unbelief in present revelation. He then clearly demonstrated the fact that diversity of, and contradictory opinions did, and would prevail among people not led by present revelation; which forcibly applies to the various religious sects of our own day; and inasmuch as they manifest the same spirit, they must be under the same condemnation with those who were coeval with the Saviour.

He admitted there were many houses--many sufficiently large, built for the worship of God, but not one, except this, on the face of the whole earth, that was built by divine revelation; and were it not for this, the dear Redeemer might, in this day of science, intelligence and religion, say to those who would follow him, "The foxes have holes, the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man hath not where to lay his head."

After the close of his discourse, President Rigdon presented for an expression of their faith and confidence, Joseph Smith, Jr., as prophet, seer and revelator, to the various quorums, and the whole congregation of saints, and a simultaneous rising up followed, in token of unanimous confidence, and covenant to uphold him as such, by their faith and prayers.

The morning services were concluded by the choir singing, "Now let us rejoice in the day of salvation," etc. During an intermission of twenty minutes, the congregation remained seated, and the afternoon services opened by singing, "This earth was once a garden place," etc. President Joseph Smith, Jr., addressed the assembly for a few moments, and then presented the first presidency of the church as prophets, seers, and revelators, and called upon all who felt to acknowledge them as such, to manifest it by rising up. All arose. He then presented the twelve apostles who were present, as prophets, seers, and revelators, and special witnesses to all the earth, holding the keys of the kingdom of God, to unlock it, or cause it to be done among them; to which all assented by rising to their feet. He then presented the other quorums in their order, and the vote was unanimous in every instance.

He then prophesied to all, that inasmuch as they would uphold these men in their several stations (alluding to the different quorums in the church), the Lord would bless them, "yea, in the name of Christ, the blessings of heaven shall be yours; and when the Lord's anointed shall go forth to proclaim the word, bearing testimony to this generation, if they receive it they shall be blest; but if not, the judgments of God will follow close upon them, until that city or that house which rejects them, shall be left desolate."

The hymn commencing with "How pleased and blest was I," was sung, and the following dedicatory prayer offered by the prophet, Joseph Smith:

    "Thanks be to thy name, O Lord God of Israel, who keepest covenant
    and showest mercy unto thy servants who walk uprightly before thee,
    with all their hearts; thou who hast commanded thy servants to
    build a house to thy name in this place. And now thou beholdest, O
    Lord, that thy servants have done according to thy commandment. And
    now we ask thee, Holy Father, in the name of Jesus Christ, the son
    of thy bosom, in whose name alone salvation can be administered to
    the children of men, we ask thee, O Lord, to accept of this house,
    the workmanship of the hands of us, thy servants, which thou didst
    command us to build; for thou knowest that we have done this work
    through great tribulation; and out of our poverty we have given of
    our substance, to build a house to thy name, that the Son of Man
    might have a place to manifest himself to his people. And as thou
    hast said in a revelation, given to us, calling us thy friends,
    saying, 'call your solemn assembly, as I have commanded you; and
    as all have not faith, seek ye diligently, and teach one another
    words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books, words of
    wisdom; seek learning even by study, and also by faith. Organize
    yourselves; prepare every needful thing, and establish a house,
    even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a
    house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of
    God. That your incomings may be in the name of the Lord, that your
    outgoings may be in the name of the Lord, that all your salutations
    may be in the name of the Lord, with uplifted hands to the Most
    High.'

    "And now, Holy Father, we ask thee to assist us, thy people, with
    thy grace, in calling our solemn assembly, that it may be done
    to thy honor, and to thy divine acceptance. And in a manner that
    we may be found worthy in thy sight, to secure a fulfillment of
    the promises which thou hast made unto us, thy people, in the
    revelations given unto us; that thy glory may rest down upon thy
    people, and upon this thy house, which we now dedicate to thee,
    that it may be sanctified and consecrated to be holy, and that
    thy holy presence may be continually in this house, and that all
    people who shall enter upon the threshold of the Lord's house may
    feel thy power, and feel constrained to acknowledge that thou hast
    sanctified it, and that it is thy house, a place of thy holiness.
    And do thou grant, Holy Father, that all those who shall worship in
    this house, may be taught words of wisdom out of the best books,
    and that they may seek learning even by study, and also by faith,
    as thou hast said; and that they may grow up in thee, and receive
    a fullness of the Holy Ghost and be organized according to thy
    laws, and be prepared to obtain every needful thing; and that this
    house may be a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of
    faith, a house of glory and of God, even thy house; that all the
    incomings of thy people, into this house, may be in the name of the
    Lord; that all the outgoings from this house may be in the name of
    the Lord; arid that all their salutations may be in the name of
    the Lord, with holy hands, uplifted to the Most High; and that no
    unclean thing shall be permitted to come into thy house to pollute
    it; and when thy people transgress, any of them, they may speedily
    repent, and return unto thee, and find favor in thy sight, and be
    restored to the blessings which thou hast ordained to be poured out
    upon those who shall reverence thee in thy house. And we ask thee,
    Holy Father, that thy servants may go forth from this house, armed
    with thy power, and thy name may be upon them, and thy glory be
    round about them, and thine angels have charge over them; and from
    this place they may bear exceedingly great and glorious tidings, in
    truth, unto the ends of the earth, that they may know that this is
    thy work, and that thou hast put forth thy hand, to fulfill that
    which thou hast spoken by the mouths of the prophets, concerning
    the last days. We ask thee, Holy Father, to establish the people
    that shall worship and honorably hold a name and standing in this
    thy house, to all generations, and for eternity, that no weapon
    formed against them shall prosper; that he who diggeth a pit for
    them shall fall into the same himself; that no combination of
    wickedness shall have power to rise up and prevail over thy people
    upon whom thy name shall be put in this house; and if any people
    shall rise against this people, that thy anger be kindled against
    them, and if they shall smite this people thou wilt smite them,
    thou wilt fight for thy people as thou didst in the day of battle,
    that they may be delivered from the hands of all their enemies.

    "We ask thee, Holy Father, to confound, and astonish, and to bring
    to shame and confusion, all those who have spread lying reports
    abroad, over the world, against thy servant, or servants, if they
    will not repent when the everlasting gospel shall be proclaimed in
    their ears, and that all their works may be brought to naught, and
    be swept away by, the hail, and by the judgments which thou wilt
    send upon them in thy anger, that there may be an end to lyings and
    slanders against thy people; for thou knowest, O Lord, that thy
    servants have been innocent before thee in bearing record of thy
    name, for which they have suffered these things; therefore we plead
    before thee a full and complete deliverance from under this yoke;
    break it off, O Lord; break it off from the necks of thy servants,
    by thy power, that we may rise up in the midst of this generation
    and do thy work.

    "O Jehovah, have mercy on this people, and as all men sin, forgive
    the transgressions of thy people, and let them be blotted out
    forever. Let the anointing of thy ministers be sealed upon them
    with power from on high; let it be fulfilled upon them as upon
    those on the day of pentecost; let the gift of tongues be poured
    out upon thy people, even cloven tongues as of fire, and the
    interpretation thereof, and let thy house be filled, as with a
    rushing mighty wind, with thy glory. Put upon thy servants the
    testimony of the covenant, that when they go out and proclaim
    thy word, they may seal up the law, and prepare the hearts of
    thy saints for all those judgments thou art about to send, in
    thy wrath, upon the inhabitants of the earth, because of their
    transgressions; that thy people may not faint in the day of
    trouble. And whatsoever city thy servants shall enter, and the
    people of that city receive their testimony, let thy peace and
    thy salvation be upon that city, that they may gather out of that
    city the righteous, that they may come forth to Zion, or to her
    stakes, the places of thy appointment, with songs of everlasting
    joy; and until this be accomplished, let not thy judgments fall
    upon this city. And whatsoever city thy servants shall enter,
    and the people of that city receive not the testimony of thy
    servants, and thy servants warn them to save themselves from this
    untoward generation, let it be upon that city according to that
    which thou hast spoken by the mouths of thy prophets; but deliver
    thou, O Jehovah, we beseech thee, thy servants from their hands,
    and cleanse them from their blood. O Lord, we delight not in the
    destruction of our fellow men! Their souls are precious before
    thee; but thy word must be fulfilled; help thy servants to say,
    with thy grace assisting them, thy will be done, O Lord, and not
    ours. We know that thou hast spoken by the mouth of thy prophets
    terrible things concerning the wicked, in the last days--that
    thou wilt pour out thy judgments without measure; therefore, O
    Lord, deliver thy people from the calamity of the wicked; enable
    thy servants to seal up the law, and bind up the testimony, that
    they may be prepared against the day of burning. We ask thee, Holy
    Father, to remember those who have been driven (by the inhabitants
    of Jackson county, Missouri), from the lands of their inheritance,
    and break off, O Lord, this yoke of affliction that has been put
    upon them. Thou knowest, O Lord, that they have been greatly
    oppressed and afflicted by wicked men, and our hearts flow out with
    sorrow, because of their grievous burdens. O Lord, how long wilt
    thou suffer this people to bear this affliction, and the cries of
    their innocent ones to ascend up in thine ears, and their blood
    come up in testimony before thee, and not make a display of thy
    testimony in their behalf? Have mercy, O Lord, upon that wicked
    mob, who have driven thy people, that they may cease to spoil, that
    they may repent of their sins, if repentance is to be found; but if
    they will not, make bare thine arm, O Lord, and redeem that which
    thou didst appoint a Zion unto thy people.

    "And if it cannot be otherwise, that the cause of thy people
    may not fail before thee, may thine anger be kindled, and thine
    indignation fall upon them, that they may be wasted away, both root
    and branch, from under heaven; but inasmuch as they will repent,
    thou art gracious and merciful, and wilt turn away thy wrath,
    when thou lookest upon the face of thine anointed. Have mercy,
    O Lord, upon all the nations of the earth; have mercy upon the
    rulers of our land; may those principles which were so honorably
    and nobly defended, viz.: the constitution of our land, by our
    fathers, be established forever. Remember the kings, the princes,
    the nobles, and the great ones of the earth, and all people, and
    the churches, all the poor, the needy and afflicted ones of the
    earth, that their hearts may be softened, when thy servants shall
    go out from thy house, O Jehovah, to bear testimony of thy name,
    that their prejudices may give way before the truth, and thy people
    may obtain favor in the sight of all, that all the ends of the
    earth may know that we thy servants have heard thy voice, and that
    thou hast sent us; that from all these, thy servants, the sons of
    Jacob, may gather out the righteous to build a holy city to thy
    name, as thou hast commanded them. We ask thee to appoint unto Zion
    other stakes, besides this one which thou hast appointed, that the
    gathering of thy people may roll on in great power and majesty,
    that thy work may be cut short in righteousness. Now these words,
    O Lord, we have spoken before thee, concerning the revelations and
    commandments which thou hast given unto us, who are identified with
    the Gentiles; but thou knowest that thou hast a great love for the
    children of Jacob, who have been scattered upon the mountains,
    for a long time, in a cloudy and dark day; we therefore ask thee
    to have mercy upon the children of Jacob, that Jerusalem, from
    this hour, may begin to be redeemed, and the yoke of bondage begin
    to be broken off from the house of David, and the children of
    Judah may begin to return to the lands which thou didst give to
    Abraham, their father; and cause that the remnants of Jacob, who
    have been cursed and smitten, because of their transgressions, be
    converted from their wild and savage condition, to the fullness of
    the everlasting gospel, that they may lay down their weapons of
    bloodshed, and cease their rebellions; and may all the scattered
    remnants of Israel, who have been driven to the ends of the earth,
    come to a knowledge of the truth, believe in the Messiah, and
    be redeemed from oppression, and rejoice before thee. O Lord,
    remember thy servant, Joseph Smith, Jr., and all his afflictions
    and persecutions, how he has covenanted with Jehovah, and vowed
    to thee, O mighty God of Jacob, and the commandments which thou
    hast given unto him, and that he hath sincerely striven to do thy
    will. Have mercy, O Lord, upon his wife and children, that they
    may be exalted in thy presence, and preserved by thy fostering
    hand; have mercy upon all their immediate connections, that their
    prejudices may be broken up, and swept away as with a flood, that
    they may be converted and redeemed with Israel, and know that thou
    art God. Remember, O Lord, the presidents, even all the presidents
    of thy church, that thy right hand may exalt them, with all their
    families, and their immediate connections, that their names may be
    perpetuated, and had in everlasting remembrance, from generation
    to generation. Remember all thy church, O Lord, with all their
    families, and all their immediate connections, with all their sick
    and afflicted ones, with all the poor and meek of the earth, that
    the kingdom which thou hast set up without hands, may become a
    great mountain, and fill the whole earth; that thy church may come
    forth out of the wilderness of darkness, and shine forth fair as
    the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners,
    and be adorned as a bride for that day when thou shalt unveil the
    heavens, and cause the mountains to flow down at thy presence, and
    the valleys to be exalted, the rough places made smooth; that thy
    glory may fill the earth, that when the trump shall sound for the
    dead, we shall be caught up in the cloud to meet thee, that we may
    ever be with the Lord, that our garments may be pure, that we may
    be clothed upon with robes of righteousness, with palms in our
    hands, and crowns of glory upon our heads, and reap eternal joy for
    all our sufferings.

    "O Lord God Almighty, hear us in these petitions, and answer us
    from heaven, thy holy habitation, where thou sittest enthroned,
    with glory, honor, power, majesty, might, dominion, truth, justice,
    judgment, mercy, and an infinity of fullness, from everlasting to
    everlasting. O hear, O hear, O hear us, O Lord, and answer these
    petitions, and accept the dedication of this house unto thee, the
    work of our hands, which we have built unto thy name! And also this
    church, to put upon it thy name; and help us by the power of thy
    spirit, that we may mingle our voices with those bright shining
    seraphs around thy throne, with acclamations of praise, singing
    hosanna to God and the Lamb; and let these thine anointed ones be
    clothed with salvation, and thy saints shout aloud for joy. Amen,
    and amen."

The choir then sang, "The spirit of God like a fire is burning," etc., after which the Lord's supper was administered to the whole assembly. Then President Joseph Smith bore testimony of his mission and of the ministration of angels, and, after testimonials and exhortations by other elders, he blest the congregation in the name of the Lord.

Thus ended the ceremonies of the dedication or the first temple built by special command of the Most High, in this dispensation.

One striking feature of the ceremonies, was the grand shout of hosanna, which was given by the whole assembly, in standing position, with uplifted hands. The form of the shout is as follows: "Hosanna--hosanna--hosanna--to God and the Lamb--amen--amen, and amen." The foregoing was deliberately and emphatically pronounced, and three times repeated, and with such power as seemed almost sufficient to raise the roof from the building.

A singular incident in connection with this shout may be discredited by some, but it is verily true. A notice had been circulated that children in arms would not be admitted at the dedication of the temple. A sister who had come a long distance with her babe, six weeks old, having, on her arrival, heard of the above requisition, went to the patriarch Joseph Smith, Sr., in great distress, saying that she knew no one with whom she could leave her infant; and to be deprived of the privilege of attending the dedication seemed more than she could endure. The ever generous and kind-hearted father volunteered to take the responsibility on himself, and told her to take her child, at the same time giving the mother a promise that her babe should make no disturbance; and the promise was verified. But when the congregation shouted hosanna, that babe joined in the shout. As marvelous as that incident may appear to many, it is not more so than other occurrences on that occasion.

The ceremonies of that dedication may be rehearsed, but no mortal language can describe the heavenly manifestations of that memorable day. Angels appeared to some, while a sense of divine presence was realized by all present, and each heart was filled with "joy inexpressible and full of glory."
