Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Ezra Taft Benson

Ezra Taft Benson was born on the anniversary of Washington's birthday, February 22, 1811, in Mendon, Worcester County, Massachusetts. He was the eldest son of John and Chloe Benson. John Benson was an industrious farmer, and his son, Ezra T., grew up to be a farm laborer and a helper to his father. When the boy was 16, he went to Uxbridge, Massachusetts, to live with a sister and her husband who kept a hotel. He remained there three years, and then, upon the death of his grandfather, he returned home and took over the management of his grandfather's farm.

At the age of twenty Ezra T. Benson married Pamelia Andrus of Northbridge, Massachusetts. During the next few years he enlarged his business activities by purchasing an interest in a cotton mill, but as he prospered he also experienced a strong desire to sell his holdings and move to the West. At any rate he wanted to see the new country that was being opened up on the great plains, which, it was said, offered many opportunities.

Accordingly, in the year 1837, Ezra T. Benson sold his holdings in Massachusetts, and journeyed to Pennsylvania. Here he remained one year and then continued on to St. Louis, where he purchased a small stock of goods with which to start a store. Looking around for a location he first settled at Lexington, Illinois, but the next year (1839) he established himself as a merchant in Quincy.

This was the year in which the Latter-day Saints were driven out of Missouri, and many of them, including the Prophet Joseph Smith, sought refuge in Quincy. In this way the young merchant, Ezra T. Benson, became acquainted with the people with whom he was to be associated during the balance of his life. He attended their meetings in Quincy, where he listened to the teachings of the Prophet and the apostles. He and his wife were equally interested, and together they were baptized in the summer of 1840.

That fall Ezra T. Benson visited Nauvoo and attended the conference of the Church. At this time he was ordained an elder. He returned to Quincy, but in the spring sold his property and cast his lot permanently with the Latter-day Saints. He moved to Nauvoo and established himself in business.

One year later, in June, 1842, Elder Benson was requested to undertake a mission to the Eastern States. This was his first experience in preaching the Gospel and traveling without "purse or scrip." It was a difficult task but he made a success of his mission. He was absent from home more than a year, but returned to Nauvoo in the fall of 1843. He remained at home throughout the winter, and in the spring of 1844 again departed for the East, this time with John Pack as his companion. A few weeks later they learned of the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith in Carthage Jail. They immediately returned to Nauvoo.

The exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo began in February, 1846, and Ezra T. Benson and his family were among the first to depart for the West. At Mt. Pisgah, Iowa, in July, 1846, he received a letter from President Brigham Young informing him that he had been selected to be a member of the Council of the Twelve.

Ezra T. Benson was among the first pioneers who came to Salt Lake Valley in July, 1847. He returned to the Missouri River in the fall, but journeyed again to the West in 1849. He built a comfortable home on the lot where Zion's Savings Bank stands in Salt Lake City.

In 1860 he was called to preside over the settlements of the Saints in Cache Valley and moved the same year to Logan. Four years later he was called on a special mission to the Hawaiian Islands. While being rowed in a small boat from the ship to the land in Lahaina Harbor, the boat was capsized by an immense wave and Elder Benson narrowly escaped drowning.

In his last years Ezra T. Benson was associated with Lorin Farr and Chauncey W. West of Ogden in a large contract for the grading of the Central Pacific Railroad. While engaged in this work he died suddenly at Ogden, on September 3, 1869, at the age of 58. The burial was at Logan.

The Deseret News said of him at the time of his death:

"We deeply sympathize with the bereaved family of the lamented deceased . . . A man so faithful and true will receive a glorious reward. He has fought the good fight; he has finished the course; he has kept the faith, and there is laid up for him a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give him in the day of reward."
