Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Jacob G. Bigler

Jacob G. Bigler was a convert to the Church, a friend and confidant of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pioneer of Nauvoo, pioneer of Utah, early settler at Nephi and first president of Juab Stake.

Jacob G. Bigler was born on a farm in Harrison County, West Virginia, on April 4, 1813. He was the son of Mark and Susanna Ogden Bigler.

The parents and sisters of Jacob Bigler joined the Church in 1837, and the following year the family moved westward to Missouri to unite with the main body of the Saints at Far West. Jacob was baptized at Far West on June 10, 1838.

The Bigler family were among the thousands of Latter-day Saints who were driven from Missouri during the winter of 1838-39. They made their way to Quincy, Illinois, where the father died on September 23, 1839. In the spring of 1840 Jacob moved his mother and sisters to Nauvoo.

Jacob Bigler was married to Amy Lorette Chase, on June 18, 1844. He labored on the Nauvoo Temple until he left for the West in the spring of 1846, when he departed with the first company of Saints. They arrived on the Missouri River in August and Jacob established a home at Council Bluffs (later named Kanesville) until 1852. In 1850 he was elected probate judge of Pottawattamie County, Iowa.

Jacob Bigler and his family joined a company of Saints who were making their way across the plains to Utah in June, 1852. They arrived in Salt Lake City in October, and the following month moved to Nephi, where they established a permanent home.

Jacob Bigler was set apart as "Bishop of Juab County," by Apostle George A. Smith, shortly after his arrival in Nephi. The following year he was elected a member of the Territorial Legislature and he served in this capacity for six terms. In 1859 he was elected mayor of Nephi. Two years later he was called on a mission to the British Isles. He returned home in 1863, having labored in England, Ireland, and Wales.

The Juab Stake Tabernacle was begun in 1860, under the direction of Jacob Bigler and completed in 1865 under the supervision of Bishop Charles H. Bryan.

When Juab Stake was organized in 1868, Jacob Bigler was chosen as president. A high council selected at the same time consisted of the following brethren: Samuel Cazier, David Cazier, Timothy S. Hoyt, William H. Warner, Timothy B. Foote, Samuel Claridge, Edward Ockey, Matthew McCune, Jacob Bigler, Jr., Israel Hoyt, Andrew Love, and George Kendall.

President Bigler served as president of Juab Stake until 1871, when he was released to join the Southern Mission. He reached St. George, where he learned that he had been elected a member of the Legislative Council and that that body was to meet in January, 1872, in Salt Lake City. He therefore returned home and was released from the Southern Mission.

Jacob Bigler was ordained a patriarch in June, 1878. He held this position until his death on February 27, 1907, at the age of ninety-three.
