Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Burton, Robert J.PPRobert Jaylor Burton

Burton, Robert J.PPRobert Taylor Burton, one of the great men of the pioneer period in Utah, and a true Stalwart of Mormonism, was born on October 25, 1821, at Amersberg, Canada. His parents were Samuel and Hannah Shipley Burton. Robert was the tenth in a family of fourteen children.

Burton, Robert J.PPLatter-day Saint missionaries visited Amersberg in 1837 and converted the parents of Robert T. Burton. Robert was away from home at the time visiting a widowed sister in Ohio, but when he returned he received the Gospel and was baptized on October 23, 1838. He was then seventeen years of age.

Burton, Robert J.PPThe Burton family left Canada, shortly after Robert's baptism, to join the body of the Saints at Far West, Missouri. When they reached Walnut Grove, Illinois, they learned that the Saints had been driven out of Missouri and that they were beginning to form a settlement in Illinois. The Burton family therefore remained in Walnut Grove until 1840, when they moved to Nauvoo.

Burton, Robert J.PPAt Nauvoo young Robert became acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith. He also accepted a call to go on a mission and labored during the fall of 1843 and the spring of 1844 in Illinois, Michigan, and Ohio. He returned to Nauvoo about two weeks before the martyrdom of the Prophet and Patriarch. He saw their lifeless bodies after they were brought from Carthage to Nauvoo. He was also present when President Brigham Young and the members of the Council of the Twelve were sustained as the leaders of the Church.

Burton, Robert J.PPBeing a lover of music Robert T. Burton became a member of the Nauvoo Brass Band. He also sang in the Nauvoo Choir.

Burton, Robert J.PPEarly in 1845 Robert was called to go on a second mission, this time to Illinois, where he was to labor with Samuel W. Richards and endeavored to allay some of the prejudice that existed against the Latter-day Saints. He returned home in the fall and on December 18 was married to Maria S. Haven. President Brigham Young performed the ceremony. Robert was now twenty-four years of age.

Burton, Robert J.PPWhen the exodus of the Saints began from Nauvoo, in February, 1846, Robert T. Burton and family were among the first to leave for the West. They ferried across the Mississippi River on February 11 and camped in the snow on Sugar Creek, Iowa. On March 1 they were part of a great caravan led by President Young, comprising four hundred wagons, which began the journey across Iowa. Council Bluffs was reached about the middle of June.

Burton, Robert J.PPRobert T. Burton spent the balance of the year 1846 and all of 1847 at a camp of the Saints a few miles south of Council Bluffs. It was here that his mother died and was buried in a lonely grave on the bank of the Missouri River.

Burton, Robert J.PPIn the spring of 1848 Robert joined a large group of Saints, under the leadership of President Young, in the journey of one thousand miles westward to Salt Lake Valley. With him were his wife and children and his aged father. On the journey, which was long and tiresome, consuming 116 days time, Robert served as bugler of the camp.

Burton, Robert J.PPOn their arrival in Salt Lake Valley the Burton family made their home in the Old Fort. In August, 1849, Robert moved to a city lot at the corner of Second West and First South Streets where he built a home. There he maintained a residence for more than fifty years.

Burton, Robert J.PPRobert T. Burton's military service began shortly after his arrival in the Valley when he joined the Nauvoo Legion, which had been formed for the protection of the Saints against the Indians. In the first company of cavalry that was organized, with George D. Grant as captain, Robert T. Burton was appointed bugler.

Burton, Robert J.PPRobert T. Burton began his military career in February, 1850, when his company of cavalry was called to go to the assistance of the settlers of Fort Utah (Provo) who were being besieged by a band of Ute Indians. The "Minute Men" made the journey to Provo in the night, on horseback, traveling through a foot of snow. They surprised the Indians who were strongly intrenched beneath the bank of the Provo River, and after a siege of three days completely routed them. During the hostilities Robert T. Burton was conspicuous for his bravery. With bullets whistling around their heads, he and Lot Smith drove a number of Indians from a settler's cabin where they had barricaded themselves.

Burton, Robert J.PPOn his return to Salt Lake City, Robert was promoted to the office of second lieutenant in the Legion. During the summer he was sent on two more expeditions against marauding Indians, one to Weber County and the other to Tooele County.

Burton, Robert J.PPEarly in 1851 he joined a group of "Minute Men" who had been summoned to protect the settlers of Grantsville. The Indians were pursued to Skull Valley where an engagement was fought in which several of the savages were killed. The following year, 1852, Lieutenant Burton led a company of men to Green River to serve papers from the district court on some renegade white men. His early life was spent in the midst of danger.

Burton, Robert J.PPMore promotions came to Robert T. Burton in a military way. In 1853 he was elected captain of his company; in 1855 he received the commission of major, and in 1857 he was promoted to colonel.

Burton, Robert J.PPHe also served in Territorial and county offices, having been named as a deputy United States marshal in 1853 and sheriff of Salt Lake County in 1854. The latter office he held for twenty years.

Burton, Robert J.PPWith the coming of Johnston's Army to Utah in 1857, Colonel Burton became very active. He led a company of cavalry eastward to take observation of the approaching troops and report back to President Brigham Young. Meantime Captain Lot Smith with a company of cavalry burned an army wagon train loaded with food supplies, which forced General Johnston to establish a winter camp at Fort Bridger. Colonel Burton then brought his men to Salt Lake City.

Burton, Robert J.PPWhen the army marched into Salt Lake Valley in June, 1858, the inhabitants of Salt Lake City evacuated their homes and moved south to Utah and Juab Counties. Colonel Burton and a company of men were left in the city to guard the homes against depredations by the army.

Burton, Robert J.PPRobert T. Burton held many offices of importance and responsibility in the Territory and the Church. In 1862 he was appointed by President Lincoln as Collector of Internal Revenue for Utah; he was elected assessor of Salt Lake County in 1880; he served as a member of the City Council of Salt Lake City from 1856 to 1873, and as a member of the Territorial Legislature from 1855 to 1887; from 1880 to 1884 he was a member of the Board of Regents of the University of Deseret.

Burton, Robert J.PPIn the Church he was always active. He was selected as bishop of the Fifteenth Ward in 1867; he was called to serve as a missionary to the Eastern States in 1869; and in 1873 he filled a second mission, this time in England. It was while he was still in England in 1875 that he was notified that he had been appointed second counselor to Edward Hunter, Presiding Bishop of the Church. Upon the death of Edward Hunter in 1884 he was appointed first counselor to Bishop William B. Preston. He served as a member of the Presiding Bishopric for thirty-two years until his death on November 11, 1907.

Burton, Robert J.PPAt his funeral, held in the Assembly Hall on Thursday, November 14, President Joseph F. Smith said of him:

Burton, Robert J.PP"His lips are sealed, but I sincerely hope that the example of his life and the testimony he has borne will not perish but live throughout this generation and generations to come . . . He knew the Prophet Joseph Smith and when he testified to the divinity of his mission on earth he knew what he was saying . . . No man ever lived more consistently to his faith in this work than he."
