Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Cannon, George Q.PPGeorge Quayle Cannon

Cannon, George Q.PPGeorge Quayle Cannon was a convert to the Church in England, a resident of Nauvoo, pioneer of Utah in 1847, among the first missionaries to Hawaii in 1850, president of the California and Oregon Mission, president of the Eastern States Mission, member of the Council of the Twelve, president of the European Mission, member of Congress, and counselor in the First Presidency to three Presidents of the Church.

Cannon, George Q.PPGeorge Q. Cannon was born in Liverpool, England, on January 11, 1827. He was the eldest son of George and Ann Quayle Cannon. In January, 1840, when George Q., was thirteen years of age, his uncle, John Taylor, arrived in Liverpool to do missionary work for the Church. He called at the Cannon home, and after presenting the Gospel to George and Ann Quayle Cannon, they accepted his message and were baptized. The boy George Q., was baptized on June 18, 1840.

Cannon, George Q.PPIn the fall of 1842 the Cannon family began their journey to America. They sailed for New Orleans on September 17. During the voyage the mother died and was buried at sea. The father continued the journey to Nauvoo with his six motherless children.

Cannon, George Q.PPAt Nauvoo George Q., found employment in the printing office of his uncle, John Taylor. He was working in this capacity when the assassination of the Prophet and Patriarch took place in June, 1844. Two months later the father of George Q. died while on a business trip to St. Louis. The six Cannon children, three boys and three girls, who had started from England with their parents in 1842, were now orphans.

Cannon, George Q.PPGeorge Q. found a home in the family of his uncle, John Taylor. With them he made the journey to Utah in the fall of 1847.

Cannon, George Q.PPIn 1850, when he was twenty-three years of age, he was called to serve as a missionary in the Hawaiian Islands. He remained there four years and distinguished himself by introducing the Gospel among the natives of the Islands. He also translated the Book of Mormon into the Hawaiian language.

Cannon, George Q.PPGeorge Q. Cannon returned to Utah in the fall of 1854, and on December 10 was married to Elizabeth Hoagland. The following year he was requested by President Brigham Young to journey to San Francisco and publish the Book of Mormon in the Hawaiian language. He accomplished this task, and also founded a paper named The Western Standard. While in California he was set apart by Parley P. Pratt to preside over the California and Oregon Mission.

Cannon, George Q.PPElder Cannon returned to Utah in January, 1858, and became the publisher of The Deseret News at Fillmore, where the paper had been moved during the trouble with Johnston's Army. In the fall of 1858 he was called to serve as president of the Eastern States Mission. He left to fill this important assignment on one hour's notice. While in the East he acted as emigration agent for the Church. During his absence from home he was selected, on October 23, 1859, to fill a vacancy in the Council of the Twelve. His ordination to this important office took place on August 26, 1860, after his return to Salt Lake City.

Cannon, George Q.PPSix weeks after he had been ordained a member of the Council of the Twelve, George Q. Cannon departed for England, where he had been called to publish the Millennial Star and take charge of Church emigration. He arrived in Liverpool on December 21, 1860.

Cannon, George Q.PPHe continued in this work until May, 1862, when he was requested to journey to Washington, D. C., and work for statehood for Utah. As the Civil War was raging at the time not much could be done about the cause of statehood, and George Q. Cannon returned to Liverpool in July.

Cannon, George Q.PPHe was then appointed president of the European Mission, which occupied his time for two years, until August, 1864, when he again sailed for America. On arriving in Salt Lake City in the fall he computed that, with the exception of nine months, he had been absent from home in the service of the Church, for fifteen years.

Cannon, George Q.PPImmediately after his return, George Q., was appointed private secretary to President Brigham Young. While working in this capacity he established, in 1866, a magazine for children, known as the Juvenile Instructor. This magazine, for many years published by the Church, has continued until the present time, under the name of The Instructor.

Cannon, George Q.PPPresident Young appointed George Q. Cannon to take charge of The Deseret News in the fall of 1867. Shortly afterwards, on November 10, 1867, he began the publication of The Deseret Evening News as a daily paper. He continued as editor and publisher of the News until August, 1872, when he was elected to Congress as a delegate from Utah.

Cannon, George Q.PPIn Congress, George Q. Cannon established a reputation for his oratory and his statesmanship. He served in this capacity for ten years, effectively aiding the people whom he represented.

Cannon, George Q.PPOn August 29, 1877, President Brigham Young died in Salt Lake City. Three years later the First Presidency was reorganized, with John Taylor as President of the Church and George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as counselors.

Cannon, George Q.PPWhen John Taylor died in July, 1887, he was succeeded by President Wilford Woodruff, who chose the same counselors.

Cannon, George Q.PPWhen Wilford Woodruff died in September 1898, he was succeeded by President Lorenzo Snow, who also chose George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as his counselors. President Cannon was serving in this capacity when he died at Monterey, California, on April 12, 1901. He was seventy-four years of age.

Cannon, George Q.PPAt his funeral, held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, on April 17th, President Joseph F. Smith said of him:

Cannon, George Q.PP"I know him to be a man of sterling integrity, a man in whom the spirit of God dwelt, a man of great intelligence, one of the wisest men I ever knew. And I know that the uppermost thought in his life has ever been the building up of Zion, and the establishment of truth and righteousness in the earth and the promulgation of the Gospel."
