Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Careless, GeorgePPGeorge Careless

Careless, GeorgePPThe annual rendition of "The Messiah," which takes place each New Year's Season, in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, reminds us that the first time Handel's famous oratorio was heard by a Salt Lake audience was on June 3, 1875, when it was presented in the Salt Lake Theatre under the direction of George Careless, a convert from England and a musician of great note in pioneer days.

Careless, GeorgePPGeorge Careless was born in London on September 4, 1839. He became a member of the Latter-day Saint Church in 1850, when he was eleven years of age. As a youth he exhibited considerable musical talent and became proficient in playing the violin. He joined an orchestra in London which played for concerts, operas, and oratorios. In a humble capacity he also served as leader of the choir in the London Branch of the Church.

Careless, GeorgePPIn 1864, when he was twenty-five years of age, George Careless emigrated to Utah. Shortly after his arrival he was appointed leader of the Salt Lake Theatre Orchestra. He held this position for twelve years, and it was during this time, in June 1875, that he trained a group of singers to present the "Messiah." It is said that not one of the singers had ever before heard the oratorio.

Careless, GeorgePPIn addition to his work as leader of the Theatre Orchestra, George Careless was appointed by President Brigham Young, in 1869, as conductor of the Tabernacle Choir. He led the Choir at the funeral of President Young, held on September 2, 1877.

Careless, GeorgePPShortly after his arrival in Utah, George Careless was married to Miss Lavinia Triplett, a young woman he had known in London. She became one of the leading soprano singers in the Tabernacle Choir. At the time of her death on July 10, 1885, the Salt Lake Herald said of her: "Her singing was simply perfection . . . If angels had human voices, surely hers would suggest heavenly music."

Careless, GeorgePPIn 1880 George Careless retired as leader of the Tabernacle Choir. He then entered the music business with David Calder. He also directed his own orchestra and organized and presented several operas, including the "Mikado" and "Pinafore."

Careless, GeorgePPGeorge Careless wrote the music for many of the Latter-day Saint hymns. Among the best known are "Oh Thou Kind and Gracious Father," "Prayer Is the Soul's Sincere Desire," "He Died, the Great Redeemer Died," "Though Deepening Trials," "Rest, Rest, for the Weary Soul," "The Morning Breaks, the Shadows Flee."

Careless, GeorgePPGeorge Careless died at his home in the First Ward in Salt Lake City on December 16, 1932. He was ninety-three years of age. He was survived by his wife, Jane Davis, whom he had married in 1888. Until the last few weeks of his life, he spent his time giving lessons in voice training, violin, piano, and organ.

Careless, GeorgePPAt his death The Deseret News said of him: "Utah stands in reverence at the bier of Professor Careless, recognizing a substantial contribution to cultural advancement and a definite service to the community he loved. He gave to pioneering a touch of the beautiful. He was an artist and a master."
