Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Clayton, WilliamPPWilliam Clayton

Clayton, WilliamPPAs long as the Latter-day Saints sing the song, "Come, Come, Ye Saints, no toil nor labor fear," the name of William Clayton, the author, will be known and remembered.

Clayton, WilliamPPWilliam Clayton was a native of England and was born at Penwortham, Lancashire, July 17, 1814. He was the eldest of 14 children born to Thomas and Ann Critchley Clayton.

Clayton, WilliamPPWhen the first missionaries of the Church went to England in 1837, William Clayton heard and believed their message and was baptized. On Christmas day of 1837 he was ordained a priest and called to assist in the work. His ability and diligence were again recognized in October, 1838, when he was ordained a high priest and selected to be a counselor to the mission president.

Clayton, WilliamPPIn September, 1840, William Clayton and his wife decided to emigrate to America. They sailed to New York City and then made their way to Nauvoo. For a short time he labored on a farm in Iowa, but in June, 1842, he was called to work in the office of the Prophet Joseph Smith and acted as his secretary. He thus had the exceptional opportunity of being a close friend and associate of the most gifted and important man then living in the world.

Clayton, WilliamPPAfter the death of the Prophet, in June, 1844, William Clayton joined with those who sustained the leadership of the Council of the Twelve, with Brigham Young at its head. In the spring of 1846 he followed President Young and the Twelve in the exodus to the West.

Clayton, WilliamPPThe difficulties of the journey across Iowa, in the rain and mud and cold, were manifold. A number of the Saints who could not endure the hardships of the trek sickened and died and were buried by the wayside. It was in the midst of these oppressive circumstances that William Clayton wrote his great hymn of hope and cheer, "All is well, all is well."

Clayton, WilliamPPWhat many felt, he alone was able to express. His own modest description of the writing of this song is found in one line in his journal, under date of April 15, 1846: "This morning I composed a new song—All is well." Little did he know when he finished writing the lines of this hymn that he had immortalized his name. "Come, Come, Ye Saints" became the grand marching song of the Mormon emigrants as they crossed the plains. "Within the space of its four stanzas," wrote George D. Pyper, "it epitomizes the weary hardships, the unfaltering faith, the indomitable courage and unconquerable spirit of the Mormon pioneers."

Clayton, WilliamPPWilliam Clayton made his way to the Missouri River and spent the winter of 1846-47 at Winter Quarters. In the spring of 1847 he was chosen by President Young to accompany the select group who were to journey west and find a permanent home for the Saints. "We'll find the place which God for us prepared, far away in the West." His personal journal, kept during this trek, is one of the most valuable and informative records handed down to us by any of the pioneers. After his return to Winter Quarters in the fall of 1847, he prepared, from this journal, a Guidebook, which he had printed in St. Louis, and which gave valuable aid and advice to emigrants who made the journey in subsequent years.

Clayton, WilliamPPThe title page of this Guidebook reads as follows: "The Latter-day Saints Emigrant's Guide, being a table of distances, showing all the springs, creeks, rivers, hills, mountains and camping places, from Council Bluffs to the valley of Great Salt Lake, also latitudes, longitudes and altitudes of the prominent points of the route, together with remarks on the nature of the land, timber, grass, etc. The whole route having been carefully measured by a roadometer, and the distance from point to point in English miles accurately shown. By William Clayton, St. Louis, Mo., 1848."

Clayton, WilliamPPAfter William Clayton returned to Utah in the fall of 1848, he made a permanent home in the Seventeenth Ward in Salt Lake City and took an active part in Church and Territorial organizations. For many years he held the position of Territorial Auditor of Public Accounts and also as Territorial Recorder of Marks and Brands. From 1868 to 1879 he was the treasurer of the ZCMI.

Clayton, WilliamPPWilliam Clayton died at his home in Salt Lake City on December 4, 1879, at the age of 65. At that time The Deseret News said of him editorially: "He was a man of sterling integrity, remarkable ability, a faithful Latter-day Saint and a good and useful citizen, whose death, though a happy relief from his suffering, was felt deeply by a host of personal friends."
