Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

William Wallace Cluff

William Wallace Cluff was an early member of the Church, a pioneer of Utah, missionary to the Hawaiian Islands and to Scandinavia, and the first president of Summit Stake.

William W. Cluff was born at Willoughby, Ohio, on March 8, 1832. He was the son of David and Betsey Hall Cluff, who were active members of the Church at the time of William's birth.

The Cluff family started for Far West, Missouri, in 1838, but because of illness were unable to complete the journey and stopped at Springfield, Illinois, until 1840, when they moved to Nauvoo. After six years residence in Nauvoo they joined the Saints in the exodus to the West. They remained on the Missouri River until 1850 when they continued the journey to Salt Lake Valley. Shortly after their arrival, they moved to Provo and established a home. William was now eighteen years of age.

When William was twenty-two years of age in 1854, he accepted a call to go on a mission to the Hawaiian Islands. He journeyed to California in company with Joseph F. Smith, John T. Caine, Silas S. Smith, and others. He was a successful missionary, and after an absence of four years returned to his home in Provo. At the time of his return, Johnston's Army was approaching Salt Lake Valley and William volunteered to assist in guarding the homes of the Saints in Salt Lake City.

The next year, 1859, he was asked by President Brigham Young to undertake his second mission—this time to Scandinavia. He filled this mission with honor and returned to Provo in 1863. A few weeks after his arrival, on October 24, 1863, he was married to Ann Whipple, whom he had met in California after his return from the Islands.

The year after his marriage William was called to undertake a second mission to Hawaii in company with several Church officials. It was on this occasion that a small boat in which the brethren were riding capsized, and Lorenzo Snow was almost drowned.

After he returned to Provo, William W. Cluff was called in 1865 to be the "Presiding Bishop of Summit, Wasatch, and Morgan Counties." He then moved to Coalville and established a permanent home. When Summit Stake was organized on July 9, 1877, Bishop Cluff was appointed as its first president. At that time Summit Stake comprised all the Latter-day Saint organizations in Summit County and western Wyoming.

President Cluff presided over Summit Stake for twenty-four years. He took a prominent part in all the activities of the people of the county. He served several terms in the Territorial Legislature, and in 1872 was a member of the Constitutional Convention. He was the leader in building the beautiful Summit Stake Tabernacle, which was dedicated on May 7, 1899. In 1901, when he received his release, after a long and active life, he moved to Salt Lake City, where he died on August 21, 1915. At his funeral President Joseph F. Smith spoke feelingly of his long-time friend. "He said he had known Elder Cluff for more than sixty-one years; he paid a high tribute to his integrity and said he was a friend and missionary companion whom he had always dearly loved."
