Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Henry Eyring

Henry Eyring, a native of Germany, and a convert to the Church in his youth, was a pioneer of southern Utah and the Mormon colonies in Mexico.

Henry Eyring was born in Coburg, Germany, on March 9, 1835. His parents died while he was yet a youth and Henry, "animated with the hope for a better and brighter future," emigrated to America in 1853, when he was eighteen years of age.

As he was not able to find work in New York City, Henry journeyed west to Missouri. At St. Louis he obtained a position with a wholesale drug firm and decided to make that city his home. Then an event took place which changed the course of his life—out of curiosity he attended a meeting of Latter-day Saints living in St. Louis. He became interested in their doctrines and, on March 11, 1855, two days after his twentieth birthday, he was baptized.

While still a member of the St. Louis Branch he was called to perform a mission among the Cherokee Indians residing in Indian Territory. Here he labored with diligence for four years, until he was able to emigrate to Utah in the fall of 1860. Shortly after his arrival in Salt Lake City he was married to Mary Bommeli, whom he had met while crossing the plains.

After two years' residence in Salt Lake City and Ogden, Henry Eyring moved with his family to St. George. Always active in the Church, he was called, in the fall of 1863, to be the bishop of the St. George Second Ward. He also labored with his hands on the St. George Tabernacle, being employed as a stonecutter.

In 1872 Henry Eyring was asked to take the management of the St. George Co-operative Store. He was laboring in this capacity when President Brigham Young called him, in the fall of 1874, to undertake a mission to Germany and Switzerland. In Germany he visited a number of his relatives, but was unable to interest them in the Gospel. While acting as editor of the mission publication, Der Stern, in Berne, Switzerland, he translated the Doctrine and Covenants into the German language.

Henry Eyring returned to St. George in the fall of 1876, after an absence of two years. The following spring he was chosen as first counselor in the St. George Stake presidency.

At the request of Apostle Erastus Snow, Henry Eyring moved to the Mormon colony in Mexico in 1887 and located at Colonia Juarez. When the Juarez Stake was organized in 1895, he was chosen as first counselor to President A. W. Ivins. In the midst of his busy life he suffered an illness and died at Colonia Juarez on February 10, 1902, at the age of sixty-six.

Henry Eyring was the father of the late Dr. Carl Eyring of the Brigham Young University. A grandson, Dr. Henry Eyring of the University of Utah, has gained international renown in the scientific world.
