Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Lorin Farr

Lorin Farr, a convert to the Church in his youth, a pioneer of Utah, early resident of Ogden, first president of Weber Stake and grandfather of President George Albert Smith, was indeed a Stalwart of Mormonism.

Lorin Farr was born on July 27, 1820, at Waterford, Vermont. His parents were Winslow and Olive Freeman Farr.

In the spring of 1832 Elders Orson Pratt and Lyman E. Johnson came into the neighborhood where the Farr family resided and held meetings. Winslow Farr, his wife, and son, Lorin, heard and believed their message and were baptized. In 1837 Lorin's father sold his holdings in Vermont, and the family journeyed to Kirtland.

Early in 1838 Lorin, then seventeen years of age, accompanied a group of members of the Church to Missouri. On his arrival in Far West he made his home in the family of the Prophet Joseph Smith and thus became well acquainted with the great leader.

After the Prophet's arrest in October, 1838, and the expulsion of the Saints from Missouri, Lorin joined his family in establishing themselves at Nauvoo. He filled two missions in the East during the summers of 1842 and 1843. At the time of the death of the Prophet, he was in Connecticut doing service as a missionary. Shortly afterward he returned to Nauvoo and on January 1, 1845, he was married to Nancy Bailey Chase. Lorin was twenty-four years of age and Nancy was twenty-one.

Lorin Farr and his wife joined in the exodus from Nauvoo in 1846 and made their way to the camps of the Saints on the Missouri River. The following year they departed for the West and arrived in Salt Lake Valley in September.

When Lorin Farr was thirty years of age, in 1850, he was requested by President Brigham Young to move to Ogden and take charge of the Saints who had settled in that vicinity. In January, 1851, the Weber Stake was organized, and Lorin Farr was chosen as its first president. From that time on until his death fifty-eight years later, he was active in all the affairs of Weber County.

He became the first mayor of Ogden in 1851 and held the position for twenty years; from 1852 to 1880 he represented the people of Weber County in the Territorial Legislature. It is said that he built the first saw mill and first grist mill in Ogden. In 1855-56 he supervised the construction of the Ogden Tabernacle—a building which still stands. In 1868-69 Lorin Farr joined with Chauncey West and Ezra T. Benson in taking a contract to grade three hundred miles of the Central Pacific Railroad west of Ogden.

Lorin Farr died in Ogden on January 12, 1909. He was eighty-eight years of age and was known as Ogden's most distinguished citizen. He left a large posterity to do him honor. A grandson, Dr. T. Earl Pardoe, has recently published an excellent biography of his grandfather, which is the source material for this article.
