Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

William Fowler

William Fowler, a humble English elder, who wrote the words of one of the most popular Mormon hymns, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," was truly a Stalwart of Mormonism. In every branch, ward, and stake in the Church this song has been sung with fervor and enthusiasm since 1862. In writing this hymn the author made a lasting contribution to the latter-day work.

William Fowler was the son of John and Bridget Niel Fowler. John Fowler was a soldier in the British army, and when his regiment was moved to Australia he took his family with him. There the boy William was born on May 9, 1830. When he was eight years old, his father was discharged from the army; the Fowler family then returned to England, and located at Sheffield where William grew to manhood.

In the winter of 1848, when William Fowler was eighteen years of age, he was invited by a friend to attend a Latter-day Saint meeting in Sheffield. He was interested in what he heard and continued to attend the meetings. In July, 1849, he was baptized by John V. Long. In 1851 he was ordained a priest and assisted the elders in their missionary work. When it was learned at the factory where he was employed as a polisher and grinder of cutlery that he was an active member of the Mormon Church, he was promptly discharged.

During the years 1853 and 1854 William Fowler gave his entire time to missionary work. "He traveled on foot from town to town and endured persecution of all sorts for the Gospel's sake."

Regarding the writing of the hymn, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," I once heard President Joseph F. Smith relate this story: He said he was on a mission in England in 1862. He was the president of the Sheffield District and was attending a meeting in Sheffield. At the close of the meeting William Fowler handed him a sheet of paper on which a poem was written. Brother Fowler said: "President Smith, I have written a new song, and I should like the choir to learn to sing it."

The Sheffield Choir sang the song, and the following year it was published in the twelfth edition of the L. D. S. Hymn Book. Since that time it has become a favorite song of Latter-day Saints in all parts of the world.

William Fowler and his family emigrated to America in 1863 and made their way to the Salt Lake Valley. In the fall of the year he moved to Manti, where he found employment as a school teacher. He was engaged in this occupation when he died on August 27, 1865, at the age of 35. He was young in years, but through his song he left an immortal name.

George D. Pyper wrote of the song "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet": "It does not compare in lieterary merit and poetic beauty with many of the other gems contained in our hymn books, but it has something different from our other hymns. In simple language it expresses deep gratitude to our Father in heaven for revealing anew the everlasting Gospel and for giving us prophets to guide us in these latter days." (L.D.S. Hymns by George D. Pyper.)
