Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Henry Grow

If a certain obscure young man by the name of Henry Grow had not joined the Church at Philadelphia, Pa., in May, 1842, it is extremely probable that the famous Mormon Tabernacle, on Temple Square, would have differed in many respects from its present architectural design.

Henry Grow was born in Philadelphia on October 1, 1817. His parents were Henry and Mary Riter Grow. We know little about Henry's youth, except that he learned the trade of "mill-wright and bridge builder," and before he was twenty-five years of age, he was "superintendent of culverts and bridges on the Norristown and Germantown railroads." Then someone brought to his door the message of the Restored Gospel, which he heard and believed. He was baptized in the Delaware River at Philadelphia in May, 1842, by William Morton.

The following year he quit his job with the railroads and made his way to Nauvoo. There, being a construction man, he went to work on the Nauvoo Temple and continued steadily at this task until the building was finished early in 1846.

Henry remained in Nauvoo during the summer of 1846, after the main body of the Saints had left, and was one of those who were driven out by the mob in September of that year. With his wife and children, he made his way across Iowa and established himself in a log cabin during the winter of 1846-47, near Winter Quarters. After the pioneers left Winter Quarters for the West, Henry Grow obtained employment as carpenter for a saw mill and grist mill near Weston, Missouri. Here he remained until he had sufficient money to finance his journey to the gathering place of the Saints. He arrived in Salt Lake City on October 1, 1851, his 34th birthday. Having friends in Weber County, he located at Mounds Fort, north of Ogden.

Always on the alert for a construction job, Henry Grow obtained a contract in 1853 to build a bridge across the Weber River. The work was so well done that it attracted the attention of President Brigham Young, and he invited Henry to move to Salt Lake City and work for him. The next few years he spent in building saw mills for President Young in Big Cottonwood and City Creek Canyons.

With the coming of Johnston's Army in 1858, Henry went to Provo and erected temporary buildings for President Young and other Church Authorities to occupy during the exodus from Salt Lake City. Returning to Salt Lake City he worked on the building of the Salt Lake Theatre.

In 1861, Henry Grow received a commission to construct a bridge across the Jordan River, west of Salt Lake City. He designed this bridge in the form of "lattice work" which he had used in the East, under the Remington patent. The timbers of the bridge were held together by wooden pegs.

When President Young saw the Jordan River Bridge, he asked Henry Grow if he could construct an arch of lattice work that would be as strong and durable as the bridge. Henry Grow replied that he could. The President then asked him how wide he could make the arch, and Henry answered, "One hundred and fifty feet." President Young is said to have then sketched on the ground the kind of an auditorium he wanted built; a large oval-shaped roof without any supporting pillars. In that conversation the Salt Lake Tabernacle was born.

The two men then went to work, assisted by architect William H. Folsom, and in 1863-64 the supporting rock buttresses were constructed. The next year Henry Grow superintended the construction of the great center arches. They were built on the ground; then raised on the supporting buttresses; then the arches were joined together. Gradually the great roof began to take form, under the supervision of two master builders, Brigham Young and Henry Grow. In October, 1867, the Tabernacle, almost completed, was used for the first time for the sessions of the semi-annual conference. Finding from the beginning that it would not seat all the people who came to the conference, President Young had the gallery erected in 1870.

In 1868, Henry Grow supervised the construction of the Z C M I store on Main Street. He then took charge of the carpentry work on the Salt Lake Temple, and in 1878-79 he built the Assembly Hall.

Henry Grow died in Salt Lake City on November 4, 1891. The work that he did "in building up Zion in the wilderness," and the memory of his accomplishments, will live for generations to come.
