Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Hamblin, JacobPPJacob Hamblin

Hamblin, JacobPPJacob Hamblin was a convert to the Church, a resident of Nauvoo, friend of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pioneer of Utah, and a famous missionary to the Indians.

Hamblin, JacobPPJacob Hamblin was born in Salem, Ashtabula County, Ohio, on April 6, 1819. He was the son of Isaiah and Daphne Haynes Hamblin. When he was seventeen years of age, Jacob moved with his parents to Spring Prairie, Wisconsin, and located on a farm. It was there, on April 30, 1839, that he was married to Lucinda Taylor.

Hamblin, JacobPPIn February, 1842, Jacob Hamblin heard the message of the Restored Gospel. He was baptized the following month by Elder Lyman Stoddard. In the fall of the year he moved to Nauvoo, where he had the great pleasure of becoming acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith. He also filled a mission to the Eastern States in 1844.

Hamblin, JacobPPAfter the death of the Prophet, Jacob Hamblin joined the Saints in their exodus to the West. With his wife and three children, he began the journey across Iowa in February, 1846. Arriving at the Missouri River he remained in the settlements of the Saints until June, 1850, when he continued the journey to Utah, arriving in Salt Lake City in September.

Hamblin, JacobPPShortly after his arrival, Jacob Hamblin established a home in Tooele Valley. There he had many experiences with the Indians, and he studied to learn how he could live in peace with the natives.

Hamblin, JacobPPAt the April Conference in 1854, Jacob Hamblin was called to do missionary work among the Indians of southern Utah. He and his companions established headquarters at Harmony, south of Cedar City. The following year they moved to Santa Clara Creek, and built a fort. Jacob then returned to Tooele and brought his family to the new location.

Hamblin, JacobPPJacob was appointed president of the Santa Clara Mission in 1857. In this capacity he visited the Indians on the Muddy and at Las Vegas Springs. In the winter of 1858-59 he went on a missionary journey to the Moquis, south of the Colorado River. He made many expeditions among the tribes of northern Arizona and had thrilling experiences which we do not have space to recount here. His life was miraculously spared on more than one occasion.

Hamblin, JacobPPIn September, 1869, Jacob Hamblin left Santa Clara and moved with his family to Kanab. While at Kanab, James A. Little, a gifted writer, wrote a sketch of Elder Hamblin's life, which has become one of the classics of Latter-day Saint literature.

Hamblin, JacobPPElder Hamblin continued his active missionary labors among the natives of northern Arizona and southern Utah until 1877, when he decided to establish a home in Arizona. He located on the headwaters of the Little Colorado, where a settlement called Amity was forming. In 1883 he moved again and located at Pleasanton, New Mexico. Here he died on August 31, 1886, at the age of sixty-seven. This humble, faithful missionary through his service to the Church, had immortalized his name. On his tombstone it was written that he was, "A peacemaker in the camp of the Lamanites."
