Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Francis A. Hammond

The early life of Francis A. Hammond, second president of San Juan Stake, was filled with adventure. Had he written an account of his first 25 years, it would read like an Horatio Alger novel.

Francis A. Hammond was born in the village of Patchogue, New York, on November 1, 1822. Patchogue is located on the Atlantic side of Long Island, and from his infancy the boy watched ships going to sea and returning. The romance of the sea got into his blood, and, he relates, "I commenced going to sea as a cabin boy and cook when I was about 14 years of age." This was on coastal vessels and was only undertaken during the summer months. In the winters he attended school and assisted his father who was a boot and shoe maker. The boy also learned from his father something about tanning leather and making harnesses and saddles. "I learned enough to enable me in after years to establish these branches of industry," he relates.

When Francis was eighteen years of age, he had learned enough about the sea to secure a job as "able seaman" on a whaling vessel, bound for Cape Horn and the Straits of Magellan. Hunting whales in the cold antarctic waters was adventurous work. The great monsters had to be speared and then hauled to the deck of the ship where they were cut to pieces and the blubber secured.

Francis was away from home two years on this first whaling expedition. After the whaling season was over, the crew hunted seals on the rocky islands at the tip of South America. On the return voyage, while the ship was anchored in a small bay, the chief mate and steward absconded in a small boat and took the ship's arms with them. They were captured by the crew and taken back to the United States for trial, Francis A. Hammond acting as their guard.

In June of 1843, he sailed on his second whaling expedition, this time to the Arctic Ocean. He now knew enough about life at sea to secure the job of boatswain, which gave him the privilege of "living aft and associating with the chief officers." The ship sailed down the West Coast of Africa, rounded the Cape of Good Hope, and then struck out directly for Hawaii, which was to be its base during the whaling season.

Hawaii was reached in March, after eight months of sailing. The ship then headed north to the whaling grounds, between Siberia and Alaska. Here an accident happened to Francis A. Hammond. A barrel of flour accidentally rolled down a hatchway and struck him in the back. He was so badly injured that at Lahaina, Maui, he was put ashore to recover, in the fall of 1844, while the vessel pursued its way homeward.

After being on land two months at Lahaina, Francis had sufficiently recovered to set up a boot and shoe shop. From the beginning his business prospered. His trade came from both the natives and seamen, and it was not long before he hired two men to assist him. In 1846 he read in a newspaper which had reached him from California, that a shipload of Mormons had arrived in San Francisco Bay. He wondered what kind of people they were, and one of his men told him he had heard they were bad people.

Francis A. Hammond was now twenty-four years of age. As he thought of his life he determined to sell his business, go to the states and marry an American girl, and then return to the islands to make his home. Accordingly, in the fall of 1847, he sailed for San Francisco. On his arrival he put up at a small hotel, and to his amazement found that the proprietor, William Glover, was a Mormon.

Finding that business was brisk he decided to remain in San Francisco for a few months and establish a shoe repair business. He purchased the "cook's galley" from the ship Brooklyn, moved it to shore and set up his shop. From the beginning he prospered.

Frequently he and Mr. Glover visited in the little parlor of the hotel. One night they sat and talked religion "until the fowls commenced crowing in the morning." Francis felt Mr. Glover's sincerity and became definitely interested. Mr. Glover gave him a book to read entitled the Voice of Warning, written by Parley P. Pratt. He read it carefully, and its forceful arguments helped to convert him. He also prayed to know whether Mormonism was true. On December 31, 1847, Francis A. Hammond was baptized in San Francisco Bay by Elder Petch and confirmed by Samuel Brannan.

About a month after Francis A. Hammond was baptized, gold was discovered at Sutter's Mill on the American River in California.

Francis tells us that as soon as the word reached San Francisco, "A wild, mad rush seized everybody to get to the mines. Captains and crews deserted their ships, lawyers left their offices, merchants and clerks left their places of business, laborers left their employers and San Francisco became almost de-populated in a day."

Francis also caught the gold-fever. He sold his shoemaking establishment, bought a packhorse, loaded on his supplies and started for the gold fields. He traveled twenty-five miles north of Sutter's Fort and located a piece of ground "twenty-four feet square" on Mormon Island. He relates that his ground was rich in gold dust and nuggets. "I never made money so fast in my life," he wrote, "as during the time I spent in digging gold. It was not uncommon to clean up $250 to $300 from one day's work."

When the gold excitement was at its height, Francis heard that a group of Mormons from the ship Brooklyn, and also several discharged members of the Mormon Battalion, were about to journey overland to Salt Lake Valley to meet their families and join the Saints in the gathering place.

He was sorely tempted to remain in California and accumulate more gold; then a strong desire seized him to unite with the Saints, whose religion he had espoused. He made his decision, sold his claim, packed his horse, and met the Latter-day Saints who were traveling eastward. The trip was over the Sierras and across the Nevada desert. The little one-year-old isolated settlement of Great Salt Lake City was reached on September 6, 1848.

Francis A. Hammond found a boarding place in the Old Fort and with his usual diligence promptly opened a shoemaker's shop. Business was good from the beginning, and it was not long before he was able to hire two men to assist him. Also he soon found the girl of his choice. Two months after his arrival he was married to seventeen-year-old Mary Jane Dilworth, Utah's first schoolteacher. Francis at the time was twenty-six.

There were two men in the little Mormon colony whom Francis was anxious to meet. One was Parley P. Pratt, who had written the book, The Voice of Warning which had influenced Francis in joining the Church; the other was President Brigham Young, the great pioneer leader.

When he was introduced to Parley P. Pratt, he found the Apostle "threshing beans before his door, using a wagon box with the sides down for a floor. He was barefooted, in his shirt sleeves and wore a home-made straw hat, with the brim nearly separated from the crown, and his ears protruding between the brim and the crown."

Francis Hammond was quite surprised. "I must confess I was a good deal surprised to find my ideal apostle in such a plight, and forced to labor in such a manner for his support, for I had the old sectarian idea about the grave and revered appearance of apostles and prophets."

Shortly after his arrival, Francis was favored with an introduction to President Brigham Young.

"I sought and obtained an introduction to him. I was profoundly impressed with his appearance. Never did a man make such an impression on me as he did. . . . No one doubted the word of Brigham, the Prophet of the Lord. We loved him and he loved the Saints with all his heart, and served them faithfully by night and by day. He seemed to have a capacity that nothing could escape him, from locating temples and directing their building, down to the smallest matter in household affairs.

"It seemed the easiest thing in the world for him to take our poor emigrant Saints and tell them how to fight the battle of life so that in a very few years they could be found with a nice, well-cultivated farm and comfortable surroundings."

Francis states that the winter of 1848-49 was a happy one for him and his bride. "We had meetings, parties and schools, well attended, during the winter, and great peace prevailed in the camp of Israel." Someone set up a molasses mill near his home. "With the squeaking of the old mill, the shouting of the boys and the howling of the big gray wolves, we had no chance to become lonesome."

After he had resided two and a half years in Salt Lake City, Francis A. Hammond received a call from the First Presidency, in March, 1851, to undertake a mission to the Hawaiian Islands. He was told that he might take his wife and six-months-old baby with him. Accordingly he closed up his business and in April joined a group of missionaries bound for California and the Pacific Isles. Francis and Mary Jane traveled by ox team and covered wagon to California. It was a difficult journey, through the heat and dust of the desert. Two months time was spent before they reached San Pedro.

Arriving at San Pedro Harbor Francis sold his outfit and with his family boarded a sailing vessel for San Francisco. Here he labored as a shoemaker until he had sufficient money to pay the necessary fare to Hawaii. Also he purchased a quantity of shoe leather as he knew he had to work his way through the mission. On August 10, 1851, he was put ashore at Lahaina, Maui, where he had lived previous to going to California.

There is not sufficient space here to relate the interesting details of Francis A. Hammond's mission. He and his wife remained on the Islands for four and a half years, during which time hundreds of natives were baptized and many branches of the Church established. Also, between their arrival and departure, two more children were born to them.

In March, 1856, Francis and his family sailed for home. Arriving at San Bernardino, California, they found a Mormon colony and decided to remain all winter and recuperate their finances. Francis set up his shoe shop, and by spring he had made enough to buy a team and wagon. They arrived in Salt Lake City in June, 1857, after an absence of six years.

In July, 1857, word was received that Johnston's Army was marching to Utah. Francis spent the fall and winter with the Mormon troops in Echo Canyon, which had been placed there to halt the advance of the army. When peace was declared, he returned to his home. In 1859 he moved to Ogden and joined Chauncey W. West in establishing a business "for the manufacture of boots, shoes, saddles and harnesses." This venture proved to be profitable, and Francis made considerable money.

His business career was interrupted in the spring of 1865 when President Brigham Young requested him to go to Hawaii and assist Elder George Nebeker in the purchase of a 6,000-acre plantation on which to settle the native Saints. This work was carried out and in the fall, when he returned home, he was requested to move to Huntsville and preside over the members of the Church in Ogden Valley. For a number of years he served as branch president, and in 1877 a ward was organized with Francis A. Hammond as bishop. The same year, June 6th, his beloved wife, Mary Jane Dilworth Hammond, died and was buried in Huntsville.

Other important events occurred at Huntsville while Francis A. Hammond served as bishop. On September 8, 1881, a little eight-year-old boy, named David O. McKay, was baptized by Peter Geertsen and confirmed a member of the Church by Bishop Hammond. Today, David O. McKay is the honored President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

In the fall and winter of 1883-84, Bishop Hammond and his son, Fletcher B., having acquired a considerable number of cattle, made an extended tour of Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, and parts of Old Mexico, looking for an opportunity to buy a large cattle ranch. No doubt hearing of his desire to move to the southwest, the First Presidency, in 1884, appointed him to preside over San Juan Stake. He accepted the appointment, sold his holdings in Huntsville, and the following year moved to the isolated town of Bluff. His sons drove 450 head of cattle to the new location.

To recount the activities of President Hammond during the following 15 years would take more space than we have here. Besides a vast territory in Utah, his stake extended into parts of Colorado, Arizona, and New Mexico. It took him three weeks to make the rounds of the wards and settlements over which he presided, traveling with horses and buggy. All his work was faithfully performed.

On November 1, 1900, President Hammond observed his 78th birthday. Three weeks later, while visiting the Saints in Bloomfield, New Mexico, his horses became frightened and he was thrown from his buggy. He died without regaining consciousness on November 27. His body was returned to Utah and buried beside his wife, Mary Jane, and other members of the family in Huntsville.
