Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Lester James Herrick

Lester James Herrick, former mayor of Ogden, former bishop of the Second Ward in Ogden, and one-time president of the European Mission, was one of the Salwarts of Mormonism.

Lester J. Herrick was born on December 27, 1827, at Nelson, Portage County, Ohio. His parents were Lemuel and Sally Herrick. When Lester was three years old, his parents were converted to the Church by Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt, and other elders who were on their way to the West as missionaries to the Lamanites. The following year the Herrick family emigrated to Missouri and settled in Jackson County. From that place they were driven out by an armed mob in 1834. For a short time they lived in Far West until they were again driven by a mob into Illinois. Lemuel settled with his family at Nauvoo, and there his wife died in 1841 "due to the privations and sufferings incident to a life of persecution." The boy, Lester, was only fourteen years old when he lost his mother.

In the spring of 1846 Lester joined his family in the exodus to the West. They settled for a time at Mt. Pisgah, Iowa, but in 1850 continued their journey to Utah. Lester's sister, Amanda, died on the plains during the journey.

After arriving in Utah the Herrick family moved to Ogden. Lester's father carried the chain for Engineer Jesse W. Fox, when he made the first survey of Ogden City. Lester was married to Sarah A. Garner in July, 1851. He secured a tract of land and engaged in farming. In 1858 he was elected sheriff of Weber County and in 1860 county commissioner. The following year he was chosen as bishop of the Second Ward in Ogden, and served in this capacity until 1870 when he was selected as "Presiding Bishop" of all the wards in Weber County.

Always active in civic affairs Lester J. Herrick was chosen as mayor of Ogden in February, 1871. He served four terms in this position.

At the April Conference of the Church held in Salt Lake City in 1873, Elder Herrick was called to undertake a mission to England. Shortly after his arrival, the president of the European Mission, Albert Carrington, received word to return home and Lester J. Herrick was appointed in his place. He served honorably in this responsible position until March, 1874, when he was succeeded by President Joseph F. Smith. Three years after his return home, he was named as first counselor to David H. Perry in the presidency of Weber Stake. He held this office until 1883.

Lester J. Herrick was a successful businessman. He accumulated a comfortable fortune through his farming, merchandising, and manufacturing enterprises. Honored and respected, he died at Ogden on April 18, 1892, at the age of sixty-four.
