Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Hinckley, Ira NathanielPPIra Nathaniel Hinckley

Hinckley, Ira NathanielPPIra N. Hinckley was a pioneer of Utah in 1850, builder of Cove Fort, first president of Millard Stake and father of a distinguished family.

Hinckley, Ira NathanielPPHe was born on a farm "in the Johnston district," upper Canada, on October 20, 1828, a son of Erastus and Lois Judd Hinckley.

Hinckley, Ira NathanielPPIra's father died when the boy was two years old; his mother married again, and in 1837 the family moved to the States and settled in Ohio. In 1842 his mother died, and Ira was left an orphan at the age of fourteen. He then moved westward with his stepfather to Springfield, Illinois.

Hinckley, Ira NathanielPPIn 1843 Ira visited Nauvoo; he became acquainted with the leaders of the Church and was baptized the following year. In Nauvoo he learned the trade of wagon builder. In 1846 he joined the Saints in their exodus to the West; he was then eighteen years of age.

Hinckley, Ira NathanielPPAfter his arrival at Winter Quarters, he went to Missouri to obtain employment. In August, 1848, in Platte County, Missouri, he was married to Eliza Jane Evans, daughter of David Evans who later settled at Lehi. On their way across the plains in 1850, Eliza died of cholera, leaving her husband with an eleven-month-old baby daughter. Three years later, in Salt Lake City, Ira was married to Adelaide C. Noble.

Hinckley, Ira NathanielPPIra N. Hinckley made his home in Salt Lake City until 1862, when he was called to settle in Coalville, Summit County. His first task was to superintend the construction of a meetinghouse. While there he and others established the Coalville Library.

Hinckley, Ira NathanielPPAfter five years residence in Coalville, Ira was called by President Brigham Young to move to Millard County and build a fort on Cove Creek. He responded readily to this call and arrived at Cove Creek in April, 1867. Within seven months of the time of his arrival Cove Fort was built. "It is one hundred feet square with walls eighteen feet high; within the walls are twelve comfortable rooms." Cove Fort still stands as a landmark of pioneer days and a monument to the memory of the builder.

Hinckley, Ira NathanielPPIn July, 1877, Millard Stake was organized, and Ira N. Hinckley was chosen as its first president. He then changed his residence from Cove Fort to Fillmore. For twenty-five years he presided over Millard Stake, directing the founding of settlements, the building of roads, canals, and meetinghouses, and all the activities of the Latter-day Saint people in his stake.

Hinckley, Ira NathanielPPWhen he was released from his position in 1902, Ira N. Hinckley moved to Provo. He died there on April 10, 1904, at the age of seventy-five. At his funeral President Seymour B. Young eulogized him as, "A man who had never betrayed a trust, never betrayed his brethren and never betrayed his God; a man who had scattered blessings along his pathway through life, not only to his loved ones, but to all with whom he came in contact."
