Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Jefferson Hunt

In a lonely little grave, at the side of the highway, about midway between Oxford and Downey, Idaho, rests all that was mortal of one of the great pioneers of Utah—Jefferson Hunt.

No adequate sketch of the life of Jefferson Hunt has ever been written. What this good man suffered and endured for the sake of his religion and his Church would, if properly told, make a gripping and faith-promoting story. It is to be hoped that one of his posterity will take the time to search out the facts and publish them to the world.

From the meager information available to the writer, the following has been obtained:

Jefferson Hunt was born in Bracken County, Kentucky, on January 20, 1803. He was the son of John and Martha Jenkins Hunt. At an early age he moved with his parents to Illinois, and there, in 1823 he was married to Celia Mounts. In 1835 Jefferson Hunt was baptized.

When he joined the main body of the Saints, we do not know, but the history informs us that he was at Far West, Missouri, on July 4, 1838, when the Saints celebrated Independence Day, and that he was assistant marshal of the day.

He was driven out of Missouri in 1839, and listed his losses at $2,000. He moved to Nauvoo and resided there until after the death of the Prophet, when he joined the Saints in the exodus to the West. Arriving at the Missouri River he joined the Mormon Battalion and was elected captain of Company A. Two of his grown sons, Gilbert and Marshall, also enlisted. Captain Hunt then obtained permission for his wife, Celia, and the entire family, to accompany the Battalion. The smaller children were Hyrum, John, Joseph, Parley, Jane, Harriet, and Mary.

After terrible suffering the Battalion arrived at Santa Fe in October, 1846. There the women and children and the sick were transferred to Fort Pueblo, on the Arkansas River. Captain Hunt continued on with the Battalion to California. At Los Angeles, in July, 1847, he was discharged from the army and set out eastward to find his family. How he made his way across the Nevada desert we do not know, but he and his son, Marshall, reached Salt Lake Valley, and they were no doubt, overjoyed to find that Mrs. Hunt and the smaller children had preceded them to the gathering place.

About 1849 Jefferson Hunt moved with his family to Provo. The same year he acted as guide for a group of gold seekers who were on their way to California. After his return to Utah in 1850 he joined Amasa Lyman and Charles C. Rich in leading a large colony of Saints to southern California, where they founded the city of San Bernardino.

When San Bernardino was abandoned in 1857, Jefferson Hunt returned with his family to southern Utah. In 1860 he located in Ogden Valley, and the town of Huntsville was named after him. How long he remained there we do not know, but by 1867 he had become a resident of Oxford, in Cache Valley. He died at Oxford on May 11, 1879. At that time The Deseret News said of him: "He was ever a staunch defender of the truth and died in full faith of the Gospel!"
