Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

William Hyde

William Hyde, early convert to the Church, friend of the Prophet Joseph Smith, diligent missionary, member of the Mormon Battalion, Utah pioneer of 1847, missionary to Australia, and founder and first bishop of Hyde Park in Cache Valley, was truly a Stalwart of Mormonism.

William Hyde was born on September 11, 1818, in the town of York, Livingston County, New York. He was the son of Heman and Polly Tilton Hyde. When William was seven years of age, his parents moved to Freedom, New York, and established themselves on a farm. Their nearest neighbor was Warren Cowdery, a brother of Oliver Cowdery. From him they obtained, soon after its publication, a copy of the Book of Mormon, which they read with great interest and which led to their conversion. Heman Hyde and his son, William, were baptized on April 7, 1834.

Two years later Heman sold his holdings in New York and joined the body of the Saints at Kirtland, Ohio. Because of persecutions they left Kirtland in 1838 and journeyed to Far West, Missouri, which had been designated as the new gathering place of the Saints. Again persecution followed them, and in the spring of 1839 they were driven from Missouri. Heman Hyde and his family followed the Prophet Joseph Smith to Nauvoo, Illinois, where they succeeded in making a home for seven years. It was here, in the fall of 1839, that William, now twenty-one years of age, was ordained an elder and called to fill a mission in Illinois, Indiana, and Michigan. He was absent from home three months on this special mission.

At April conference of the Church, held at Nauvoo in 1840, William Hyde was ordained a seventy and called to fill another mission. This time he and his companion, an Elder Herrett, traveled as far east as Maine and the Fox Islands, where they were successful in making converts, but in the midst of their labors they were both stricken with typhus fever. Elder Herrett died of the disease and shortly thereafter William Hyde began his return journey to Nauvoo. On the way he met a group of Saints who were traveling to the headquarters, and he joined them in the journey. In the group was a young lady named Elizabeth Bullard; a romance developed between William Hyde and Elizabeth Bullard and on February 23, 1842, they were married at Nauvoo.

During the spring and summer of 1842 William Hyde labored to build a home, but at the October Conference he was again called to perform missionary work in the Eastern States. On his return journey in April, 1843, he visited the Hill Cumorah in New York.

After spending the summer in Nauvoo, Elder Hyde undertook his fourth mission. With Erastus Snow he journeyed to Vermont. The two elders were at Whitehall, Vermont, on July 9, 1844, when they learned of the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith in Carthage, Illinois. They immediately began their return trip to Nauvoo, where they arrived on August 6. Two days later a meeting was held at Nauvoo, at which time President Brigham Young and the Council of the Twelve were sustained as the leaders of the Saints. William Hyde gave them his full support.

Elder Hyde spent the principal part of his time during 1845 in laboring on the Nauvoo Temple, which was so far completed in the late fall that the faithful Saints could receive their endowments.

The exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo began early in 1846. William Hyde and family, with his parents, crossed the Mississippi River on May 18 and pursued their journey to the West. Arriving at Council Bluffs on July 12, William was requested to join the Mormon Battalion. His reaction to this call was as follows:

"My thoughts at leaving my family at this time were indescribable; far from the land we had called civilized, with no dwelling save a wagon, with the scorching mid-summer heat beating upon them and with the prospect of the cold December blast finding them in the same place. My family consisted at this time of a wife and two children, the eldest of whom was but three and a half years old, and the situation of my wife was such as to require the assistance and watch care of her companion." (L D S Biographical Encyclopedia, Vol. 1, p. 760.)

During the latter part of July, 1846, William Hyde marched with the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas, a distance of 180 miles. There the soldiers were given their guns and uniforms and then began a further march, in the dust and heat, to Santa Fe, New Mexico, a distance of 800 miles. Several of the soldiers perished while on this march. After a short rest at Santa Fe they continued on to San Diego, California, another thousand miles, over a trackless waste, where they arrived on January 29, 1847. They remained in California until July 16, when they were discharged at Los Angeles.

William Hyde was anxious to return to his family. He joined a group of about fifty of the Battalion soldiers who began preparations to make the journey eastward. They traveled northward to Sacramento; then eastward over the Sierra Nevada Mountains; thence along the Humboldt River and on to the Salt Lake Valley, where they arrived on October 12, 1847.

William Hyde was disappointed in not finding his family in Salt Lake Valley, and decided to continue on to the Missouri River, although the winter season was approaching. He joined fifteen men, all mounted on horseback, and began the journey. Their travels in the cold and snow and the hardships they suffered need not be enumerated here. It is sufficient to say that they reached Winter Quarters on December 11, 1847, and that William Hyde soon found his wife and children. A son had been born during his absence.

In the summer of 1849, William Hyde and family joined a group of emigrants who were making the journey to Utah. They arrived in Salt Lake Valley on September 22 after a journey of about three months. William soon found employment as a clerk in a store, which position he held until August, 1852, when he was called by the First Presidency to undertake a mission to Australia. This was a difficult assignment, but William Hyde did not shrink from it. He traveled first by ox team to San Bernardino; then by boat up the California coast to San Francisco; thence by sailing vessel to Australia. He arrived at Sidney on April 9, 1853.

The climate in Australia did not agree with Elder Hyde, and his health failed. After fourteen months of missionary service he was released by the mission president to return to his home. Sixty-three of the Australian Saints accompanied him on his return journey.

Elder Hyde arrived in Salt Lake City on August 14, 1854., "in a feeble state of health, too weak to do manual labor." It was not until the next spring that he was able to attend to his farm work.

In October, 1857, William Hyde was called to serve with the Mormon forces who opposed the coming of Johnston's Army. During the winter he had the command of one hundred men in Echo Canyon.

Cache Valley was opened for settlement in 1859, and several hundred persons moved to the new location. In the spring of 1860. William Hyde left for Cache Valley to seek a new site for a home. He and others settled on a fertile tract of land four miles north of Logan, which was soon named Hyde Park in his honor. He was the first bishop of the village and was active in civic affairs in Cache County. He was one of seven men sent from the county in January, 1863, to a convention in Salt Lake City which met for the purpose of forming a state constitution.

In 1865 he was elected to the Territorial Legislature and appointed probate judge of Cache County. When a military district was formed, he was named as adjutant to General Ezra T. Benson.

In his business ventures, William Hyde was successful. In 1866, he, with Thomas E. Ricks and William D. Hendricks, built a flour mill at Logan at a cost of $27,000. The same year he joined Ezra T. Benson in a contract to build one hundred miles of grade for the Central Pacific Railroad. He established and managed a co-operative store at Hyde Park.

William Hyde, a great and a good man, died at Hyde Park on March 2, 1874, after a brief illness, at the age of 56.
