Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

John Jaques

President David O. McKay has made the statement that his favorite hymn is:

"O, say what is truth? Tis the fairest gem that the riches of worlds can produce."

This beautiful and inspiring song was written by an English convert, John Jaques, and was first published in The Millennial Star on August 1, 1850, when Elder Jaques was twenty-three years of age.

During the following year, 1851, Franklin D. Richards, president of the European Mission, published in England the ninth edition of the Hymn Book, and in it he included John Jaques' poem and song. Thus "O Say, What Is Truth?" has been sung by Latter-day Saints, with ever-increasing popularity, for over one hundred years.

John Jaques was born at Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, England, on January 7, 1827. His parents were Thomas and Mary Ann Heighington Jaques. At the age of eighteen John was converted to the Church and was baptized by Elder Thomas B. Ward. Three years later he was ordained an elder and moved to Stratford-on-Avon, where he became identified with that branch. It was here that he wrote his beautiful song, in the home city of William Shakespeare.

Sometime in 1850 John Jaques moved to Liverpool and became a clerk in the office of the European Mission headquarters. He was engaged in this work when he married Miss Zilpah Loader, October 31, 1853.

Three years later, in May, 1856, John Jaques, his wife, and baby, left England with a large group of emigrants, to join the main body of the Saints in Salt Lake Valley. They sailed to Boston; thence traveled westward by rail to the end of the line at Iowa City, Iowa. Here they were instructed to buy or build handcarts and begin the long weary walk of 1,300 miles to Salt Lake Valley.

On this expedition John Jaques and his family traveled with the ill-fated Martin Handcart Company, numbering about 600 persons. They were delayed in leaving Iowa City until the latter part of July and as a result they ran into cold and inclement weather as they proceeded westward. In central Wyoming they encountered a severe snow storm, and before they were rescued by parties from Salt Lake City, 135 of those who began the journey had perished. Among them was the infant daughter of John Jaques, who died and was buried near Green River on November 23, 1856.

John Jaques was a gifted writer, and shortly after he arrived in Salt Lake City, he sought and found employment in the Historian's Office. He remained there until 1863 when he became assistant editor of the Daily Telegraph, a newspaper established by Thomas B. Stenhouse. He followed this occupation until he was called on a mission to his native land in 1869. Returning to Utah in 1871 he entered the employment of The Deseret News and remained in this capacity until he was called again, eight years later, to work in the Church Historian's Office. In 1889 he was sustained as an assistant to the Church Historian, and he held this position until his death, on June 1, 1900.

In the course of his busy life, John Jaques wrote several books and pamphlets which were popular in their day. Among them was a Catechism for Children which passed through several editions. He wrote a number of hymns, but none became as popular as "O Say, What Is Truth?"

John Jaques served in many organizations. He was elected to the Territorial Legislature for two terms. He was a school trustee from the Twelfth Ward and served as a captain in the Nauvoo Legion. For a number of years he was secretary of the Genealogical Society of Utah. He was senior president of the Eighth Quorum of Seventy.

When he died, The Deseret News said of him editorially:

"For full half a century John Jaques labored incessantly for that which he firmly believed was the cause of human redemption. His first literary efforts were in The Millennial Star. That periodical received much of its luster from his active mind and pen. In poetry and prose he reflected the light of truth, for the benefit of his fellows, and his logical thoughts and spiritual sentiments were a comfort and strength to many honest souls."
