Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Johnson, Benjamin F.PPBenjamin Johnson

Johnson, Benjamin F.PPBenjamin F. Johnson, one of the early members of the Church and a pioneer of Utah and Arizona, was born at Pomfret, Chatauqua County, New York, on July 28, 1818. He was the tenth of sixteen children born to Ezekiel and Julia Hills Johnson. His parents came originally from Massachusetts and settled in western New York in 1814.

Johnson, Benjamin F.PPAbout 1830, Benjamin's brothers, Joel H. and David, moved to Amherst, Ohio, and the following spring were converted to the Church by Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt, and other missionaries who were on their way to Missouri. Through the efforts of Joel and David, who returned to New York to visit their family, all the older members were baptized, except the father and the small children.

Johnson, Benjamin F.PPIn 1833 the Johnson family moved to Kirtland to be with the main body of the Saints. Two years later, when he was seventeen years of age, Benjamin was baptized at Kirtland. His first employment there was that of a laborer on the temple.

Johnson, Benjamin F.PPThe Johnson family joined the Kirtland Camp in 1838 and began the long journey to Missouri. At Springfield, Illinois, the mother and smaller children stopped with friends, but Benjamin continued on to Far West. From there he was requested to go to Adamondi-ahman, at which place he selected a city lot and prepared to build a home. However, he was soon expelled from Missouri, together with all the Latter-day Saints residing in that state. Returning to Illinois, he remained during the year 1839 with his family in Springfield, but in the fall made a trip to Nauvoo.

Johnson, Benjamin F.PPEarly in 1840 Benjamin departed on a mission to Canada, and labored principally in or near Toronto. He returned to Kirtland in 1841 and on December 25 of that year was married to Malissa LeBaron. The young couple journeyed to Hancock County, Illinois, and settled at Ramus. Here Benjamin frequently had as his guest the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the Prophet requested him to look after the Church property in that vicinity. Benjamin remained at Ramus (later Macedonia) until the Prophet and his brother, Hyrum, were slain in June, 1844. Of this event he wrote in his history as follows:

Johnson, Benjamin F.PP"To attempt to delineate the feelings of woe and unutterable sorrow that swelled every heart too full for tears, I need not attempt. I stood up, dazed with grief; could groan, but could not weep. The fountain of tears was dry. 'Oh God, what will thy orphan church and people do now?' was the only feeling or thought that now burst out in groans."

Johnson, Benjamin F.PPBenjamin F. joined the exodus from Nauvoo in the winter of 1846 and crossed the Mississippi River on the ice. He located temporarily in Iowa, but in 1848 continued his journey to Salt Lake Valley in Willard Richards' company, arriving at his destination on October 22.

Johnson, Benjamin F.PPHe endured the trials and the tribulations that were the lot of the pioneers, but through his industry developed a prosperous harness business and operated a drug store in Salt Lake City. He had no sooner established himself than he received a call to lead a colony to Summit Creek (Santaquin), in Utah County. He had moved his family there and had begun to farm when he received a further call to depart on a mission to the Hawaiian Islands. This was a test of his faith, but he accepted the call and within ten days was on his way.

Johnson, Benjamin F.PPThe journey to the islands was made by team to San Bernardino and San Pedro; thence up the coast by boat to San Francisco, and from there by sailing vessel to Honolulu. Benjamin arrived at his destination on February 18, 1853, and after laboring faithfully for two years sailed again for his home land. Shortly after his arrival in Utah, he passed his thirty-seventh birthday.

Johnson, Benjamin F.PPHe now returned to Santaquin, but in 1862 he became discouraged in this location and moved to Spring Lake, where his brother, Joseph E., resided. Here he remained and prospered. In 1877 he was made bishop of the Spring Lake Ward and presided until 1882, when he was requested by President John Taylor to establish a colony of Saints in Mexico. To this call, as well as all others made of him by the Church, he responded readily and departed from Spring Lake on May 20. His brother, Joseph E., and other members of the family accompanied him, and they all arrived safely at Mesa, Arizona, in the fall.

Johnson, Benjamin F.PPThe settlement in Mexico did not materialize for the faithful man, Benjamin F. Johnson. A war broke out between the Yaqui Indians and the Mexicans which prevented the establishment of a Latter-day Saint colony there at the time. He therefore made a permanent home in Mesa during the balance of his life, although he journeyed frequently to distant states and cities. He died at Mesa on November 18, 1905, being then in his 88th year.

Johnson, Benjamin F.PP"He was beloved by all who knew him. He had the pure love of God in his heart, which was abundantly manifest in his love for his fellow-men."
