Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Heber C. Kimball

The announcement in August, 1953, that President David O. McKay had dedicated a site for a temple in England, brought to mind the story of the introduction of the Gospel to Great Britain over one hundred years ago.

The man who led the first Latter-day Saint missionaries to England in 1837 was Heber C. Kimball, missionary, apostle, pioneer of Utah, and counselor to President Brigham Young. His statute stands atop the great monument at the mouth of Emigration Canyon, and for his life and accomplishments he will be known and remembered for generations to come.

Heber C. Kimball was born at Sheldon, Vermont, on June 14, 1801. He was the son of Solomon and Ann Spaulding Kimball. When Heber was ten years old, his parents left Vermont and moved westward to Ontario County, New York. Here he grew to manhood. When he was nineteen years old, he left his father's farm and moved to Mendon, New York, where he engaged in the pottery business with his brother.

In 1822 Heber C. Kimball was married to Vilate Murray, who came from the neighboring town of Victor. Heber was twenty-one years of age at the time; Vilate was sixteen.

Among the young men in Mendon with whom Heber became intimately acquainted was a carpenter and cabinet maker by the name of Brigham Young. These two became fast friends.

In the fall of 1831 Mormon missionaries came to Mendon for the first time. They were humble elders from a neighboring branch of the Church in Pennsylvania. Heber C. Kimball and Brigham Young heard their message and believed their teachings. The following spring they were both baptized and at once became active members of the Church.

In September, 1832, Heber accompanied Brigham and Joseph Young on a journey to Kirtland, where they saw the Prophet Joseph Smith for the first time. They returned home and in the fall of 1833 sold their possessions in Mendon and moved to Kirtland. From that time on their lives were constantly identified with the Church.

Heber C. Kimball made the journey to Missouri as a member of Zion's Camp in 1834. On February 14, 1835, he and Brigham Young were chosen as members of the first Council of the Twelve. In 1835 and 1836 they served as missionaries in the Eastern States. Then, in June, 1837, the Prophet Joseph Smith informed Heber that he had been selected "to go to England and open the door of salvation to that nation."

Heber C. Kimball felt his weakness in this great undertaking but determined to go as he had been requested and do the best that he could, feeling that the Lord would sustain him.

A number of missionaries accompanied Elder Kimball on his first journey to England, among whom were Orson Hyde, Willard Richards, Joseph Fielding, and Isaac Russell. How they made their way eastward to New York City and then across the Atlantic in a sailing vessel, in poverty and penury, is a story we do not have space to relate here. It is sufficient to say that when Heber C. Kimball landed at Liverpool, he was completely without funds and had to depend upon his companions for subsistence.

The missionaries made their way to Preston, where Joseph Fielding had a brother, James Fielding, who was an active minister in the Church of England. Reverend Fielding received the American elders kindly and on the second day of their arrival invited them to speak in his church.

The congregation heard them enthusiastically, and they were invited to speak again. Several now applied for baptism, and Reverend Fielding saw that he was about to lose a number of his members. He therefore turned against the elders and closed his church to them. However, one week later, on July 30, 1837, eight days after his arrival in Preston, Heber C. Kimball had the great satisfaction of baptizing eight converts in the River Ribble. They were the first to join the Church in England.

After the first baptisms were performed, success came rapidly to Heber C. Kimball and his companions. They found eager listeners in the homes of the new members and in the market place. Three weeks after their arrival, they had baptized between forty and fifty converts, and a branch of the Church had been organized at Preston.

Space is not available here to recount the individual efforts of the elders during the time they remained in England, but astonishing success attended them. When Heber C. Kimball. Orson Hyde, and Isaac Russell departed for America, eight months after their arrival in England, they left branches of the Church in twenty-six towns and cities, with a membership of approximately two thousand. Thus was the Gospel established in Great Britain by humble elders who placed their reliance upon their Heavenly Father and who traveled and labored "without purse or scrip." Now, after more than one hundred years, the President of the Church has traveled to that land and announced that a temple will be built for the benefit of the British Saints.

With the departure of Heber C. Kimball and his companions for America, Joseph Fielding and Willard Richards were designated to remain in England and preside over the various branches.

Elder Kimball reached New York City on May 12, 1838, and ten days later, "After journeying by steamboat, railroad and canal, arrived in Kirtland and was greeted by his family and friends.

"I found my family in good health," he relates, "and as comfortably situated as I could expect; our joy was mutual. The Saints likewise welcomed us home, for which I felt to thank my Heavenly Father."

Heber C. Kimball was greatly disappointed in not finding President Joseph Smith in Kirtland, as he desired to report the success of his mission to him, but both the Prophet and Brigham Young had been forced to flee from Kirtland, because of the persecutions of their enemies, and had made their way by team and wagon, in a winter journey, to Missouri.

Heber made arrangements to follow them, and after a journey of nearly one thousand miles, he reached Far West with his family, July 25, 1838. There he was joyfully received by the Prophet and the Saints. "Joseph requested me to preach to the Saints and give them a history of my mission, saying, 'It will revive their spirits and do them good.'"

About two weeks after the arrival of Elder Kimball in Missouri, persecution broke out against the Saints in that state, which continued to mount and spread until the governor, Lilburn W. Boggs, who sympathized with the mob, called out the militia with orders to drive the Mormons from Missouri, or "exterminate" them. The Prophet Joseph Smith, his brother, Hyrum, and others were taken and imprisoned in Liberty Jail. Heber C. Kimball, Brigham Young, and a number of the Twelve were not molested as they were not well known to the mob; thus they were able to journey out of Missouri and make their way to Quincy, Illinois.

In April, 1839, the Prophet and his brother, Hyrum, escaped from their persecutors and made their way to Quincy; the following month the Prophet established a new gathering place for the Saints at Commerce, Illinois, forty miles north of Quincy. Heber C. Kimball, Brigham Young, and many others followed him to the new location.

After finding suitable quarters for his family, "in an old military barracks" at Montrose, Iowa, Heber C. Kimball made arrangements to depart for his second mission to England, to which the members of the Twelve had been called in a revelation given the previous year, July 8, 1838, at Far West.

He and Brigham Young were recovering from sickness when they departed from their families on September 14, 1839. They had no money with which to pursue their journey. The first day they were carried fourteen miles in a wagon "by Brother Hubbard's boy." The following day, "Brother Duel carried us twelve miles." Thus Heber C. Kimball, the faithful missionary and apostle, made his way to England the second time.

We shall not attempt to relate the details of this mission to England. It is sufficient to say that never was so much accomplished by a similar group of missionaries. Between seven and eight thousand converts were baptized and many branches of the Church were organized within the time of "one year and sixteen days" while the Twelve remained in England.

Heber C. Kimball left Liverpool on April 20, 1841, to return to the United States. After one month in a sailing vessel he landed at New York City; he then traveled by train and steamboat to Nauvoo, where he arrived on July 1. There a group of friends greeted him, on the shore.

"President Joseph Smith was the first one that caught us by the hand. I never saw him feel better in my life than he does at this time; this is the case with the Saints in general."

Heber C. Kimball at once became active in Nauvoo. The Twelve met almost daily with the Prophet, and various tasks were assigned them. On August 16, 1841, the Prophet made the statement in a public sermon that, "The time had come when the Twelve should be called to stand in their place next to the First Presidency. . . . and assist to bear off the Kingdom victorious to the nations."

Elder Kimball also began during this time the construction of a home in Nauvoo, which stands to this day as one of the commodious residences in that city.

When the Prophet Joseph Smith was slain in Carthage Jail on June 27, 1844, Heber C. Kimball was in the Eastern States on a mission for the Church. He returned to Nauvoo during the first week of August and was present at the conference when the Twelve were sustained as the leaders of the Saints. He labored to complete the temple and was loyal to Brigham Young in all his endeavors.

In February, 1846, President Young, Heber C. Kimball, and others of the Twelve led the Saints from Nauvoo in the great exodus to the West. Heber was with the historic band of pioneers who made the first journey to Salt Lake Valley in 1847. He returned to the Missouri River in the fall and at a meeting of the Twelve held in Council Bluffs on December 27, 1847, the First Presidency was reorganized, with Brigham Young as President of the Church and Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards as counselors.

The next year, 1848, Heber led a company of Saints to Salt Lake Valley. He arrived in the Valley in September. He soon built a large, commodious home on North Main Street and this remained his permanent residence until his death on June 22, 1868, at the age of 67.

At his funeral held in the large Tabernacle on June 24, President Brigham Young said of him :

"I will relate to you my feelings concerning the departure of Brother Kimball . . . He was a man of as much integrity, I presume, as any man who ever lived upon the earth. I have been personally acquainted with him for forty-three years, and I can testify that he has been a man of truth, a man of benevolence, a man that was to be trusted. . . . What can we say to one another? Live as he has lived; be as faithful as he has been; be as full of good works as his life has manifested to us."
