Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Christopher Layton

Christopher Layton was a native of England, a convert to the Church, resident of Nauvoo, member of the Mormon Battalion, bishop of Kaysville, Utah, and president of St. Joseph Stake in Arizona.

Christopher Layton was born in Thorncut, England, on March 8, 1821. He was the son of Samuel and Isabel Wheeler Layton. In 1841, when he was twenty years of age, Latter-day Saint missionaries came to Thorncut; Christopher Layton heard and believed their message and was baptized on January 1, 1842. The following year he was married to Mary Matthews, and in 1843 the two set sail for America. They arrived in Nauvoo in April, 1843, and established a home. Two years later Mary Matthews Layton died, leaving her husband with a thirteen-month-old daughter.

A friendly family took the child to rear, and, in 1846, Christopher Layton departed for the West with the exiled Saints. Arriving at the Missouri River he enlisted in the Mormon Battalion, and made the long journey on foot to California. After his discharge at Los Angeles, in July, 1847, he made his way to the gold fields. There he forsook mining for the buying and selling of horses. He made considerable money and decided to sail to England to visit his parents. After a long, stormy voyage he reached his homeland, only to find that his mother had died two weeks before his arrival.

While in England, Christopher was married to Sarah Martin. With his wife he returned to America in the fall of 1850 and, after remaining in St. Louis two years, crossed the plains to Utah.

In 1857 Christopher established a home in Kaysville. He became a very successful farmer and cattle raiser. In April, 1862, he was chosen as bishop of Kaysville Ward, and continued to serve in that capacity for fifteen years. Under his administration the old Kaysville Ward Meetinghouse was completed.

When the Davis Stake was organized in June, 1877, Christopher Layton was chosen as first counselor to President William R. Smith. He continued in this position until February, 1883, when he was asked by President John Taylor to move to Arizona and preside over the St. Joseph Stake. He promptly accepted this appointment and arrived at St. David on February 24. In June, 1885, he established a home at Safford.

Christopher Layton presided over St. Joseph Stake for fifteen years, and was a great power in developing the settlements of Gila Valley. Because of ill health he was released from his position in January 1898; he then returned to Layton, where he continued to reside until his death on August 7, at the age of seventy-seven.

At his funeral held on August 13, President Joseph F. Smith paid him an eloquent tribute:

"We have on this occasion before us the remains of a very notable man; a man of strong individuality and of great physical and mental power and magnetism; a man who was fitted and qualified by nature to be a leader among men, and a power in the midst of his fellow creatures. He was no ordinary individual; he was one among a thousand."
