Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Maeser, Karl G.PPKarl G. Maeser

Maeser, Karl G.PPKarl G. Maeser, a convert to the Church from Germany, became one of the leading educators of Utah and the first principal of the Brigham Young Academy in Provo. He was born at Meissen, Germany, on January 16, 1828. He was the eldest of four sons born to John and Christina Zocher Maeser. His father was a prominent man in Meissen, a master china painter, who acquired sufficient means to rear comfortably and educate his family.

Maeser, Karl G.PPAs a child Karl was such an earnest and eager reader of books that he seriously injured his eyes at the age of eight. Thereafter he attended private schools for a few years; at twenty he was graduated with honors from the Normal School at Fredrichstadt.

Maeser, Karl G.PPOn leaving school he became a tutor for three years; he was then offered and accepted a professorship in the Bundich Institute in Dresden. In June, 1854, when he was twenty-six years of age, he married Anna Mieth, daughter of the director of the Bundich Institute. He was now settled in his occupation as a teacher, but soon other influences came into his life.

Maeser, Karl G.PPHe accidentally came upon a small pamphlet attacking the Mormon religion, and he became so interested that he determined to investigate the tenets of its maligned people. A friend gave him the name of John Van Cott, president of the Latter-day Saint Scandinavian Mission. He wrote to Elder Van Cott who, in turn, referred him to the president of the Swiss and German Mission, Daniel Tyler, with head-quarters at Geneva.

Maeser, Karl G.PPKarl G. Maeser now began a correspondence with Elder Tyler, which, in a few weeks, resulted in a request that a Mormon missionary be sent to visit him. Elder Tyler forwarded this request to Franklin D. Richards at Liverpool, president of the European Mission, and he appointed Elder William Budge, who had some knowledge of the German language, to make the journey to Dresden. Elder Budge arrived there on September 28, 1855, and was invited to lodge at the Maeser home during his visit.

Maeser, Karl G.PPDiscussions about the Restored Gospel were now held daily, in which Edward Schoenfeld, brother-in-law of Karl G. Maeser, Mrs. Maeser, and her two sisters, and a teacher named Edward Martin, were invited to join.

Maeser, Karl G.PPTwo weeks after the arrival of William Budge in Dresden, Karl G. Maeser, Edward Schoenfeld, and Edward Martin applied for baptism. While arrangements were being made to perform this ordinance, President Franklin D. Richards arrived in Dresden. He was making a trip to Italy and stopped over to see how Elder Budge was getting along with his investigators. It was then arranged that President Richards would baptize the new converts, and the ordinance was performed in the Elbe River on October 14, 1855. The event was described in later years by Professor Maeser:

Maeser, Karl G.PP"On coming out of the water, I lifted both of my hands to heaven and said, 'Father, if what I have done just now is pleasing unto thee, give me a testimony, and whatever Thou shouldst require of my hands I shall do, even to the laying down my life for this cause.'

Maeser, Karl G.PP"There seemed to be no response to my fervent appeal, and we walked home together, President Richards and Elder Budge to the right and left of me, while the other men walked some distance behind us, so as to attract no notice. Our conversation was on the subject of the authority of the priesthood, Elder Budge acting as interpreter. Suddenly I stopped Elder Budge from interpreting President Richards' remarks as I understood them, and I replied in German, when again the interpretation was not needed as President Richards understood me also. Thus we kept on conversing until we arrived at the point of separation, when the manifestation as suddenly ceased as it had come."

Maeser, Karl G.PPBefore Elder Budge left Dresden, five more persons had been baptized, and a little branch of the Church had been organized. Elder Budge ordained Karl G. Maeser an elder and requested him to preside over the little group. Thus was the Gospel planted in Saxony, Germany.

Maeser, Karl G.PPRealizing that he would not be accepted as a professor at the Bundich Institute as soon as it became known that he was a Mormon, meetings were held in secret. Within a year after his baptism, Karl G. Maeser made preparations to immigrate to America and join the Saints in Utah.

Maeser, Karl G.PPKarl G. Maeser, with his wife and small son, accompanied by Edward Schoenfeld and wife and Mrs. Maeser's sister, Camilla Mieth, left Dresden on June 6, 1856, bound for America.

Maeser, Karl G.PPWhen the party reached England, Elder Maeser was requested by the mission president to remain in London for a short time and labor among the German people who resided in that city. He accepted this call and spent one year in the British Isles, working as a missionary both in England and Scotland. Meantime Edward Schoenfeld and his wife traveled on to Salt Lake City.

Maeser, Karl G.PPIn May, 1857, Elder Maeser, with his family (a second son had been born in London), sailed from Liverpool to Philadelphia. Just before their arrival in America their infant son died. They took the little one to Philadelphia for burial. This voyage was made in a sailing vessel and consumed seven weeks' time.

Maeser, Karl G.PPThe Maeser family arrived in Philadelphia on July 4, 1857. Karl had exhausted his supply of money, and it was necessary for him to seek employment. He had ill luck in employment in Philadelphia. He therefore journeyed to Richmond, Virginia, doing missionary work as he traveled. At Richmond he engaged to teach music, especially piano, in which he was some-what proficient, to the children of prominent families. Among those who engaged him was the ex-president of the United States, John Tyler. He now was able to save a little money, due to his diligence, and by June, 1860, he had sufficient to take himself and family to Salt Lake City.

Maeser, Karl G.PPThe journey was made by rail to Council Bluffs; there he acquired a yoke of oxen and a wagon and continued on across the plains. The Maeser family arrived in Salt Lake City on September 1, 1860. They were met by Elder and Mrs. Schoenfeld who took them to their home.

Maeser, Karl G.PPIn November, Karl G. Maser opened a school in the Fifteenth Ward Meetinghouse. He advertised his school in The Deseret News as the "Deseret Lyceum" and offered to teach the pupils who came to him, English, German, French, Italian, Latin, Greek, drawing, bookkeeping, and mathematics. The tuition was to be $6 per quarter, payable in advance.

Maeser, Karl G.PPIt was during this first winter that the diligent and capable professor came to the attention of President Brigham Young, who, in the spring of 1861, requested him to take charge of the Union Academy, which stood directly across the street from the present West High School.

Maeser, Karl G.PPThe fame of Professor Maeser as a teacher spread throughout the community, and the next spring John Sharp and Charles R. Savage, influential members of the Twentieth Ward, asked President Young if they might engage him to teach the children of their ward. The plan was agreed to, and in the fall of 1862 Karl G. Maeser opened a school in the Twentieth Ward Meetinghouse.

Maeser, Karl G.PPHere he remained for five years, until the spring of 1867 when he was called by the First Presidency to undertake a mission to Switzerland and Germany. This was a difficult task, but, finally, the necessary financial arrangements were made, and Karl G. Maeser departed from Salt Lake City on May 10, 1867. He traveled by ox team to Julesburg, Colorado, then the terminus of the railroad. From there he went by train to New York City; thence by boat to Liverpool, and then on to Zurich, Switzerland.

Maeser, Karl G.PPHere he labored faithfully until December 21, 1868, when he received a letter from President Brigham Young requesting him to start a paper in the German language, for the benefit of the mission. It was not long before he carried out this assignment. The first issue of Der Stern appeared on January 1, 1869. Elder Maeser also translated many of our Church hymns into German, such as "Oh My Father," "Do What Is Right," "Come, Come, Ye Saints." On June 20, 1869, Elder Maeser was made the president of the Swiss and German Mission, upon the release of Joseph Horne. He continued this work with diligence and success until he was released to return home in July, 1870.

Maeser, Karl G.PPElder Karl G. Maeser was released from his presidency of the Swiss and German mission early in July, 1870, and shortly thereafter began his journey homeward. He reached New York on July 26 and one week later arrived by train in Salt Lake City. As he entered his home in the Twentieth Ward, he said to his wife and children: 'Thank God it is accomplished. I have done my duty and my dear Heavenly Father has brought me safely home again."

Maeser, Karl G.PPIn the fall he resumed his school work in the Twentieth Ward Meetinghouse. He also taught classes in the Deseret University. He was active with his pen and wrote articles for The Juvenile Instructor. He spoke frequently in ward meetings in Salt Lake City.

Maeser, Karl G.PPThe next five years passed pleasantly for Karl G. Maeser and then, in the spring of 1876, something of extraordinary importance happened: President Brigham Young sent for him and spoke to him about as follows:

Maeser, Karl G.PP"We have been considering the establishment of a Church school and are looking around for a man to take charge of it. You are the man, Brother Maeser. We want you to go to Provo and conduct an academy, to be established in the name of the Church."

Maeser, Karl G.PPKarl G. Maeser accepted the appointment. He realized that great responsibility and great opportunity were before him. During the next few days he made arrangements to leave for Provo. He learned that his salary was to be $1,200 a year, "payable in such commodities as the treasurer might take in on tuition."

Maeser, Karl G.PPBefore leaving Salt Lake City, in April, 1876, he made a call on President Young to learn if the President had any further instructions for him. President Young answered:

Maeser, Karl G.PP"Brother Maeser, I want you to remember that you ought not to teach even the alphabet, or the multiplication tables, without the spirit of God. That is all. God bless you. Goodbye." This brief advice proved to be the inspiration of Professor Maeser's educational work, during the balance of his life.

Maeser, Karl G.PPThe Brigham Young Academy opened in Provo on April 24, 1876, with 29 students. Karl G. Maeser was the sole teacher. From the beginning the students felt the personality of the new schoolmaster. One of his pupils has said that his words pierced their souls.

Maeser, Karl G.PPAt the fall term in 1876 the Academy opened in the Lewis Building with 60 students, which was increased during the school year to 106. Among the students were James E. Talmage (later one of our greatest scholars), Reed Smoot, and George Sutherland, both of whom became national figures.

Maeser, Karl G.PPFor seven and a half years the Brigham Young Academy met in the Lewis Building in Provo, where it grew and prospered, and then, on the night of January 27, 1884, the building was destroyed by fire. Nothing remained but blackened ruins. "Fire has destroyed the house" said Professor Maeser, "but the Academy lives on." The next day the school opened in the basement of the old Tabernacle.

Maeser, Karl G.PPIn the fall of 1884 the Academy found a new home on the upper floor of the old Z C M I Warehouse in Provo, near the depot. So many students registered that Professor Maeser had to hire two or three teachers to assist him. Here, for seven and a half years the Academy again grew and prospered, under the inspired leadership of its great teacher.

Maeser, Karl G.PPFurther honors awaited Karl G. Maeser. In addition to his duties at the Academy, he was selected by the First Presidency, on June 8, 1888, to be the general superintendent of all Church schools. He held the two positions until January 4, 1892, when he resigned as principal of Brigham Young Academy. It was a dramatic occasion. On that day the student body, with Professor Maeser at their head, marched from their old home in the Z C M I warehouse, to their new building on University Street.

Maeser, Karl G.PPIn 1894 Dr. Maeser was called to the position of second assistant to George Q. Cannon in the General Superintendency of the Church Sunday Schools.

Maeser, Karl G.PPKnown, honored, and loved by thousands, Dr. Karl G. Maeser died at his home in Salt Lake City on February 15, 1901.

Maeser, Karl G.PPBryant S. Hinckley said of him: "He found himself and did his work, and, through his consecration to his great profession, forever enshrined himself in the hearts of his students."
