Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

George Manwaring

The First Vision of the Prophet Joseph Smith "is the greatest vision of which we have any record in literature," wrote George D. Pyper, "for on no other occasion, so far as we know, did both the Father and the Son appear at one time to any other man." (L D S Hymns by George D. Pyper.)

On many occasions since the organization of the Church, great and learned men have spoken and written profoundly about the First Vision, but it remained for a young convert from England, George Manwaring, to be the first to write a song about the marvelous experience which came to the youthful Prophet in the spring of 1820.

George Manwaring's song is found in all of our song books under the title of "Joseph Smith's First Prayer." Here is the opening verse:

"Oh how lovely was the morning,

Radiant beamed the sun above,

Bees were humming, sweet birds singing,

Music ringing through the grove,

When within the shady woodland,

Joseph sought the God of love."

More than any other poet in the Church, George Manwaring caught the inspiration of the First Vision, and expressed it in verse.

This gifted young man was born in Sandback, Cheshire, England, on March 19, 1854. When he was seventeen years of age, he came to Utah with his parents and settled in Salt Lake City. In the Fourteenth Ward he joined the choir, and here he met Electa Stevenson, to whom he was married on October 26, 1874.

He held various positions in the city, such as window dresser at the ZCMI, bookkeeper at Teasdale's Dry Goods Store, and salesman for Calder's Music Company. In the music store he learned to play the organ, and was often found playing his own accompaniment to the songs he had composed.

During the first days of July, 1889, George Manwaring fell ill of a fever; pneumonia followed and he died on July 7, at the age of thirty-five.

This gifted genius wrote many of the songs we sing today: "Sing We Now at Parting," "Children Gladly Join and Sing," "Welcome Happy Sunday, Day of Days the Best," "Lord, We Ask Thee, Ere We Part," "'Tis Sweet to Sing the Matchless Love,' and "Sweet Sabbath Day."

But the song that will live the longest, we think, is "Joseph Smith's First Prayer." "George Manwaring's simple lines versify three of the greatest truths of the Mormon faith," wrote George D. Pyper, "first, the power and efficacy of prayer, second, the reality of the power of evil, and third, the revealing of the personality of God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ." (L D S Hymns by George D. Pyper.)

The music for this popular song was written by another Utah composer, Adam C. Smith. For many years Brother Smith led the choir in Manti. He died in that city on January 12, 1909.
