Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

James Henry Martineau

James Henry Martineau, a pioneer of Utah, Arizona, and the Mormon colonies in Mexico, lived a long and useful life. It would take many times as much space as we have here to relate his many interesting experiences.

James H. Martineau was born at Port Jackson, Montgomery County, New York, on March 13, 1828. He was of Huguenot descent, his ancestors having fled from France to America in the Seventeenth Century in order to gain religious freedom. John Martineau, the father of James H., was a successful engineer who accumulated a fortune in building bridges and waterworks, for large cities and railroads.

The first wife of John Martineau died about 1822, and in 1824 he married a girl seventeen years of age, Eliza Mears of Baltimore, Maryland. Four years later a son was born who was named James Henry.

The panic of 1837 swept away the father's fortune, and the boy was forced to make his own way at an early age. However, he took a philosophical view of the situation. "I was compelled at an early age to engage in the battle of life," he wrote, "and thus I became in a measure courageous, persevering, and independent."

James registered as a student at the Monroe Academy at Elbridge, New York, and worked his way through school by doing janitor work. In 1845, when he was 17, he "graduated" and at once went to work in a newspaper office at Auburn.

The following year, 1846, war broke out between the United States and Mexico. "I had an adventurous spirit," related James, "and I determined to enlist." As soon as he had enlisted and his mother learned of his action (his father having passed away), she went to the recruiting office and asked that his enlistment be canceled, as he was only eighteen years of age. The enlistment was promptly canceled. The boy was chagrined. He left home and went to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, where he again enlisted. In a few days he found himself on the way to Newport Barracks, Kentucky, with other troops. He was kept there during the war and acted as a drill sergeant and clerk.

At the close of the war, before he could return home, he received word that his mother had died. He was now alone in the world, and he determined on further adventure—he would go to the California gold mines. Accordingly he set out for St. Joseph, Missouri, where he arrived in the fall of 1849. He taught school there during the winter, and in the spring of 1850 joined a group of immigrants on their way to the Pacific Coast. In July he arrived in Salt Lake City, and now the course of his life was changed. He related, "During the journey I had been told the Mormons were guilty of every kind of wickedness, but on my arrival in Salt Lake City I found I had been so much deceived by these reports that I determined to remain in the valley during the winter, study the people for myself and go on in the spring to California."

He went to Farmington and secured a job from William Walker as a farm hand. The people were kind to him. His investigations of the Church and the Gospel were favorable and convincing, and, on January 8, 1851, he was baptized by William McBride, "on the Temple Block." One month later he was ordained a seventy by Jedediah M. Grant, and in March, 1851, he was on his way to a new town in southern Utah, named Parowan, where he had been advised to locate. He was now twenty-three years of age.

From the time of his arrival in Parowan, James H. Martineau took his religion seriously; he became a thorough Latter-day Saint. He entered into every phase of the life of the community. He became a member of the Iron County Militia and was named as the first clerk of the county. He also served as city councilor and alderman, and as ward clerk. But the most important of all, eight months after his arrival in Parowan, and he was married to Susan Ellen Johnson, the fifteen-year-old daughter of Joel H. Johnson. "We began life with very little of this world's goods," he wrote in his history. Susan Ellen proved to be an ideal companion for James H. Martineau. They were to have sixty-seven years of married life together.

James H. Martineau took an active part in community affairs at Parowan. As the town was the southernmost settlement in Utah, there was constant danger from Chief Walker and his band of about 400 Ute Indians who roamed that country. The settlers had to be constantly on the alert with an organized militia, in which James H. Martineau acted as sergeant major. He held other public offices; in the fall of the year of his arrival he was chosen city recorder. The next year he was selected to be a counselor to Tarlton Lewis, first bishop of Parowan.

When the Walker War broke out in 1853, President Brigham Young requested the people of Parowan to build a fort, "the outside wall to be twelve feet high and six feet thick." James H. Martineau worked on this wall "all summer" without compensation.

In April, 1854, he and a few others organized the Parowan Dramatic Association, which presented plays in the isolated community. James H. painted the scenery. He also purchased a homemade bass violin, which he learned to play. Because he was a good singer, he became the leader of the choir.

At an election held in Parowan in March, 1855, James H. Martineau was chosen as a member of the city council.

In order to supplement his small farming operations, he learned, either from books or from someone in Parowan, the art of surveying. This trade he followed during the balance of his active life. "In 1859 I surveyed Parowan city," he wrote, "it having previously continued in fort form. I also surveyed the town of Paragoonah, and made additional surveys at Cedar City."

In 1859 some Ute Indians came to James H. Martineau's door in Parowan with a small child, a girl, they had stolen from a tribe located on the Colorado River. They wanted to trade her for a rifle and said they would kill her if James H. did not make the trade. Fearing they would carry out their threats, he gave them his only rifle and took the child. He named her Cora Colorado and kept her in his household until she grew to womanhood.

Many settlers moved to Cache Valley in 1859 and 1860, and a surveyor was urgently needed in that section of the territory to lay out new towns. While James H. Martineau was on a visit to Salt Lake City, President Brigham Young advised him to move to Logan and to use his knowledge as a surveyor to assist the people. He did as the President advised and settled in Logan in July, 1860. Within the next few years, he tells us in his history, he surveyed the towns of Providence, Millville, Hyrum, Paradise, Wellsville, Mendon, Newton, Clarkston, Richmond, Smithfield, Hyde Park, and Benson, in Utah, and Weston, Oxford, Franklin, Blackfoot, and Idaho Falls in Idaho. In Logan he also served as city recorder and as county clerk and county surveyor for Cache county.

In 1868, President Young asked him to assist Jesse W. Fox in locating the Union Pacific Railroad through Echo Canyon, and the following year he assisted the same man in locating the railroad from Ogden to Salt Lake City. In 1871-72 he became chief engineer for the Utah Northern Railroad from Ogden to Franklin, Idaho.

As Mormon settlers were moving to Arizona in the late 1870s and early 1880s, a surveyor was needed in that territory, and Apostle Moses Thatcher of Logan asked James H. Martineau to accompany him on a visit to the Latter-day Saint settlements, in November, 1882. They returned early in 1883, and the following year James H. moved to Pima, Arizona, where he became second counselor to Christopher Layton in the presidency of the St. Joseph Stake. During the next few years he surveyed St. David, Pima, Curtis, Graham, Fort Thomas, Thatcher, Solomonville, and Duncan, "with their fields and canals."

In 1888 he moved to Colonia Juarez in Mexico, and there he resumed his work of surveying. "I surveyed the town plats of Chuichupa, Dublan, and Colonia Juarez land purchases," he wrote.

James H. Martineau returned to Logan, Utah, in 1908 and retired from his lifetime of strenuous activities. He was ordained a patriarch in November of that year by Apostle Marriner W. Merrill. The balance of his life was spent in doing temple work and in giving blessings to the Saints. The good man lived until he was ninety-three years of age and died in Salt Lake City on June 24, 1921.
