Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Peter Maughan

Peter Maughan was a native of England, a convert to the Church in 1838, emigrant to Nauvoo in 1841, pioneer of Utah in 1850, leader of first settlers to Cache Valley in 1856, founder of Wellsville and president of the Cache Valley settlements until his death in 1871.

Peter Maughan was born at Brekenridge, Cumberland County. England, on May 7, 1811. He was the son of William and Martha Walton Maughan. When he was fourteen years of age, Peter Maughan was employed as a miner in the lead mines at Alston. In the spring of 1829, when he was eighteen years of age, he was married to Ruth Harrison.

In 1838 Peter Maughan became a member of the Church. He was baptized by Isaac Russel, one of the first missionaries to serve in England. Early in 1841, Ruth Harrison Maughan died, leaving her husband with six children.

Being encouraged by President Brigham Young, who was serving as a missionary in England, Peter Maughan decided to immigrate to America and take his children with him. The family sailed from Liverpool on April 21, 1841, and arrived in New York one month later. Peter Maughan made a stop of two months in Kirtland, and then traveled on to Nauvoo. In the fall of 1841 he was married to Mary Ann Davis.

While living in Nauvoo he was engaged in working on the temple as a stonemason. In 1844, at the request of the Prophet Joseph Smith, he opened a coal mine on Rock River. In the exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo in 1846, Peter Maughan went to Galena, Illinois, and remained until 1850, in order to obtain means to cross the plains to Utah. With his family he arrived in Salt Lake City in September, 1850, and shortly thereafter located in Tooele Valley.

When Tooele County was organized in April, 1851, Peter Maughan was appointed county assessor, county clerk, and county commissioner. He also represented the county in the Territorial Legislature.

In July, 1856, President Brigham Young sent Peter Maughan to explore Cache Valley and select a suitable site for a settlement. A number of men joined him in this expedition, namely, Zial Riggs, George W. Bryan, William Maughan, J. Tate, and M. Morgan. They located the present site of Wellsville and in September, Peter Maughan and family, with several settlers, returned there and built homes.

Peter Maughan was named as probate judge of Cache County in January, 1857; he was also elected to the Territorial Legislature. In the fall of 1859 he was appointed by President Brigham Young as "presiding bishop" and president of the Saints in Cache Valley. He served in this capacity until his death at Logan, on the 24th of April, 1871.

At the time of his death the Deseret News said of him editorially:

"It can be truly said of him that another hero in the cause of God has gone to a higher sphere . . . He belonged to that class of large-hearted men who, the more intimately they are known, the better they are liked . . . He was universally known for his unswerving honesty, integrity and justice."
