Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Marriner Wood Merrill

Marriner Wood Merrill was a native of Canada, a convert to the Church, a pioneer of Utah, early settler in Cache Valley, bishop of Richmond, president of Cache Stake, president of the Logan Temple, and a member of the Council of the Twelve.

Marriner W. Merrill was born in Sackville, New Brunswick, Canada, on September 25, 1832. He was the son of Nathan and Sarah Reunolds Merrill, the fourth in a family of thirteen children.

When he was twenty years of age, Marriner W. Merrill heard the Gospel from missionaries who visited his home, and shortly thereafter was baptized. In the spring of 1853 he started on the long journey to Utah. He traveled by train and boat to Keokuk, Iowa, and thence by ox team and wagon to Salt Lake City, where he arrived on September 11, 1853.

Shortly after his arrival in Utah, Marriner W. Merrill was married to Sarah Ann Atkinson; she was with the company in which he had crossed the plains.

In 1854 Marriner and his wife established a home in Bountiful where he was engaged in getting out logs and making shingles. He also secured thirty acres of land and followed farming until 1860, when he sold his property in Bountiful and moved to Cache Valley, locating at Richmond.

Several families settled at Richmond, and on July 21, 1861, Marriner W. Merrill was named as bishop. In June, 1864, Bishop Merrill was named as postmaster of Richmond.

When the Utah-Northern Railroad began building into Cache Valley in 1872-73, Marriner W. Merrill undertook to do considerable of the grading. In 1874 he was made superintendent of the railroad. When the railroad was extended northward to Butte, he became superintendent of construction.

Always civic minded and interested in the affairs of government, he was elected county commissioner in Cache County in 1872. Two years later he was elected to the Territorial Legislature where he served for six years.

At a quarterly conference held at Logan on May 4, 1879, Marriner W. Merrill was chosen as first counselor to William B. Preston, the president of the stake.

The building of the Logan Temple was begun in May, 1877, and the beautiful structure was completed and dedicated in May, 1884. The First Presidency then selected Marriner W. Merrill to be the president of the temple. Five years later, at the October Conference in 1889, President Merrill was chosen to be a member of the Council of the Twelve. In 1899 he was named president of Cache Stake.

Marriner W. Merrill was a friend of education. He served as trustee of both the Brigham Young College and the Agricultural College at Logan. His sons and daughters were given the opportunity to have a college education.

Marriner W. Merrill died at Richmond on February 6, 1906. His funeral was held in the Richmond Tabernacle which was then nearing completion. He was praised and honored by the speakers as being one of the great men of the Church.
