Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

McCune, Elizabeth C.PPElizabeth Claridge McCune

McCune, Elizabeth C.PPElizabeth Ann Claridge McCune was characterized by President Charles W. Penrose as "one of the great women of the Church in the latter days."

McCune, Elizabeth C.PPMrs. McCune was born in Hemel Hempstead, England, on February 19, 1852. She was the daughter of Samuel and Charlotte Joy Claridge.

McCune, Elizabeth C.PPThe parents of Elizabeth joined the Church the same year that she was born, and the following year, 1853, they immigrated to Utah and established a home at Nephi. There Elizabeth Claridge grew to womanhood.

McCune, Elizabeth C.PPIn 1867, her father, Samuel Claridge, was called by President Brigham Young to settle "on the Muddy" in Nevada. Elizabeth, fifteen years of age, went with him, and endured the hardships of pioneer life in that frontier settlement. She helped her father make adobes to build a new home.

McCune, Elizabeth C.PPIn 1871 Elizabeth returned to Nephi, and the following year, on July 1, 1872, she was married to her childhood sweetheart, Alfred William McCune. She was twenty years of age at the time.

McCune, Elizabeth C.PPAlfred and Elizabeth McCune began life inauspiciously, on a farm near Nephi, but he was a man of genius and was destined to become one of the wealthiest men in the West. He took a contract to build a portion of the Southern Railroad; he traveled to Montana and engaged in the timber and mining business, which yielded him several million dollars; his final great achievement was to develop an immense copper mine in Peru.

McCune, Elizabeth C.PPWhile Mr. McCune looked after his vast business enterprises, his wife remained in Salt Lake City and reared her family. In 1888, she was chosen a counselor in the Seventeenth Ward Y L M I A; in 1893 she was selected as a temple worker in the Salt Lake Temple; in 1896 she spent several months in Europe gathering genealogy; in 1898 she was made a member of the General Board of the Y L M I A; in 1904 she was called to be a member of the Genealogical Society. Together with Mrs. Susa Young Gates, she visited libraries in the eastern cities of the nation and in Great Britain, Germany, and Switzerland, to study their methods of record keeping.

McCune, Elizabeth C.PPMrs. McCune was appointed a member of the General Board of the Relief Society in 1911. In this capacity it is said that, "She traveled and preached the Gospel, bore her unfailing testimony, and cheered the Saints, in every stake in the Church, from Canada to Mexico, and in several of the missions."

McCune, Elizabeth C.PPIn the early 1900s Mr. and Mrs. McCune erected on North Main Street the most beautiful and costly home ever built in Salt Lake City. In 1920, upon their moving to Los Angeles, this home was presented to the Church and has since housed the L D S School of Music and Art.

McCune, Elizabeth C.PPMrs. McCune died in Salt Lake City on August 1, 1924. At her funeral held in the Assembly Hall President Penrose said: "I honor Sister McCune for her good life, for her faith in God and Jesus Christ, for her activities to show her faith by her works . . . and we honor her husband and other members of the family for the part they took and the influence they yielded." Mrs. McCune was laid to rest in the family plot at Nephi.
