Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Alexander McRae

Alexander McRae was a convert to the Church, a defender of the Saints in Missouri, a fellow prisoner with the Prophet Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail, a pioneer of Utah and bishop of the Eleventh Ward in Salt Lake City.

Alexander McRae was born in Anson County, North Carolina, on September 7, 1807. In his youth he learned the trade of tailor. In March, 1829, when he was twenty-one years of age, he enlisted in the United States Army and served five years.

After his discharge from the Army, he moved to Kentucky, and, at Newcastle, Henry County, he was married to Eunice Fitzgerald on October 2, 1834. The same year he moved to Ripley County, Indiana, and established himself on a farm. There he was visited by elders of the Church, and in June, 1837, he and his wife were baptized. From that time on he was actively identified with the Latter-day Saints in all their wanderings.

Alexander McRae moved to Far West in the fall of 1837 and at once became active in defense of the members of the Church against their persecutors in Missouri. When the militia attacked Far West in October, 1838, Alexander McRae was taken prisoner with the Prophet Joseph Smith, Joseph's brother, Hyrum, and other leaders. They were held in Liberty Jail at Liberty, Missouri, from November 30, 1838, to April 6, 1839.

Of his experiences while in Liberty Jail, Alexander McRae wrote in 1854:

"Among our friends who visited us were Presidents Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball—the latter several times; George A. Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve; Don C. Smith, brother of Joseph, came several times and brought some of our families to see us; Benjamin Covey, bishop of the Twelfth Ward of this city, brought each of us a new pair of boots and made us a present of them; Orrin P. Rockwell brought us refreshments many times and Jane Bleven and her daughter brought us cakes and pies, etc., and handed them in through the window. These things helped us much as our food was very coarse and so filthy we could not eat it until we were driven to it by hunger."

The prisoners escaped from their persecutors in Missouri in April, 1839, and made their way to Quincy, Illinois, where they found their families. Alexander McRae then established a home in Nauvoo, until the Saints were driven from that city in 1846. In the fall of 1846 he was with the exiles at Winter Quarters, on the Missouri River. Two years later he moved to Kanesville, Iowa, and shortly afterwards was elected sheriff of Pottawattamie County.

In 1852 Alexander McRae joined a group of Saints in the journey to Salt Lake Valley. On his arrival he built a home on the corner of Sixth East and Second South Streets where he continued to reside during the balance of his life, except for a period of two years, 1869-70, when he served as a missionary in the Southern States.

Alexander McRae was chosen bishop of the Eleventh Ward, in Salt Lake City, on January 19, 1857. He held this position with honor for thirty-four years, until his death on June 20, 1891.
