Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Isaac Morley

Isaac Morley was a convert to the Church in 1830, counselor to Bishop Edward Partridge in 1831, a patriarch in 1837, a resident of Nauvoo, pioneer of Utah in 1848, and leader of the first settlers to Manti, Sanpete County, in 1849.

Isaac Morley was born in Montague, Hampshire County, Massachusetts, on March 11, 1786. He was the son of Thomas and Edetha Morley. When he was a young man, Isaac moved to Ohio and acquired a homestead. In 1812 he returned to Massachusetts and was married to Lucy Gunn.

When Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt and other missionaries journeyed westward from New York in the fall of 1830, they passed through northern Ohio. In Kirtland and vicinity they baptized several hundred converts; among them was Isaac Morley. Isaac at once became active in the Church. On June 3, 1831, he was ordained a high priest and at the same time was set apart as first counselor to Bishop Edward Partridge. In the fall of 1831 he was called by revelation to travel to Missouri, "preaching the Gospel by the way." Later he made his home in Missouri and was among those who were expelled from Jackson County in 1833.

In 1835 Isaac Morley accompanied Bishop Partridge on a mission to the Eastern States. On their return to Kirtland, the Prophet received a revelation in which it is stated: "Behold I am well pleased with my servant Isaac Morley and my servant Edward Partridge, because of the integrity of their hearts in laboring in my vineyard, for the salvation of the souls of men."

Isaac Morley attended the dedication of the Kirtland Temple in 1836. He then returned to Missouri, and, at Far West, in November, was ordained a patriarch by President Joseph Smith.

Isaac Morley was with the Saints when they were driven from Missouri in 1839. He settled in Hancock County, Illinois. There again he suffered persecutions. His home and out-buildings were burned by a mob in the fall of 1845. In 1846 he joined in the exodus of the Saints to the West. At Winter Quarters, on the Missouri River, on January 3, 1848, his wife, Lucy, died.

Patriarch Morley made the long journey to Salt Lake Valley in the summer of 1848. He remained in Salt Lake City about one year and then was asked by President Brigham Young to lead a colony to Sanpete Valley and make a settlement. The group selected numbered about 220 persons. They arrived at the present site of Manti on November 22, 1849. Snow fell in such quantities during the first few weeks that the settlers decided to build dugouts in the hillside. There they spent the first winter. In the spring many of the settlers were discouraged. Isaac Morley encouraged them to remain and build a city.

Patriarch Morley spent the balance of his life as a resident of Sanpete Valley. He died at Fairview on June 24, 1865. In the history of the Church he has left an immortal name, for the good he accomplished and the service he performed.
