Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

John Riggs Murdock

The life of John Riggs Murdock reads like a romance. His parents, John and Julia C. Murdock, were living in Orange township, Cuyahoga County, Ohio, when John R. was born, on September 13, 1826. In the fall of 1830, when he was four years of age, his parents were converted to the Church by Parley P. Pratt, Oliver Cowdery, and other missionaries who had come into the neighborhood.

The mother of John R. Murdock died in May, 1831, after having given birth to twins, a boy and a girl, who were named Joseph and Julia. As Emma Smith, the wife of the Prophet Joseph, had recently lost twins of her own, John Murdock presented his motherless babies to her and asked her to rear them. Emma took them when they were nine days old.

The boy, John R., now five years of age, found a home in the family of Caleb Baldwin, a member of the Church. The following year Caleb Baldwin decided to move to Independence, Missouri, one thousand miles westward, and he took little John R. with him. Arriving in Independence, Morris Phelps and his wife, who had no children, asked Caleb Baldwin if they might have little John R. Murdock, and the boy, now six years of age, was given to them.

In the fall of 1833, one year later, the Saints were driven out of Jackson County, and John R. and his foster parents were forced to flee to a neighboring county. It was here in Clay County that he was baptized by his own father, who was also a refugee with the Saints, on the day following his eighth birthday, September 14, 1834.

Four years of his childhood were now spent in Clay County, Missouri. Then in 1838, the Morris Phelps family moved to Far West, Caldwell County, where the Saints were gathering. In the fall of that year furious persecution broke out against the Saints, and they were all ordered by Governor Boggs to leave the State of Missouri. Morris Phelps was seized by the mob and lodged in jail. John R. was then taken into the family of his father, who had married again, and he assisted his father in driving a herd of cattle eastward to Illinois.

A new gathering place for the Latter-day Saints was now established at Commerce, Illinois, (soon to be named Nauvoo) and here John R. Murdock, now thirteen years of age, went to work for a man named Cornelius P. Lott, who was managing President Joseph Smith's eighty-acre farm, a few miles north of Nauvoo. Thus the boy had an opportunity to become intimately acquainted with the Prophet, who frequently visited his farm. About this great man, John R. Murdock later wrote:

"He was one of the noblest and most admirable men that one could ever meet, both for his physical and mental attractions. Anyone in his company would feel that he was with his superior, yet he was so kind and so lovable. He often brought his family to the farm, for his family and Father Lott were on terms of great intimacy. We all passionately loved and revered the Prophet.

"He used to relate to us many instances of his life. In common labor, mowing, chopping, cradling, and so forth, he was an expert. He scarcely ever met his equal as an athlete, and he took great delight in all healthful sports." (Life of John R. Murdock, pp. 54-55.)

When the Saints moved westward, in 1846, after the death of the Prophet, John R. Murdock, now nineteen years of age, remained in the family of Cornelius P. Lott, as he had now acquired a sweetheart in the person of Miss Almira Lott, Father Lott's sixteen-year-old daughter.

Arriving at the Missouri River the Saints were asked to furnish 500 men to enlist in the army of the United States for service in the war with Mexico. Among those who enlisted was John R. Murdock. With the Mormon Battalion he made the weary march on foot to Santa Fe, thence to San Diego, and on to Los Angeles, a distance of 2,000 miles, where, after one year's service, he was mustered out on July 16, 1847.

With other members of the Battalion he now set out to find the Saints in Salt Lake Valley. The journey was made by way of Sacramento and the Humboldt Valley. John R. arrived safely in the Salt Lake Valley in October, 1847, and found his father and foster mother living in the Old Fort.

One year later, a large group of immigrants came into Salt Lake City, under the leadership of the First Presidency. Among them were Father Lott and his family. John R. Murdock and Almira Lott were married on November 12, 1849. Almira was nineteen years of age and John R. was twenty-three.

In the spring of 1851 John R. Murdock moved to Lehi, where he acquired forty acres of land and established a home. Here he soon became prominent, serving as town marshal, alderman, and for a time as mayor.

Always public spirited and anxious to assist anyone in distress, he volunteered, in the late fall of 1856, to go to the rescue of the stranded handcart pioneers. These poor helpless people had been overtaken in a snowstorm in Wyoming, and John R. Murdock and others made their way to the emigrants through three feet of snow and brought them safely to Salt Lake City.

The following year, 1857, John R. received a call from President Brigham Young to assist in carrying the mail from Salt Lake City to Independence, Missouri. The journey occupied two months' time, and on one occasion John R. and his companions almost perished in a terrible blizzard.

Arriving at his home in Lehi, President Young again sent for John R. and requested him to carry the mail through to the river that season. With fast horses and mules he made the second trip in fifteen days, averageing eighty miles a day, which set a record that was not equaled until the mail was carried by the Pony Express some years later.

President Brigham Young had now learned the worth of this distinguished young frontiersman, who had proved to be so resourceful and dependable. He sent for him in the spring of 1861 and asked him to take charge of a train of fifty wagons which were being sent to the Missouri River to bring back European emigrants. This was a laborious journey of 2,000 miles, to and from the river, and each driver was to give his time and pay his own expenses. John R. Murdock made the trip successfully. In fact he was so successful that President Young asked him to go again in 1862, 1863, and 1864. Thus he spent four complete summers transporting immigrants to Utah, and paying his own way. This was indeed an unselfish labor.

In the fall of 1864, on his return from his fourth trip, President Young asked John R. Murdock to move to Beaver City, in southern Utah, and become the bishop of that settlement. This was the most difficult assignment of any he had received as he was now well established in Lehi and owned considerable property. But he did not hesitate in accepting the new call. He went to Lehi, sold his property, and in the summer of 1865, with his family, his cattle, sheep, horses, and his portable possessions, moved to Beaver, where he established a permanent home. Of this move he relates:

"I bought a farm and some town lots and built houses for my family to live in. I also immediately set about building schoolhouses, a meetinghouse, and other public buildings. I was very zealous in this labor and carried a great part of the responsibility myself."

In business he was eminently successful. He sent to the Missouri River and purchased a saw mill "which was the first saw mill brought to Beaver or to southern Utah." He organized a co-operative woolen factory which operated for years under his direction. He became interested in the valuable mines which were opened west of Beaver; his flocks and herds increased until they numbered into the thounsands. John R. Murdock, by his diligence and foresight, became a wealthy man. But throughout his life his love for his religion was his principal interest.

In 1877, when the Beaver Stake was organized, John R. Murdock was chosen as the first president. This gave him new responsibilities which he carried out in a most satisfactory manner.

When the War Department abandoned Fort Cameron at Beaver, John R. and his son-in-law, Philo T. Farnsworth, purchased the property and presented a considerable portion of it, with buildings, to the Church. Here the Murdock Academy was established.

John R. Murdock, the boy who lost his mother when he was five years of age and was set adrift in the world, lived a great and useful life. Full of years and accomplishments, he died on November 12, 1913, at the age of eighty-seven, at the home of his daughter, Mrs. William DeWolf, at Milford, Utah.

Francis M. Lyman said of him: "The most remarkable thing about John R. Murdock was his unyielding and undying faith in the prophetic mission of Joseph Smith. . . . As a stake president he always gave satisfaction. . . . He was possessed of most excellent business qualifications and his accumulation of wealth was brought about in an honorable manner."
