Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Alexander Neibaur

Alexader Neibaur, one of the few Jews who have joined the Church, a teacher of Hebrew and German to the Prophet Joseph Smith and author of the well-known hymn, "Come Thou Glorious Day of Promise," was born in Ehrenbreitstein, Germany, on January 8, 1808.

The parents of Alexander Neibaur planned to have him educated as a Jewish rabbi, but the boy had other ideas, and at the age of seventeen he registered at the University of Berlin as a student of dentistry. Three years later he was graduated and looked around for a favorable place to begin his practice. He finally opened an office in the city of Preston, England. It was in Preston in 1834 that he met and married an English girl, Ellen Breakel.

Three years later, in 1837, the first LDS missionaries came to Preston, under the leadership of Heber C. Kimball. Alexander Neibaur heard and believed their message. He was baptized on April 9, 1838. It is said that he was "the first of his race to accept the Gospel."

Early in 1841 Alexander Neibaur emigrated from England to Nauvoo. On his arrival he formed a close relationship with the Prophet Joseph Smith and later became an instructor to the Prophet in the German and Hebrew languages. In the History of the Church, under date of June 18, 1844, there is the following: "Joseph the Prophet stayed at home to receite German with Brother Neibaur."

After the death of the Prophet, Alexander Neibaur joined the Saints in their exodus to the West. On his arrival in Salt Lake City he built an adobe home on the corner of Second South and Second East Streets. In order to make a living he practiced the profession of dentistry, and for a number of years he was the only dentist in Salt Lake Valley. In the first issue of The Deseret News, published on June 15, 1850, there is a small advertisement which reads: "A. Neibaur, Surgeon Dentist, Third Street east and Second south of the Council House, will attend to all branches of his profession."

Later he added to his income by the manufacture and sale of "phosphorous matches." He made good matches at a time when such things were the luxuries of the rich.

Alexander Neibaur died in Salt Lake City on December 15, 1883, at the age of seventy-five. He left a large posterity to do him honor.

At the time of his death The Deseret News said of him:

"He lived and died a faithful disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ, enduring all he was ever called to pass through, with an heroic, determined, uncomplaining spirit, and after a long lease of life, which he filled up with deeds of worth and usefulness, he has gone to await a glorious resurrection in the Paradise of God."

Dr. Hugh Nibley, professor of history and languages at the Brigham Young University and Reed Nibley, professor of music at the University of Utah, are great-grandsons of Alexander Neibaur.
