Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Nibley, Charles W.PPCharles Wilson Nibley

Nibley, Charles W.PPCharles Wilson Nibley was a native of Scotland, pioneer of Utah in 1860, missionary to the Eastern States in 1869, missionary to England in 1877, superintendent of Cache Stake Sunday Schools in 1800, first counselor in the Union Stake presidency in 1901, Presiding Bishop of the Church in 1907, and counselor to President Heber J. Grant in the First Presidency in 1925.

Nibley, Charles W.PPCharles W. Nibley was born at Hunterfield, Scotland, on February 5, 1849. He was the son of James and Jean Nibley, who had joined the Church in 1844.

Nibley, Charles W.PPJames Nibley was a coal miner, who worked for meager wages. After he and his wife were baptized, they saved for eleven years to accumulate sufficient money to cross the ocean to America. In 1855 they made the voyage in the steerage of a sailing vessel, and arrived at Providence, Rhode Island. As their money was gone, they remained in Rhode Island five more years and saved enough to continue the journey to Utah. They arrived in Salt Lake City in September, 1860, and shortly thereafter located in Wellsville, Cache County, where they knew one family (the Stoddard family) from their native town of Hunterfield.

Nibley, Charles W.PPAt Wellsville the boy, Charles W., herded sheep and worked in the village store. In 1867 he walked through the canyon to Brigham City and obtained employment in a store owned by a man named Rosenbaum. It was at Brigham City that he met and married Rebecca Neibaur, daughter of Alexander Neibaur, Utah's pioneer dentist. The date of their marriage was March 30, 1869.

Nibley, Charles W.PPIn the fall of 1869, Charles W. Nibley, twenty years of age, was called on a short term mission to the Eastern States. When he returned to Utah in 1870, he obtained a position as passenger and freight agent for the Utah Northern Railroad, a narrowgauge, then building into Cache Valley. While thus employed he moved to Logan in 1873, and established a home. In May, 1877, he was called to perform a mission to Great Britain. He labored two years in Liverpool as secretary of the European Mission.

Nibley, Charles W.PPReturning to Logan in 1879, he became the manager of the U. O. Manufacturing and Building Co. The following year he was chosen as superintendent of Cache Stake Sunday Schools.

Nibley, Charles W.PPIn 1889 Charles W. Nibley joined David Eccles of Ogden in a business enterprise in Oregon. They and others organized the Oregon Lumber Company, with headquarters at Baker City. The business prospered, and they launched into other enterprises known as the Sumpter Valley Railroad and the LaGrande Sugar Company. In 1901 the Union Stake was organized at LaGrande with Franklin S. Bramwell as president and Charles W. Nibley as first counselor.

Nibley, Charles W.PPIn the summer of 1906 Charles W. Nibley accompanied his lifelong friend, President Joseph F. Smith, on a tour of the European Missions. At Berne, Switzerland, President Smith predicted that temples would be built in that land.

Nibley, Charles W.PPIn December, 1907, Charles W. Nibley was called to Salt Lake City and informed by President Smith that he had been chosen to be the Presiding Bishop of the Church.

Nibley, Charles W.PPShortly thereafter he moved to Salt Lake City and purchased a home on North Temple Street. Two years later the old Tithing Office, which had housed the Presiding Bishopric since pioneer days, was torn down, and the new Bishop's Building, at 40 North Main Street, was erected. Bishop Nibley also began a change in the tithing system, from a commodity basis, to a cash basis. This change was eventually effected.

Nibley, Charles W.PPIn 1909 Bishop Nibley accompanied President Joseph F. Smith on a trip to the Hawaiian Islands. The next year they traveled together to Europe, and made a tour of the European Missions.

Nibley, Charles W.PPIn 1911 Bishop Nibley devoted his time largely to the building of the Hotel Utah. He was chairman of the building committee.

Nibley, Charles W.PPIn the summer of 1913 he went with President Smith to Cardston, Canada, where a site for a temple was selected.

Nibley, Charles W.PPIn 1914 Bishop Nibley purchased from the American Sugar Refining Company a controlling interest in the Utah-Idaho Sugar Company.

Nibley, Charles W.PPThe following year Bishop Nibley accompanied President Smith and Senator Reed Smoot on a trip to the Hawaiian Islands. On that visit, in June, 1915, a site for a temple at Laie was selected.

Nibley, Charles W.PPWith the advent of World War I, Charles W. Nibley was named state chairman for the Red Cross organization. In 1918 he was made a member of the War Industries Board.

Nibley, Charles W.PPPresident Joseph F. Smith died at Salt Lake City on November 19, 1918. Of this great man Bishop Nibley said:

Nibley, Charles W.PP"His death brought the greatest sorrow into my life, for to me he was my ideal. If I could only be assured that I would be worthy to associate with him in the hereafter, I would be happy indeed."

Nibley, Charles W.PPOn May 20, 1922, Bishop Nibley presented to Salt Lake City, a beautiful golf course, consisting of fifty-six acres of valuable land, which today is known as Nibley Park. He stated on that occasion: "Truly it is more blessed to give than to receive, especially if the gift is from the heart and intended to be of service to others."

Nibley, Charles W.PPCharles W. Nibley continued as Presiding Bishop of the Church until the death, on May 16, 1925, of President Charles W. Penrose. Shortly thereafter he was called by President Heber J. Grant to succeed President Penrose as a member of the First Presidency. He served faithfully in this capacity until his death on December 11, 1931. Had he lived two months longer he would have reached his eighty-third birthday.

Nibley, Charles W.PPAt his death Edward P. Kimball paid him this tribute: "Judged from any standard the life of Charles W. Nibley was a success. He was born in very humble circumstances and rose by his own efforts to power and influence. He was loved for his genuine worth and the nobility of his character."
