Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Charles William Penrose

When one inquires into the subject of the origin of our Mormon hymns, it is interesting to learn that many of our most popular songs have been written by converts to the Church from England. For example, that great, stirring song, "O Ye Mountains High," was written by a young Englishman, twenty-two years of age, who had been a member of the Church only four years, and who had never seen the mountains and the valleys of Utah—Charles W. Penrose.

Charles William Penrose was born in London, England, on February 4, 1832. He was the son of Richard and Matilda Sims Penrose. Charles was a precocious child; it is said that he could read the scriptures when he was only four years old. When he was eighteen a friend interested him in the Restored Gospel, and after due investigation he was baptized on May 14, 1850. He was the only member of his father's family to join the Church.

Due to his diligence Charles was ordained an elder the year after his baptism and was requested by the mission president to undertake a mission, "without purse or scrip," in the towns and cities of Essex. He responded to this call and labored with success, founding branches in Maldon, Danbury, Chelmsford, and Colchester.

He relates that he wrote the song, "O Ye Mountains High," in 1854 as he was walking along a dusty road in Essex.

"I had read about Zion and heard about the streets of Salt Lake City, with the clear streams of water on each side of the street; with shade trees and so on. I could see it in my mind's eye, and so I composed the song as I walked along the road. . . . When I got to a place called Mundon, in Essex, I held a cottage meeting, and in that meeting I sang it for the first time it was ever sung. Of course the words were adapted to a person who had never been to Zion then, but it was afterwards changed in a very slight respect or two, to fit people who had gathered with the Saints. It was inspirational and seemed to please President Brigham Young."

The song, "O Ye Mountains High," not only pleased President Brigham Young, but also it has pleased all the members of the Church now for more than a century.

Charles W. Penrose continued his missionary labors in England until 1861, when he immigrated to Utah with his wife and children. He settled in Farmington and built a small home and labored at farming in the summers and teaching school in the winters. In 1864, he moved to Logan, where a position was offered him to teach. He had no sooner established himself in this community than he was called to do missionary work again in England. His second mission in England continued for three years, and after his release he returned to Logan to become secretary and treasurer of the Logan branch of the Z C M I. He also was a member of the high council and was prominent in all Church activities.

In 1870, Charles W. Penrose was offered and accepted the editorship of the Ogden Junction, a semi-weekly newspaper published in Ogden. He now found a work for which he was admirably fitted and which remained the principal work of his life.

Charles W. Penrose resigned his position with the Ogden Juntion in June 1877, and, at the request of President Brigham Young, moved to Salt Lake City to become a member of the staff of The Deseret News. Three years later he was appointed "editor-in-chief" of the News, which position he held for many years. He was probably the most brilliant editorial writer that the Church has produced.

During his residence in Salt Lake City his activities were many and varied. He became known as an able speaker and was in demand in the wards and stakes. He served in the Territorial Legislature for several terms and was a member of the Constitutional Convention of 1882. In August of 1884 he was chosen as second counselor to Angus M. Cannon in the presidency of Salt Lake Stake.

The years 1882 to 1890, constitute a stormy period in the history of the Latter-day Saints in Utah, Idaho, and Arizona, and during that time Charles W. Penrose defended the people and their doctrines, both in writing and speaking, with all his splendid ability.

He was appointed an assistant to the Church Historian in 1895, and in this capacity he performed a notable work. He wrote many articles for eastern publications and also published a series of twelve gospel tracts under the title of "Rays of Living Light" of which hundreds of thousands of copies have since been distributed by the missionaries.

When Apostle Abram O. Woodruff died in 1904, Charles W. Penrose was selected to fill the vacancy in the Twelve. He was set apart in this high office on July 7, 1904, by President Joseph F. Smith. Elder Penrose was seventy-two years old at the time.

In 1906 he was called to preside over the European Mission, with headquarters in Liverpool, England. He spent four years in Europe and performed a notable work. He returned to Salt Lake City in 1910.

When President John Henry Smith, a member of the First Presidency, died in October, 1911, Charles W. Penrose was chosen in his place. He was seventy-nine years of age, but still in vigorous health. He served under President Joseph F. Smith for seven years, and then was chosen as second counselor to President Heber J. Grant.

Charles W. Penrose died in Salt Lake City on May 16, 1925, at the age of ninety-three. At his death The Improvement Era said of him editorially:

"In summing up the life of President Penrose, we may say that his chief characteristic was his determination to do right at all times and live according to the precepts of his religion. He was persistent, determined, ever at work in the line of his duty. To one who knew him well he said recently, 'Mormonism is as much a part of me as my arm, my leg or my heart'; and again, 'Do right because it is right and not because anyone tells you to do it.'"

Thus passed the author of the great, cheering song, "Oh Ye Mountains High."
