Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Orson Pratt

Among the men who journeyed eastward across the plains with George A. Smith in the summer of 1856, was Orson Pratt, forty-four years of age, a member of the Council of the Twelve, a missionary, a pioneer of Utah, who was on his way to Liverpool, England, to preside over the European Mission. This was to be the fourth time for him to labor as a missionary in Europe.

Orson Pratt was born at Hartford, New York, on September 19, 1811. His parents were farming people who worked hard to obtain a living for themselves and family. Orson was a quiet, studious, thoughtful boy who took advantage of every opportunity that was offered him to attend school. His parents were not members of any church, but he was naturally religious and found pleasure in reading the Bible. Also he was inclined to scientific studies, and at the age of nineteen he had qualified himself to some degree as a surveyor.

Then the course of his life was suddenly changed. His brother, Parley, who had been living on a homestead in Ohio, returned to his home in New York. On his arrival he announced that he had found and joined the true Church—the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—and he extended to them a copy of the Book of Mormon which he had recently obtained. In September, 1830, at Canaan, New York, Parley baptized his nineteen-year-old brother, Orson.

A few weeks after his baptism, Orson set out to find the Prophet of his chosen religion. He traveled 200 miles westward and located his youthful leader, Joseph Smith, at the home of Peter Whitmer in Seneca County. It was on this occasion that the Prophet received a revelation (Section 34, Doctrine and Covenants) calling Orson Pratt to the ministry. He was ordained an elder by the Prophet and went on a mission to eastern New York in the winter of 1830.

In the spring of 1831 Orson left his home in New York and traveled westward, on foot, about 250 miles, to Kirtland, Ohio, the gathering place of the Saints. He was accompanied on this journey by Samuel H. Smith, brother of the Prophet.

Orson performed missionary work in Ohio and adjacent states during the summer of 1831, and on February 3, 1832, at Kirtland, when he was only twenty-one years of age, he was ordained a high priest and sent on a mission to the Eastern States. His companion was Lyman E. Johnson. They remained in the East about one year, traveled almost 4,000 miles, held 207 meetings and baptized 104 persons. Orson was now a seasoned missionary.

The young men were home only about one month when the Prophet requested them to again resume their missionary labors in the Eastern States. On this second mission, which continued six months, they baptized fifty persons and held 125 meetings. They returned to Kirtland on September 28, 1833, and on November 27, were again on their way to the State of New York to visit a number of branches.

Orson returned to Kirtland in January 1834, in time to make preparations for the long march of Zion's Camp to Missouri. After traveling 2,000 miles and performing missionary work in Missouri, Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio, he arrived back in Kirtland on April 26, 1835, and on the same day "was ordained one of the Twelve Apostles, under the hands of David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery." Orson was now twenty-three years of age and his life's work was before him.

The record of the next few years is one of almost continuous missionary work. At Sacketts Harbor, New York, on June 18, 1835, he baptized Sarah M. Bates, who, one year later became his wife. During the winter of 1835-36 he remained in Kirtland and taught a grammar school. He also studied the Hebrew language, and continued his studies in mathematics, for which he had great fondness.

In 1838 Orson moved with his family to Quincy, Illinois; later he went to Far West, Missouri, and was with the Saints when they were driven out of that state. In the fall of 1839, he departed from Commerce with other members of the Twelve who had been called to fill a mission to Great Britain. Arriving in England in April, 1840, he was sent to Edinburgh, Scotland, and was among the first to introduce the Gospel among the Scottish people.

On his return to Nauvoo in 1841, he became a member of the City Council; he also taught school and specialized in mathematics, the rudiments of which he had mastered without the aid of a teacher.

In the spring of 1843, he journeyed to Washington, D. C., and presented a memorial to Congress asking for redress for the wrongs inflicted upon the Saints in Missouri. He was in the East doing missionary work when he learned of the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

When Nauvoo was evacuated by the Saints in the spring of 1846, Orson Pratt and his family were among the exiles who followed the leadership of Brigham Young to the West. He was also numbered among the pioneer band who made the historic journey to the Great Basin in 1847, and he and Erastus Snow were the first of the pioneers to enter Salt Lake Valley.

One week after the arrival of the Pioneers in Salt Lake Valley, Orson Pratt and Henry G. Sherwood began, on August 2, 1847, the work of surveying the streets and blocks of Salt Lake City. They had time to survey only the central, or what today is the business portion of the city, when they were forced to leave the work to others and depart for their temporary homes on the Missouri River. The return journey occupied two and a half months and they arrived at Winter Quarters on October 31, 1847.

In April, 1848, Orson Pratt was called to preside over the European Mission. Shortly thereafter he departed from Winter Quarters to fill this assignment, and three months later arrived at Liverpool, England. His presidency in Europe was eminently successful. During the two years he remained there the membership of the Church in that mission increased from 18,000 to 31,000. During the same period he chartered and fitted out twenty ships to carry Saints to America. He wrote fifteen pamphlets and published several hundred thousand of them in different languages. He edited The Millennial Star and increased the circulation from four thousand to twenty-three thousand. He also lectured to large audiences in the principal cities of England and Scotland.

Returning to his home in Salt Lake City in the summer of 1851, he taught school and also delivered twelve lectures in the Old Tabernacle on the subject of astronomy. These lectures were subsequently published in The Deseret News.

He also served during the winter as a member of the Territorial Legislature and was chosen as speaker of the House of Representatives.

In 1852 Orson Pratt was called on a mission to Washington, D. C., and while there he published a periodical known as The Seer, which became a valuable addition to Church literature.

His missionary labors were almost constant. He filled missions to Europe in 1853, 1856, and again in 1864.

In 1869 he traveled to New York City, where he issued an edition of the Book of Mormon in what was known as the Deseret Alphabet.

At the General Conference of the Church in April, 1874, Orson Pratt was sustained as Historian and General Church Recorder. He held this office until his death and performed outstanding work.

In the summer of 1878 Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith made a trip to the East in the interest of Church history. They visited Palmyra, New York; Kirtland, Ohio; and Independence, Missouri. At Richmond, Missouri, they met and had an extended interview with David Whitmer, the last surviving witness of the Book of Mormon. He bore a strong testimony to them of the divinity of the book and the validity of the great vision in which he had taken part.

Orson Pratt journeyed again to England in December, 1878. His object was to publish an edition of the Book of Mormon, which he had arranged in verses, with footnotes and references. He returned from this mission in 1879, having accomplished his task.

The long and useful life of this man was now drawing to a close. He suffered from diabetes, but with great determination continued his work as best he could. He frequently attended stake conferences and also served as a member of the Legislature. Ten days before he died he delivered a short sermon in the Tabernacle, where he spoke to a large congregation in a clear and forcible manner. His death occurred at his residence in Salt Lake City on October 3, 1881. He had passed his 70th birthday a few weeks previously.

Orson Pratt crossed the ocean sixteen times on missions for the Church. He was a prolfic writer. Among his published works are the following: Divine Authority; The Kingdom of God; Remarkable Visions; Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon; Remarks on Mormonism; The Great First Cause; The New Jerusalem; Absurdities of Immaterialism and eight tracts on the first principles of the Gospel. He also published a number of scientific works as follows: Cubic and Biquadratic Equations; Key to the Universe and an unpublished manuscript on Differential Calculus.

At his death The Deseret News said of him editorially:

"Orson Pratt was truly an Apostle of the Lord. Full of integrity, firm as a rock to his convictions, true to his brethren and to his God, earnest and zealous in defense of the truth, ever ready to bear testimony to the latter-day work, he had a mind stored with scripture, ancient and modern; he was an eloquent speaker, a powerful minister, a logical and convincing writer, an honest man and a great soul who reached out after eternal things, grasped them with the gift of inspiration and brought them down to the level and comprehension of the common mind. . . . He set but little store on the wealth of the world, but has laid up treasures in heaven which will make him eternally rich."
