Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Parley Parker Pratt

Parley Parker Pratt, convert to the Church during its first year, 1830, early missionary to the Lamanites, member of the first Council of the Twelve, first editor of The Millenial Star in England, pioneer of Utah in 1847, poet, author, able speaker, and finally martyr to the cause—this man was truly a Stalwart of Mormonism.

Parley P. Pratt was born on April 12, 1807, in Burlington, Otsego County, New York, the son of Jared and Charity Pratt. His youth was spent on his father's farm, and he had little opportunity to gain an education. When he was nineteen he left home and moved westward to Ohio, where he obtained a small tract of forest land and constructed a log house. He then returned to New York and on September 9, 1827, was married to the sweetheart of his youth, Thankful Halsey. She accompanied him on his return to his "wilderness" home.

In August, 1830, Parley P. Pratt and his wife decided to pay a visit to their parents in New York. At or near Rochester, Parley was given a copy of the Book of Mormon which had been published at Palmyra earlier in the year. He read the book with great interest and decided to seek out and interview the author. At Palmyra he met Hyrum Smith and sat up all night with him asking him questions about the new religion.

He then continued on to Waterloo, New York, and visited the Whitmer farm. Here he met Oliver Cowdery, and other members of the Church. On September 1, 1830, he was baptized in Seneca Lake by Oliver Cowdery, who also confirmed him and immediately ordained him an elder. Parley continued on to the home of his parents in Otsego County, where he formed the resolution to devote the remainder of his life to the preaching and teaching of the newly-revealed truths.

He taught the Gospel to his own family and baptized his nineteen-year-old brother, Orson, on September 19, 1830. He then returned to Palmyra, where he had the privilege of meeting the young Prophet Joseph Smith for the first time. Parley has given us an excellent description of the appearance of the Prophet:

"President Joseph Smith was in person tall and well built, strong and active; of a light complexion, light hair, blue eyes and of an expression peculiar to himself, on which the eye naturally rested with interest and was never weary of beholding. His countenance was mild, affable, beaming with intelligence and benevolence, mingled with a look of interest and an unconscious smile, or cheerfulness, and entirely free from all restraint or affectation of gravity; and there was something connected with the serene and steady penetrating glance of his eye, as if he would penetrate the deepest abyss of the human heart, gaze into eternity, penetrate the heavens and comprehend all worlds."

At the first meeting Parley attended, the Prophet invited him to speak. "I did so and afterward listened to a discourse from his own mouth, filled with intelligence and wisdom." (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, page 47.)

In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith at Fayette, New York, in October, 1830, Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson were appointed to accompany Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer on a missionary journey, "into the wilderness, among the Lamanites." This was the first missionary journey undertaken by any of the elders of the Church in the States and Territories west of New York.

Late in October the elders began their journey "on foot." About a month later they reached the vicinity of Kirtland, Ohio, near the place where Parley had formerly resided. Here they went from farm to farm, teaching and preaching the Gospel. They met with almost instant success. "In two or three weeks from the time of our arrival in the neighborhood," wrote Parley, "we had baptized 127 souls, and this number soon increased to 1,000." Among the prominent men who received the Gospel at this time were Sidney Rigdon, Isaac Morley, John Murdock, and Edward Partridge.

Branches of the Church were organized and officers were appointed to preside over them; then the missionaries continued their journey, in the cold and inclement winter season, until they arrived at Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, late in January, 1831.

After laboring several weeks among the Indian tribes on the frontier, Parley P. Pratt left his companions and journeyed eastward to report the success of the mission to President Joseph Smith. He found the Prophet at Kirtland, which had now been established as the headquarters of the Church, and was warmly welcomed by him.

During the spring and summer of 1831, the Prophet received a number of important revelations pertaining to the welfare of the Church. Parley P. Pratt was present when several revelations were given and described the manner in which they were dictated and recorded. He mentions particularly Section 50 in the Doctrine and Covenants.

"After we had joined in prayer in his (Joseph's) translating room, he dictated in our presence the following revelation (Section 50). Each sentence was uttered slowly and very distinctly, and with a pause between each, sufficiently long for it to be recorded by an ordinary writer in long hand. This was the manner in which all his written revelations were dictated and written.

"There was never any hesitation, reviewing, or reading back, in order to keep the run of the subject, neither did any of these communications undergo revisions, interlinings or corrections. As he dictated them, so they stood, so far as I have witnessed, and I was present to witness the dictation of several communications of several pages each." (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, page 65.)

During the summer and fall of 1831, Parley, accompanied by his brother, Orson, made a second missionary journey to Missouri, where they remained in the settlements of the Saints in Jackson County until the spring of 1832. In May Parley arrived back at the headquarters in Kirtland.

In the spring of 1834 Parley P. Pratt performed a mission through Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York, with the Prophet Joseph Smith as his companion.

"As we journeyed day after day, and generally lodged together," wrote Parley, "we had much sweet communion concerning the things of God and the mysteries of the Kingdom, and I received many admonitions and instructions which I shall never forget."

Parley returned to Kirtland the latter part of April and then, early in May, 1834, joined Zion's Camp in its march to Missouri and return.

When the first apostles were chosen in February, 1835, Parley P. Pratt was among the number. He was set apart to this high office by Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and President Joseph Smith. He was twenty-seven years of age at the time.

During the persecutions in Missouri in 1838, Parley was imprisoned in the town of Richmond with the Prophet and a number of the Church leaders. In his Autobiography, he relates a dramatic incident that occurred at that time.

"In one of those tedious nights we had lain as if in sleep until the hour of midnight had passed, and our ears and hearts had been pained while we had listened for hours to the obscene jests, the horrid oaths, the dreadful blasphemies and filthy language of our guards.

"I had listened until I had become so disgusted, shocked, horrified, and so filled with the spirit of injustice that I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and rebuking the guards; but had said nothing to Joseph or anyone else, although I lay next to him and knew he was awake. On a sudden he arose to his feet and spoke in a voice of thunder, or as a roaring lion, uttering as near as I can recollect the following words:

"'Silence, ye fiends of the infernal pit! In the name of Jesus Christ, I rebuke you, and command you to be still. I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die this instant!'

"He ceased to speak; he stood erect in terrible majesty; chained and without a weapon, calm, unruffled and dignified as an angel; he looked upon the quailing guards, whose weapons were lowered or dropped to the ground; whose knees smote together, and who, shrinking into a corner, or crouching at his feet begged his pardon, and remained quiet until a change of guards.

"I have seen ministers of justice, clothed in magisterial robes, and criminals arraigned before them while life was suspended on a breath in the courts of England; I have witnessed a Congress in solemn session to give laws to nations; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns; but dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri." (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, page 229.)

Parley P. Pratt escaped from his persecutors in Missouri, when he fled from Columbia Jail on July 4, 1839, while the people of the town were holding a patriotic celebration. He made his way to Illinois and established a home at Nauvoo. In September of the same year he departed for England on a special mission to which he and a number of the Twelve had been called. Shortly after his arrival, Parley was assigned the task of editing a monthly publication, The Millennial Star. The first number was issued on May 1, 1840. This worthy periodical continues to this day.

Parley labored three years in England before he was released to return home. The last two years he presided over the British Mission.

Returning to America, he reached Nauvoo in January, 1843.

"I was astonished to see so large a city," he wrote, "all created during my absence. I visited my brothers Orson and William and their families by whom I was hospitably entertained. I also visited President Joseph Smith and family, who received me with the usual welcome and 'God bless you, Brother Parley.'"

Parley was in the East engaged in missionary work when he received word of the death of the Prophet in June, 1844. He hastened to Nauvoo and was present when President Young and the Twelve were sustained as leaders of the Church.

In the exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo in February, 1846, was Parley P. Pratt. He and others broke the trail westward across Iowa to the Missouri River. Arriving at the river he was again called to serve for a brief time in England, to regulate the affairs of the Church. He returned to Winter Quarters in April, 1847, and in July led a caravan of Saints to Salt Lake Valley.

In 1851 Parley was called to preside over the Pacific Mission. He journeyed to California and from there sailed to Chili, where he spent a winter in learning the Spanish language and introducing the Gospel to the people of that country. Returning home he was again sent on a mission to the East in 1856. Near Van Buren, Arkansas, he was killed by enemies of the Church on May 13, 1857. At the time of his death Parley was fifty years of age.

In his missionary work and his writings Parley P. Pratt made a great contribution to the Church. Among his well-known songs in the hymn book are: "An Angel from on High, the Long, Long Silence Broke," "Come, O Thou King of Kings," "The Morning Breaks, the Shadows Flee," and "This Earth Shall Be a Blessed Place."

His prose writings had a wide circulation during his life. Among them are The Voice of Warning, The Key to Theology, Missouri Persecutions, and his valuable Autobiography, published after his death.

Recent editions of the Autobiography have been published which will be read with interest by present-day readers.
