Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

William Bowker Preston

It is a pleasant task for me to write a sketch of the man after whom I was named—William B. Preston, first bishop of Logan and fourth Presiding Bishop of the Church. Once I had the privilege of shaking hands with Bishop Preston. I had gone to the depot in Logan to meet my father who was arriving on the train from Salt Lake City, and Bishop Preston got off the car with him. Father introduced me to him and told the Bishop I was named after him. I still remember his pleasant smile and warm handshake.

William Bowker Preston was born on a farm in Franklin County, Virginia, on November 24, 1830. His parents were Christopher and Martha Claytor Preston. William was the third child in a family of seven.

At the age of 22, William B. Preston got the wanderlust. He decided to go to the gold fields of California. With a moderate amount of money he set out on his great adventure, going first by boat to the Isthmus of Panama. He crossed the Isthmus on a donkey and then took a boat for San Francisco. He stayed there a few days to look around and then journeyed to Sacramento, the headquarters of the gold seekers.

William found work and remained in Sacramento all winter, but what he saw there did not make a favorable impression on him. Most of the miners spent their earnings in dissolute living, which was foreign to him. He decided to give up the idea of mining and settle on a farm. He accordingly went twenty-five miles west to Yolo County, rented 320 acres of land and engaged in raising grain and cattle.

William B. Preston's nearest neighbors were Hezekiah Thatcher and family, Latter-day Saints from Utah. In visiting them he learned of their religion and became convinced that it was true. In February, 1857, he was baptized by a missionary from Utah named Henry G. Boyle.

Late in the fall of 1857 word was received by the Thatcher family that President Brigham Young desired the Mormon people living in California to return to Utah; this was because of the coming of Johnston's Army. The Thatcher family promptly sold its holdings and departed for the gathering place. With them was their neighbor, William B. Preston. Shortly after their arrival in Salt Lake City, William was married to Harriet Ann Thatcher, Hezekiah's nineteen-year-old daughter. This event took place on February 24, 1858.

During the spring of 1858 William joined the Mormon group of men who were stationed in Echo Canyon to halt the advance of Johnston's Army. In the "move south" in 1858 he settled with the Thatcher family in Payson and built a home there. Father Thatcher established a store in Payson and sent two of his sons with William B. Preston to California to purchase goods.

When they returned, Hezekiah Thatcher informed William that Brigham Young had advised him to settle in a new valley in northern Utah named Cache Valley and establish a flour mill there. Hezekiah sent two of his sons and William B. Preston to look the country over; this was in August, 1859. On their arrival on the site of Logan, William remarked, "This is good enough for me," and proceeded to build a house.

In November, 1859, two apostles of the Church, Orson Hyde and Ezra T. Benson, arrived in Cache Valley for the purpose of forming Church organizations in the little settlements. At Logan they found seventeen families and decided to organize a ward. "Whom shall we have for bishop?" they inquired of Peter Maughan, who was presiding in the valley at the time. Peter Maughan is said to have replied, "There is a young man residing in that house who seems to be a very enterprising, go-ahead man; I think he will make a good bishop." The recommendation of Peter Maughan was accepted, and William B. Preston was chosen as the first bishop of Logan.

In January, 1860, while there was still two feet of snow on the ground, William assisted Jesse W. Fox in surveying the streets and blocks of Logan.

William B. Preston was comparatively unknown when he was set apart as bishop of Logan on November 14, 1859, but from that time forward he showed his qualities of leadership. He was self-reliant, energetic, and determined to succeed.

After the city was surveyed in January, 1860, Bishop Preston assigned the settlers their city lots and small tracts of farming land.

The next move was to get water on the bench land where Logan was located, and Bishop Preston urged and carried through the building of the Logan and Hyde Park canal. No money was expended on this work—the people had none to spend—but they built the canal and in return received water for their land.

In the election of 1862, William B. Preston was chosen as representative from Cache County to the Territorial Legislature. This was an opportunity for him to meet and associate with the prominent men of the Territory, an opportunity which he had not previously enjoyed. He thus became intimately acquainted with such men as George A. Smith, Orson Pratt, Erastus Snow, Wilford Woodruff, Joseph F. Smith, and others.

Many hundreds of Latter-day Saint emigrants, from Europe and the United States, gathered each year at the Missouri River, without means to pursue their journey across the plains to Salt Lake Valley. In the spring of 1863 President Brigham Young called for 500 men with ox teams and wagons to go back to the river and bring these people to Utah. Bishop William B. Preston volunteered for this unselfish service. He made two trips, in the summers of 1863-64, each of which took about five months of his time. Part of each winter he served in the Territorial Legislature.

At the April conference in 1865 the name of William B. Preston was listed among the missionaries called to serve in Great Britain. He at once arranged his affairs to leave home. He left Salt Lake City on May 10 and journeyed across the plains by ox team to Omaha where he took the train for the East. Before reaching New York City he took a side trip to Virginia to have a brief visit with his parents whom he had not seen for thirteen years. He found that their farm and home had been devastated by the Civil War.

Pursuing his journey to England, William arrived at Liverpool on August 23, 1865, and was assigned to the Newcastle Conference, where he acted as president until January, 1866. He was then called to take charge of the business affairs of the Liverpool office. Here he remained until July, 1868, when he was released to return home, having served three years. On his return journey he took charge of a company of 600 Saints bound for Utah.

Once again in Salt Lake City he learned that President Brigham Young had taken a contract to build seventy miles of road bed for the Union Pacific Railroad through Echo Canyon. President Young offered a sub-contract to William B. Preston to do a portion of this work. William took advantage of this opportunity and was soon employed with his men in Echo Canyon.

Returning to Logan in 1869 he resumed his position as bishop. He was also elected mayor of the city, and held the position for twelve years.

After the death of Peter Maughan, William B. Preston was selected to be the "Presiding Bishop" of Cache Valley.

When Cache Stake was organized in May, 1877, William was chosen as counselor to the stake president, Moses Thatcher. In 1879, Moses Thatcher was made a member of the Council of the Twelve and William B. Preston took his place as stake president. He continued to hold this position until April, 1884, when he was selected to be the Presiding Bishop of the Church. One of the great responsibilities during the next few years was an assignment to complete the construction work of the Salt Lake Temple. He labored diligently at this task until the temple was dedicated on April 6, 1893.

William B. Preston died at the home of his daughter, Mrs. Oscar Moyle, in Salt Lake City, on August 2, 1908. He was 78 years of age. At his funeral President Joseph F. Smith said of him: "Bishop Preston was ever kind and courteous. He was held in high esteem by the Church leaders and was so thoroughly converted to the Gospel that he would have laid down his life in its cause." After the funeral in the Assembly Hall the body was conveyed to the family burial plot in Logan.
