Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Ralph Ramsay

The Eagle Gate, on North State Street in Salt Lake City, is well known to almost every resident of Utah, but the man—Ralph Ramsay—who carved the eagle that sits atop the picturesque archway, is not so well known.

Ralph Ramsay was born near the town of Ryton, county of Durham, England, on January 22, 1824. He was the son of Joseph and Mary Bainbridge Ramsay. In his youth he was apprenticed to William Hobbs, who taught him the business of wood carving and turning. After his apprenticeship, he opened a shop of his own.

When Ralph was twenty-five years of age, he heard and accepted the Gospel. He was baptized in the River Tyne, on July 8, 1849. While he remained in England, he was active in missionary work and served as second counselor in his branch presidency.

Ralph Ramsay was married to Elizabeth Burns (the date of the marriage is not known) and on March 18, 1856, the couple left England on their long journey to Utah. After seven weeks in a sailing vessel they arrived in Boston. They then traveled by train to Iowa City, Iowa, where they joined a handcart company which was wending its way across the plains to Utah. The journey was long and difficult for Ralph and Elizabeth Ramsay, and they had the great sorrow of burying two of their children on the plains.

On his arrival in Utah, Ralph Ramsay was employed in making furniture for President Brigham Young and others. He did carving in the construction of the Bee Hive and Lion Houses. He was employed as a carpenter and wood worker in the building of the Salt Lake Theatre and the Tabernacle.

It was probably during the latter part of 1858 that Ralph Ramsay began to carve the eagle that was to adorn the gate leading into President Young's property. It is related that Truman O. Angell had shot a large eagle in City Creek Canyon and that this bird was used as a model by Brother Ramsay.

A note in the Journal History under date of February 17, 1859, informs us when the eagle was mounted:

"A large spread eagle was placed over the gate east of President Young's house. The eagle stands on a bee hive and is made of wood and bound together with iron. It was made by Ralph Ramsay."

Ralph Ramsay moved away from Salt Lake City in 1872 and settled in Richfield, Sevier County. Later he moved to Snowflake, Arizona, where he died on January 25, 1905, at the age of eighty-one.

The years played havoc with the old wooden eagle. Winter snows and summer heat cracked its wings until daylight could be seen through them. In 1891 the eagle was taken down and sent east, where it was electroplated and then returned as a beautiful copper structure. It was then mounted on new piers and longer curved supports, and it stands today as a monument to Ralph Ramsay, a humble convert to the Church from England.
