Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Richards, Franklin D.PPFranklin Dewey Richards

Richards, Franklin D.PPFranklin Dewey Richards was a convert to the Church, a resident of Nauvoo, missionary to the Eastern States and to England, three times president of the European Mission, member of the Council of the Twelve and Church Historian.

Richards, Franklin D.PPFranklin D. Richards was born at Richmond, Berkshire County, Massachusetts, April 2, 1821. He was the son of Phinehas and Wealthy Dewey Richards.

Richards, Franklin D.PPIn his youth Franklin was a studious boy; he read widely and was particularly fond of the scriptures. To earn a living, he learned the trade of carpenter.

Richards, Franklin D.PPWhen Franklin was fifteen years of age, two Mormon missionaries, Brigham Young and his brother, Joseph Young, who were cousins to Franklin's father Phinehas, came into the neighborhood, preaching the Restored Gospel. As a result of this visit, Franklin and his father were both baptized, Franklin on June 3, 1838, two months after his seventeenth birthday.

Richards, Franklin D.PPIn October, 1838, Franklin left his home in Massachusetts to join the body of the Saints in Missouri. He arrived at Far West just as the Mormon people were being driven from Missouri. At a conference held at Quincy, Illinois, in May, 1839, Franklin saw the Prophet Joseph Smith for the first time.

Richards, Franklin D.PPFrom July, 1840, to April, 1841, Franklin served as a missionary in Indiana. On June 24, 1842, at Nauvoo, he was married to Jane Snyder.

Richards, Franklin D.PPFranklin D. Richards was again on a mission in the Eastern States when he received word of the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He returned to Nauvoo, and, in June, 1846, with his family, crossed the Mississippi River and departed for the West. While at Sugar Creek, Iowa, he was called to undertake a mission to England. He left his family to make their way across the plains, while he traveled eastward towards New York. He reached England and filled a mission with honor and distinction. Two years later he returned to America, found his family at Winter Quarters, and with them journeyed to Salt Lake Valley.

Richards, Franklin D.PPIn February, 1849, at Salt Lake City, Franklin D. Richards was chosen to be a member of the Council of the Twelve. At the time he was twenty-seven years of age. In October of the same year he again departed for England, having been called to preside over the British Mission. After having performed an outstanding work he returned to Salt Lake City in August, 1852. He was allowed to remain at home only two years when he was again appointed to journey to England and preside over the European Mission. He returned to Salt Lake City in 1856. It was during this mission that he baptized Karl G. Maeser at Dresden, Germany.

Richards, Franklin D.PPFranklin D. Richards was now permitted to remain at home for ten years; during this time he was extremely active in civic, military, and Church affairs.

Richards, Franklin D.PPIn July, 1866, he was again appointed to preside over the European Mission. As he made his way to Liverpool, he crossed the ocean for the seventh time. This mission proved to be his last foreign service. He remained in Europe two years, and then returned to his home in Salt Lake City in October, 1868.

Richards, Franklin D.PPFranklin D. Richards was called by President Brigham Young, in January, 1869, to take charge of the affairs of the Church in Weber Stake. A short time later he moved to Ogden, and made that city his home during the balance of his life. In February, 1869, he was appointed Probate Judge of Weber County by the Territorial Legislature.

Richards, Franklin D.PPThe year 1869 was a history-making year for the people of Ogden. On Marth 8th the track of the Union Pacific Railroad was built into that city, and Franklin D. Richards delivered before the crowd assembled a speech of welcome. He was also present at Promontory, Utah, on May 10, 1869, when the last spike was driven, completing the first continental railroad.

Richards, Franklin D.PPIn December, 1869, Judge Richards, as he was familiarly called, established at Ogden a small weekly paper known as the Ogden Junction. The first editor he employed for this paper was Charles W. Penrose, an Englishman by birth and author of the famous song, "O Ye Mountains High."

Richards, Franklin D.PPIn 1870 Judge Richards was elected to the Territorial Legislature to represent Weber County. He was subsequently re-elected to the same position and served six successive terms.

Richards, Franklin D.PPThe years 1870 to 1889 were years of intense activity for Franklin D. Richards. He attended stake conferences in all parts of the Church; he assisted in organizing new stakes; he dedicated chapels and attended the dedication of temples. In addition he was engaged in several prosperous business enterprises.

Richards, Franklin D.PPIn the interest of Church history, Franklin D. Richards made a trip east in 1885. While at Nauvoo he obtained from Lewis A. Bidamon a large part of the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon. This he brought to his home in Ogden and his son, Charles C. Richards, subsequently presented the manuscript to the President of the Church, to be retained in the Historian's Office.

Richards, Franklin D.PPAt the general conference of the Church, held in April, 1889, Franklin D. Richards was sustained as Church Historian and General Church Recorder. In 1894 he became the first president of the Utah Genealogical Society.

Richards, Franklin D.PPAfter the death of President Wilford Woodruff, in September, 1898, Lorenzo Snow became the President of the Church, and Franklin D. Richards was sustained as president of the Council of the Twelve. He held this position when he died at Ogden on December 9, 1899. He was seventy-eight years of age.

Richards, Franklin D.PPAt the time of his death George Q. Cannon said of him in an editorial in The Instructor:

Richards, Franklin D.PP"His devotion to the cause of God, his uprightness of character, and his spotless purity of life, have marked him as a true and noble man among the children of our Father. The value of the example and influence which the life of such a man exerts upon a community, can not be estimated. . . . We mourn the loss of his genial presence and his fatherly kindness."
