Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Willard Richards

Willard Richards was a convert to the Church, a missionary to England, member of the Council of the Twelve, friend and confidant of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pioneer of Utah, counselor to President Brigham Young in the First Presidency, and founder of The Deseret News.

Willard Richards was born at Hopkinton, Massachusetts, on June 24, 1804. He was the son of Joseph and Rhoda Howe Richards.

As a young man he took up the study of medicine and was a practicing physician near Boston when he first heard of the Mormon religion in 1835. In 1836 he made his way to Kirtland where he met the Prophet Joseph Smith, and also Brigham Young. There he continued his investigation of the doctrines of the Church, and as a result was baptized by Brigham Young on December 31, 1836.

Willard was ordained an elder on March 6, 1837, and after performing a brief mission to the Eastern States was set apart by the Prophet Joseph Smith as a missionary to accompany Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde to England.

On his arrival in England, he labored in Bedfordshire. In 1838 Elders Kimball and Hyde departed for America, and Willard Richards became first counselor to Joseph Fielding, the mission president. On April 14, 1840, at Preston, England, he was ordained an apostle by Brigham Young, in accordance with a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Willard returned to America in the spring of 1841, and located in Nauvoo.

In December, 1841, at Nauvoo, Willard Richards was appointed "General Church Clerk, Temple Recorder and private secretary to President Joseph Smith." A few weeks previous to this appointment the Prophet had written in his history: "I have been searching all my life to find a man after my own heart, whom I could trust with my business in all things, and I have found him. Dr. Willard Richards is the man."

After the death of the Prophet, Willard joined the Saints in the exodus to the West. In 1847 he made the journey to Utah with the original band of pioneers. He returned to the Missouri River in the fall, and was present at a meeting at Council Bluffs when the First Presidency was reorganized, with Brigham Young as President of the Church and Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards as counselors.

In the summer of 1848 Willard made the return trip to Salt Lake Valley, leading a large camp of exiled Saints to their new home.

In Utah Willard Richards became prominent. He was secretary of the Territory of Utah, postmaster of Salt Lake City, president of the Legislative Council, Church Historian and Recorder, and publisher of The Deseret News, which he founded in June, 1850.

After a brief but severe illness, Willard Richards died on March 11, 1854, at the age of forty-nine. He left a distinguished family. His grandson, Stephen L Richards, is now a member of the First Presidency of the Church.
