Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Joel Ricks

I should be less than grateful if I did not write a few paragraphs about my maternal grandfather, Joel Ricks—a pioneer of Cache Valley and a stalwart in the Church.

Joel Ricks was born on a farm in Trigg County, Kentucky, on February 18, 1804, the son of Jonathan and Temperance Edwards Ricks. He grew up on the frontier and had little opportunity to attend school. Some of the products from his father's farm were shipped to New Orleans, and Joel made several trips to that city in his youth, traveling down the Mississippi by flatboat and returning to Kentucky by steamboat.

On May 1, 1827, Joel Ricks was married to Eleanor Martin. Two years later he made a trip on horseback to Illinois, to look into the possibilities of farming in that section of the country. He was favorably impressed and secured property in Madison County, east of Alton.

It was here in 1841 that Latter-day Saint missionaries visited his home. He attended their meetings and was baptized the same year by Elder George Boosinger. In 1842 he made a trip to Nauvoo and had an interview with the Prophet Joseph Smith. In 1845 he moved to the Mormon settlement of Appanoose, above Nauvoo, and purchased a farm. The next year he followed President Brigham Young and the Twelve in the trek to the West.

When the first pioneers left Winter Quarters in 1847 to search out a home for the Saints in the Rocky Mountains, Joel Ricks sent one of his best teams to assist them on their journey. The following year, 1848, he journeyed to Salt Lake Valley. On the Elkhorn River, while his twenty-year-old son, Thomas Edward, was trying to recover some stolen cattle, he was shot by the Indians and seriously wounded.

The Heber C. Kimball company, which consisted of 792 wagons, reached Salt Lake Valley late in September, 1848. Joel Ricks and a few of his friends settled on Bountiful Creek where they built a mill for President Kimball. The next year Joel secured land in Centerville and Farmington. He erected a tannery and went into stock raising rather extensively. Due to his diligence and thrift he was always able to take care of himself and his family and to assist others.

As his opportunities in Davis County were somewhat limited, he decided in May, 1859, to investigate the possibilities of farming and cattle raising in Cache Valley. With his neighbor, James Quayle, he rode from Farmington to Cache Valley on horseback. They found a few log cabins at Wellsville, but no other houses, although prospective settlers were camped in their wagons near the present locations of Providence and Logan.

Joel Ricks was pleased with what he saw in Cache Valley and determined to make that place his home. He sold his holdings at Farmington and Centerville and moved to Logan where he built a log house on the site of the present First Security Bank Building. He also obtained a large tract of land in what is today known as Benson Ward.

In connection with Ezra T. Benson and others, Joel Ricks built the first saw mill in Logan. He also established a tannery, which was very important to the settlers at that time. He built and maintained a ferry on Logan River, west of the city. He served as treasurer of Cache County for many years.

Joel Ricks was a devout Latter-day Saint and was always ready to answer any call made upon him by the Church. Before the advent of the railroad, there was hardly a year when he did not send teams back to the Missouri River to bring in immigrants. He assisted with his means in building the Logan Tabernacle and Temple and ward meetinghouses in Logan. At the time of the organization of Cache Stake in 1877 he was ordained patriarch.

Joel Ricks died at Logan on December 5, 1888, at the age of eighty-four. His posterity at the time numbered 377 persons.
