Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Ricks, Thomas E.PPThomas Edwin Ricks

Ricks, Thomas E.PPThomas Edwin Ricks was a convert to the Church in 1845, a pioneer of Utah in 1848, pioneer of Cache Valley in 1859, leader of first colony to upper Snake River Valley in 1882 and first president of Bannock Stake.

Ricks, Thomas E.PPHe was born in Trigg County, Kentucky, July 21, 1828. He was the son of Joel and Eleanor Martin Ricks. In his youth he moved with his parents to Madison County, Illinois, and there was baptized on February 14, 1845. In September the family moved to Nauvoo.

Ricks, Thomas E.PPWhen the Saints left Nauvoo in 1846, in the exodus to the West, Thomas E., then eighteen years of age, drove a team for Charles C. Rich. Arriving at the Missouri River he remained until the spring of 1848, when he joined the Heber C. Kimball company in the long journey to Salt Lake Valley. While crossing the plains he was shot in the leg by an Indian, which disabled him for a number of months.

Ricks, Thomas E.PPArriving in Salt Lake Valley he located at Centerville, in Davis County. In 1849 he joined a company under the leadership of Parley P. Pratt in making an exploration of southern Utah. In Salt Lake City, on August 28, 1852, he was married to Tabitha Hendricks.

Ricks, Thomas E.PPAt the April conference in 1855, Thomas E. Ricks was called by President Brigham Young to assist in founding an Indian Mission at Las Vegas, Nevada. He performed this task, and upon his return was sent east to Wyoming in the fall of 1856 to assist in rescuing members of a stranded hand-cart company. In 1858 he went with others to rescue colonists at Fort Lemhi, Idaho, who had been attacked by Indians.

Ricks, Thomas E.PPIn the fall of 1859, when he was thirty-one years of age, he moved to Logan in Cache Valley. There he at once became prominent and served as county sheriff, assessor and collector and as a colonel in the local militia. He was active in the Church and was a member of the stake high council.

Ricks, Thomas E.PPWhen the railroad began to build into Cache Valley in 1872, Thomas E. Ricks took large contracts to do grading. He and W. D. Hendricks contracted to lay the track for the Utah Northern from Franklin, Idaho, to Butte, Montana.

Ricks, Thomas E.PPIn December, 1882, he was called by President John Taylor to lead a colony of Saints into upper Snake River Valley. He and others arrived at the site of Rexburg in 1883 and laid out the town. Other neighboring settlements were located under his direction. When Bannock Stake was organized in February, 1884, he was chosen as president. Ricks College, established at Rexburg in 1888, was named in honor of the founder of the settlement.

Ricks, Thomas E.PPThomas E. Ricks died at his home in Rexburg on September 28, 1901. He was seventy-three years of age. At that time The Deseret News said of him editorially:

Ricks, Thomas E.PP"The death of Thomas E. Ricks removes a typical pioneer figure. He possessed all the qualities that best serve to settle and build up the frontier. His sound wisdom and untiring energy, together with the kindness of heart, made him as valuable as he was beloved in the community where he lived."
