Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Joseph Harris Ridges

As the great Tabernacle organ sends out its pealing tones over half a world each Sunday morning, by the magic of radio, let us not forget the humble man, Joseph H. Ridges, who, in poverty and hardship, built the original Tabernacle organ nearly one hundred years ago.

Joseph Harris Ridges was born at Ealing, near Southampton, England, on April 27, 1827. His father was Edward Ridges. When Joseph was a small child, the family moved to London and there, directly across the street from the Ridges home, was an organ factory. Joseph has told us that he spent many days in this factory watching the workmen build organs. He became interested in every phase of organ construction and dreamed about building one himself.

A young man who worked in the factory took special interest in him and taught him the intricacies of organ construction. The boy often attended church services, principally to hear the playing of the organ. Occasionally he went to distant towns to inspect church organs and hear their music. Once he allowed himself to be locked in a church so that he could inspect the pipes, bellows, and valves, of this particular organ.

Then something happened that temporarily changed the course of Joseph Ridges' life. In 1850 rumors spread over England that gold had been discovered in Australia, and Joseph, now twenty-three years of age and eager for adventure, decided to go to that distant country and dig for the precious metal. He was five months on a sailing vessel before he landed at Sidney. He then made his way to the mines, but, as usual, the mines were disappointing, and Joseph did not find any gold. In order to make a living he began to do carpenter work and cabinet making. He also started to build an organ which he thought he might sell to one of the churches in Sidney.

Then the course of his life was changed again. He came in contact with a Latter-day Saint missionary named Augustus Farnham and heard the message of the Restored Gospel. He accepted the truth and on November 15, 1853, was baptized by Elder Farnham at Sidney.

Elder Farnham persuaded Joseph to finish the organ he was building and then to donate the instrument to the Church in Salt Lake City. This plan was agreed to, and in 1855 the organ was completed. In the spring of 1856 Elder Farnham and Joseph H. Ridges boarded a ship at Sidney, bound for San Pedro, California; stored away on the boat was the precious organ, packed in tin cases.

On their arrival at San Pedro, the two men moved inland to the Mormon colony at San Bernardino, where they remained throughout the winter. In April, 1857, they began the journey to Salt Lake City with a wagon train, taking the organ with them. President Brigham Young was pleased with the gift, and he had Joseph Ridges install the organ in the old Tabernacle. A note in The Deseret News informs us that the organ was played for the first time on October 11, 1857.

When the new Tabernacle was projected in the early 1860s, President Young saw clearly that it would not do to construct such a large building without a large organ to furnish the music. He thereupon sent for Joseph H. Ridges and asked him if he could construct such an organ. Brother Ridges assured him that he could. Here are his own words:

"The thoughts of President Young were always in advance of the community. One day he said the Tabernacle should have a big organ which would be commensurate with the beauty and vastness of the building. He sent for me and asked me if it were possible to build such an organ. I told him I thought it could be done, whereupon he asked me to draw preliminary plans."

The plans drawn by Joseph H. Ridges for the Tabernacle organ were approved by President Young, and he was authorized to go ahead with the work. It was a tremendous undertaking in this isolated community, where it was difficult to obtain proper material. The first requirement was to find suitable lumber, free from knots and pitch and pine gum. Joseph H. Ridges sent men out to explore the canyons of Utah and bring in samples of timber. As luck would have it, suitable timber was found, but it was in the Pine Mountains of Washington County, over 300 miles south.

Joseph H. Ridges erected a shop on the Temple Block in which to build the Tabernacle organ. President Brigham Young permitted him to hire the best mechanics that were obtainable to assist him in the work. Among these men were Frank Woods, Shure Olson, Niels Johnson, and Henry Taylor. Each was assigned a department of the work, and meetings were held daily as the construction advanced.

The matter of obtaining suitable glue was quite a problem. A large quantity of this material was needed, and in order to obtain it, kettles were set up on the street outside the Temple Block in which cowhides were boiled. Calf skins also were sought and found, with which to make the great bellows.

As the work advanced, Joseph H. Ridges discovered that certain materials were needed which could be obtained only in the East. He therefore left his men to do the preliminary work, and he journeyed to the terminus of the railroad, which was building west of Omaha at the time. He then took the train for Boston, where he purchased a quantity of spring wire, thin sheet brass, soft leather to make the valves, ivory for the keys, and other materials.

He returned to Salt Lake City early in 1866, and a note in The Deseret News, dated May 4th of that year, informs us as to the progress of the organ at that time.

"We paid a visit to the organ shop the other day, where the large organ for the new Tabernacle is being built, and we were gratified to note the progress already made. Brother J. H. Ridges, the builder, informed us that the organ is being constructed on a large scale on the most improved principle. It has two key boards and 27 pedals. . . . Its compass embraces 35 stops, five of which are mechanical. It will contain something like 2,000 pipes (to be exact, 2,648), the largest being 32 feet in length.

"The two manuals are the swell organ and the great organ, the stops of which, when played singly, produce the richest tones that modern organ building can produce, and when they are combined the volume of musical sound is grandly majestic. The instrument, when completed, will be 20 by 30 feet and 40 feet high, and the cost of it, if made in the East and freighted here, would be over $30,000."

Well, to make a long story short, as we shall have to do here, President Young opened the new Tabernacle to the public on Sunday, October 6, 1867, for the sessions of the semi-annual conference. In his opening remarks he spoke of the large organ.

"He thought it proper to say something of the unfinished condition of the organ. Not over one-third of the pipes were up, and until the casing is built, they had thrown around it a loose garment. It was now only about 15 feet high, but when completed it would be 40 feet high. Brother Ridges, and those who had labored with him, had done the best they could, and notwithstanding their diligence by early day, noon and night, they had been unable to have it properly tuned. It was, however, in a condition to accompany the choir, and he was pleased with it."

Twenty months later, in July, 1869, the organ was still not entirely completed. A reporter writing in The Deseret News on July 3 of that year informs us that the scaffolding had been taken down and that the organ presented a grand appearance. "Its cathedral-like shape, with the immense towers and symmetrical proportions, now stand out beautifully, and the entire work reflects great credit upon Brother Ridges, the designer and builder; however, Brother Ridges informs us that a large amount of work has yet to be bestowed upon the organ."

I have been unable to learn exactly when the great organ was entirely completed, but it was no doubt some time in 1870.

In closing, there is one feature of the organ that I desire to mention: When it was first played five men were required to pump the large bellows; later a portion of City Creek was diverted under the Tabernacle and a water wheel was installed to do this work.

The faithful builder, Joseph H. Ridges, lived many years to enjoy the benefits of the great organ. When he died in March, 1914, President Joseph F. Smith said that he had been "an instrument of God" in designing and building the Tabernacle organ.
