Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Rogers, Aurelia SpencerPPAurelia Spencer Rogers

Rogers, Aurelia SpencerPPWomen as well as men are numbered among the Stalwarts of Mormonism. Aurelia Spencer Rogers, lovely and accomplished daughter of Orson and Catherine Spencer, who, at Farmington, Utah, in August, 1878, was set apart as president of the first Primary organization in the Church, was a noted and useful woman.

Rogers, Aurelia SpencerPPWhen Aurelia was born at Deep River, Connecticut, on October 4, 1834, her father was serving in that village as a Baptist minister. Seven years later, through the efforts of his brother, Daniel, Orson Spencer allied himself with the Church, and in the fall of 1841 moved to Nauvoo.

Rogers, Aurelia SpencerPPAurelia lived in Nauvoo from the time she was seven years of age until after her eleventh birthday, and she had some pleasant memories of her life there. One was a distinct recollection of the Prophet Joseph Smith and of his frequent visits to the Spencer home.

Rogers, Aurelia SpencerPPAfter the death of the Prophet, Orson Spencer followed the leadership of President Brigham Young, and in February, 1846, left Nauvoo in the exodus to the West with his wife, Catherine, and their six children.

Rogers, Aurelia SpencerPPAfter a few weeks' journey in Iowa, in the snow and cold, Mrs. Catherine Spencer died. "My mother was ill prepared to stand the cold weather and rough roads," wrote Aurelia. "She therefore sank from the effects of a severe cold and soon died."

Rogers, Aurelia SpencerPPOrson Spencer was left with six motherless children, ranging in ages from thirteen down to four. Ellen, the eldest, took charge of the little group, with the assistance of Aurelia, eleven, and the journey was continued.

Rogers, Aurelia SpencerPPArriving at Winter Quarters, Orson Spencer built a log cabin for his children and then departed for England where he had been called to preside over the European Mission. Of this circumstance Aurelia wrote, "Father left us in charge of a good man and his wife, James and Mary Bullock, who looked after our interests the same as their own."

Rogers, Aurelia SpencerPPIn the spring of 1848, while Orson Spencer was still in England, the Bullock family took the Spencer children with them to Salt Lake Valley. A young pioneer in the caravan named Thomas Rogers, cast glances at Aurelia as the company journeyed along. Three years later, on March 27, 1851, Thomas Rogers and Aurelia Spencer were married in Salt Lake City. He was twenty-three years of age and she was sixteen. The couple moved to Farmington, where they established a permanent home. Twelve children were born to them, five of whom died in infancy.

Rogers, Aurelia SpencerPPIn 1878, Aurelia Rogers discussed with her bishop in Farmington, the problem of giving the small boys and girls of the ward more supervision and training. She also took the matter up with Eliza R. Snow, the head of the Relief Society organization of the Church. Eliza R. Snow talked with President John Taylor, and he approved the plan for a separate organization for the children. As a result, the first Primary Association of the Church was formed at Farmington with Aurelia Spencer Rogers as president. The opening meeting was held on August 25, 1878, in the ward chapel. The movement grew, and in a few years there were Primary Associations in many wards. Mrs. Louise B. Felt became the first general president of all the Primary Associations of the Church in June, 1880.

Rogers, Aurelia SpencerPPMrs. Rogers became a member of the Primary Association General Board in October, 1893, and continued to serve in this capacity until her death. She served as a delegate from Utah to the Woman's Sufferage convention at Atlanta, Georgia, in January, 1895, and the following month as a delegate to the National Council of Women in Washington, D. C. In 1896 her husband died, after forty-five years of married life. In 1898 Mrs. Rogers published a very interesting volume detailing the lives of her parents, herself, and brothers and sisters, and also an account of the beginning of the Primary work, entitled Life Sketches.

Rogers, Aurelia SpencerPPMrs. Rogers died at Farmington, on August 19, 1922, in her eighty-eighth year. At her death The Deseret News said of her: "The sweetness and unselfishness of Mrs. Rogers' natural disposition, her abundant faith, hope, and charity and unassumed humility, won for her the respect and love of young and old."
