Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Romney, MilesPPMiles Romney

Romney, MilesPPMiles Romney was a native of England, an early convert to the Church, an immigrant to America in 1841, a resident of Nauvoo, pioneer of St. George in 1862, architect and builder of the St. George Tabernacle, and superintendent of construction in the building of the St. George Temple.

Romney, MilesPPMiles Romney was born in Dalton, England, on July 15, 1806. He was the son of George and Sarah King Romney. In his youth Miles learned the trade of carpenter and specialized in the building of circular stairways. In this work he became very proficient.

Romney, MilesPPWhen he was twenty-four years of age, in 1830, Miles was married to Elizabeth Gaskell. Seven years later the Gospel was introduced into England by Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, and their associates. Miles Romney heard their message, and with his usual thoroughness investigated their teachings for two years before he was baptized.

Romney, MilesPPHaving a desire to join the Saints in Nauvoo, he left England and sailed for America in February, 1841. Shortly after his arrival in the city of the Saints, he was appointed master mechanic on the Nauvoo Temple. He continued to labor on this building until the Saints were expelled from Illinois in 1846.

Romney, MilesPPMiles Romney reached Utah in 1850, and the following year he was appointed foreman of the public works. He continued in this work until 1856, when he was called on a mission to England. He filled an honorable mission and returned to his home in Salt Lake City in 1858.

Romney, MilesPPIn October, 1862, Miles Romney was called by President Brigham Young to move to St. George. He promptly accepted this call. The year following his arrival in the southern colony, he was appointed to draw the plans and supervise the construction of a tabernacle. He was assisted by such able men as Edson Barney, William Barnes, Willis Copeland, Hosea Stout, David Rogers, Thomas Cottam, Benjamin Blake, and Warren Hardy.

Romney, MilesPPIn October, 1874, while working on the St. George Tabernacle, Miles Romney accidentally fell from a window and suffered serious injuries. It was several months before he regained his health. In the meantime he had been appointed superintendent of all construction on the St. George Temple. He worked in this capacity until his death in May, 1877; he was then in his seventy-first year.

Romney, MilesPPHis character was summed up in the closing paragraphs of his obituary in the following words:

Romney, MilesPP"He was a kind father and a steadfast friend, liberal in his views and charitable to all, without fanaticism, but firm in the faith. He died as he lived, in faith and fellowship." Prior to his death he remarked to a friend: "I feel that my work is done. I am ready to depart when the providences of God shall call me. I anticipate the change of worlds with a great deal of pleasure."
