Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Savage, CharlesPPCharles Roscoe Savage

Savage, CharlesPPTo the student of Church history it is quite amazing to note how many of the Stalwarts of Mormonism came from the British Isles. Our subject, Charles Roscoe Savage, pioneer photographer, and founder of "Old Folks' Day," and an Englishman, was born at Southampton, on August 16, 1832.

Savage, CharlesPPIt is related that the early life of Charles Roscoe Savage was one of poverty and hardship. In his youth he had no opportunity to attend school and had to gain his education as he went along through life. His father's wages as a gardener were not sufficient to support his family, and Charles went to work at an early age in order to assist his parents and brothers and sisters. In this struggle for survival he learned a valuable lesson: that he had to depend upon himself for any success he was to gain in life, and that he could not depend upon others to assist him.

Savage, CharlesPPAt the age of fifteen Charles R. Savage first heard doctrines taught that there was really something to live for, that life was an opportunity rather than a burden. He was baptized at Portsmouth on May 21, 1848, a few months prior to his sixteenth birthday. In 1852 he was called to do missionary work in Switzerland. He remained there three years and was sustained by the kindness and help of the Saints.

Savage, CharlesPPAfter returning to England he sailed for America in 1856 and arrived at New York City in February, 1857. There he sought and obtained employment in a printing office where he worked for two years. He also met and married at this time, Miss Annie Adkins, a Mormon immigrant from England.

Savage, CharlesPPDuring his residence in New York City, Charles became interested in photography and soon concluded to adopt that business as a profession. Securing a limited amount of equipment he moved to Council Bluffs, Iowa, in 1859, where, for a few months, he set up a photography shop. The next year he was able to obtain an ox team and a wagon and cross the plains with his family to Salt Lake City.

Savage, CharlesPPArriving at the headquarters of the Church, Charles formed a partnership with Marsena Cannon, a pioneer photographer who had preceded him to the Valley. Their business prospered; soon Charles R. Savage had his own studio. He was through and painstaking in his work and kept up with all the new developments in photography. He soon became known as the leading photographer in the Territory.

Savage, CharlesPPThe active mind of Charles R. Savage led him into many fields of endeavor. He became a captain in the Nauvoo Legion. He served for years as a member of the Tabernacle Choir. He was a member of the high council of Salt Lake Stake when that stake included the entire county. But what he is best known for, outside of his photographic work, is the fact that he originated "Old Folks' Day," which today is known and observed throughout the Church.

Savage, CharlesPPIn the spring of 1875 Charles R. Savage suggested to Presiding Bishop Edward Hunter that it would be both fitting and proper to designate a day each year for the enjoyment and pleasure of the Old Folks. Bishop Hunter then appointed Charles R. Savage and George Goddard to work out such an arrangement. May 14 of that year the first Old Folks' Day was held, when 240 aged people were conveyed by train to Lake Point, a popular resort on the shore of Great Salt Lake. A band accompanied them, and they were provided with refreshments. Old Folks' Day has been observed annually since that time.

Savage, CharlesPPOn the 21st of June, 1883, Savage's store and photograph studio on Main Street in Salt Lake City were destroyed by fire. This was an incalcuable loss as hundreds of negatives of pioneer scenes were burned—a loss that could never be replaced.

Savage, CharlesPPCharles R. Savage died at his residence in Salt Lake City February 3, 1909, at the age of seventy-six. At his funeral held on February 7, in the Assembly Hall, Presiding Bishop Charles W. Nibley paid him this tribute:

Savage, CharlesPP"His work with the aged was his chief delight. He it was who originated the movement that has blessed so many thousands of aged men and women. He loved all mankind and he recognized in every man a friend and a brother. He exemplified the message heralded by the angels, 'Peace on earth, good will to men.'"
