Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Smith, EliasPPElias Smith

Smith, EliasPPElias Smith was a cousin of Joseph Smith, a convert to the Church, a resident of Kirtland and Nauvoo, a pioneer of Utah, editor of The Deseret News, and probate Judge of Salt Lake County.

Smith, EliasPPElias Smith was born at Royalton, Windsor County, Vermont, on September 6, 1804. He was the son of Asahel and Elizabeth Schellenger Smith.

Smith, EliasPPIn 1809 Asahel settled with his family at Stockholm, New York, and there his son, Elias, grew to manhood. When he was twenty-five years of age, Elias was visited by his uncle, Joseph Smith, Sr., who had made the trip from Palmyra to inform his relatives about the Book of Mormon and the organization of the Church. Elias did not accept the Gospel immediately, but he began an investigation which resulted in his baptism, by his cousin, Hyrum, on August 27, 1835. The following year he moved with his father and family to Kirtland, Ohio.

Smith, EliasPPElias was employed as a schoolteacher in Kirtland and was active in the organizations of the Church. In 1838 he moved to Missouri and settled at Far West. He was present during the persecutions in Missouri, and when the Saints were expelled from that state, he moved with them to Illinois. At Nauvoo he was employed in the office of the Times and Seasons and the Nauvoo Neighbor.

Smith, EliasPPOn August 6, 1845, at Nauvoo, he was married to Lucy Brown, a convert from England.

Smith, EliasPPAfter the death of the Prophet, Elias Smith joined the Saints in their exodus to the West. Because of the illness of his parents, he was forced to remain in Van Buren County, Iowa. There his mother died in October, 1846, and his father in July, 1848.

Smith, EliasPPElias continued his journey to Utah in 1851. He arrived in Salt Lake City in September, and in the following November was employed by Willard Richards as business manager of The Deseret News. He was also named as postmaster of Salt Lake City, and in March, 1852, was commissioned by the Territorial Legislature as probate judge of Salt Lake County.

Smith, EliasPPJudge Smith was an able man, and he filled the positions to which he had been appointed with satisfaction and honor. After the death of Willard Richards, he became the editor of The Deseret News. He continued in this work until 1863.

Smith, EliasPPJudge Smith died in Salt Lake City on June 24, 1888. He was eighty-three years of age. At his death The Deseret News said of him editorially:

Smith, EliasPP"Judge Smith filled the important position of a pioneer jurist in the new community. He occupied that position so long that he seemed to have become a fixture, a pillar, in fact, in the civil superstructure. He became probate judge of Salt Lake County in March, 1852, and he retained the position until March, 1884, a period of 32 years."

Smith, EliasPPAt his funeral, held in the Assembly Hall on June 27, 1888, Elder John Henry Smith praised him for his integrity:

Smith, EliasPP"As a husband and father he was just. I can truthfully say that he was one of God's noblemen. He was as firm as a rock in his integrity and as faithful to his friends as ever God made a man."
