Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Jesse Nathaniel Smith

Jesse Nathaniel Smith was a cousin of the Prophet Joseph Smith, a pioneer of Utah in 1847, one of the early settlers of Parowan in 1851, a pioneer of Arizona in 1878, and first president of Snowflake Stake.

Jesse N. Smith was born at Stockholm, St. Lawrence County, New York, on December 2, 1834. He was the son of Silas and Mary Aikens Smith. His parents joined the Church when he was a child and moved to Kirtland, Ohio. They later journeyed to Missouri where they suffered persecutions with the Saints. They were on their way to Nauvoo when the father died at Pittsfield, Illinois, on September 13, 1839.

After the death of the Prophet, the widow of Silas Smith, with her two sons, Silas and Jesse, joined the Saints in their exodus to the West. They arrived in Salt Lake Valley in the fall of 1847. Jesse was then twelve years of age.

Four years later, when he was sixteen, he was called to go with the pioneers to Parowan. The following year, 1852, he was married to Emma S. West.

When Parowan Stake was first organized, in 1855, Jesse N. Smith was named as a counselor to John C. L. Smith. He later served as a counselor to William H. Dame, until 1860, when he was called on a mission to Scandinavia. He labored principally in Denmark until he was released to return home in April, 1864.

After remaining home four years he was called, in 1868, to preside over the Scandinavian Mission. He responded to this call and served two years, until his return to Parowan in 1870.

The Latter-day Saint colonization of Arizona began about 1876, and two years later Jesse N. Smith was asked to move to that territory and preside over the newly-formed Eastern Arizona Stake. He did as requested and promptly settled at Snowflake. As more Mormon settlers came to Arizona, it was found necessary in July, 1887, to divide the Eastern Arizona Stake. Two new stakes were formed, the Snowflake and the St. Johns. Jesse N. Smith was called to preside over the Snowflake Stake, and he diligently and ably performed this labor until his death on June 5, 1906.

The name of Jesse N. Smith will long be remembered in the history of the Mormon settlements in Arizona. At his death The Deseret News said of him:

"No man did more for the building up of the Snowflake region than did Jesse N. Smith. His labors extended even into Mexico, and he was one of the men who made it possible for Mormon colonies to be planted in the Sister Republic.

"He was a thoroughly-honest, good, and kind-hearted man, whom to know was to love. He inspired faith and confidence in the hearts of those with whom he came in contact. His strong personality lent strength to the weak and alleviation to the distressed. His death will be mourned by all who knew his worth."
