Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Samuel Harrison Smith

Among the stalwart men of the Church, in its early struggling days, was Samuel Harrison Smith, younger brother of the Prophet Joseph Smith. It seems strange that so little has been written about this excellent man, who gave his full support to the great work that had been established, under divine direction, by his brilliant and capable brother.

Samuel was born at Tunbridge, Vermont, on March 13, 1808. In 1816, when he was eight years of age, his parents moved to Palmyra, New York. Here they remained two years, but in 1818 they purchased one hundred acres of land two miles south of Palmyra. They moved to this land in the fall of the year after constructing a small log cabin.

It was on this farm, in the spring of 1820, that Joseph Smith Junior beheld his first vision. There is ample evidence that he related the story of this great event to the members of his family and that they all believed him. Samuel was twelve years old at the time and must have listened to his brother with the greatest of interest.

Regarding Samuel's activities for the following nine years there is no information in Church history. It appears that his life was completely overshadowed by that of his famous brother.

During these years Joseph had received the plates of the Book of Mormon, and, because of persecution at Palmyra, had moved to the home of his wife's parents in Harmony, Pennsylvania. There Samuel H. Smith and Oliver Cowdery visited him in the spring of 1829. On April 7th, Oliver began to write for Joseph while the latter translated the plates, and it it believed that during this time Samuel worked on Joseph's farm.

Then important events followed in rapid succession. The Aaronic Priesthood was restored on May 15, and on the same day Joseph and Oliver were baptized in the Susquehanna River. They now explained the principles of the Gospel to Samuel, and on the 25th of the same month he was baptized by Oliver Cowdery, being the third man to accept that ordinance in this dispensation.

In the latter part of the month of June, 1829, the translation of the Book of Mormon was completed and the plates were shown to the Three Witnesses and the Eight Witnesses. Samuel H. Smith was one of the Eight Witnesses who testified that he saw and handled the plates. He was twenty-one years of age at this time.

History is silent in regard to Samuel's activities during the latter part of 1829 and the early part of 1830, but when the Church was organized at the home of Peter Whitmer at Fayette, New York, on April 6, 1830, Samuel H. Smith was one of the six young men who formed the organization. He had now participated in enough important events to immortalize his name.

When the first conference of the Church was held at the Whitmer home on June 9, 1830, Samuel H. Smith was present and was ordained an elder by Oliver Cowdery. Three weeks later he was set apart as a missionary, to introduce the Book of Mormon in the neighboring towns of western New York. He carried a number of the books with him, but as he was unable to sell them he gave one copy to Mrs. Rhoda Greene, of Bloomington, who had kindly given him a meal. This woman was Brigham Young's eldest sister. The Book of Mormon given to her was circulated through the entire Young family and was partially the means of bringing them all into the Church.

The book was also read by Heber C. Kimball, who had married Vilate Murray, a niece of Brigham Young. He also became a convert and later joined the Church. Thus to Samuel H. Smith credit may be given for having first interested two of the greatest men who have allied themselves with the Church.

In December, 1830, a revelation was received by the Prophet Joseph Smith directing the members of the Church to gather in Ohio. Samuel H. Smith and Orson Pratt walked the entire distance from Fayette, New York, to Kirtland, Ohio, in February, 1831. The following March 13, Samuel observed his twenty-third birthday.

We do not know how Samuel occupied his time until June 3, but on that date a conference was held in Kirtland at which time Samuel was ordained a high priest by Lyman Wight. In a revelation given the following day, Samuel was directed to go as a missionary to Missouri in company with Reynolds Cahoon. His task for the balance of the summer was thus planned for him.

In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith at Kirtland, Ohio, June 4, 1831, a number of elders were called to journey to Missouri, "the land of their inheritance." They were requested to travel "two by two and preach by the way in every congregation." Among those selected for this journey were Reynolds Cahoon and Samuel H. Smith. Reynolds Cahoon was forty-one years of age at the time and Samuel was twenty-three, yet, despite the difference in their ages they were agreeable companions.

The journey to Missouri, made in the heat of summer, walking along the dusty highways, traveling "without purse or scrip," was one of difficulty and hardship, but these faithful elders pursued their way; they held many meetings, baptized several converts, and arrived safely at Independence, Missouri, on August 4, 1831. Here Samuel was overjoyed to meet his brothers, Joseph and Hyrum.

After spending five days in Jackson County, during which time Samuel and his companion attended "the first conference held in the land of Zion," they began their return journey to Kirtland, where they arrived on September 28.

At a conference held at Amherst, Ohio, on January 25, 1832, Samuel was called by revelation to accompany Orson Hyde "to the eastern countries." He and his companion traveled as far east as Boston, Massachusetts, and were away from home eleven months. They gained many converts and baptized a number of people who became prominent in the Church, among whom were Leonard W. Hardy and Henry Harriman. At Boston, on June 26, Samuel baptized a young woman named Mary Bailey, who, two years later, became his wife. The missionaries returned to Kirtland in December, 1832.

The first high council in the Church was organized at Kirtland, Ohio, on February 17, 1834, and Samuel H. Smith was chosen to be a member.

After remaining in and around Kirtland three years, during which time he "labored with his hands" to support his family, Samuel moved to Far West, Missouri, in the spring of 1838. He had hardly established himself on a farm when he was driven out of Missouri by a mob militia. He became separated from his family and endured great hardship before he reached Quincy, Illinois, in the spring of 1839.

Samuel located on a farm at Plymouth, Illinois, about forty miles southeast of Nauvoo, and here, on January 25, 1841, his wife, Mary Bailey died, after giving birth to her fourth child. He found it difficult to care for his motherless children and three months later, on May 3, he married Levira Clark.

In June, 1844, Samuel was living on his farm at Plymouth when he received word that his brothers, Joseph and Hyrum, had been imprisoned in Carthage Jail. He immediately decided to go to their assistance and left for Carthage with a team and wagon. As he approached the city he was recognized and turned back by members of the mob. He returned to his home and obtained a swift riding horse which he determined to ride through at all hazards. As he approached Carthage two men on horseback, armed with rifles, pursued him. Samuel rode his horse with all possible speed and outdistanced them although they shot at him several times.

In Carthage he learned of the death of his brothers, which was a staggering shock to him. He helped Willard Richards make preparations to convey the bodies of the martyrs to Nauvoo and rode with them the next day to that city, a distance of eighteen miles.

Samuel did not recover from the severe experience of being pursued by the mob. He evidently had sustained a permanent injury, as he was taken ill about two weeks after the death of his brothers and passed away on July 30, 1844, at the age of thirty-six.

The Times and Seasons said of him at the time of his death.

"If ever there lived a good man upon the earth, Samuel H. Smith was that person. His labors in the Church, from first to last, carrying glad tidings to the eastern cities, and finally his steadfastness as one of the witnesses of the Book of Mormon, and his many saintly traits of virtue, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, and charity, shall be given of him hereafter, as a man of God."
