Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Smoot, AbrahamPPAbraham Owen Smoot

Smoot, AbrahamPPOne of the most colorful characters in early Utah history was Abraham Owen Smoot, a pioneer builder of Salt Lake and Utah Counties, and the father of a large family. One of his children who distinguished himself nationally was United States Senator Reed Smoot.

Smoot, AbrahamPPAbram O. Smoot, as he was familiarly called, was a vigorous personality, and his influence was felt wherever he was located. He was born in Owen County, Kentucky, on February 17, 1815. When he was thirteen years old, his parents moved to Tennessee, and there his father died in 1828. The widowed mother and her son were converted to the Church in 1835 and thereafter all the years of Abram's life were spent in the Church.

Smoot, AbrahamPPIn 1836, when he was twenty-one years of age, he journeyed to Kirtland, Ohio, with Wilford Woodruff. There he formed the acquaintance of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the two became fast friends. Abram remained one winter in Kirtland and attended the School of the Prophets. In the spring of 1837 he returned to the South and labored as a missionary in Kentucky and Tennessee, but the following year he led a group of Saints to the gathering place in Far West, Missouri.

Smoot, AbrahamPPWhen trouble broke out between the Latter-day Saints and the officials of Missouri in the fall of 1838, which resulted in the expulsion of the members of the Church from that state, Abram O. Smoot was among those who were forced to leave. Before his departure, he was married to Martha T. McMeans on November 11, 1838, and the two traveled out of the state toward Illinois in a small wagon drawn by a span of horses. On their way they picked up a stranded family, consisting of the father and mother and five children, and conveyed them to Quincy.

Smoot, AbrahamPPAbram and Martha Smoot were among the first settlers of Nauvoo. There they made their residence until the great exodus in 1846, when they followed President Brigham Young to the camps on the Missouri River. The following year Abram was the captain of a company of immigrants who follewed the pioneers to Salt Lake Valley. He arrived in the valley during the latter part of September, 1847, and here he made his home for the following twenty years.

Smoot, AbrahamPPWhen the first high council was organized in the fall of 1847, Abram O. Smoot was made a member. It is said also that he was the first justice of the peace in Salt Lake Valley. He was always active in civic and religious affairs.

Smoot, AbrahamPPDuring his first years of residence here, he made several trips to the Missouri River to freight merchandise to Salt Lake City. In 1851 he was sent on a mission to England and the following year was appointed to take charge of the season's immigrants to Utah.

Smoot, AbrahamPPReturning east in 1856, he raised money to purchase cattle and wagons for the Church. Upon his return, he was elected mayor of Salt Lake City. He was the second man to fill this position. In 1857 he made a trip to the Missouri River with mail from Utah. At Kansas City he learned that the President of the United States had ordered an army to come to Utah and that they were bringing a new governor to take the place of Brigham Young. Abram O. Smoot immediately made up his mind to convey this information to President Young. With a fast team and a light wagon he drove through to Salt Lake City in twenty days, averaging fifty miles per day. Arriving in the valley, he learned that President Young and a large group of Saints were celebrating July 24, Pioneer Day, in the mountains at Brighton, east of Salt Lake City. With several friends, he at once drove to Brighton and conveyed the startling information to President Young. This is one of the most dramatic episodes in Utah history.

Smoot, AbrahamPPAbram O. Smoot continued to serve as mayor of Salt Lake City until 1866. During that time he was interested in the development of the community and took part in civic and religious affairs. He was a successful business man and labored unceasingly to establish home industries.

Smoot, AbrahamPPPresident Young requested Abram O. Smoot to move to Provo in 1868 and become president of Utah Stake. He responded to this call, and in the spring of the year of his arrival he was named mayor of Provo. He held this office for twelve years. He also served the same period of time as a member of the Territorial Legislature.

Smoot, AbrahamPPWhen President Brigham Young founded the Brigham Young Academy in Provo in 1875, Abram O. Smoot became the president of the Board of Trustees. He held this position for twenty years and labored unceasingly for the establishment and welfare of the struggling educational institution, giving it both his time and means.

Smoot, AbrahamPPTo enumerate the activities of Abram O. Smoot in Provo and Utah County during his residence there would be impossible in this brief sketch. It is sufficient to say that he was the dominant figure in Church and business circles for twenty-seven years, until his death at the age of eighty on March 6, 1895.
