Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Eliza Roxey Snow

Eliza Roxey Snow, author of the immortal hymn, "O My Father," and onetime president of the Relief Society organizations of the Church, was one of the Stalwart women of Mormonism.

Eliza R. Snow was born in Becket, Berkshire County, Massachusetts, on January 21, 1804. She was the daughter of Oliver and Rosetta Snow.

When Eliza was two years of age, her parents moved westward to Ohio and settled on a farm at Mantua, Portage County. They were not far from Kirtland, the headquarters of the Church, and Latter-day Saint missionaries soon visited them and converted them. Eliza was baptized on April 5, 1835. Later in the same year she moved to Kirtland and found employment as a schoolteacher.

From the time she was a child, Eliza had written poetry and had gained considerable fame from the lines that had flowed from her gifted pen. Under the inspired teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, she seized upon Gospel themes and soon established the reputation of being the most noted poetess in the Church. It was while residing at the home of Stephen Markham in Nauvoo in 1845 that she wrote the hymn, "O My Father." She relates that at the time she was living in an attic room and using a wooden chest for a table.

After the death of the Prophet, Eliza R. Snow joined the Saints in their great exodus to the West. She left Nauvoo riding in a carriage with Stephen Markham and his wife and suffered considerably from the cold and rain during the journey across Iowa. She spent the winter of 1846-47 at Winter Quarters on the Missouri River, and in the spring of 1847 began the weary trek to Salt Lake Valley, following the trail of the pioneer band.

The first winter in the Valley Eliza lived in the Old Fort, but in 1856 she moved to the Lion House, where she continued to reside until her death on December 5, 1887.

Eliza R. Snow made a tour of Europe and the Holy Land in 1872-73. She published two volumes of her poems and wrote a life of her distinguished brother, Lorenzo Snow. In July, 1880, she was set apart by President John Taylor as president of the Relief Societies of the Church.

Of the hymn, "O My Father," George D. Pyper wrote: "It is a drama of eternal life; not merely a hymn, but a prophecy and revelation."

Orson F. Whitney paid Eliza R. Snow this tribute:

"If all her other writings, prose, and verse, were swept into oblivion, this poem alone ('O My Father'), the sweetest and sublimest of all the songs of Zion, would perpetuate her fame and render her name immortal. But she believed that a poet should do something more than make verses, and she put that belief into practice, laboring incessantly for the promulgation of her religious faith and for the teaching and counseling of the women of her people." (Whitney's History of Utah, Vol. 4, p. 573.)
