Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Erastus Snow

One of the Stalwart men of the Church during its formative period in the East, and the pioneer period in Utah, was Erastus Snow, missionary, apostle, successful businessman, and colonizer of St. George and other Southern settlements. This able man was born at St. Johnsbury, Vermont, on November 9, 1818, the son of Levi and Lucina Snow.

The first missionaries of the Church to visit St. Johnsbury were Orson Pratt and Luke Johnson; they taught the Restored Gospel there in 1832. They made several converts, among whom was William Snow. The following year William baptized his fourteen-year-old brother, Erastus.

From the time of his entrance into the Church, Erastus Snow became an active member and missionary. During 1836, when he was seventeen years old, he labored eight months in Pennsylvania, traveled sixteen hundred miles and baptized fifty persons. He journeyed to Kirtland, Ohio, during the winter, but in the spring of 1837 he made his way to Pennsylvania and baptized forty more converts.

Again in the spring of 1838 he resumed his missionary travels; this time he went as far east as Virginia and Maryland. He was now on his third mission and was only nineteen years of age.

In June, after his return to Kirtland, he joined a group of Saints who were on their way to Far West, Missouri, the new gathering place. At Far West on December 3, 1838, shortly after his twentieth birthday, he was married to Artemesia Beman.

During the winter of 1838-39, Erastus Snow, with several of the prominent brethren, visited the Prophet Joseph Smith and his companions who were confined in Liberty Jail. They tried to assist the prisoners to escape, but the attempt failed. Erastus then made his way to Jefferson City, Missouri, where, after an interview with the Secretary of State, an order was issued for a change of venue, for the Prophet and his companions, from Daviess to Boone County. While on this journey they escaped from their guards.

In the fall of 1839, after the Saints were driven out of Missouri, Erastus Snow established his residence at Montrose, Iowa. At the April conference at Nauvoo in 1840, when he was twenty-one years of age, he was called to undertake his fourth mission, this time to Pennsylvania and the New England States. He took his wife with him on this mission and remained in the East two and a half years. Everywhere he was successful in his labors and at Salem, Massachusetts, he built up a branch numbering fifty-three persons.

After his return to Nauvoo, Erastus built a home and engaged in the mercantile business, but again in the spring of 1844 he was sent east on a mission. He was in Salem, Massachusetts, when he learned of the death of the Prophet. He returned at once to Nauvoo.

Erastus Snow and his family were among the first to leave Nauvoo in the exodus to the West, which began in February, 1846. In crossing the Mississippi River the boat capsized, and he lost part of his household goods. His eldest child fell into the water and came near drowning.

After crossing Iowa he located with the main group of the Saints at Cutler's Park, on the west bank of the Missouri River. Here he and his wife suffered a tragedy in the loss of their youngest child.

On April 8, 1847, Erastus Snow said goodbye to his family at Winter Quarters, and began the journey with the pioneer band to the Great Basin, to seek out a new gathering place for the Saints. The facts of this journey are well known, but it is interesting to mention here that Erastus Snow and Orson Pratt were the first two pioneers to enter Salt Lake Valley. Erastus at the time was twenty-eight years of age.

While in the Valley he built a small cabin in the Old Fort and also did plowing and planting. He returned to his family at Winter Quarters on October 31.

Preparations were made to abandon Winter Quarters in the spring of 1848, as almost all the inhabitants were moving west. During January, Erastus Snow was sent to the eastern branches to solicit clothing and supplies for the Saints who were in need. He traveled as far as New York and Boston and was successful in obtaining a small quantity of necessary articles.

Upwards of five thousand people made the journey from the Missouri River to Salt Lake Valley in 1848. On his arrival in the new settlement, Erastus Snow built a home and acquired at tract of farming land. Then a surprise came to him. On February 12, 1849, he was called to be a member of the Council of the Twelve.

This position brought its great responsibilities. At the October conference of the Church held at Salt Lake City in 1849, Erastus Snow was appointed to open a new mission in Denmark. With other missionaries he made his way across the plains in the winter, enduring great hardships. After obtaining funds in the East and in England, to assist him on his mission, he arrived in Copenhagen on June 14, 1850.

The first missionaries to arrive in Copenhagen, Denmark, in June, 1850, were Erastus Snow, George P. Dykes, and John E. Forsgren. Peter O. Hansen had arrived several days previously. The missionaries rented a hotel room, "Where they all knelt down and offered a prayer of thanksgiving to God for their safe arrival, and dedicated themselves to His service."

Although only one of the elders, Peter O. Hansen, could speak the language, they all began to work diligently among the people and, on August 12, about two months after their arrival, Elder Snow baptized fifteen converts in the beautiful Oresund near Copenhagen. The baptisms continued, and one month later the members of the Church in Denmark numbered fifty persons.

Meantime Elder Forsgren, a native of Sweden, had gone to Gavle, his home town, and had made a few converts, but in a short time the authorities of the city arrested him, and he was banished from the country.

In the fall of 1850, Elders Snow and Forsgren, assisted by the local Saints in Copenhagen, began to translate the Book of Mormon into the Danish language. By the spring of 1851 this work had been successfully completed, and Erastus Snow had devised ways and means for bringing about its publication. This was the first edition of the Book of Mormon in a foreign language. In the spring of 1852 he issued an edition of the Doctrine and Covenants in Danish. He also wrote a tract called, A Voice of Truth, (En Sandheds Rost) which was widely circulated, and in addition he began the publication of a small monthly paper called the Skandinaviens Stjerne.

When Erastus Snow held a mission-wide conference in Copenhagen, prior to his departure for the United States, in March, 1852, over five hundred members of the Church were represented, so great had been the growth of the organization of the Church during his presidency.

With Elder Snow when he left Copenhagen were nineteen "migrating Saints," the first of many thousands who left their homelands in Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, to unite with the Latter-day Saints in Utah.

After spending a few weeks in England, where he assisted Franklin D. Richards in organizing the Deseret Iron Works—a company formed to manufacture iron in southern Utah—the two apostles sailed from Liverpool to New York City; thence by train to St. Louis, and from there by team to Salt Lake City, where they arrived August 20, 1852. Elder Snow had been absent from his home nearly three years.

At the October conference of the Church in 1853, Erastus Snow and George A. Smith were called to "gather up fifty families" and lead them to southern Utah "to strengthen the southern settlements."

The following year the First Presidency requested Elder Snow to go to St. Louis, where there was a large group of Saints, and preside over them and look after the Church immigration from that city. While in St. Louis he succeeded in establishing a Mormon newspaper called The St. Louis Luminary. He returned home in the fall of 1855, and in April, 1856, he was again sent east, with George A. Smith, to St. Louis, Washington, D.C., and New York City, on business for the Church. These were difficult journeys as the long trip across the plains had to be made with team and wagon.

At the October conference in 1861, three hundred families were called by the First Presidency to settle in southern Utah. President Young expected them to plant and raise cotton. As to where they were to locate, "President Young said he wished a city to be built on the slope of the junction of the Santa Clara with the Rio Virgen and said it should be named St. George." George A. Smith, Orson Pratt, and Erastus Snow were the leaders of the company. The site of St. George was reached on December 1st and Erastus Snow held the first meeting there on December 4th.

From this time until his death, which occurred in Salt Lake City on May 27, 1888, Erastus Snow made his home in St. George. During all these years he performed the arduous task of presiding over the settlements of the Saints in southern Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, and Colorado. His work as a colonizer was extremely outstanding. The building of the St. George Temple was under his immediate supervision and direction.

At his death The Deseret News said of him:

"He was a man among men. When his thoughts were uttered, whether in private circles, in councils, or on the public platform, they had the clearness that is imparted by having been carefully weighed. As a consequence he was as safe and sound an adviser as could be found. From the earliest times of his long connection with the Church, he has been viewed as one of the wisest men who have been identified with the work of God in this dispensation. This distinguishing characteristic was exhibited in every position in which he was required to operate, and in the midst of every kind of circumstances, as an evangelist in carrying the Gospel to the nations or building up the Kingdom at home."
