Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Spencer, OrsonPPOrson Spencer

Spencer, OrsonPPOrson Spencer, student, teacher, minister of the Baptist Church, convert to Mormonism, missionary, pioneer of Utah, first Chancellor of the University of Deseret, was indeed a Stalwart of Mormonism.

Spencer, OrsonPPOrson Spencer was born in West Stockbridge, Massachusetts, on March 14, 1802, a son of Daniel and Chloe Spencer. A boy of delicate health but of brilliant mind, he entered Lenox Academy near his home, at the age of fifteen, and was graduated two years later with honors. In 1819 he entered Union College at Schenectady and was graduated four years later, with an A.B. degree.

Spencer, OrsonPPHe was now qualified to teach in the colleges of the country, and he accepted a position in Georgia. However he did not remain long in this vocation; his devout nature led him into religious work. He went to college again and received an M.A. degree. He then became a Baptist minister. This was in 1829 when he was twenty-seven years of age. The next year he married a very exceptional young woman, Catherine Curtis, nineteen years of age, and together they established a home at Deep Creek, Connecticut, where Orson served in the ministry.

Spencer, OrsonPPAfter five successful and happy years, Orson was given charge of a Baptist church at Middlefield, Massachusetts, and moved to that town. He remained in Middlefield until the spring of 1841 when his brother, Daniel, who had accepted the Mormon faith at West Stockbridge, visited Orson, and in a few days so convinced him of the truth that he and his wife were baptized. Daniel also converted his brother, Hyrum, and in the summer of 1841 the three brothers, with their families, made the long journey to Nauvoo to join the main body of the Saints.

Spencer, OrsonPPAt Nauvoo Orson Spencer kept a store and taught school in order to gain a livelihood. He also formed a close acquaintanceship with the Prophet Joseph Smith, which proved to be an inspiration to him throughout the balance of his life.

Spencer, OrsonPPAfter the death of the Prophet, in June, 1844, Orson Spencer and his brothers followed the leadership of President Brigham Young in the journey to the West. They departed from Nauvoo in February, 1846, in cold and inclement weather, and, a few weeks later, near Keosaqua, Iowa, Orson's wife, Catherine, thirty-five years of age, died of what appears to have been pneumonia. Orson was left with six motherless children, all under thirteen years of age.

Spencer, OrsonPPThe brave man pursued his journey. At Winter Quarters, a few months later, President Young called him to preside over the European Mission with headquarters at Liverpool. He left his motherless children with relatives and filled this assignment with honor. During his two years in England, he wrote a brilliant series of letters expounding the Gospel, to a Reverend Crowel, which he later published under the title of Spencer's Letters.

Spencer, OrsonPPFollowing his release, he journeyed to Utah in the fall of 1849. In February, 1850, when the University of Deseret was established, Orson Spencer was named as Chancellor. The school opened in the fall in a small home in the Seventeenth Ward, with forty pupils.

Spencer, OrsonPPOrson Spencer was again called to preside in Europe in 1852. While there he endeavored to establish the Church in Prussia, but was expelled by the authorities of that government.

Spencer, OrsonPPReturning to Salt Lake City in 1853 he was called to assist Erastus Snow in missionary work in St. Louis in 1854. He was diligently engaged in this work when he died there of a fever, on October 15, 1855, at the age of fifty-three.

Spencer, OrsonPPOn learning of his death the editor of The Millennial Star wrote:

Spencer, OrsonPP"Orson Spencer's honesty of heart, sterling integrity, and determination of purpose were forcibly manifest in his embracing the truth for the love of it; forsaking an enviable position in society and an extensive circle of acquaintances and friends and cleaving to a persecuted and down-trodden people, for the Gospel's sake. These characteristics have marked his entire career in the Church. He bore trial and affliction with the most unflinching fortitude . . . He needs no praise, no eulogy to preserve his name from oblivion—it is indelibly inscribed in the hearts of his brethren."
