Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Stephens, EvanPPEvan Stephens

Stephens, EvanPPEvan Stephens, former director of the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir and composer of many stirring hymns sung by the Latter-day Saints, was born in Pencader, South Wales, June 28, 1854. He was the youngest of ten children born to David and Jane Stephens.

Stephens, EvanPPEvan's father was a farm laborer, and it was only by rigid economy that he was able to feed and clothe his family. Evan was a sickly child and doubts were entertained that he would survive his childhood, but he grew stronger as the years advanced, although he was never robust. He started to school when he was six years of age and continued until he was ten, but at that time he had to leave school and assist in providing a living for himself and family. He herded sheep, milked cows, and did such other work as a boy of his years could do.

Stephens, EvanPPThe parents of Evan Stephens had joined the Church in Wales prior to his birth and, in 1866, when he was twelve years of age, they immigrated to Utah and settled in Willard, Box Elder County. Here Evan found employment as a farm laborer, working for his board.

Stephens, EvanPPThe boy had a natural interest in music, and in Willard he became a member of the ward choir. The leader, Daniel Tovey, took an interest in the boy, and encouraged him in his desire to sing and play. He gave Evan special attention and taught him to read music.

Stephens, EvanPPWhen Evan was sixteen, his older brother, Thomas, who was also musically inclined, purchased a small, four-octave cabinet organ, and it was on this instrument that the boy learned to play. He spent long hours practicing his favorite hymns; music became the ruling passion of his life.

Stephens, EvanPPAbout this time his interest was greatly stimulated by a visit to Salt Lake City. He attended services in the Tabernacle and listened to the great organ and the singing of the Tabernacle Choir. He was only a poor country boy and little did he dream that one day he would become the leader of that great choir.

Stephens, EvanPPReturning to Willard, Evan bettered his financial condition by taking a job as section hand on the Utah Northern Railroad. His wages were $37.50 a month, and he was required to work ten hours a day. But when he was not working, he was active with his music. He became the leader of the ward choir, organist in Sunday School, director of a glee club, and he led the singing in his quorum meeting.

Stephens, EvanPPHis work as a section hand took him to Logan, and there he sought and obtained permission of Professor Alexander Lewis, leader of the Logan Tabernacle Choir, to practice on the Tabernacle organ. He immediately attracted the attention of Professor Lewis, who offered him the position as organist for the Choir at $60 a month. As this was better pay than working as a section hand, and as he would be engaged in his favorite occupation, he immediately accepted and moved to Logan. He was now launched upon a career that was to be his life's work. (It is a pleasure to me to state that while in Logan, Evan Stephens gave organ lessons to my mother, Ellen Ricks.) Evan stimulated great interest in Logan by training groups of singers and by presenting small operettas and cantatas.

Stephens, EvanPPBeing anxious to improve his learning in music, Evan moved to Salt Lake City in 1882 and took lessons on the pipe organ with Joseph J. Daynes as teacher. He also trained groups of children to sing and gave concerts in the Tabernacle and Salt Lake Theatre. In May, 1885, he went to Boston and studied pipe organ for one year at the New England Conservatory of Music.

Stephens, EvanPPReturning to Salt Lake City he organized an opera company and presented several well-known operas in the Salt Lake Theatre. His reputation as a leader of singing groups was now so well established that in 1890, he was asked by the First Presidency to become the director of the Tabernacle Choir. In this capacity, three years later, he took the Choir to Chicago, where they won second prize in a nation-wide contest They also gave successful concerts in St. Louis, Kansas City, Omaha, and Denver.

Stephens, EvanPPIn January, 1896, when Utah was admitted to statehood, a great celebration was held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. Evan Stephens wrote a special song for the occasion entitled, "Utah, We Love Thee." This song was rendered under his direction by one thousand children. Subsequently it was adopted by the Utah State Legislature as the official state song.

Stephens, EvanPPThe year 1897 marked the fiftieth anniversary of the arrival of the Latter-day Saint pioneers in Salt Lake Valley. A great celebration was held during the week of July 24th. Bishop O. F. Whitney wrote a Jubilee Ode entitled "Teamsters," which was set to music by Evan Stephens. On July 20th, at a reception for the pioneers held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, Evan Stephens directed one thousand voices in singing this ode.

Stephens, EvanPPThe following year, 1898, Evan took a long vacation from his strenuous labors as leader of the Choir. He left Salt Lake City by train and traveled to New York City, where he enjoyed the grand operas and plays which were running on Broadway at the time. After remaining in New York about a month, he boarded an ocean liner to visit England and his beloved Wales. At Pencader, South Wales, he visited his native village and the house where he was born. He later made a tour of several countries on the continent.

Stephens, EvanPPAfter an absence of eight months Evan returned to Salt Lake City and resumed his labors as leader of the Choir.

Stephens, EvanPPIn 1902 another tour of the Choir was undertaken to California, and successful concerts were given in San Francisco, and at Stanford University in Palo Alto.

Stephens, EvanPPAgain in 1909 a tour of the Choir was made to the Northwest, where, at the Alaska-Yukon Exposition in Seattle, several concerts were held which drew large audiences and great commendation.

Stephens, EvanPPUpon returning home Evan Stephens noted that he was beginning his twentieth year as leader of the Choir.

Stephens, EvanPP"How long my work will continue, I know not," he said. "I am ready to hand the baton over to a younger man whenever those who preside over us deem it wise or are willing; but until they give me an honorable release and a 'God bless you,' to cheer me on in other paths, or in my retirement, I hope to be able to fulfill my mission worthily where I am, and to advance and not retard the community in its onward progress in the divine art."

Stephens, EvanPPEvan was asked to continue on with his work in "the divine art." In 1911 he received a letter inviting the Choir to sing "twice daily for ten days" at Madison Square Garden in New York City. This invitation was accepted and proved to be a triumph throughout.

Stephens, EvanPPAt the conclusion of these concerts, through the efforts of Senator Reed Smoot of Utah, the Choir was invited to sing at the White House in Washington, D. C., before President and Mrs. William Howard Taft and their invited guests. The concert was excellent, and the singers received the highest commendation from President and Mrs. Taft.

Stephens, EvanPPOn the return trip to Utah, concerts were given in several of the larger cities of the country. This was the most extensive of the tours taken by the Choir under the direction of Professor Stephens; it was also the last under his leadership.

Stephens, EvanPPEvan Stephens observed his 62nd birthday on June 28, 1916. Three weeks later he sent a letter to the First Presidency, stating that he had served twenty-six years as leader of the Choir, and that he felt his place should now be filled by "a suitable and younger man." The First Presidency reluctantly accepted his resignation.

Stephens, EvanPPAfter his retirement from the Choir, Evan Stephens served on the General Music Committee of the Church. In 1920, at the request of President Heber J. Grant, he wrote a cantata depicting the life of the boy prophet, Joseph Smith, entitled "The Vision." This was to commemorate the one hundredth anniversary of the First Vision. Later on he wrote another cantata, "The Martyrs," which deals with the death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. These compositions were well received by the public in Salt Lake City.

Stephens, EvanPPEvan Stephens took great pleasure in his home at 1996 South State Street, which he kept open to all his friends. Here he died of apoplexy, on October 26, 1930. He never married. His first loves were his religion and his music.

Stephens, EvanPPProfessor Stephens wrote many songs. A few of the best known are, "Utah, We Love Thee"; "In Remembrance of Thy Suffering"; "We Ever Pray for Thee"; "Today, While the Sun Shines"; "Let Us All Press On," and "True to the Faith That Our Parents Have Cherished."

Stephens, EvanPPAt his funeral Anthony C. Lund said of him: "Evan Stephens has done more than any other one person toward musical progress of the Church and this state . . . His life was a large contribution to the cultural development of Utah and Salt Lake City in particular . . . May he rest in peace and be loved and remembered." Time has proved that Evan Stephens will be long remembered.
