Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Stevenson, EdwardPPEdward Stevenson

Stevenson, EdwardPPEdward Stevenson, a convert to the Church, missionary, intimate friend of the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon, pioneer of Utah, and for many years a member of the First Council of the Seventy, was born at Gibraltar, Spain, on May 1, 1820. His father, Joseph Stevenson, was a native of England, but was employed at Gibraltar at the time of Edward's birth.

Stevenson, EdwardPPEdward was seven years of age when his parents immigrated to America. The family settled in Michigan, near Detroit, where the father acquired a large farm. Joseph Stevenson died in 1831. Two years later Latter-day Saint missionaries came into the neighborhood and as a result of their teachings, Edward and his mother joined the Church.

Stevenson, EdwardPPIn the fall of 1834, the Prophet Joseph Smith, accompanied by his father and mother and his brother, Hyrum, visited Detroit, where Mrs. Smith's brother resided. During this visit, the Prophet performed missionary work in the countryside around Detroit. At the town of Pontiac, "in a little schoolhouse," Edward Stevenson heard him speak.

Stevenson, EdwardPP"Here are some of the Prophet's words as uttered in the schoolhouse" wrote Edward. "With uplifted hand he said: 'I am a witness that there is a God, for I saw him, in open day, while praying in a silent grove in the spring of 1820.' He further testified that God, the Eternal Father, pointing to a separate personage in the likeness of himself said: 'This is my Beloved Son, hear ye him.' Oh how these words thrilled my entire system and filled me with joy unspeakable, to behold one who, like Paul the apostle of olden time, could with boldness testify that he had been in the presence of Jesus Christ." (Juvenile Instructor, Vol. 29, p. 443.)

Stevenson, EdwardPPThe Stevenson family immigrated to Missouri in 1836 and located at Far West. They remained there until the Saints were driven out of that state in the spring of 1839. Edward and his family then moved to Nauvoo, where he took an active part in the Church until the exodus of the Saints from that city in 1846.

Stevenson, EdwardPPWriting of Oliver Cowdery, whom he had known in both Michigan and Missouri, he said:

Stevenson, EdwardPP"I have often heard him bear a faithful testimony to the restoration of the Gospel, by the visitation of an angel, in whose presence he stood in company with the Prophet Joseph Smith and David Whitmer. He testified that he beheld the plates, the leaves being turned by the angel, whose voice he heard, and that they were commanded as witnesses to bear a faithful testimony to the world, of the vision that they were favored to behold, and that the translation from the plates of the Book of Mormon was accepted of the Lord, and that it should go forth to the world, and no man on earth should stop its progress.

Stevenson, EdwardPP"Although for a time Oliver Cowdery absented himself from the body of the Church, I never have known a time when he faltered or was recreant to the trust so sacredly entrusted to him by an angel from heaven." (Millennial Star, Vol. 48, p. 420.)

Stevenson, EdwardPPEdward Stevenson made the journey across the plains to Utah in the fall of 1847. Ten years later he went on a mission to the Eastern States. Subsequently he filled several missions; in fact he crossed the plains eighteen times in connection with his missionary work.

Stevenson, EdwardPPWhile on a visit to Kirtland, Ohio, in 1869, Edward Stevenson met Martin Harris. This chance meeting resulted in the coming of Martin Harris to Utah in 1870. Elder Stevenson tells the story:

Stevenson, EdwardPP"In the year 1869 I was appointed to a mission to the United States. Having visited several of the Eastern States, I called at Kirtland, Ohio, to see the first temple that was built by our people in this generation. While there I met Martin Harris, soon after coming out of the temple.

Stevenson, EdwardPP"He took from under his arm a copy of the Book of Mormon, the first edition, I believe, and bore a faithful testimony, just the same as I had heard him bear thirty-six years previously. He said that it was his duty to continue to lift up his voice, as he had been commanded to do, in defense of the book that he held in his hand . . . and that he was daily bearing testimony to many who visited the temple.

Stevenson, EdwardPP"After patiently hearing him I felt a degree of compassion for him and in turn bore my testimony to him . . . After my arrival in Utah in 1870, I was inspired to write to Martin Harris, and soon received a reply that the spirit of God, for the first time, prompted him to go to Utah. Several letters were afterward exchanged. President Brigham Young, having read the letters, through George A. Smith requested me to get up a subscription to immigrate Martin Harris to Utah, he subscribing $25 for that purpose. Having raised the subscription to about $200, I took the railroad cars for Ohio, on July 19, 1870." (Millennial Star, Vol. 44, pp. 78-87.)

Stevenson, EdwardPPAlthough Martin Harris was eighty-seven years of age at this time, Edward Stevenson found him ready and willing to come to Utah. The two came by train, as the Union Pacific Railroad had been completed the previous year, and arrived in Salt Lake City on August 30, 1870.

Stevenson, EdwardPPSoon after his arrival in Utah, Martin Harris applied for baptism. He was accordingly baptized by Edward Stevenson, and confirmed by Orson Pratt, assisted by others of the Council of the Twelve.

Stevenson, EdwardPPAfter visiting in Salt Lake City for a few weeks, Martin Harris went to Cache Valley to reside with his son, Martin Harris, Jr. He died in the home of his son at Clarkston, Utah, on July 10, 1875, at the age of ninety-two. "On the day of his death he was bolstered up in his bed, where, with the Book of Mormon in his hand, he bore his last testimony to those who were present." When he was placed in his casket, a Book of Mormon was put in his right hand and buried with him.

Stevenson, EdwardPPEdward Stevenson had a lifelong acquaintance with David Whitmer. He first heard him speak in 1834 in Pontiac, Michigan. Fifty-two years later Edward wrote of this visit: "My first acquaintance with him (David Whitmer) was fifty-two years ago in Michigan, where he, with others, related the vision of the angel and the showing of the plates . . . I felt then, although thirteen years of age, that I was very much favored and blessed of the Lord to see and hear these men."

Stevenson, EdwardPPTwo years later Edward Stevenson again heard David Whitmer bear his testimony, in Far West, Caldwell County, Missouri. "In 1836 I met David Whitmer in Far West, Caldwell County, Missouri, and his testimony was still unchanged."

Stevenson, EdwardPPIn subsequent years Edward Stevenson had two more visits with David Whitmer. Of these he wrote in 1886:

Stevenson, EdwardPP"During the intervening time I have visited him twice, once nearly nine years ago, when I spent ten hours with him in three sittings, and again last February, when I remained from early breakfast until 2 p.m., having dinner with him."

Stevenson, EdwardPPOf this last visit Edward Stevenson wrote to Daniel H. Wells under date of February 16, 1886:

Stevenson, EdwardPP"After my visit to Independence I took a run down to Lexington Junction, forty-two miles from Kansas City, and up the Lexington railroad five miles to Richmond, Ray County, Missouri, and called on David Whitmer, desiring to see once more the only surviving witness of the visitation of the angel, who commanded him with others to bear record of the Book of Mormon and this gospel dispensation of the nineteenth century.

Stevenson, EdwardPP"Eight years ago I visited him, and fifty-two years ago I heard him bear his testimony, as also Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris, when I was only a boy fourteen years of age . . . David Whitmer is now past eighty-one years of age . . . He is very feeble, his weight being less than one hundred pounds.

Stevenson, EdwardPP"In this, his last testimony, he said to me: 'As sure as the sun shines and I live, just so sure did the angel appear unto me and Joseph Smith, and I heard his voice and did see the angel standing before us, and on the table were the plates and sword of Laban, and the ball and compass.'" (Jenson's Historical Record, p. 211.) David Whitmer died at Richmond, Missouri, two years after this visit with Edward Stevenson.

Stevenson, EdwardPPEdward Stevenson, after many years of missionary work, was chosen to fill a vacancy in the First Council of the Seventy at the October conference in 1894. He was seventy-four years of age at the time. After he became one of the General Authorities, he traveled throughout the Church, attending conferences in the stakes and missions. At Walla, Walla, Washington, he suffered a severe illness in 1896. He returned to his home in Salt Lake City and died there on January 27, 1897. His name will always be linked with the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon, all of whom were his personal friends.
