Preston Nibley, Stalwarts of Mormonism ( 1954)

Wells, Daniel H.PPDaniel Hanmer Wells

Wells, Daniel H.PPDaniel Hanmer Wells was a convert to the Church, a close friend of the Prophet Joseph Smith, a pioneer of Utah, prominent military man in the early days of the territory, mayor of Salt Lake City, counselor to Brigham Young in the First Presidency, and first president of the Manti Temple.

Wells, Daniel H.PPDaniel H. Wells was born at Trenton, New York, on October 27, 1814. He was the son of Daniel and Catherine Chapin Wells. When Daniel was twelve years of age his father died; the boy then moved westward with his mother and sister and settled on a farm at Commerce, Illinois.

Wells, Daniel H.PPWhen he was twenty-three years of age, Daniel was married, on March 12, 1837, to Eliza Rebecca Robinson. Two years later, when the Latter-day Saints were forced to leave Missouri, because of the persecutions of their enemies, they selected the town of Commerce, Illinois, as the new gathering place; the name of the settlement was then changed to Nauvoo.

Wells, Daniel H.PPDaniel H. Wells received the new settlers kindly and became a true and loyal friend of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The land on which the Nauvoo Temple was built once belonged to Daniel H. Wells. When persecution broke out against the Saints in Hancock County, Squire Wells, as he was familiary called, came out boldly in their defense. The Prophet Joseph Smith, when on his way to Carthage in June, 1844, called at the home of Squire Wells to bid his friend goodbye. Of this event Daniel Wells said later:

Wells, Daniel H.PP"I watched the caravan ride away, with tears in my eyes and a choking sensation in my throat, for I knew I had touched the hand of a prophet of God, a man above all other men; that he was riding to his martyrdom and I would never see his like again."

Wells, Daniel H.PPAfter the death of the Prophet and during the exodus of the Saints to the West, Daniel H. Wells decided to cast his lot with the Latter-day Saints. He was baptized at Nauvoo on August 9, 1846, and shortly thereafter joined the exiles at Winter Quarters. In the spring of 1848 he accompanied President Brigham Young and a large group of immigrants on their journey to Salt Lake Valley.

Wells, Daniel H.PPDaniel H. Wells held many offices during the early days of Utah. In March, 1852, he received the commission of general in the Nauvoo Legion. In 1857-58 he was in command of the Utah troops as they opposed the coming of Johnston's Army. He also served as commanding officer of the Legion in various Indian uprisings.

Wells, Daniel H.PPIn 1857 Daniel H. Wells was chosen as second counselor to President Brigham Young in the First Presidency. He served in this capacity for twenty years.

Wells, Daniel H.PPWhen the Manti Temple was completed and dedicated in May, 1888, Daniel H. Wells was appointed to take charge as president.
