t DaviD & Goliath attle i s the l orD ’ s he B

• Just as Saul was tested, David needed to be tested as well.

• Saul’s life was filled with fear and depression.

• When the Philistines challenged Israel, the king of Israel had to lead God’s

armies to victory.

• However, when the mighty Philistine hero, Goliath, challenged the Israelites to

fight him, all cowered in terror (1 Sam. 17:11).

• Saul failed again to lead Israel’s armies.

• During this battle, Jesse, David’s father, sent David to check on his older

brothers at the field of battle (1 Sam. 17:17–19).

• As he arrived and heard the commotion in the camp, David was surprised

with the Philistine’s defiance of God’s army.

• With great courage and faith, David accepted the challenge and stepped

forward to fight the Philistine.

Contrasting Warriors

The Bible’s description of Goliath is important. It stands in contrast to David.

Opponent Goliath David

Description Terrifying, giant warrior Shepherd boy

Height Nearly nine feet tall Unknown and unimpressive

Weapons Sword, spear, and javelin Shepherd’s staff and sling, five

of bronze and iron; armor pebbles; a heart of faith and

weighing about 125 pounds complete trust in the Lord

“Who is this uncircumcised

Philistine that he should defy the

armies of the living God?”(17:26).

David’s answer showed his utter confidence

in his God: “You come against me with

sword and spear and javelin, but I come

against you in the name of the Lord

Almighty, the God of the armies of Israel,

whom you have defied” (17:45). The battle

ended before it had even started. Like many

other parts of the Bible show, no one and

nothing can stand against the Lord of

creation (see Ex. 15:1–18).

© 2009 Rose This free eChart is taken from the pamphlet Life of David ISBN 9781596363090. The full-color, © 2012 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies,

glossy, and easy-to-understand pamphlet tracks every major event in King David’s life as well as but do not post on the internet or send via email.Your

Publishing Inc. This chart on David and Goliath is just one page from the full-color pamphlet, Life of David, Click here to receive FREE www.rose-publishing.com which gives a time line of David’s life, map of his kingdom, comparison charts of King Saul Rose Bible e-Charts via email.

the important people around him. and David’s attitudes toward God and toward each other, David’s family tree, the Psalms of www. friends may sign up for Free Rose Bible eCharts & Save $5 on your $25 order enter coupon code: 5EC12 at

rose-publishing.com. David, and the symbolism in the lives of David and Jesus Christ. ISBN: 9781596363090 Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Esther

Esther, a 14-page full-color pamphlet includes a

summary of Esther’s story, a map of Persia and the

Middle East, a time line, a background on the biblical

feast of Purim, comparison charts on the key people,

Hebrew/Persian meanings of their names, and the

spiritual insights between the two banquets.

Pamphlet ............ 9781596363113 ...........$3.99

Also available as PDF and in Spanish.

Minor Prophets

The books of the Bible written by the 12 minor

prophets contain some of the most powerful and

beloved portions of Scripture. Minor Prophets is a 14-

page pamphlet that gives us an inside view of what the

Lord values—a life lived wholeheartedly for him.

Pamphlet ............ 9781596364301 ...........$3.99

Also available as PDF.

Life of David

This handy 14-page guide gives you the entire life of King David at a

glance. From humble beginnings as a shepherd boy to king over Israel,

David is one of the most beloved and impressive characters in the Bible.

Deluxe Then and Now Bible Map Book

Despite many personal failures and weaknesses, David went down in

Deluxe Then and Now® Bible Map Book includes full-

history as “a man after God’s own heart.” Examine in detail the historical

color Bible maps with clear-plastic overlays that show

background of biblical events, a map of Bible places, This Bible pamphlet

modern cities and countries. Now you can see where

tracks every major event in King David’s life as well as the important people

Bible places are today.

around him.

Book ................... 9781596360846 ...........$29.99

Pamphlet ....................9781596364301 ................$3.99

Also available as a PDF.

Also available as a PDF. Quantity discounts available.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
