Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: Illinois ( 1995)

Introduction to Regional Studies-Illinois

During the summer of 1993, faculty members of Religious Education at Brigham Young University spent several days visiting important LDS Church history sites in the state of Illinois. Illinois played a pivotal and important role in the history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. From 1839 to 1846, Illinois became a place of refuge from the storms of expulsion in Missouri as well as a place of settlement for the converts from the Eastern States and Great Britain. Rapid church growth took place during the Illinois period. Furthermore, the Lord revealed much of the organization and structure of the Church while the Saints lived in Illinois. One important example is the placing of the Quorum of Twelve next to the First Presidency in the seniority and governing of the Church. In addition, important priesthood practices and ordinances were publicly taught during this period. Missionary efforts expanded with the gospel being preached not only in the United States and Canada but also overseas. The Saints' stay in Illinois proved to be a time of harmony and unity as well as disharmony and apostasy. It became a place for the sealing of testimonies with blood and a place of departure to lands of isolation.

vLDS history in Illinois is indeed fascinating. Consequently, in preparation for this trip, faculty members researched and wrote on the early Church history in Illinois in order to provide each other with greater in-depth knowledge about the time period. This publication is the result of their work. It is not a complete review of the history of the Church in Illinois, but rather insights to some of the events and challenges of that time. It is hoped that the reader will gain a better understanding of the people and events during the Illinois period in order to more fully appreciate the blessings we now enjoy as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

NAUVOO HISTORY SYMPOSIUM COMMITTEE H. Dean Garrett, Editor Larry C. Porter Donald Q. Cannon Arnold K. Garr
