Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: Illinois ( 1995)

John C. Bennett: For Prophet or Profit

Andrew C. Skinner

Tragically, the kingdom-building efforts at Nauvoo produced a number of insiders-turned-outsiders, men who played a significant role in bringing to pass the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum. Not the least of them was John C. Bennett, according to John Taylor. [^1]

249History has not been kind to John C. Bennett: epithets include hypocrite, scoundrel, moral leper, eel, yankee huckster, and Benedict Arnold of Mormon history. However, in our own day some have suggested a reevaluation of the man who seems to have been one of the Church's most bitter foes. Called a cardboard villain at a 1989 history conference—meaning, as one supposes, a person whose reputation for villainy far exceeds the supporting facts—John C. Bennett deserves a review of his life in order that we can examine his motives for coming to Nauvoo and associating with the Saints.

Biographical Sketch

Described in his prime as being "5 feet 7 or 8 inches high, [with] dark complexion, dark eyes, Roman nose, [no] upper front teeth; quick spoken, [and of] good language," [^2] [^3]

Soon after his licensing, Bennett married a young woman from Plymouth, Massachusetts. [^4] He then practiced medicine in several locations in Ohio, Indiana, Virginia (now West Virginia), and Illinois (where he developed an extensive clientele). Later on, Bennett would send extracts from a newspaper called The Louisville Journal to Joseph Smith as evidence of his high standing in the medical profession. [^5]

250Indeed, by 1834 Bennett had held several professorships, including one in gynecology at Willoughby University, Ohio, where he was commissioned to organize the medical school (1834) and serve as its first dean. But he was dismissed by the board of trustees after a stay of only a few months because he proved to be a "promoter rather than an educator." [^6]

250As early as 1829, Bennett was busy trying to found a Methodist university in Ohio. One year later he endeavored to establish a "Christian University" in the same state. Both attempts failed, but he remained undaunted. In 1831, he was leading the way toward securing a charter for Wheeling University (Virginia) and received an appointment as professor and dean of its proposed medical department. Ultimately, nothing came of this venture, but he did not cease to look for opportunities to promote new things.

250While continuing to pursue his various educational and medical enterprises between 1825 and 1830, Bennett also preached, on occasion, as a Methodist minister. In 1830 he became a disciple of Alexander Campbell. Another minister of this faith, Sidney Rigdon, became acquainted with Bennett before Rigdon converted to Mormonism in the fall of 1830. [^7] [^8]

In January 1833, Bennett and nine associates obtained from the Indiana legislature a charter for another nonsectarian Christian college to be located in New Albany, Indiana. The group immediately changed the name of the school to Indiana University, [^9] named Dr. Bennett as president, and began conferring degrees of several kinds even though, apparently, no instruction was ever given. Some degrees were of an honorary nature, but the list also included the Doctor of Medicine degree, "for which diplomas were sold throughout the Middle West and as far east as New York." [^10]

251This enterprise has been labelled the first medical diploma mill in the United States. [^11] It might also be the source of Bennett's own MD and LLD degrees, which he appended to his name and jealously guarded. [^12] An 1845 communication published in the Western Medical Reformer, Cincinnati, Ohio, referred to John C. Bennett as

251that notorious personage who, in 1833-34, traveled through New York, the north of Pennsylvania and Ohio, and peddled his New Albany diplomas to every ignoramus who could raise ten dollars to buy one. He filled the diplomas and peddled them out. [^13]

251In addition to his medical title, Bennett also began to foster the image of a military man—an image he seems in some ways to have preferred. No one knows exactly what brought him to Illinois in June 1838, or why he was so quickly given extremely high offices in the state's militia. But eight months after settling in Fairfield, Wayne County, he was appointed by Governor Thomas Carlin "Brigadier-General of the Invincible Dragoons of the 2nd Division of Illinois Militia," a militia company of Edwards, White, and Wabash Counties in the southeastern part of the state. In July 1840 he was appointed "Quartermaster-General of the Militia of the State of Illinois," again, by Governor Carlin. [^14]

251Clearly, John C. Bennett was a successful promoter—of many different things—as well as an experienced, if not professional, lobbyist for his causes. These were not necessarily bad things to be, especially on the edge of the U.S. frontier in the late 1830s. Nor did they automatically make someone a bad person. The emerging West needed promoters and organizers as well as skilled medical personnel and Bennett possessed these qualities. However, Doctor Bennett's reputation deteriorated rapidly in the 1840s, after his encounter with the Mormons. His past, particularly his marriage and Masonic difficulties, caught up with him at Nauvoo, and all his previous activities began to be viewed with suspicion.

General Bennett probably first came in contact with the Church in 1834 while Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were at Kirtland, it being only four miles from Willoughby University. Perhaps Rigdon and Bennett renewed the acquaintanceship they had struck up when both were Campbellite ministers. Bennett later wrote to Smith and Rigdon, when the Saints were in Missouri undergoing persecution and then expulsion, and offered to come to their aid with all the forces he could muster in Illinois, because "his bosom swelled with indignation" at the treatment the Mormons were receiving. [^15]

252In a letter dated 25 July 1840 from Fairfield, Illinois, addressed to his "dear friends," Bennett communicated his happiness over the fact that God came to the rescue of the Saints when in Missouri and that they were finally "in a civilized land," enjoying peace and happiness. He then proposed a timetable for joining the Saints which conveyed a sense of immediacy. [^16]

252Two days later, on 27 July, Bennett dispatched another letter to Sidney Rigdon and Joseph Smith, apparently to reinforce in their minds the strength of his resolve to join with them. However, one is struck by the image Bennett presents of himself in these two letters—a busy man (he signs off from the first letter, "in haste"), a man of importance who has weighty responsibilities concerning the business of both state and nation, one who is a successful professional, highly respected, a man who is well educated (as evidenced by his use of Latin phrases), and one who profoundly believes in the cause of the Prophet and people of Mormonism and, thus, wants to help them. And of course the idea of Bennett as a promoter is again reinforced and emerges as the golden thread running through the fabric of his life. [^17]

252Three days after the 27 July letter, Bennett sent yet another note to Joseph and Sidney expressing increasing anxiety to be with the Saints. The tone of this third letter evinces somewhat greater humility on his part. But, at the same time, Bennett reminded them that at the time of the Missouri conflict he had proffered assistance to the Saints and, had the problem not ended so quickly, he could have assisted them with his "military knowledge and prowess." [^18]

Joseph Smith extended a warm welcome to Bennett to come to Nauvoo, but he by no means held out to him any material inducements or false hopes—only possible spiritual blessings. He concluded an 8 August 1840 letter to Bennett with a bit of poignant humor: "Therefore my general invitation is, Let all that will, come, and partake of the poverty of Nauvoo freely." [^19]

253One is inclined to believe that such frank talk would have discouraged the faint-hearted, the thoroughly corrupt, or the monetary schemers from coming to Nauvoo. Perhaps Doctor Bennett came for at least two reasons: first, because the promoter in him saw a chance to be involved in another new and significant adventure—getting in on the ground level, as it were—and second, because he knew that he was truly needed and could make a life-saving contribution. There is no question that Joseph was glad to have him help build Nauvoo.

253Some may believe that it was a poor prophet indeed, or at the very least, a poor judge of character, who would allow a man like John C. Bennett to join the Saints at Nauvoo, but the issues are not so clear-cut. First of all, Bennett's correspondence of July 1840 seems to express a genuine, sincere desire to join in the kingdom-building efforts. Because we have the benefit of viewing Bennett's life in its entirety, as B. H. Roberts infers, there is the temptation to ascribe dishonorable intentions and ulterior motives to every one of Bennett's actions or ventures. [^20] But those who knew Bennett best in 1840 held that his motives for coming to Nauvoo were not totally corrupt. John Taylor, who was closely associated with Bennett, said, "Respecting John C. Bennett I was well acquainted with him. At one time he was a good man." [^21]

253Second, even prophets cannot always discern the wicked from the righteous. Joseph himself had been taught this principle, at least by 1828, in a revelation:

253But as you cannot always judge the righteous, or as you cannot always tell the wicked from the righteous, therefore I say unto you, hold your peace until I shall see fit to make all things known unto the world concerning the matter. (D&C 10:37)

253Third, the Prophet Joseph Smith operated under a different set of personal guidelines than some of us today. He said:

253I don't care what a man's character is; if he's my friend—a true friend, I will be a friend to him, and preach the Gospel of salvation to him, and give him good counsel, helping him out of his difficulties.

253Friendship is one of the grand fundamental principles of "Mormonism"; [it is designed] to revolutionize and civilize the world and cause wars and contentions to cease and men to become friends and brothers. [^22]

254Undoubtedly, in the Prophet's judgment, John C. Bennett had met the criteria both for his friendship and for association with the Church. In his letter of 15 August 1840, the final announcement of his imminent arrival in Nauvoo, Bennett stated to the Prophet that he had determined "to devote [his] time and energies to the advancement of the cause of truth and virtue, and the advocacy of the holy religion which you have so nobly defended, and so honorably sustained." [^23]

254Fourth, Joseph undoubtedly felt the Church at that time was in need of a man possessing the apparent abilities and talents of John C. Bennett. During the year 1840, a number of prominent, faithful men, who had proven true to the cause of God, died in Nauvoo—some from the effects of their sufferings in Missouri. Among them were Edward Partridge, first bishop of the restored Church (who died 27 May 1840), and Joseph Smith, Sr., the Prophet's father (who would pass away 14 September 1840). Joseph Smith also had to deal with an ailing Sidney Rigdon at that time. Joseph Smith knew well that Bennett was a promoter and organizer—of medical schools, state militias, and Masonic lodges; and that the kingdom could use him. Robert Flanders concludes:

254Bennett seemed to be a man of ambition, force, energy, and intelligence—qualities that had already won him preferment in the world. They were attributes which Smith possessed himself and admired in others, and he expected this prestigious new[aid[e]-de-camp to 'open doors' for the advancement of Nauvoo. [^24]

254Fifth, Joseph undoubtedly believed, as the Church today believes, that God uses both wicked and righteous people to fulfil the plan of his grand design. Regarding the use of people—all kinds of people—to further the kingdom along, Ezra Taft Benson has stated that God uses all men, especially righteous men, to bring about his purposes. It was so in the past and it will continue to be so. [^25]

Bennett at Nauvoo

By September 1840, John C. Bennett had moved to Nauvoo and begun to enjoy the favor of the Prophet. Very little time elapsed between his arrival and the point at which his presence and influence were felt, as he began to "open doors" for the advancement of the new city. At the Sunday morning session of the October 1840 conference, Bennett was appointed to help draft the Nauvoo Charter and was selected chief Mormon lobbyist to secure passage of the bill in the state legislature at Springfield. [^26]

255The city charter, including charters for the Nauvoo Legion and the University of the City of Nauvoo, was signed by Governor Thomas Carlin on 16 December 1840. Stephen A. Douglas, then secretary of the state of Illinois and leader of the Democratic party, had used his influence to expedite the passage of the bill. The first election to choose members of the Nauvoo city council, as provided by the charter, took place on 1 February 1841. John C. Bennett was elected mayor and, shortly thereafter (February 3), was also appointed chancellor of the university. On 4 February, he was elected major general of the Nauvoo Legion while Joseph Smith became lieutenant general. [^27]

255Within four days, 1-4 February 1841, John Bennett had been elevated to three of the highest civil posts in Nauvoo. He executed legal punishments, helped select textbooks for use in the common schools, organized and commanded an army of four thousand well-drilled Mormons, and was one of the founders of the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Society. He was also instrumental in starting the Masonic lodge. [^28] In May 1841, Stephen Douglas appointed Bennett "Master in Chancery" for Hancock County—a type of judicial office held by appointment. [^29]

255At the April 1841 general conference, Bennett was elevated to the First Presidency of the Church and appointed Assistant President, until such time as Sidney Rigdon's health should be restored. While he did not accomplish much in this office administratively or spiritually, it has been argued that his other contributions to the material betterment of the Mormon people are clearly demonstrable inasmuch as some of his economic policies were reestablished in the West after the Saints moved from Nauvoo. [^30]

Without question, Bennett helped improve Nauvoo's environment. As mayor he had the swamps drained and the flats cleared. He worked to create a healthier population by encouraging better eating habits and sanitation. [^31] There are many references to his promotion of the tomato as a medicinal agent. One such notice in theTimes and Seasons implies the weight of Bennett's influence in matters of public health: "Dr. Bennett is of the opinion that most of the bilious effections to which our citizens are subjected during the hot seasons, can be prevented by the free use of the tomato—we are of the same opinion and, as health is essential to our happiness and prosperity as a people, we would earnestly recommend its culture to our citizens." [^32]

The Conflict Begins

Many sensed that Nauvoo was making impressive strides forward with John C. Bennett's help. However, chinks began to appear in Bennett's armor in 1841. He had entered Nauvoo as an eligible bachelor and pursued a relationship with at least one woman. But in March 1841, the Prophet received a letter which stated that Bennett had a wife and three children back in McConnelsville, Ohio, and that he was of questionable character. Joseph held the letter in reserve (having grown accustomed to good men having evil spoken concerning them) but told Bennett to cease his liaison with the woman who began thinking that Bennett was going to marry her. According to the Prophet, Bennett only "broke off his publicly wicked actions to sink deeper into iniquity and hypocrisy." [^33]

256On 15 June 1841 Hyrum Smith and William Law wrote Joseph Smith from the East and confirmed Bennett's prior marital status and difficulties. When confronted with the letter Bennett frankly admitted the truth of its contents. He then attempted to commit suicide by ingesting poison, but was revived. Because of this apparent display of remorse, Joseph gave his once close friend a second chance to reform his life, but, according to the Prophet, Bennett persisted in continuing his adulterous ways unbeknown to many.

The catalyst for Bennett's moral turpitude seems to have been the doctrine of plural marriage. Evidence suggests that the principle was revealed to the Prophet as early as 1831 but was not written down until 1843 or openly preached until 1852. However, this sacred order of marriage and family life was confidentially taught to a few of Joseph's closest and most spiritually mature associates at Nauvoo. Those who accepted it often did so only after they worked through a personal crisis of faith and knew of the doctrine's strict association with covenants, obligations, and responsibilities—the antitheses of debauchery! Those who were not invited to participate, who only heard rumors about the practice of taking more than one wife, sometimes distorted and twisted the teaching to accommodate their own perverted notions or gratify their appetites. Capitalizing on the rumors and lack of understanding among Church members, and using his favored status, Bennett sought to have illicit sexual relationships by telling women they were married to him "spiritually" and that Joseph Smith approved it. [^34]

257Partly as a result of the Bennett incident, Joseph became concerned enough about dissension, division, and corruption in the Church, during the early part of 1842, that he thought it necessary to alert others. During a 30 March 1842 Relief Society meeting, Emma read a letter to the group from the Prophet and other Church leaders warning against "iniquitous characters, [who] say they have authority from Joseph or the First Presidency." The Relief Society sisters were told that they were,

257in the name of the Lord, to check & destroy any faith that any innocent person may have in any such characters; for we do not want any one to believe any thing as coming from us, contrary to the old established morals & virtues & scriptural laws, regulating the habits, customs & conduct of society: and all persons pretending to be authorized by us, whether they are prophets, Seers, or revelators: Patriarchs, Twelve Apostles, Elders, Priests, Majors, Generals, City Councillors, Aldermen, Marshalls, Police, Lord Mayors or the Devil, are alike culpable & shall be damned for such evil practices. [^35]

257The reference here to "Majors," "Generals," and "Lord Mayors," as applying to John C. Bennett, could hardly have escaped the notice of the attentive. Furthermore, the juxtaposition of "Majors" and "Generals" sounds very close to major general—Bennett's title in the Legion.

257 Tensions, even hostility, between John Bennett and Joseph Smith began to come to a head on 7 May 1842. The Nauvoo Legion was on parade in the morning; in the afternoon it was separated into cohorts and fought an animated sham battle as part of the day's military display. Bennett tried to coax the Prophet into various unprotected positions on the battlefield in order to harm him. But the Prophet kept his bodyguard at his side and afterward commented that the Spirit had whispered that there was "mischief concealed in that sham battle" and that Bennett would have to answer for it on the Day of Judgment. [^36]

258On 15 May 1842 (eight days after the mock-battle incident), the Prophet initiated Church disciplinary proceedings to investigate Bennett's behavior by gathering testimony from those found to be involved with him. The Nauvoo High Council discovered that as a doctor, with interests in gynecology, Bennett had taken advantage of his close contacts with female patients. He promised and may have performed abortions. [^37] The Wasp, a Mormon Nauvoo newspaper, reported that Bennett tried to poison the husband of a woman with whom he wanted to pursue a relationship. [^38] He was also found to have frequented a brothel. [^39]

258 John C. Bennett was not alone in his intrigue. Witnesses testified that others were seducing females in the name of Church authority and doctrine, but the name of John C. Bennett loomed largest within the High Council court. With all of his illicit activity coming to light, Bennett resigned as mayor on 17 May and indicated, months later, that this was the day he withdrew his own name from Church membership records. [^40]

258At a city council meeting on 19 May, John Bennett reaffirmed what he had sworn to in an affidavit two days earlier, namely that Joseph Smith had never taught him in public or private that illicit intercourse with females was justifiable, that anyone who said that Joseph Smith had given him authority to hold illicit intercourse was a "liar in the face of God," and that the life and character of Joseph were strictly virtuous, both publicly and privately, as far as he knew. [^41]

258Bennett was also disfellowshipped from the Nauvoo Masonic Lodge and cashiered by the court-martial of the Nauvoo Legion. [^42] On 26 May he attended a Lodge meeting of nearly one hundred brethren and acknowledged his wicked and licentious conduct toward certain females in Nauvoo. The Prophet Joseph noted that "so deep was his apparent sense of his guilt and unfitness for respectable society" that he broke down and cried like a child. But, owing to all that Joseph had begun to learn about Bennett, the Prophet wasn't sure whether Bennett was acting or really sincere. Joseph's journal entry concludes: "So deeply did he feign, or really feel contrition for the moment, that he was forgiven still." [^43]

The records of the Nauvoo Masonic Lodge, for the period extending from May through August 1842, indicate that the Lodge took great care and time to fully consider the case against John C. Bennett. Emotional reaction was at a minimum; both Christian and Masonic charity were graciously extended to Bennett. A reasonable effort was made to keep matters of freemasonry separate from Church concerns over his behavior.

259The minutes of the 8 August 1842 meeting disclose the separate charges upon which Bennett was tried and unanimously expelled from freemasonry. They include various acts of adultery, perjury, and embezzlement. [^44]

259Before he departed from Nauvoo in June 1842, Bennett stayed at the home of Robert D. Foster, a prominent local businessman who had joined the Church in 1839. [^45]

259Bennett apparently left Nauvoo sometime around mid-June 1842. Perhaps his departure was precipitated by the events of 18 June, the day that the Prophet decided to disclose publicly all of Bennett's immoral activities. He spoke to thousands, "in great plainness," about Bennett's wickedness. [^46] This was the final devastation which Bennett had been trying to avoid. In May, when he had been notified of official Church disciplinary action against him, he was also granted a reprieve from public humiliation on account of his earnest pleadings that the newspapers not carry notices of his situation—"for his mother's sake." [^47]

259By mid-June the doctor's humiliation became complete, having been exposed before the High Council, the Nauvoo city council, the Masonic lodge, members of the Church, and the general public. It was time to fight back, and Bennett did so with success. As an experienced promoter he knew just how to go to work in this latest cause—that of marshalling forces to take revenge and save face.

Bennett's post-June activities reveal him to be the principal character responsible for (1) instigating three major splits in the highest levels of Mormon hierarchy; (2) causing numerous other defections; (3) stimulating great persecution against the Mormons; (4) diverting the Church from missionary and administrative concerns to deal with internal problems; and (5) creating a volatile atmosphere in which the murders of Joseph and Hyrum could occur. Two years after Bennett's defection, enemies and dissenters (some of whom had been associated with him) published The Nauvoo Expositor to expose Joseph Smith and plural marriage and thus set in motion events culminating in the Prophet's martyrdom. [^48]

260After Bennett left Nauvoo he deliberately planned to attack the Prophet verbally, promote dissension at Nauvoo and stir up persecution around the country. He spent early July in Carthage and Warsaw, two Illinois towns known for their deep-seated anti-Mormon sentiments. From there Bennett went to Springfield where he contacted The Sangamo Journal which began to publish his attacks on Mormonism. In a weekly series of open letters Bennett charged the Mormons with, among other things, political maneuvering to gain control of Hancock County, responsibility for the recent attempts on the life of Missouri governor Lilburn W. Boggs, and supporting a degenerate hierarchy corrupted by gross sexual misconduct—an ironic twist indeed! Bennett openly stated that anyone who was a friend of Joseph Smith was an enemy of his. [^49]

260Having begun to spread effectively his vilifications, John C. Bennett embarked on an extended speaking tour of the East in July 1842. His stops included St. Louis, Louisville, Cincinnati, Cleveland, New York, Boston, Salem, back to New York, Philadelphia, Buffalo, Kalamazoo, Chicago, and eventually back to Springfield and St. Louis. A notice in The Cincinnati Republican for 26 July 1842 presents the general flavor of his activities.

260General Bennett, the distinguished seceder from the Mormon faith, was in town on Sunday, and stopped at the Broadway Hotel. He made so many startling disclosures of the iniquities practiced by Joe Smith on the noodles congregated at Nauvoo that his life is considered in danger of the assassin's steel. He left yesterday morning on the Robert T. Lytle for the East. [^50]

260While in St. Louis the first time, Bennett began to contemplate publishing a book on Mormonism. Apparently, local newspapers were opposed to the idea since too many people were already attempting to make money off the Mormons. Undaunted, Bennett continued to work toward securing a publisher.

In November 1842, Bennett's still famous work, The History of the Saints; or, An Expose of Joe Smith and Mormonism, rolled off the press of Boston publishers, Leland and Whiting. The book is mainly a collection of affidavits, certificates and letters, anti-Mormon testimonies, and articles previously published by Bennett, mostly in newspapers such as The Sangamo Journal. Its length runs to some 344 dull pages.

261In his book, Bennett explicitly stated that his express purpose behind joining Mormonism, for a brief time, was to gather enough firsthand information "to expose the enormous iniquities perpetrated by one of the grossest and most infamous imposters [sic]" on earth, to overthrow Joseph Smith, and "to save [his] country from the most dreadful evils and the establishment of a false and persecuting religion." [^51] [^52]

261When Bennett's support of Rigdon did not pan out, he next gave his allegiance to and promoted the cause of James J. Strang who came forward declaring himself to be Joseph's ordained successor. Strang also produced a letter, purportedly written by the Prophet himself in June 1844, which instructed him to gather the Saints in a Zion to be established in Wisconsin. [^53] [^54]

261After he fell from grace among the Strangites, Bennett moved around the country, practicing medicine and dentistry, breeding poultry, lecturing, writing, and promoting his enterprizes. He ended up in Polk City, Iowa, where he died in 1867.

Conclusion

It is clear that John C. Bennett was a man of energy, passion, and even genius. He established or was instrumental in helping to establish universities, medical facilities, faculties, tools, techniques, remedies, military units, governmental posts, new agricultural institutions and methods, professional and fraternal societies; high church offices, and civil procedures. He wrote books and articles, gave public lectures, and taught classes. He attempted to spread charm, sometimes even good will, and brotherhood.

262But John Bennett was also restless and unstable. Most of his endeavors were abandoned after a relatively brief period of time, usually under a cloud of ill will and suspicion, or under unknown circumstances. Above all, he seems to have possessed the desire and ability to promote himself. And one detects in him a fleeting humility—at best.

262As noted, John C. Bennett has been called the Benedict Arnold of Mormon history. Perhaps it would be just as instructive to regard him as the "Jekyll and Hyde" of Mormon history. He is a complex figure, an enigma, and a mass of contradictory motivations. Before June 1842, he publicly maintained his desire to be in harmony with the Prophet. After that time, literally almost overnight, he became vicious in his attempts to bring down Joseph Smith. Before June 1842, Bennett was a great supporter of the Brethren and urged all to stand by them, and them to stand by each other. After June 1842, he began to hate Joseph Smith and considered everyone an enemy who claimed friendship with the Prophet. On the one hand, he promised repeatedly to comply with principles of moral decency. On the other hand, he sank deeper into the mire of illicit, extramarital sex.

As Bennett himself indicated, love is what brought him to Nauvoo—love for the Brethren and the Church, and the principles it taught. Did he come to Nauvoo for the sake of the prophets of God rather than the profits of the world? Were his motives pure in 1840? Probably—if one is willing to accept John Taylor's assessment. Was he ever completely devoid of schemes or the promotional instinct? Probably not. But both Bennett's love for Nauvoo and his promotional skills opened many doors for the kingdom and created a more solid foundation upon which the Church could be built. Ultimately his hatred and duplicity also closed some doors and contributed to instability. But Bennett himself was the great loser.

263If Bennett's love for the Brethren could have produced in him a constant loyalty toward the Church, and if that constant loyalty had been combined with his considerable talents, John C. Bennett might have become one of the immortal pioneer builders of the West and heroes of the kingdom. Unfortunately, his passions resulted in the exact opposite. It may, in fact, have been the principle of plural marriage, which was withheld from him, that was the very test designed to determine whether he could remain loyal to God's anointed and channel his love into those avenues the Lord requires of his most trusted Saints.

263"And for his love he shall be great, if he do this if he continue," says D&C 124:17 concerning John C. Bennett. Apparently, his great strength was also his great weakness.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Church (7 vols. Ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980), 7:56; hereafterHC.
[^2] Proceedings of the Grand Lodge of Illinois, 1942, A.F. & A.M. in Mervin B. Hogan, The Involvement of John Cook Bennett with Mormonism and Freemasonry at Nauvoo (Salt Lake City: Author's Published Manuscript), 22.
[^3] James J. Tyler, John Cook Bennett, Colorful Freemason of the Early Nineteenth Century (n.p. n.d.), 5. Publication reprinted from the Proceedings of the Grand Lodge of Ohio, 1947.
[^4] Robert T. Divett, Medicine and the Mormons: An Introduction to the History of Latter-day Saints Health Care (Bountiful, UT: Horizon Publishers, 1981), 69.
[^5] Tyler, Bennett, Colorful Freemason 3. For reference to The Louisiville Journal see HC 4:168.
[^6] Ibid., 6.
[^7] Frederick C. Waite, "The First Medical Diploma Mill in the United States," Bulletin of the History of Medicine (Baltimore, 1946), 20: 496. See also Kenneth W. Godfrey, Causes of Mormon, Non-Mormon Conflict in Hancock County, Illinois, 1839-1846 (PhD dissertation, Brigham Young Univ, 1967), 113.
[^8] Divett, Medicine and the Mormons, 69.
[^9] Waite, "First Medical Diploma Mill," 496. This is not related to the present Indiana University.
[^10] Tyler, Bennett, Colorful Freemason, 5.
[^11] Waite, "First Medical Diploma Mill," 495.
[^12] Ibid., 497. Frederick C. Waite made a careful search of the lists of graduates from all medical schools in the United States prior to 1833 and did not find Bennett's name anywhere.
[^13] Western Medical Reformer, (Cincinnati: 1845) V:13, quoted in Waite, 499.
[^14] John C. Bennett, The History of the Saints or, An Expose of Joe Smith and Mormonism (Boston: Leland & Whiting, 1842), 14.
[^15] B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Provo, UT: Brigham Young Univ. Press, 1965) 2:49; hereafter CHC.
[^16] HC 4:168-70.
[^17] Ibid.
[^18] Ibid., 4:172.
[^19] Ibid., 4:178.
[^20] CHC 2:48.
[^21] HC 5:81.
[^22] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1970), 316.
[^23] HC 4:179.
[^24] Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo, Kingdom on the Mississippi, (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1975), 95.
[^25] Ezra Taft Benson, "Civic Standards for the Faithful Saints," Ensign, No. 6, 25 (July 1972): 59-60.
[^26] HC 4:205.
[^27] Ibid., 4:287, 296.
[^28] Flanders, Nauvoo, 247.
[^29] Bennett, History of the Saints, 25.
[^30] Leonard J. Arrington, "Centrifugal Tendencies in Mormon History," To the Glory of God, Madsen and Tate, eds. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972), 168.
[^31] Divett, Medicine and the Mormons, 65.
[^32] Times and Seasons, No. 13, 2:404.
[^33] HC 5:36.
[^34] Encyclopedia of Mormonism, Daniel H. Ludlow, ed., s.v. "Plural Marriage," 3:1093.
[^35] Quoted in Richard S. Van Wagoner, "Sarah M. Pratt: The Shaping of an Apostate," Dialogue, (Sum 1986), 74. See also Eliza R. Snow, "A Record of the Organization and Proceedings of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo." Microfilm.
[^36] HC 5:4.
[^37] Jeruiah N. Goddard Affidavit, August 28, 1842. The Wasp, July 27, 1842.
[^38] The Wasp, July 27, 1842.
[^39] Times and Seasons, 5:891-92.
[^40] Bennett, History of the Saints, 40-41.
[^41] HC 5:38-39.
[^42] HC 5:32 & 49, and CHC 2:143.
[^43] HC 5:18-19.
[^44] Hogan, Bennett with Mormonism and Freemasonry, 20.
[^45] Van Wagoner, "Sarah M. Pratt," 75.
[^46] Wilford Woodruff's Journal, 2:178.
[^47] HC 5:18.
[^48] Daniel Bachman, "A Study of the Mormon Practice of Plural Marriage Before the Death of Joseph Smith" (Master's thesis, Purdue University, 1975), 226-27.
[^49] Flanders, Nauvoo, 264-67; HC 5:35-40, 79-80 note, 250.
[^50] The Cincinnati Republican, July 26, 1842, quoted in Tyler, Bennett, Colorful Freemason, 10.
[^51] Bennett, History of the Saints, 3-10.
[^52] Orson Hyde, Speech of Orson Hyde, (Liverpool: James and Woodburn, 1845), 27-29.
[^53] William A. Linn, The Story of the Mormons, (New York: Russell & Russell, 1963), 324-25.
[^54] Tyler, John Cook Bennett, 11. Dictionary of American Biography, (1936), 18:124.
