Various authors, Regional Studies in LDS History: Illinois ( 1995)

Nauvoo and Hancock County, Illinois: A Selected Bibliography of Family and Local History Sources

Compiled by Kip Sperry [^1]

Historical Background

Nauvoo, a rural city in Hancock County, Illinois, was headquarters of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons) from 1839 until 1846. Located in western Illinois on the east bank of the Mississippi River, Nauvoo, "the beautiful," was home to an estimated 8-12,000 people during the 1840s.

267The Prophet Joseph Smith and the new Zion in Illinois attracted thousands of Latter-day Saint converts who migrated to Nauvoo from Missouri, Ohio, and elsewhere in the United States, as well as from eastern Canada, the British Isles, Scandinavia, and other countries. The Mississippi River was a major route for Church members migrating to Nauvoo.

267Beginning in 1840, with peak immigration occurring during the years 1841-43, many Latter-day Saint converts travelled from Liverpool, England, through the port of New Orleans and, by steamboat, up the Mississippi River. Others arrived through the port of New York and from throughout the United States.

267Beginning in the fall of 1840, the Saints labored to build a magnificent temple in Nauvoo, where temple ordinances could be performed for the living and, by proxy, for the dead. It was in Nauvoo that Joseph Smith taught the doctrine of proxy temple ordinances for the salvation of deceased ancestors and exaltation of Latter-day Saints. Although the first proxy baptisms for the dead were performed in the Mississippi River, by November 1841 proxy baptisms for the dead were being performed in the baptismal font of the temple. The font rested on the backs and shoulders of twelve oxen, representing the Twelve Tribes of Israel.

The first endowments for the living were given in an upstairs room over Joseph Smith's "Red Brick" store in Nauvoo on 4 May p.268] 1842. Beginning in December 1845 and continuing to 10 February 1846, thousands of Church members received their endowments in the Nauvoo Temple, the religious center of Nauvoo. The Nauvoo Temple, built of native gray limestone, was destroyed by fire in October 1848 and by a tornado in May 1850.

268After the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith on 27 June 1844 in Carthage, and in the face of continued persecution in Illinois, the majority of the Saints migrated west across the plains to the Rocky Mountains where they found their new home. Beginning in February 1846 and under the direction of Brigham Young, the second president of the Church, the Latter-day Saints left Nauvoo because of political mistrust and conflicts and misunderstandings with their neighbors. They left behind their homes, the sacred Nauvoo Temple, and their beloved Nauvoo, "the city beautiful." [^2]<_P> 1

Scope of This Project

Much has been written about Nauvoo and Hancock County, Illinois, and the Mormon experience during the 1839 to 1846 period. Many records of family and local history interest have been created since Hancock County was formed in 1825.

268Part one of this selected bibliography identifies titles of printed sources for Nauvoo and Hancock County, Illinois, that will be of interest to those doing family history and local history research in this area.

268Within this same scope, part two identifies original records, manuscripts, and computer databases covering Nauvoo and Hancock County. Most of the sources in part two are available on microfilm at the Family History Library in Salt Lake City. The Family History Library Catalog (FHLC) gives the call numbers of records in that library. Many of the original records cited, such as land, probate, and court records, are available at the Hancock County Courthouse in Carthage, Illinois, where most of the records extend into a later time period than that covered in this bibliography. As an example, vital records, probate records, land records, and tax records continue to the present time period and are housed in the Hancock County Courthouse.

Many of the printed sources and titles listed in this selected bibliography are also available at the Harold B. Lee Library p.269] (Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah), the LDS Historical Department Library (Salt Lake City), and other libraries and archives throughout the country. Titles are identified in each respective library's card or computer catalog.

269With few exceptions, excluded from this project are doctrinal topics, biographies, references to individual journals and autobiographies, diaries, broadsides, proclamations, most general American and Illinois genealogical sources (such as civil vital records, federal military records, etc.), compiled genealogies (family histories), most controversial works, correspondence, individual maps of Nauvoo and Hancock County, works dealing with archaeological excavations in Nauvoo, tourist guides or flyers, theatrical works, book reviews, and most general LDS sources (such as the Patriarchal Blessing Index).

ABBREVIATIONS USED

BYUBrigham Young University

BYU StudiesBrigham Young University Studies

DialogueDialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought

FHLFamily History Library, Salt Lake City, UT

FHLCFamily History Library Catalog

len M. Leonard, "Nauvoo," ncyclopedia of Mormonism, (ed. Daniel H. Ludlow (New York: Macmillan Publishing, 1992) 3: 987-93. See also, Robert Bruce Flanders, auvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi ((Urbana, IL: Univ of Illinois Press, 1965).

len M. Leonard, "Nauvoo," ncyclopedia of Mormonism (ed. Daniel H Ludlow (New York: Macmillan Publishing, 1992) 3: 987-93. See also, Robert Bruce Flanders, auvoo, Kingdom on the Mississippi ((Urbana, IL: Univ of Illinois Press, 1965).

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Church (7 vols. Ed. B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980), 7:56; hereafterHC.
[^2] Proceedings of the Grand Lodge of Illinois, 1942, A.F. & A.M. in Mervin B. Hogan, The Involvement of John Cook Bennett with Mormonism and Freemasonry at Nauvoo (Salt Lake City: Author's Published Manuscript), 22.
