The Atonement of Jesus Christ, which includes his resurrection, provides cause for celebration and rejoicing throughout the Christian world. Because of Jesus Christ and his infinite and eternal Atonement, all humankind who came to this earth are given the gift of the resurrection and immortality. This is truly the most powerful story of triumph over tragedy.

Like all good stories, it is a personal one. It is the story of one man who, though loved by many, was despised by others. Some sought to take away his life and, when it appeared as though they were successful, those close to him wept for their loss. Some may have even supposed that all was lost. However, before long, joy replaced their sorrow as they became witnesses of the resurrected Savior. Triumph overcame tragedy at a very personal level for many people at the meridian of time.

The story is far more than just personal; it is the ultimate story of triumph over tragedy, for it affects all of us for time and for eternity. As Jacob taught regarding the Atonement, “If the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell . . . and became the devil. . . . And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God” (2 Nephi 9:8–9). Through his Atonement, the Savior did not just help us become better people; he did not just give us a boost or fill in some gap that we could not bridge ourselves. He redeemed our souls from hell. He literally saved us from an eternity of dwelling with the devil—a life of being angels to a devil, of being devils ourselves.

There is no doubt this is the greatest triumph over the direst of tragedies. Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf taught:

Nevertheless, because of Jesus Christ, your death will be temporary. Your spirit one day will reunite with your body. This resurrected body will not be subject to death, and you will live in the eternities, free from pain and physical suffering.

This will happen because of Jesus the Christ, who laid down His life and took it up again.

He did this for all who believe in Him.

He did this for all who do not believe in Him.

He did this even for those who mock, revile, and curse His name. [[1]]

The essays published in this book were delivered at annual Brigham Young University Easter Conferences in 2018 and 2019. I thank all those who participated in these conferences for sharing their thoughts, wisdom, and testimonies about the life and teachings of the Savior Jesus Christ. I hope this volume brings much for you to ponder upon that will enlighten your mind and nourish your soul. And, as the resurrected Savior said to his assembled disciples when he appeared to them, may “peace be unto you” (John 20:19).

Charles Swift

Provo, Utah

Notes

[1]Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, “Behold the Man!”Ensign, May 2018, 108.