The late S. George Ellsworth was one of the most respected Mormon historians in the second half of the twentieth century. He helped found the Western History Association and was the first editor of its journal, Western Historical Quarterly. He authored a widely used textbook on Utah’s history and wrote extensively on Mormonism in the United States. Perhaps less known is that, beginning in the 1950s, Ellsworth researched and wrote about the first LDS mission to the Pacific. For the next forty years, he was the leading authority on the subject. In this chapter, Ellsworth’s presentation at the 1981 MPHS annual meeting, he paints a multi-hued portrait, seen through American eyes, of LDS missionary and church life in French Polynesia during the 1840s and early 1850s. This account was made possible by the thoughtful and detailed diaries and correspondence of Elders Addison Pratt and Benjamin Grouard. Ellsworth’s presentation is further enriched by the use of non-LDS sources to both corroborate the missionary accounts and to fill in the places where they are silent.

16:{"metadata":[["$","title","0",{"children":"New Wine and Old Bottles: Latter-day Saint Missionary Work in French Polynesia, 1844–1852 - Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History"}],["$","meta","1",{"name":"description","content":"$1b"}],["$","meta","2",{"name":"keywords","content":"New Wine and Old Bottles: Latter-day Saint Missionary Work in French Polynesia, 1844–1852, Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History, online books, BYU Studies"}],["$","link","3",{"rel":"canonical","href":"https://byustudies.byu.edu/online-book/voyages-of-faith/new-wine-and-old-bottles-latter-day-saint-missionary-work-in-french-polynesia-1844-1852"}],["$","link","4",{"rel":"icon","href":"/favicon.ico","type":"image/x-icon","sizes":"16x16"}],["$","$L1c","5",{}]],"error":null,"digest":"$undefined"} 1a:"$16:metadata" 1d:I[66263,["1120","static/chunks/1120-75f909259fd067cc.js","5466","static/chunks/5466-b96f3c00376edc43.js","8534","static/chunks/8534-7ca745715241e193.js","9126","static/chunks/9126-91257ba5fa5d06c5.js","8387","static/chunks/8387-2bdb776aa3fa620b.js","6874","static/chunks/6874-bf14f6d1ebc153cc.js","9383","static/chunks/9383-5debb36c04efe52f.js","3063","static/chunks/3063-404186ec4ce8f075.js","7132","static/chunks/7132-1bf9ca313709cfa3.js","5858","static/chunks/5858-a921a795a1989287.js","9233","static/chunks/9233-cd31d8c4ef751ef5.js","8361","static/chunks/8361-ec429c2d2a4b8505.js","7594","static/chunks/app/(site)/(containers)/(content)/online-book/%5BbookId%5D/%5BchapterId%5D/page-aca9af7241f107d8.js"],"default"] 1e:Tbd15,

Between 1844 and 1852, the Church’s first non-English speaking, non-Caucasian mission was established in French Polynesia. The missionaries’ task was manifold. They had to learn a foreign language, become acquainted with Tahitian folkways, and decide which folkways harmonized with the gospel and which did not. From their knowledge of the gospel and their experience in the Church, these missionaries had to select and phrase the gospel message in terms understandable to the islanders.

When the first LDS missionaries landed in 1844, only a generation had passed away since the islanders had abandoned their traditional religion—complete with ancient gods, cosmogony, priesthoods, ceremonies, taboos, sacred persons, and sacred places. While the first Christian missionaries (representatives of the London Missionary Society) had arrived in the Society Islands in 1797, effective Christianization had not begun until 1819 when the leading chief of Tahiti was baptized after abandoning his family gods. Many conversions followed. Think what was required of these islanders to leave their traditional religion, which emphasized hallowed customs and ceremonies, and convert to a Western religion teaching concepts of sin, repentance, and redemption through the sacrifice of the Son of God.

The narrative history of the mission, the struggle between Mormon and English missionaries, and the political relations of Latter-day Saints with the French Protectorate government have been treated elsewhere and will not be repeated here, as they may be known generally.1 Suffice it to say that the LDS missionaries arrived in the Society Islands at a most propitious time since the French had taken possession of the islands in 1843 and declared religious freedom. Moreover, the power and influence of the English missionaries were on the decline.

Our consideration of the process of conversion of the Polynesians to the LDS Church will center on four questions. First, who were the LDS missionaries, and what was their proselyting practice? Second, what was the religious condition of the Polynesians when these missionaries arrived in the islands twenty years after the beginning of Christianization? Third, what did the LDS missionaries teach the islanders and require of them for religious and social practices? And finally, what did it mean to be a Latter-day Saint in French Polynesia during the 1840s and 1850s?

The LDS Missionaries in the Pacific

On May 23, 1843, Joseph Smith called four men to the Pacific Islands: Noah Rogers (president), Addison Pratt (fig. 1), Benjamin F. Grouard, and Knowlton F. Hanks. Brigham Young set them apart and gave them general instructions.2 Surprisingly, several of these men were prepared for this mission. Pratt and Grouard had been seamen in the American whale fishery industry. Pratt had spent six months on O‘ahu, Hawai‘i, in 1822. Rogers had been in the Church six years, Pratt five, and Grouard two. Each had served short missions in the States. Each had experienced religious conversion, was well read in the scriptures, and knew the basic tenets of the gospel.

The four missionaries made their way to the East Coast of the United States and from New Bedford, Massachusetts, boarded the Timoleon bound for the Society Islands. Elder Hanks died en route and was buried at sea. After seven months, the Timoleon made its first landfall on the island of Tubuai, about three hundred miles south of Tahiti. Elder Pratt accepted the islanders’ invitation to disembark and be their teacher, and he took up residence there in early May 1844. Elders Rogers and Grouard traveled on to Tahiti, beginning their labors at Papeete under adverse conditions.

The society of Papeete was in an upheaval. The ongoing war between the French and the islanders and the bitter resentment of the English missionaries at losing their place in society because of the French occupation and the arrival of the Mormons all presented problems. After months of discouragement and little success, Elder Rogers returned to Nauvoo. Elder Grouard left Tahiti for the Tuamotu Archipelago and commenced laboring on the coral-reef island of Anaa. Elders Pratt and Grouard, who did most of the initial proselyting, were the two who can be credited with establishing the Church in French Polynesia.

There was no LDS Church literature in the Tahitian language, so these missionaries depended on the London Missionary Society’s work for the Bible and hymnals. Elders Pratt and Rogers took with them copies of the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, Parley P. Pratt’s Voice of Warning, and Orson Pratt’s Remarkable Visions.3

The missionaries’ first task was to learn the language. Pratt explained the process well. He assembled with the people, sang with them, and wrote down the words as he understood them. Unfortunately, his prior language experience was not necessarily an advantage: “They often laugh at me for talking Owyhee [Hawaiian] to them,” he wrote in his journal, “and I fear this in some degree will be a disadvantage to me.”4 With the aid of a handful of Americans living on the island of Tubuai, Pratt made progress and in five months declared himself “tolerably understood.” A year later, he wrote Brigham Young:

I can explain almost any passage of scripture after a fashion; but their language is so deficient, and the translation of the Bible is so imperfect, that it is hard to make them understand the plan of salvation. . . . What knowledge we have obtained of the language is by hard study, and not by the “gift of tongues.”5

Pratt’s struggle with the language led to his first converts. The Americans on the island, who were building a schooner by salvaging parts from a wrecked ship, served as his interpreters on various occasions, including his informal gospel discussions at night. In time six of these seven Americans joined the Church, forming the nucleus of the Tubuai congregation. As soon as there were enough men to be ordained to the priesthood, Pratt organized the Tubuai congregation into a branch, the first one in the Pacific, on July 29, 1844. Eventually, the branch numbered sixty members, about 30 percent of the two hundred people on the island.6

Following the pattern set by English missionaries, the Latter-day Saints held three preaching services each Sunday: one each in the morning, afternoon, and evening. Baptismal services were usually on Sunday, an hour or two before the meeting. Meetings consisted of hymns, prayers, confirmations, ordinations, and sermons. The sacrament was administered on the first Sunday of each month and at the baptism and confirmation of converts.7 School was conducted weekdays, with lessons in reading, arithmetic, geography, and, sometimes, chapters of the Bible. On Monday, Wednesday, and Friday evenings, Pratt held Bible study classes. Other evenings were usually taken up, sometimes until midnight, with discussions of doctrine and passages of scripture. The days were long but fulfilling. “I have all I can attend to, to answer Bible questions, while out of meetings and school,” explained Pratt.8 His attention paid off. When he returned with his family and his wife’s sister’s family to Tubuai on a second mission in 1850, his sister-in-law Caroline B. Crosby was pleased with what she found on the island. On Sunday, September 26, 1850, she wrote:

The bell rang for church at 7 o’clock, we all repaired to the Fare bure ra (or house of worship, where some 80 or a hundred persons were collected for worship.) We were highly pleased to see the decency and order which prevailed among them; almost all of them with bibles under their arms ready to follow the speaker where ever he might appoint them. They have 3 meetings and a school in the course of the day, besides our white brethren have one expressly for ourselves, which keeps us very busily employed through the day.9

The Religious Condition of the Polynesians

Through the extensive labors of English missionaries, the islanders had advanced far enough in Christian concepts to receive and understand the gospel message brought by the LDS missionaries. The English missionaries, at great expense in time and labor, had made considerable contributions, without which the Mormons could have made little or no progress.10

The English missionaries saved the Mormons much work. Because of the English missionaries, traditional religion had largely been overthrown. To a considerable degree, the traditional gods had been destroyed, their temples abandoned, and ancient taboos removed. The Tahitian language had been committed to written form, and books—including the Bible—had been translated from English into Tahitian. Churches and schools had been established and governments instituted along lines reminiscent of European political and judicial institutions. The English missionaries endeavored to enforce the Christian standards of sexual morality. Island families had been encouraged to build and occupy homes of their own in an effort to abolish communal sleeping. Moreover, the English missionaries had prohibited traditional dances—altogether too suggestive for these Christians. The English had also been able to effect laws prohibiting the importation and use of liquor on the islands.

The efforts of the English missionaries were felt most on Tahiti and on some of the more populous islands. But they only occasionally visited the distant, outlying, and thinly populated islands, whose people were entrusted into the hands of local missionaries. Not all the inhabitants of the Society Islands were Christians, and throughout the islands there were frequent uprisings, disputes, backslidings, and regressions.

The English missionaries were not entirely successful, however. Although they had utilized local missionaries on Tubuai for two decades, the islanders retained many customs and traditions. For example, Pratt early observed that “they [the islanders] have many superstitions respecting devils and ghosts.”11 During his first year there, he visited ancient worship centers, the maraes, “the sacred place[s] . . . used for worship, where stones were piled up, altars erected, sacrifices offered, prayers made, and sometimes the dead deposited.”12 But it was another year before they told him more about the maraes and human sacrifices.13

While Elder Pratt worked on Tubuai, Elder Grouard (fig. 2) focused on the the Tuamotu Archipelago, and Anaa in particular, where Grouard had heard he would be among “among strangers & semi-savages . . . as it was but a few years since that the Paumotu [Tuamotu] natives were wild, ferocious cannibals; glutting themselves on human flesh.”14 Grouard wrote:

My feelings, as I approached this strange land, & heard the wild shouts of these half civilized sons of the ocean, I can not easily describe. It seemed to me as though I had got out of the world almost, & was on an other planet among an other race of people, or about entering among them. A different race of people thay certainly were, from what I had ever seen before, & as for being out of the world, I might almost as well have been, as it was a part of it seldom ever visited by any one.

Once on the island, he was

surrounded by some two or three hundred natives of both sexes & all ages: naked, half-naked & clad; hooting, hallooing, laughing & jabbering like a legeon of evil spirits. Thay looked to me wild & savage; & hearing the frightful savage noises thay made, & not being able to understand a word they said, I really did not know but what I had become a victim for sacrifice in very deed.15

Grouard was met by high chiefs, “large, well built, & of a noble mien, & well dressed in the native style. I was agreeably surprised to see such likely looking persons.” He was further encouraged by the fact that they could speak Tahitian “if thay choose.”16 The chiefs were satisfied with Grouard’s reasons for coming to their island, and they encouraged him to stay. Of a population of about two thousand on the island of Anaa, only “near one hundred” had been baptized into Christianity by the English missionaries, and even they—according to Elder Grouard—had been introduced only to outward Christian forms without a thorough understanding. He noted that the Christians acted “exceedingly holy” and “that a man would be tried & fined for walking out on the sabbath, . . . if it was a considerable distance; but when monday came their goodness was laid aside . . . & lying cheating stealing whoreing & almost every other abominable thing was considered no disgrace or crime.” As for worship, Grouard observed that they held “meeting[s] three times on sunday & once in the week.” They held family prayers “night & morning . . . & even the bigest scoundrel, lyer, drunkerd, thief & whoremonger would be afraid to lie down to sleep with out first praying or eat without first asking a blessing.” Grouard blamed the English missionaries for this situation: “Such was the idea thay had received of the worship of God from their teachers . . . actions were nothing.”17

Furthermore, the French and islander “war” in Tahiti had given cause for the people to throw off all restraints. Grouard said that “the utmost confusion & disorder prevailed. Sin in the most horrid form walked abroad in open daylight.” In this chaotic situation, the chiefs regarded Grouard’s coming as providential—a means to help stabilize their society.18

Grouard rejoiced at the reception he and his message received from these people on Anaa. “Notwithstanding their ignorance and superstition: thay would always hearken to counsel, & pay the greatest respect to our teachings & authority, & sought advice from us in all things, temporal and spiritual.” Genuine satisfaction repaid his many personal “privations and hardships”:19

To hear them calling upon the Lord, who but a few short years before were the most ferocious savage canibals, & to hear them call, too, in the name of Jesus for God to roll forth establish & build up his latter day work, it caused more joy in my bosom than I can tell. Yes, but a few short years have past since their large double canoes, manned with from 50 to a 100 men, 15 & 20 in number would return from the adjacent Islands loaded with the sculls of those victims thay had slain in battle and whose body’s thay had eaten. This is no fiction I assure you: their old marais or worshiping places are filled with the sculls now, where by scratching away a few inches of dirt you may have a full vew of them. Thay were buried here in honor to their god, as trophies of their victories. Such were the people who are now rejoicing in the gospel. I have baptised three generations, namely father son & grandson, who have together set down to these feasts of human flesh, who are now faithfull members of the Church of Christ.20

Addison Pratt had similar experiences on Tubuai and rejoiced in the reformation taking place in the people’s lives. An interview with one “aged brother in the Church” nearing death illustrates this point. The man asked Pratt, “What is to become of me? I have been a warrior and a man of blood. I have sacrificed the lives of many of my fellow creatures.” Pratt explained “You did it in a time when you was swallowed up in heathenish superstition and ignorance. You did it to revenge upon your enemies.” Then quoting Acts chapter 17 verse 30, Pratt reminded the man that he had done these things in ignorance but had since repented, been baptized, and kept the commandments. Pratt continued, “And now do not let your mind waver, but place your hope and faith on [Jesus Christ], and he will lead you safely through the dark valley which you are now about to pass.” Within a few days, the man died, “without any kind of sickness. But as a lamp that burns till the oil is all exhausted and goes out of itself, so departed he this life.”21

Although many individuals experienced conversion, the population as a whole did not. During summer 1846, Elder Grouard, having built a large pahi paumotu (a double canoe), took an extended voyage, visiting and preaching on several of the coral-reef islands of the Tuamotus. His experience among these rarely visited islands led him to conclude that many of the ancient beliefs were still very much alive. On Rangiroa he found many “Marais or idolitrus worshiping places scattered all over the Island.” He suspected that many still followed the old ways, “Especially among thease lower Islands, wich are seldom visited by vessels, thay still regard their Marais as sacred.” This was confirmed during his stay on Tiahau, when the locals—including those he had baptized—warned him not to visit a nearby marae,

lest the wrath of their ancient Gods should overtake us for trespassing upon their sacred ground. If I had no curiosity before to see this particular place, of course this friendly caution would awaken it in me; to break down & destroy their foolish prejudice & superstition if for nothing else. I first however preached to them from Eph. 2:1–3 & gave them a severe lecturing for their superstition. . . . After this, we all, who felt a curiosity, went to see this wonderful place.

The people of these Islands were exceedingly zealous idolatrous worshipers, and thay tell many wonderful stories about their exploits when assisted by their gods. . . . It cannot be wondered that they still are very superstitious, since it is so recently they were idolaters. Three generations, at least, are still living, who worshiped heathen gods, and their monuments of heathenism still standing so thickly around them, it is almost a wonder thay are so free from superstition as thay are.22

Notwithstanding their concerns about the survival of traditional religion in one form or another, the LDS missionaries found much in the islanders’ culture to praise, encourage, and build upon. They appreciated the people’s generosity, altruism, kindness, and deep, sincere religious faith. The islanders’ willingness to be taught and to obey were also commendable. There is no doubt that Pratt and Grouard loved the people sincerely. Their dedication to the islanders was profound and their devotion enduring.

The Teachings of the LDS Missionaries

The Church was young when the LDS missionaries arrived in French Polynesia. One must keep in mind that the elders left Nauvoo in 1843 and that they had been members of the Church only a few years. Obviously, they taught the doctrines they knew or had learned from the few books they had with them. Their journals and letters and the journals and letters of the English missionaries who encountered them and their teaching include an impressive understanding of the restored gospel.

If there were any attempt on the part of the missionaries to equate traditional pre-Christian beliefs with any aspect of LDS Church doctrine or teaching, the diaries and letters are silent on the subject. Considering that almost all the people reached by the missionaries were at least nominally Christian, it fits with the expressed statements of their teaching that they built on that foundation to clear it of “sectarian” views and practices and to build the structure of their own message. When the French governor required an official statement of purpose from the missionaries in 1850, they replied as follows:

1st. To preach the everlasting Gospel. . . .

2nd. To teach the people by precept and example the habits of virtue and industry. . . .

3rd. To observe and keep the laws of every land wherein we dwell . . . and to teach and admonish the people to observe and keep the laws of their land.

In short, the elders came to do good: “We preach to, and admonish the people, to keep all the commandments of God, and strictly to obey the laws of the land wherein they dwell.”23

In addition to teaching the gospel to the islanders, the LDS missionaries taught people passing through the area. In October 1844, while on Tubuai, the crew of a visiting ship invited Elder Pratt to speak. For two hours, he discussed “the first principles of the gospel. I took it from the foundation up, and set it forth with all its officers, gifts and blessings.” He compared the church that Jesus had organized in New Testament times to the LDS Church, which he said “differed with evry sect under heaven at the present day.” The listeners “told the brethren the next day, that such preaching was new to them, but they did not see how anyboddy that believed in the Bible could get around it for it was all scripture, none could deny.”24

The LDS missionaries taught both the islanders and nonislanders the basics of the gospel. Frequent reference is made to their preaching “the first principles of the Gospel”—meaning, we may presume, faith, repentance, baptism by immersion, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.25

Baptism by immersion was perhaps the most distinctive Latter-day Saint practice to the islanders. The English missionaries had baptized by sprinkling, so the Tahitians had never seen baptism by immersion. At times hundreds of people came to the shore to witness the ordinance. The elders were quick to take advantage of the islanders’ fascination by holding preaching services at which baptism by immersion was defended with scriptural passages.26 And while the English missionaries called the Mormons ma mai ia (fools) for baptizing by immersion, the islanders soon learned the biblical scriptures to prove to the English missionaries the validity of this practice.27

Though most Tahitian converts were baptized with the intent of becoming active participants in the Church, motives varied. Some thought baptism would bring healing, while others thought baptism would get them into the Church, which would provide an administration with oil for the restoration of health. The elders were cautious and tested for faith and repentance. There are many references in Pratt’s daily account of his administering to the sick, especially at Anaa in the Tuamotus and at Tiarei, Tahiti. Shortly after he landed on Tubuai, attesting to the Latter-day Saints having the same gifts of healing as did the Saints of former days, Elder Pratt wrote:

Today [November 13, 1844] I administered some consecrated oil to Br. Pilot. He had been sick sevral days with a rheumatic affection in his legs and feet. They were verry much swollen and verry painful. They had been doctored by the native doctor, but he said they were no better. Before administering, I asked him if he was willing to dispense with doctoring and put his trust in the Lord. He said he was. I first washed his feet thoroughly in cold water, then anointed and laid hands on them. I called the next morning and the knee and foot that was swollen the worst and the most painful was entirely well, but some pain in the other, tho it was much better.28

Elder Pratt had many testimonies of healing through the power of faith and by anointing with oil and blessing with the laying on of hands.29 But whenever he sensed a lack of faith, he declined to administer a blessing.30

Cases involving varua ino (evil spirits) appeared occasionally. In July 1845 on the island of Anaa, Elder Grouard was summoned to the bedside of a sick sister.

I laughed when the messenger told me she was posesed of a devil, but he asured me it was true, & entreated me to make haste. Knowing the natives were very supersticious, & never having seen a person actualy posesed of a devil, I did not believe it, but thought probibly some severe pain had taken the person; cholic or something of the kind: but when I arrived where the person was I received a sensation that told me it was something more than cholic. Such a scream I never had before witnessed, & it rather startled me: but after looking on the person a few minuits my fear left me: I then laid hands on her & in the name of Jesus Christ I rebuked the evil spirit, & he immediately left her, when she arose in her right mind & called for some drink, & in a few minuits was as well as ever.31

In addition to baptism by immersion and blessings by the laying on of hands, the Word of Wisdom also distinguished the LDS Church. Since Pratt had been a strong advocate of the temperance movement before joining the LDS Church, it is plausible that he emphasized this teaching. In the islands, liquor had been introduced by European and American seamen. The English missionaries had induced some islanders to enforce laws against liquor entering port. They were effective in some places for some time, but on islands where resident foreigners ran grog shops, every ship that stopped dispensed quantities of liquor to the local inhabitants. Consequently, the elders made observing the Word of Wisdom, with its admonition against drinking and smoking, a serious matter. On Anaa, in June 1845, Grouard wrote of the formidable cultural challenges facing the missionaries:

Those who I had baptised, 19 in number had all thrown away the use of tobacco & spirits a truly cheering evidence to me of their cincerity; tobacco in particular having been what constituted almost one half of their living, & employed them about one half of the time in preparing it for use: in a word thay were servile slaves to it. Walk through the villige what time of day or night you would you would see 4 or 5 companies of 10 or 12 each squated around a small fire with a pipe or cegar passing it from one to the other taking one or two puffs each, swalowing the smoke & emiting it from their nose: even duering the short half or three quarters of an hour meeting thay many of them would have to go out & have a smoke, in fact it was made a business by some one or more to see there was a fire convenient to the meeting house. Those who I had baptised however as soon as I told them it was contrary to the Lords will for them to make use of such useless & hurtfull trash laid it aside expressing a firm resolution never to take it again.32

In time the converts became very zealous with the teaching. At the May 18, 1851, conference of the LDS Church at Huuau, Tahiti, local elders preaching among the Tuamotu Islands “had been verry rigid regarding it [Word of Wisdom], cutting off members without mercy, who were known to make use of it in any degree.” After his first mission to the islands, Addison Pratt discussed the matter with Church leaders in Salt Lake. Upon his return to French Polynesia, he counseled that members were to exercise their free agency and choose whether to follow the Word of Wisdom. However, he told them that “the elders would have no faith in administering” to the disobedient “in cases of sickness or distress.” He further counseled that the elders were “not to ordain any to the priesthood, who would not observe the Word of Wisdom.” The Word of Wisdom had to be interpreted in new ways to allow for the culinary customs of the islanders. Among the Tuamotuan Saints, there had arisen “much contention” over the “practice of eating dogs.” After quoting some scriptures, Elder Pratt observed “that he thought it should be left to their own option what they should eat.”33

On Tubuai early in his first mission, Pratt was pressed with another difficult Word of Wisdom question put to him through his interpreter. He wrote:

Sevral natives called on us today to see what would be required of them if they should join the church. Among the questions that were asked, one of the women asked if they must leave off eating fleas and lice? Br Hill told her she must (as he was interpreter). “What must we do with them, when we catch them?” she asked. “Kill them and throw them away.” “It [is] a pity to throw them away when they are so sweet,” said she, tho I thought her partly in jest.34

Just as the LDS missionaries stressed the importance of the Word of Wisdom, they required moral chastity. Elder Pratt “spoke in particular of the sin of lycentiousness as this seems to me to be the crying sin of these islands, and they commence it when small children. This sin I never cease to warn them against, both old and young.” When young people came to him for baptism he bore down on the subject: “I talked much with them at the time they offered themselves, and told them what would be expected of them. . . . At the waterside, after singing and prayer, I talkt to them again.”35 And while Elder Grouard often defended the islanders, he believed their vices had come from the white man “with the exception of licenciousness, . . . an old heathen practice: and the english missionaries, if thay have taught them better by precept, have not by example, or at least a part of them, as their illegitimate half cast progeny among thease Islands fully prove.”36 Still, Pratt did not despair, notwithstanding the difficulties: “It is but a small part towards making saints of them to get them no farther than to barely baptize them. . . . But still, I know that faith and patience work wonders, and I am not yet discouraged.”37

As already noted, the English missionaries had effected the prohibition of native dances. Hence, the LDS missionaries recorded little about the practice. What is said, however, shows that the Mormons agreed with the English on this score. On July 19, 1846, Pratt entered in his journal: “In the evening tried and suspended some members for danceing and smoaking, which are contrary to the rules of the church, and also dancing is not alowed out of the church.”38

After the French assumed power in 1843, the social laws were relaxed and the dances reappeared. While on his second mission in the 1850s, when the Mormons sought to launch a schooner that Grouard and others had built, Pratt recorded that it could not be launched without help from the entire population of Tubuai. During Pratt’s absence, many converts had fallen away, “and those out of the church refused to help, unless we would give them the privilege of having a native dance.” There was nothing else for the missionaries to do but allow the dance, and the islanders took days alternating between feasting, dancing, and pulling the schooner to water.39

While dancing was usually prohibited, singing was generally encouraged. Pratt noted that “the Pacific islanders have a great desire for learning psalm, and hymn tunes. They have verry strong and clear voices, not verry high, nor verry low.” Pratt spent much time teaching hymns and translating words for them. Through his experience, he concluded that the islanders “do not catch sounds quick, but when they once learn a tune, are never tired of singing it, will collect at a neighbour’s house at dark and sing a new tune over and over, till mid night.”40 Such drilling annoyed Grouard, so the islanders preferred to have Pratt present at such times.

Like singing, a strong work ethic was included among the positive and practical teachings of the LDS missionaries. An officer of the government on Anaa came to Elder Grouard and inquired,

If any person comes into your church must thay leave off work? No, said I, but to the contrary must become more industrious. What, enquired he may one do all manner of work? Yes said I, if it is but honest. Well then said he, I have an office in government & in case I should be baptized what should I do with that, lay it aside? No, said I, but you should be more carefull & diligent to act in truth & rightiousness in it.41

From passing references, it is evident that the missionaries were well acquainted with the broader spectrum of Church doctrine. The islanders were introduced to the following principles: the apostasy of the early Christian church; the dispensation of the fullness of times; modern-day prophets; continuing revelation from God; the coming forth of the Book of Mormon; the restoration of divine authority (though hardly mentioned as such); and the concept of a lay priesthood (operative in regularly established branches of the Church).

Some teachings, however, brought misunderstanding. The elders’ teaching of the Church’s philosophy of history pertaining to Israel and America was not always well understood. English missionary Charles Barff heard Elder Rogers on Raiatea in November 1844 and journalized that the missionary had attempted “to prove that the natives of North America were the descendants of Ephraim! but the congregation he was addressing was at a loss to know what advantage that was to them when proved and refused to hear him again.”42 Nor was Elder Pratt any more successful in proving his point to a ship’s captain. Most of what he said was well received, “but when I come to prove from Jacobs blessing to a demonstration that America was the verry land, he promised Ephraim & Manasseh, & that Old England had nothing to do with it . . . he took his hat & steered for the door soon as possible.”43

The doctrine of gathering was more readily understood. Beginning in 1844, Elder Pratt referred to the gathering and wrote Brigham Young, asking him to make some preparation for gathering the island Saints as soon as possible, suggesting “some place appointed on this side of the Rocky Mountains.” Pratt explained that “when we speak to them about their gathering, they say, many of them, ‘We are ready to go now!! But how are we to get there?’ The only answer we can give is, The Lord will open the way.”44 By 1851 the hope was that the Church would establish a gathering place for the Polynesian Saints in California, but this did not happen.45

If the Polynesian Saints could not gather to America, they could gather to an island Zion. On December 11, 1850, English missionary William Howe wrote:

Whether the Mormons have got the notion that Jerusalem is to be found somewhere about our missions, I do not know, but they are pouring in fast upon our out stations in considerable numbers. [a number not decipherable] men, women, and children have landed at Tupuai, and have obtained permission from the Governor to locate themselves there to commence an agricultural establishment. They have made considerable progress in baptizing the people at the Paumotus.46

These, then, are extracts from the letters and diaries that give us an idea of what the missionaries taught. Obviously they knew more than they taught or wrote. They had to simplify their gospel lessons to meet the understandings of their listeners. It must have been challenging to teach basic Christianity and the first principles of the restored gospel, while emphasizing the added truths, the restoration of the priesthood, and the elements of Church organization and at the same time teaching practical concepts related to everyday living.

The Success of the Missionaries

The Mormon mission to French Polynesia effectively closed in 1852 after the French passed a law making it extraordinarily difficult for any foreigner to be recognized as a minister; most English Protestant missionaries soon departed as well. Tubuai and the Tuamotus had been the centers of greatest success for the LDS missionaries, the places where most of the islanders were converted to the Church. After the mission closed, there was backsliding, to be sure. Without missionaries to tend the flock constantly, it is a wonder that the converts remained as true as they did. There were some who tired of the LDS Church. Pratt wrote: “Another woman wisht to have her name taken off of the church record. Said she was tired of trying to serve the Lord. Said she wisht to go and serve the devil with her whole heart. And these natives know how to do that with their might.”47

In the end, the successes far outweighed any failures. Elders Pratt and Grouard would have been pleased to hear their work complimented by others. George Platt, an English missionary, wrote in May 1855 (three years after the LDS missionaries had left the field): “The Paumotu [Tuamotu] group seems to be entirely give up to the Mormons . . . [they] have no books with which to teach but our own. It was my wish they should be well supplied with books, as the Mormons teach them to read.”48 And William Howe, an English missionary called to Tubuai when Pratt and Grouard were absent, explained about Mormons:

I ought here to state there are three foreigners, two Americans and one Englishman, residing on the island, the excellence of whose conduct is such as to produce the happiest effect upon the people. This is a very unusual statement I make; but a very delightful one, and I earnestly pray that such cases may multiply.49

And lastly, the American consul at Tahiti and a son of an English missionary together visited Pratt in September 1846 and said that “there had never been a mission started in the Pacific Ocean that had met with the success that this had, & when our means & encouragement from home were considered, it was a wonder.”50

The strength of the Church in French Polynesia today stands as a tribute to these early missionaries and their service. They were pioneers in introducing the Polynesian people to the gospel, and the large number of Polynesian Saints in the Church today attests to the firm foundation they laid.

1f:T4c9,

The late S. George Ellsworth was one of the most respected Mormon historians in the second half of the twentieth century. He helped found the Western History Association and was the first editor of its journal, Western Historical Quarterly. He authored a widely used textbook on Utah’s history and wrote extensively on Mormonism in the United States. Perhaps less known is that, beginning in the 1950s, Ellsworth researched and wrote about the first LDS mission to the Pacific. For the next forty years, he was the leading authority on the subject. In this chapter, Ellsworth’s presentation at the 1981 MPHS annual meeting, he paints a multi-hued portrait, seen through American eyes, of LDS missionary and church life in French Polynesia during the 1840s and early 1850s. This account was made possible by the thoughtful and detailed diaries and correspondence of Elders Addison Pratt and Benjamin Grouard. Ellsworth’s presentation is further enriched by the use of non-LDS sources to both corroborate the missionary accounts and to fill in the places where they are silent.

20:T489d,

1. S. George Ellsworth, Zion in Paradise: Early Mormons in the South Seas (Logan: Utah State University, 1959).

2. Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed., rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1971) 5:404–5.

3. Orson Pratt’s book contained an account of Joseph Smith’s First Vision, the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and other events in the Prophet’s life, coupled with an excellent exposition of the fundamentals of Mormonism closely paralleling the Articles of Faith.

4. Addison Pratt, Journals, May 12, 1844, Archives Division, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City (hereafter cited as LDS Church Archives); Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 159. Subsequent to his presentation of this paper at the 1981 MPHS annual meeting, Ellsworth published Addison Pratt’s journals in S. George Ellsworth, ed., The Journals of Addison Pratt (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press), 1990. References from this published source have been added to Ellsworth’s original citations from the unpaginated Pratt holograph.

5. Addison Pratt to Brigham Young, February 20, 1845, in Times and Seasons 6 (November 1, 1845): 1019–22; “News From Our Mission in the Pacific,” Millennial Star 7 (January 1, 1846): 15.

6. During Grouard’s first eight months in the Tuamotus, he organized eight branches with a combined membership of nearly eight hundred.

7. The frequency of administering the sacrament was not standard in the first few decades of Church history. When the question was raised in 1851, Presiding Bishop Edward Hunter replied that the bishops “may be governed by their own feelings in the matter.” Two months later, Hunter, who also served as bishop of the Salt Lake City Thirteenth Ward, added that in his ward (as in French Polynesia), they administered the sacrament “once a month.” “Bishops Record of Salt Lake City,” December 15, 1851, February 25, 1852, LDS Church Archives.

8. Pratt, Journals, February 17, 1846; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 272.

9. Caroline Barnes Crosby, Journals, September 26, 1850, Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City, Utah.

10. However, Pratt and Grouard gave the English little credit and instead blamed them for many of the vices they found in the people.

11. Pratt, Journals, July 24, 1844; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 78.

12. John Davies, A Tahitian and English Dictionary (Tahiti: London Missionary Society’s Press, 1851; reprint, AMS, 1978), 133; Pratt, Journals, July 24, September 5, October 12, and November 16, 1844; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 178, 189–90, 207, 217.

13. Pratt, Journals, October 1, 1845; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 246; Addison Pratt to George A. Smith, March/April 1849, in Frontier Guardian (Kanesville, Iowa), June 13, 1849; reprinted in Addison Pratt to Brother Smith, in “Letter from Elder Addison Pratt, Late of the Sandwich Islands,” Millennial Star 11 (August 15, 1849): 250.

14. Benjamin F. Grouard, Journal, April 23, 1845, LDS Church Archives.

15. Grouard, April/May 1845.

16. Grouard, April/May 1845.

17. Grouard, May 1845.

18. Grouard, Summer 1845.

19. Grouard, January/February 1846.

20. Grouard, Journal, Summer 1845. See also Addison Pratt and Benjamin F. Grouard to the Presiding High Council of the Church, October 19, 1846, Brigham Young Papers, LDS Church Archives.

21. Pratt, Journals, October 6, 1846; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 291–92.

22. Grouard, Journal, summer 1846.

23. Pratt, Journals, August 12, November 11, 1850; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 448, 456–60.

24. Pratt, Journals, October 2, 1844; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 201–2.

25. Pratt, Journals, January 17, 1847, August 15, 1844; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 182, 309; Grouard, Journal, September 1845.

26. Pratt, Journals, October 21, 1844; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 209–11; Grouard, Journal, August 10, 1844, May 22, 25, 1845, June 1845.

27. Pratt, Journals, February 23, 1847; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 317–19.

28. Pratt, Journals, November 13, 1844; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 215–16.

29. Pratt, Journals, June 28 and November 13, 1844; June 29, July 17, September 11, September 29, October 16, November 11, 1846; January 22; February 4–5, 11, 23, March 7, 1847; November 24, 1850; September 8, November 2, 1851; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 171–72, 215–16, 283–98, 311–22, 461, 478–80.

30. Pratt, Journals, June 28, November 13, 1844; June 29, July 17, October 16, 1846; January 22, February 4–5, 11, 23, March 7, 1847; November 24, 1850; September 8, 1851; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 171–72; 215–16; 283–93, 315, 461, 478.

The English missionaries observed the practice among the Mormons: “There are also a number of Mormonite teachers now going amongst the people, professing the gift of healing by anointing with oil, but as they can only exercise on those who have been baptised into their faith, they present a strong inducement to those who are afflicted with [a sickness?] to unite with them, & if they once do so, there is generally, some means found for retaining them altho’ the pretended miracle be not wrought” (Alexander Chisholm letter, March 21, 1851, “South Seas Letters, 1851,” London Missionary Society, London [hereafter cited as LMS]).

31. Grouard, Journal, July 8–10, 1845.

32. Grouard, Journal, June 1845.

33. Pratt, Journals, May 18, 1851; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 472.

34. Pratt, Journals, September 3, 1844; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 188–89.

35. Pratt, Journals, November 21, 1844; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 218.

36. Grouard, Journal, May 1845.

37. Addison Pratt to Brigham Young, February 20, 1845, in Times and Seasons 6 (November 1, 1845): 1021. See also Addison Pratt to Brigham Young, February 20, 1845, Latter-day Saint’s Millennial Star 7 (January 1, 1846): 14–16.

38. Pratt, Journals, July 19, 1846; The Journals of Addison Pratt, 285.

39. Pratt, Journals, February 3, 1851; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 466–69.

40. Pratt, Journals, February 17, 1846; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 272.

41. Grouard, Journal, May 1845.

42. Charles Barff, Journal, South Seas Journals, 1845–71, LMS.

43. Pratt, Journals, October 3, 1844; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 202–3.

44. Pratt and Grouard to the Presiding High Council, October 19, 1846, LDS Church Archives.

45. Pratt, Journals, May 4, December 22, 1851; April 6, 1852; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 469, 489, 494. An English missionary talked with a Mormon convert: “One man asked me, Where Zion was? Whether it was not in America. I told him he read in the Scriptures of one Zion, symbolical of another. I knew of no other. He said they were going to Zion. I replied, it would be well if they were found in the Heavenly Zion. He said they were going to America.” George Platt letter, January 16, 1849, South Seas Letters.

46. William Howe letter, December 11, 1850, South Seas Letters.

47. Pratt, Journals, September 6, 1846; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 287.

48. George Platt letter, May 15, 1855, South Seas Letters.

49. William Howe letter, August 14, 1847, South Seas Letters.

50. Pratt, Journals, September 14, 1846; Ellsworth, The Journals of Addison Pratt, 287–88.

21:Tbd61,

Between 1844 and 1852, the Church’s first non-English speaking, non-Caucasian mission was established in French Polynesia. The missionaries’ task was manifold. They had to learn a foreign language, become acquainted with Tahitian folkways, and decide which folkways harmonized with the gospel and which did not. From their knowledge of the gospel and their experience in the Church, these missionaries had to select and phrase the gospel message in terms understandable to the islanders.

When the first LDS missionaries landed in 1844, only a generation had passed away since the islanders had abandoned their traditional religion—complete with ancient gods, cosmogony, priesthoods, ceremonies, taboos, sacred persons, and sacred places. While the first Christian missionaries (representatives of the London Missionary Society) had arrived in the Society Islands in 1797, effective Christianization had not begun until 1819 when the leading chief of Tahiti was baptized after abandoning his family gods. Many conversions followed. Think what was required of these islanders to leave their traditional religion, which emphasized hallowed customs and ceremonies, and convert to a Western religion teaching concepts of sin, repentance, and redemption through the sacrifice of the Son of God.

The narrative history of the mission, the struggle between Mormon and English missionaries, and the political relations of Latter-day Saints with the French Protectorate government have been treated elsewhere and will not be repeated here, as they may be known generally.1 Suffice it to say that the LDS missionaries arrived in the Society Islands at a most propitious time since the French had taken possession of the islands in 1843 and declared religious freedom. Moreover, the power and influence of the English missionaries were on the decline.

Our consideration of the process of conversion of the Polynesians to the LDS Church will center on four questions. First, who were the LDS missionaries, and what was their proselyting practice? Second, what was the religious condition of the Polynesians when these missionaries arrived in the islands twenty years after the beginning of Christianization? Third, what did the LDS missionaries teach the islanders and require of them for religious and social practices? And finally, what did it mean to be a Latter-day Saint in French Polynesia during the 1840s and 1850s?

The LDS Missionaries in the Pacific

On May 23, 1843, Joseph Smith called four men to the Pacific Islands: Noah Rogers (president), Addison Pratt (fig. 1), Benjamin F. Grouard, and Knowlton F. Hanks. Brigham Young set them apart and gave them general instructions.2 Surprisingly, several of these men were prepared for this mission. Pratt and Grouard had been seamen in the American whale fishery industry. Pratt had spent six months on O‘ahu, Hawai‘i, in 1822. Rogers had been in the Church six years, Pratt five, and Grouard two. Each had served short missions in the States. Each had experienced religious conversion, was well read in the scriptures, and knew the basic tenets of the gospel.

The four missionaries made their way to the East Coast of the United States and from New Bedford, Massachusetts, boarded the Timoleon bound for the Society Islands. Elder Hanks died en route and was buried at sea. After seven months, the Timoleon made its first landfall on the island of Tubuai, about three hundred miles south of Tahiti. Elder Pratt accepted the islanders’ invitation to disembark and be their teacher, and he took up residence there in early May 1844. Elders Rogers and Grouard traveled on to Tahiti, beginning their labors at Papeete under adverse conditions.

The society of Papeete was in an upheaval. The ongoing war between the French and the islanders and the bitter resentment of the English missionaries at losing their place in society because of the French occupation and the arrival of the Mormons all presented problems. After months of discouragement and little success, Elder Rogers returned to Nauvoo. Elder Grouard left Tahiti for the Tuamotu Archipelago and commenced laboring on the coral-reef island of Anaa. Elders Pratt and Grouard, who did most of the initial proselyting, were the two who can be credited with establishing the Church in French Polynesia.

There was no LDS Church literature in the Tahitian language, so these missionaries depended on the London Missionary Society’s work for the Bible and hymnals. Elders Pratt and Rogers took with them copies of the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, Parley P. Pratt’s Voice of Warning, and Orson Pratt’s Remarkable Visions.3

The missionaries’ first task was to learn the language. Pratt explained the process well. He assembled with the people, sang with them, and wrote down the words as he understood them. Unfortunately, his prior language experience was not necessarily an advantage: “They often laugh at me for talking Owyhee [Hawaiian] to them,” he wrote in his journal, “and I fear this in some degree will be a disadvantage to me.”4 With the aid of a handful of Americans living on the island of Tubuai, Pratt made progress and in five months declared himself “tolerably understood.” A year later, he wrote Brigham Young:

I can explain almost any passage of scripture after a fashion; but their language is so deficient, and the translation of the Bible is so imperfect, that it is hard to make them understand the plan of salvation. . . . What knowledge we have obtained of the language is by hard study, and not by the “gift of tongues.”5

Pratt’s struggle with the language led to his first converts. The Americans on the island, who were building a schooner by salvaging parts from a wrecked ship, served as his interpreters on various occasions, including his informal gospel discussions at night. In time six of these seven Americans joined the Church, forming the nucleus of the Tubuai congregation. As soon as there were enough men to be ordained to the priesthood, Pratt organized the Tubuai congregation into a branch, the first one in the Pacific, on July 29, 1844. Eventually, the branch numbered sixty members, about 30 percent of the two hundred people on the island.6

Following the pattern set by English missionaries, the Latter-day Saints held three preaching services each Sunday: one each in the morning, afternoon, and evening. Baptismal services were usually on Sunday, an hour or two before the meeting. Meetings consisted of hymns, prayers, confirmations, ordinations, and sermons. The sacrament was administered on the first Sunday of each month and at the baptism and confirmation of converts.7 School was conducted weekdays, with lessons in reading, arithmetic, geography, and, sometimes, chapters of the Bible. On Monday, Wednesday, and Friday evenings, Pratt held Bible study classes. Other evenings were usually taken up, sometimes until midnight, with discussions of doctrine and passages of scripture. The days were long but fulfilling. “I have all I can attend to, to answer Bible questions, while out of meetings and school,” explained Pratt.8 His attention paid off. When he returned with his family and his wife’s sister’s family to Tubuai on a second mission in 1850, his sister-in-law Caroline B. Crosby was pleased with what she found on the island. On Sunday, September 26, 1850, she wrote:

The bell rang for church at 7 o’clock, we all repaired to the Fare bure ra (or house of worship, where some 80 or a hundred persons were collected for worship.) We were highly pleased to see the decency and order which prevailed among them; almost all of them with bibles under their arms ready to follow the speaker where ever he might appoint them. They have 3 meetings and a school in the course of the day, besides our white brethren have one expressly for ourselves, which keeps us very busily employed through the day.9

The Religious Condition of the Polynesians

Through the extensive labors of English missionaries, the islanders had advanced far enough in Christian concepts to receive and understand the gospel message brought by the LDS missionaries. The English missionaries, at great expense in time and labor, had made considerable contributions, without which the Mormons could have made little or no progress.10

The English missionaries saved the Mormons much work. Because of the English missionaries, traditional religion had largely been overthrown. To a considerable degree, the traditional gods had been destroyed, their temples abandoned, and ancient taboos removed. The Tahitian language had been committed to written form, and books—including the Bible—had been translated from English into Tahitian. Churches and schools had been established and governments instituted along lines reminiscent of European political and judicial institutions. The English missionaries endeavored to enforce the Christian standards of sexual morality. Island families had been encouraged to build and occupy homes of their own in an effort to abolish communal sleeping. Moreover, the English missionaries had prohibited traditional dances—altogether too suggestive for these Christians. The English had also been able to effect laws prohibiting the importation and use of liquor on the islands.

The efforts of the English missionaries were felt most on Tahiti and on some of the more populous islands. But they only occasionally visited the distant, outlying, and thinly populated islands, whose people were entrusted into the hands of local missionaries. Not all the inhabitants of the Society Islands were Christians, and throughout the islands there were frequent uprisings, disputes, backslidings, and regressions.

The English missionaries were not entirely successful, however. Although they had utilized local missionaries on Tubuai for two decades, the islanders retained many customs and traditions. For example, Pratt early observed that “they [the islanders] have many superstitions respecting devils and ghosts.”11 During his first year there, he visited ancient worship centers, the maraes, “the sacred place[s] . . . used for worship, where stones were piled up, altars erected, sacrifices offered, prayers made, and sometimes the dead deposited.”12 But it was another year before they told him more about the maraes and human sacrifices.13

While Elder Pratt worked on Tubuai, Elder Grouard (fig. 2) focused on the the Tuamotu Archipelago, and Anaa in particular, where Grouard had heard he would be among “among strangers & semi-savages . . . as it was but a few years since that the Paumotu [Tuamotu] natives were wild, ferocious cannibals; glutting themselves on human flesh.”14 Grouard wrote:

My feelings, as I approached this strange land, & heard the wild shouts of these half civilized sons of the ocean, I can not easily describe. It seemed to me as though I had got out of the world almost, & was on an other planet among an other race of people, or about entering among them. A different race of people thay certainly were, from what I had ever seen before, & as for being out of the world, I might almost as well have been, as it was a part of it seldom ever visited by any one.

Once on the island, he was

surrounded by some two or three hundred natives of both sexes & all ages: naked, half-naked & clad; hooting, hallooing, laughing & jabbering like a legeon of evil spirits. Thay looked to me wild & savage; & hearing the frightful savage noises thay made, & not being able to understand a word they said, I really did not know but what I had become a victim for sacrifice in very deed.15

Grouard was met by high chiefs, “large, well built, & of a noble mien, & well dressed in the native style. I was agreeably surprised to see such likely looking persons.” He was further encouraged by the fact that they could speak Tahitian “if thay choose.”16 The chiefs were satisfied with Grouard’s reasons for coming to their island, and they encouraged him to stay. Of a population of about two thousand on the island of Anaa, only “near one hundred” had been baptized into Christianity by the English missionaries, and even they—according to Elder Grouard—had been introduced only to outward Christian forms without a thorough understanding. He noted that the Christians acted “exceedingly holy” and “that a man would be tried & fined for walking out on the sabbath, . . . if it was a considerable distance; but when monday came their goodness was laid aside . . . & lying cheating stealing whoreing & almost every other abominable thing was considered no disgrace or crime.” As for worship, Grouard observed that they held “meeting[s] three times on sunday & once in the week.” They held family prayers “night & morning . . . & even the bigest scoundrel, lyer, drunkerd, thief & whoremonger would be afraid to lie down to sleep with out first praying or eat without first asking a blessing.” Grouard blamed the English missionaries for this situation: “Such was the idea thay had received of the worship of God from their teachers . . . actions were nothing.”17

Furthermore, the French and islander “war” in Tahiti had given cause for the people to throw off all restraints. Grouard said that “the utmost confusion & disorder prevailed. Sin in the most horrid form walked abroad in open daylight.” In this chaotic situation, the chiefs regarded Grouard’s coming as providential—a means to help stabilize their society.18

Grouard rejoiced at the reception he and his message received from these people on Anaa. “Notwithstanding their ignorance and superstition: thay would always hearken to counsel, & pay the greatest respect to our teachings & authority, & sought advice from us in all things, temporal and spiritual.” Genuine satisfaction repaid his many personal “privations and hardships”:19

To hear them calling upon the Lord, who but a few short years before were the most ferocious savage canibals, & to hear them call, too, in the name of Jesus for God to roll forth establish & build up his latter day work, it caused more joy in my bosom than I can tell. Yes, but a few short years have past since their large double canoes, manned with from 50 to a 100 men, 15 & 20 in number would return from the adjacent Islands loaded with the sculls of those victims thay had slain in battle and whose body’s thay had eaten. This is no fiction I assure you: their old marais or worshiping places are filled with the sculls now, where by scratching away a few inches of dirt you may have a full vew of them. Thay were buried here in honor to their god, as trophies of their victories. Such were the people who are now rejoicing in the gospel. I have baptised three generations, namely father son & grandson, who have together set down to these feasts of human flesh, who are now faithfull members of the Church of Christ.20

Addison Pratt had similar experiences on Tubuai and rejoiced in the reformation taking place in the people’s lives. An interview with one “aged brother in the Church” nearing death illustrates this point. The man asked Pratt, “What is to become of me? I have been a warrior and a man of blood. I have sacrificed the lives of many of my fellow creatures.” Pratt explained “You did it in a time when you was swallowed up in heathenish superstition and ignorance. You did it to revenge upon your enemies.” Then quoting Acts chapter 17 verse 30, Pratt reminded the man that he had done these things in ignorance but had since repented, been baptized, and kept the commandments. Pratt continued, “And now do not let your mind waver, but place your hope and faith on [Jesus Christ], and he will lead you safely through the dark valley which you are now about to pass.” Within a few days, the man died, “without any kind of sickness. But as a lamp that burns till the oil is all exhausted and goes out of itself, so departed he this life.”21

Although many individuals experienced conversion, the population as a whole did not. During summer 1846, Elder Grouard, having built a large pahi paumotu (a double canoe), took an extended voyage, visiting and preaching on several of the coral-reef islands of the Tuamotus. His experience among these rarely visited islands led him to conclude that many of the ancient beliefs were still very much alive. On Rangiroa he found many “Marais or idolitrus worshiping places scattered all over the Island.” He suspected that many still followed the old ways, “Especially among thease lower Islands, wich are seldom visited by vessels, thay still regard their Marais as sacred.” This was confirmed during his stay on Tiahau, when the locals—including those he had baptized—warned him not to visit a nearby marae,

lest the wrath of their ancient Gods should overtake us for trespassing upon their sacred ground. If I had no curiosity before to see this particular place, of course this friendly caution would awaken it in me; to break down & destroy their foolish prejudice & superstition if for nothing else. I first however preached to them from Eph. 2:1–3 & gave them a severe lecturing for their superstition. . . . After this, we all, who felt a curiosity, went to see this wonderful place.

The people of these Islands were exceedingly zealous idolatrous worshipers, and thay tell many wonderful stories about their exploits when assisted by their gods. . . . It cannot be wondered that they still are very superstitious, since it is so recently they were idolaters. Three generations, at least, are still living, who worshiped heathen gods, and their monuments of heathenism still standing so thickly around them, it is almost a wonder thay are so free from superstition as thay are.22

Notwithstanding their concerns about the survival of traditional religion in one form or another, the LDS missionaries found much in the islanders’ culture to praise, encourage, and build upon. They appreciated the people’s generosity, altruism, kindness, and deep, sincere religious faith. The islanders’ willingness to be taught and to obey were also commendable. There is no doubt that Pratt and Grouard loved the people sincerely. Their dedication to the islanders was profound and their devotion enduring.

The Teachings of the LDS Missionaries

The Church was young when the LDS missionaries arrived in French Polynesia. One must keep in mind that the elders left Nauvoo in 1843 and that they had been members of the Church only a few years. Obviously, they taught the doctrines they knew or had learned from the few books they had with them. Their journals and letters and the journals and letters of the English missionaries who encountered them and their teaching include an impressive understanding of the restored gospel.

If there were any attempt on the part of the missionaries to equate traditional pre-Christian beliefs with any aspect of LDS Church doctrine or teaching, the diaries and letters are silent on the subject. Considering that almost all the people reached by the missionaries were at least nominally Christian, it fits with the expressed statements of their teaching that they built on that foundation to clear it of “sectarian” views and practices and to build the structure of their own message. When the French governor required an official statement of purpose from the missionaries in 1850, they replied as follows:

1st. To preach the everlasting Gospel. . . .

2nd. To teach the people by precept and example the habits of virtue and industry. . . .

3rd. To observe and keep the laws of every land wherein we dwell . . . and to teach and admonish the people to observe and keep the laws of their land.

In short, the elders came to do good: “We preach to, and admonish the people, to keep all the commandments of God, and strictly to obey the laws of the land wherein they dwell.”23

In addition to teaching the gospel to the islanders, the LDS missionaries taught people passing through the area. In October 1844, while on Tubuai, the crew of a visiting ship invited Elder Pratt to speak. For two hours, he discussed “the first principles of the gospel. I took it from the foundation up, and set it forth with all its officers, gifts and blessings.” He compared the church that Jesus had organized in New Testament times to the LDS Church, which he said “differed with evry sect under heaven at the present day.” The listeners “told the brethren the next day, that such preaching was new to them, but they did not see how anyboddy that believed in the Bible could get around it for it was all scripture, none could deny.”24

The LDS missionaries taught both the islanders and nonislanders the basics of the gospel. Frequent reference is made to their preaching “the first principles of the Gospel”—meaning, we may presume, faith, repentance, baptism by immersion, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.25

Baptism by immersion was perhaps the most distinctive Latter-day Saint practice to the islanders. The English missionaries had baptized by sprinkling, so the Tahitians had never seen baptism by immersion. At times hundreds of people came to the shore to witness the ordinance. The elders were quick to take advantage of the islanders’ fascination by holding preaching services at which baptism by immersion was defended with scriptural passages.26 And while the English missionaries called the Mormons ma mai ia (fools) for baptizing by immersion, the islanders soon learned the biblical scriptures to prove to the English missionaries the validity of this practice.27

Though most Tahitian converts were baptized with the intent of becoming active participants in the Church, motives varied. Some thought baptism would bring healing, while others thought baptism would get them into the Church, which would provide an administration with oil for the restoration of health. The elders were cautious and tested for faith and repentance. There are many references in Pratt’s daily account of his administering to the sick, especially at Anaa in the Tuamotus and at Tiarei, Tahiti. Shortly after he landed on Tubuai, attesting to the Latter-day Saints having the same gifts of healing as did the Saints of former days, Elder Pratt wrote:

Today [November 13, 1844] I administered some consecrated oil to Br. Pilot. He had been sick sevral days with a rheumatic affection in his legs and feet. They were verry much swollen and verry painful. They had been doctored by the native doctor, but he said they were no better. Before administering, I asked him if he was willing to dispense with doctoring and put his trust in the Lord. He said he was. I first washed his feet thoroughly in cold water, then anointed and laid hands on them. I called the next morning and the knee and foot that was swollen the worst and the most painful was entirely well, but some pain in the other, tho it was much better.28

Elder Pratt had many testimonies of healing through the power of faith and by anointing with oil and blessing with the laying on of hands.29 But whenever he sensed a lack of faith, he declined to administer a blessing.30

Cases involving varua ino (evil spirits) appeared occasionally. In July 1845 on the island of Anaa, Elder Grouard was summoned to the bedside of a sick sister.

I laughed when the messenger told me she was posesed of a devil, but he asured me it was true, & entreated me to make haste. Knowing the natives were very supersticious, & never having seen a person actualy posesed of a devil, I did not believe it, but thought probibly some severe pain had taken the person; cholic or something of the kind: but when I arrived where the person was I received a sensation that told me it was something more than cholic. Such a scream I never had before witnessed, & it rather startled me: but after looking on the person a few minuits my fear left me: I then laid hands on her & in the name of Jesus Christ I rebuked the evil spirit, & he immediately left her, when she arose in her right mind & called for some drink, & in a few minuits was as well as ever.31

In addition to baptism by immersion and blessings by the laying on of hands, the Word of Wisdom also distinguished the LDS Church. Since Pratt had been a strong advocate of the temperance movement before joining the LDS Church, it is plausible that he emphasized this teaching. In the islands, liquor had been introduced by European and American seamen. The English missionaries had induced some islanders to enforce laws against liquor entering port. They were effective in some places for some time, but on islands where resident foreigners ran grog shops, every ship that stopped dispensed quantities of liquor to the local inhabitants. Consequently, the elders made observing the Word of Wisdom, with its admonition against drinking and smoking, a serious matter. On Anaa, in June 1845, Grouard wrote of the formidable cultural challenges facing the missionaries:

Those who I had baptised, 19 in number had all thrown away the use of tobacco & spirits a truly cheering evidence to me of their cincerity; tobacco in particular having been what constituted almost one half of their living, & employed them about one half of the time in preparing it for use: in a word thay were servile slaves to it. Walk through the villige what time of day or night you would you would see 4 or 5 companies of 10 or 12 each squated around a small fire with a pipe or cegar passing it from one to the other taking one or two puffs each, swalowing the smoke & emiting it from their nose: even duering the short half or three quarters of an hour meeting thay many of them would have to go out & have a smoke, in fact it was made a business by some one or more to see there was a fire convenient to the meeting house. Those who I had baptised however as soon as I told them it was contrary to the Lords will for them to make use of such useless & hurtfull trash laid it aside expressing a firm resolution never to take it again.32

In time the converts became very zealous with the teaching. At the May 18, 1851, conference of the LDS Church at Huuau, Tahiti, local elders preaching among the Tuamotu Islands “had been verry rigid regarding it [Word of Wisdom], cutting off members without mercy, who were known to make use of it in any degree.” After his first mission to the islands, Addison Pratt discussed the matter with Church leaders in Salt Lake. Upon his return to French Polynesia, he counseled that members were to exercise their free agency and choose whether to follow the Word of Wisdom. However, he told them that “the elders would have no faith in administering” to the disobedient “in cases of sickness or distress.” He further counseled that the elders were “not to ordain any to the priesthood, who would not observe the Word of Wisdom.” The Word of Wisdom had to be interpreted in new ways to allow for the culinary customs of the islanders. Among the Tuamotuan Saints, there had arisen “much contention” over the “practice of eating dogs.” After quoting some scriptures, Elder Pratt observed “that he thought it should be left to their own option what they should eat.”33

On Tubuai early in his first mission, Pratt was pressed with another difficult Word of Wisdom question put to him through his interpreter. He wrote:

Sevral natives called on us today to see what would be required of them if they should join the church. Among the questions that were asked, one of the women asked if they must leave off eating fleas and lice? Br Hill told her she must (as he was interpreter). “What must we do with them, when we catch them?” she asked. “Kill them and throw them away.” “It [is] a pity to throw them away when they are so sweet,” said she, tho I thought her partly in jest.34

Just as the LDS missionaries stressed the importance of the Word of Wisdom, they required moral chastity. Elder Pratt “spoke in particular of the sin of lycentiousness as this seems to me to be the crying sin of these islands, and they commence it when small children. This sin I never cease to warn them against, both old and young.” When young people came to him for baptism he bore down on the subject: “I talked much with them at the time they offered themselves, and told them what would be expected of them. . . . At the waterside, after singing and prayer, I talkt to them again.”35 And while Elder Grouard often defended the islanders, he believed their vices had come from the white man “with the exception of licenciousness, . . . an old heathen practice: and the english missionaries, if thay have taught them better by precept, have not by example, or at least a part of them, as their illegitimate half cast progeny among thease Islands fully prove.”36 Still, Pratt did not despair, notwithstanding the difficulties: “It is but a small part towards making saints of them to get them no farther than to barely baptize them. . . . But still, I know that faith and patience work wonders, and I am not yet discouraged.”37

As already noted, the English missionaries had effected the prohibition of native dances. Hence, the LDS missionaries recorded little about the practice. What is said, however, shows that the Mormons agreed with the English on this score. On July 19, 1846, Pratt entered in his journal: “In the evening tried and suspended some members for danceing and smoaking, which are contrary to the rules of the church, and also dancing is not alowed out of the church.”38

After the French assumed power in 1843, the social laws were relaxed and the dances reappeared. While on his second mission in the 1850s, when the Mormons sought to launch a schooner that Grouard and others had built, Pratt recorded that it could not be launched without help from the entire population of Tubuai. During Pratt’s absence, many converts had fallen away, “and those out of the church refused to help, unless we would give them the privilege of having a native dance.” There was nothing else for the missionaries to do but allow the dance, and the islanders took days alternating between feasting, dancing, and pulling the schooner to water.39

While dancing was usually prohibited, singing was generally encouraged. Pratt noted that “the Pacific islanders have a great desire for learning psalm, and hymn tunes. They have verry strong and clear voices, not verry high, nor verry low.” Pratt spent much time teaching hymns and translating words for them. Through his experience, he concluded that the islanders “do not catch sounds quick, but when they once learn a tune, are never tired of singing it, will collect at a neighbour’s house at dark and sing a new tune over and over, till mid night.”40 Such drilling annoyed Grouard, so the islanders preferred to have Pratt present at such times.

Like singing, a strong work ethic was included among the positive and practical teachings of the LDS missionaries. An officer of the government on Anaa came to Elder Grouard and inquired,

If any person comes into your church must thay leave off work? No, said I, but to the contrary must become more industrious. What, enquired he may one do all manner of work? Yes said I, if it is but honest. Well then said he, I have an office in government & in case I should be baptized what should I do with that, lay it aside? No, said I, but you should be more carefull & diligent to act in truth & rightiousness in it.41

From passing references, it is evident that the missionaries were well acquainted with the broader spectrum of Church doctrine. The islanders were introduced to the following principles: the apostasy of the early Christian church; the dispensation of the fullness of times; modern-day prophets; continuing revelation from God; the coming forth of the Book of Mormon; the restoration of divine authority (though hardly mentioned as such); and the concept of a lay priesthood (operative in regularly established branches of the Church).

Some teachings, however, brought misunderstanding. The elders’ teaching of the Church’s philosophy of history pertaining to Israel and America was not always well understood. English missionary Charles Barff heard Elder Rogers on Raiatea in November 1844 and journalized that the missionary had attempted “to prove that the natives of North America were the descendants of Ephraim! but the congregation he was addressing was at a loss to know what advantage that was to them when proved and refused to hear him again.”42 Nor was Elder Pratt any more successful in proving his point to a ship’s captain. Most of what he said was well received, “but when I come to prove from Jacobs blessing to a demonstration that America was the verry land, he promised Ephraim & Manasseh, & that Old England had nothing to do with it . . . he took his hat & steered for the door soon as possible.”43

The doctrine of gathering was more readily understood. Beginning in 1844, Elder Pratt referred to the gathering and wrote Brigham Young, asking him to make some preparation for gathering the island Saints as soon as possible, suggesting “some place appointed on this side of the Rocky Mountains.” Pratt explained that “when we speak to them about their gathering, they say, many of them, ‘We are ready to go now!! But how are we to get there?’ The only answer we can give is, The Lord will open the way.”44 By 1851 the hope was that the Church would establish a gathering place for the Polynesian Saints in California, but this did not happen.45

If the Polynesian Saints could not gather to America, they could gather to an island Zion. On December 11, 1850, English missionary William Howe wrote:

Whether the Mormons have got the notion that Jerusalem is to be found somewhere about our missions, I do not know, but they are pouring in fast upon our out stations in considerable numbers. [a number not decipherable] men, women, and children have landed at Tupuai, and have obtained permission from the Governor to locate themselves there to commence an agricultural establishment. They have made considerable progress in baptizing the people at the Paumotus.46

These, then, are extracts from the letters and diaries that give us an idea of what the missionaries taught. Obviously they knew more than they taught or wrote. They had to simplify their gospel lessons to meet the understandings of their listeners. It must have been challenging to teach basic Christianity and the first principles of the restored gospel, while emphasizing the added truths, the restoration of the priesthood, and the elements of Church organization and at the same time teaching practical concepts related to everyday living.

The Success of the Missionaries

The Mormon mission to French Polynesia effectively closed in 1852 after the French passed a law making it extraordinarily difficult for any foreigner to be recognized as a minister; most English Protestant missionaries soon departed as well. Tubuai and the Tuamotus had been the centers of greatest success for the LDS missionaries, the places where most of the islanders were converted to the Church. After the mission closed, there was backsliding, to be sure. Without missionaries to tend the flock constantly, it is a wonder that the converts remained as true as they did. There were some who tired of the LDS Church. Pratt wrote: “Another woman wisht to have her name taken off of the church record. Said she was tired of trying to serve the Lord. Said she wisht to go and serve the devil with her whole heart. And these natives know how to do that with their might.”47

In the end, the successes far outweighed any failures. Elders Pratt and Grouard would have been pleased to hear their work complimented by others. George Platt, an English missionary, wrote in May 1855 (three years after the LDS missionaries had left the field): “The Paumotu [Tuamotu] group seems to be entirely give up to the Mormons . . . [they] have no books with which to teach but our own. It was my wish they should be well supplied with books, as the Mormons teach them to read.”48 And William Howe, an English missionary called to Tubuai when Pratt and Grouard were absent, explained about Mormons:

I ought here to state there are three foreigners, two Americans and one Englishman, residing on the island, the excellence of whose conduct is such as to produce the happiest effect upon the people. This is a very unusual statement I make; but a very delightful one, and I earnestly pray that such cases may multiply.49

And lastly, the American consul at Tahiti and a son of an English missionary together visited Pratt in September 1846 and said that “there had never been a mission started in the Pacific Ocean that had met with the success that this had, & when our means & encouragement from home were considered, it was a wonder.”50

The strength of the Church in French Polynesia today stands as a tribute to these early missionaries and their service. They were pioneers in introducing the Polynesian people to the gospel, and the large number of Polynesian Saints in the Church today attests to the firm foundation they laid.

12:["$","$L1d",null,{"book":{"id":30,"title":"Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","subtitle":"Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","image_id":"website-files-bucket/books/book_cover_images/book-voyages.jpg","excerpt":"","book_series_id":null,"series_ordering":0,"ebook_link_kindle":null,"ebook_link_deseret":null,"ebook_link_nook":null,"free_book":0,"pdf_id":null,"footnotes":null,"public":1,"slug":"voyages-of-faith","wp_id":77384,"product_link":"product/voyages-of-faith-explorations-in-mormon-pacific-history","author_id":null},"chapter":{"id":533,"title":"New Wine and Old Bottles: Latter-day Saint Missionary Work in French Polynesia, 1844–1852","subtitle":null,"online_book_id":30,"excerpt":null,"content":"$1e","intro_text":"$1f","page_number":13,"previous_chapter":"nineteenth-century-voyages","next_chapter":"the-first-mormon-missionary-women-in-the-pacific-1850-1852","pdf_id":null,"footnotes":"$20","slug":"new-wine-and-old-bottles-latter-day-saint-missionary-work-in-french-polynesia-1844-1852","public":1,"wp_id":null,"test":"1066","podcast_file_id":null,"section_heading":null,"chapter_author":null},"topics":[],"scriptures":[],"authors":[],"processedContent":{"html":"$21","headings":[{"id":"heading-0","textContent":"The LDS Missionaries in the Pacific","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-1","textContent":"The Religious Condition of the Polynesians","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-2","textContent":"The Teachings of the LDS Missionaries","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-3","textContent":"The Success of the Missionaries","tagName":"H2"}]}}]