Human beings are constantly in the process of shaping and proclaiming their cultural identity. Historically, these impulses have been closely related to religion through creation lore and a multitude of rituals, which tell people who they are and how they can prosper in life. Careful study reveals that these stories and identity-bequeathing performances are not static entities that move unchanged across time and space. They are constantly, if subtly and perhaps not altogether consciously, being shaped and reshaped. Religious conversion is part of this process. It is the act of adding to, subtracting from, and otherwise modifying one’s personal identity in realms that have been designated “religious.” It does not imply that all previous ideas and activities are erased. Conversion is a process “not of obliteration but of widening embrace and assimilation,” a fundamentally creative act by which people’s ideas and behavior are modified to more effectively comprehend and control the temporal and spiritual worlds in which they live.2

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints launched a sustained mission to the Maori beginning in the 1880s. Within a few years, thousands had been converted. By the turn of the twentieth century, the Church counted nearly a tenth of the total Maori population as members, with a significantly higher percentage in certain pas (settlements) along the east coast of the North Island from the southern Wairarapa to Poverty Bay and beyond (map 1).3 From one perspective, the reason a significant minority of Maori converted to the LDS Church in the final decades of the nineteenth century and why the religion will continue to thrive among them in the twenty-first century is that it provided an unusually rich, culturally compatible resource for defining their identity as a people.

[caption] Map 1[/caption]

When Faith in British Christianity Flickered

The history of Maori religious development in the second half of the nineteenth century is inextricably tied to the events through which the Maori lived.4 When the Church was officially organized in 1830 in upstate New York, halfway around the world New Zealand was firmly in the hands of the Maori. A total of several thousand Pakeha (European) traders, whalers, and missionaries and a handful of settlers clung precariously to their few coastal outposts, which were made possible by the patronage of Maori rangatira (chiefs). At this time, the Maori population is estimated to have been well in excess of one hundred thousand. Fifty years later, as the Mormons began to establish a mission among them, the Maori population was close to its all-time low of less than fifty thousand, and predictions of their extinction were regularly being pronounced.5 It was assumed that the Maori would be absorbed by the dominant Pakeha society, just as the neighboring Tasmanians had been. The humanitarian objective had long been “amalgamation” (assimilation), and the rationale was that the only way to save the Maori race was to extinguish Maori culture through Europeanizing Maori law, labor, loves, and, especially, land.6 By the 1880s, Pakeha settlers not only outnumbered the Maori by more than ten to one, but they had managed to acquire millions of acres of their land, often through deceit and avarice. Perhaps no other development in the years following the 1840 Treaty of Waitangi (supposedly set up to protect the Maori from Pakeha cupidity) weighed upon the Maori more heavily than the alienation of their land.

When the Pakeha’s lust for land led to wars and property confiscations in the 1860s, and especially when many of the English missionaries allied themselves against their Maori converts, faith in British Christianity flickered. This led to the rise of a number of new religious movements like the Pai Marire, Tariao, and Te Ringatu, which, though still based on the Bible, were profoundly influenced by a Maori worldview.7 Instead of a retreat into irrationality and fanaticism, as some contemporary Pakeha assumed, what actually may have been happening was that the Maori were reasserting their right to express their religious personality, to shape their own manifestations of taha wairua (spirituality). Both these indigenous religions and the newly arrived Latter-day Saint faith provided avenues for a refusal to be circumscribed by European Christian conceptualizations of religion.

The Maori-Israel Connection

Scholars today recognize that all Bible readers, including Pakeha Protestants, largely make sense of the scriptural text from within a particular “social location” (that is, as members of a particular social community).8 Not surprisingly, neither the Maori Saints nor those involved in the new Maori religious movements read the Bible the same way their former Pakeha missionary teachers did. Judeo-Christian communities that experience oppression or marginalization often seek understanding and affirmation in biblical texts that echo their experience. For many Maori converts, the narratives and imagery of the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament) were especially meaningful. In their struggles they readily identified with Israelite oppression at the hands of the Egyptians, Philistines, or Babylonians. They shared in the Israelite dreams of deliverance and eventual restoration and triumph. So completely did their history seem to parallel that of ancient Israel that a number of new religious groups incorporated the Israelite saga into Maori history. These Maori referred to themselves as “Hurai” or “Tiu” (Jews) and to their island as “Canaan.”9

The Maori-Israelite connection was greatly reinforced by the Church’s theology. Nineteenth-century Latter-day Saints held a rather exalted view of the identity of indigenous peoples in the western hemisphere and in Polynesia. They believed that the Maori were a literal “remnant” of Israel, rather than just another people with situational similarities.10 This made the Mormon missionaries noticeably more admiring of the Maori people and more comfortable with Maoritanga (Maori culture) than other Pakeha. Although they were not immune to the racial assumptions of their age, these American Mormons seemed to wear the “white man’s burden” more lightly than their Pakeha counterparts; and generally they did not assume, as did certain Protestant missionaries, that islanders had to be “civilized” before being Christianized.11

The Book of Mormon and the Maori

The Book of Mormon, in particular, was read to offer crucial documentary proof of a literal Maori connection to Canaan. The book gives a brief account of Hagoth and several boatloads of people who set sail and “were never heard of more” (Alma 63:5–8). In time, Hagoth’s voyagers would be recognized by Mormon Maori to be part of their people’s ancestors.12 The missionaries who began the work among the Maori encountered considerable interest in their message about the Book of Mormon. In 1881, in what was the first sustained but ultimately unsuccessful attempt to bring the Maori into the Mormon fold, John S. Ferris used the Book of Mormon to emphasize the Israelite heritage of the Maori (fig. 1). Within two weeks, he was “surrounded by the Maoris that want to talk on the Gospel and learn all about the Book of Mormon.”13 These Bay of Plenty Maori had connections to the powerful “King movement” in the central part of the island. A month later, Ferris reported to the mission president, William Bromley, that he had received word that the Maori king, Tawhiao, “wishes the book of Mormon translated in to the Maori language.”14 In time, Ferris was invited to go to “the King in the High Mountains of the Chate-chat and learn the Maorie language and talk to all the King’s people.” Ferris wrote, “I have agreed to live with them four years and learn their language and teach them the Book of Mormon and the doctrines of the Church, unless I am called home.”15 For a variety of reasons, these particular plans never materialized. Nonetheless, keen interest had been manifested in the Book of Mormon.

[caption] Figure 1. John Solomon Ferris (c. 1880), the first LDS missionary to make a sustained effort to teach the New Zealand Maori. Courtesy LDS Church Archives.[/caption]

Two years later, Alma Greenwood and his companion, Ira Hinckley, witnessed the first of several waves of Maori conversions that soon established the east coast of the North Island as the stronghold of Mormonism among the Maori. Greenwood linked the conversion of a prominent Ngati Kahungunu chief, Ihaia Whakamairu (fig. 2), to the Book of Mormon. On July 7, 1883, Greenwood recorded in his diary that he continued discussing with Whakamairu “the coming forth of the Book of Mormon & the giving the origin of the Maoris . . . in the evening Isaiah [Ihaia] asked for baptism.” Three months later, Greenwood “occupied most of the day reading the ‘Book of Mormon’” to the Maori. At one point, his listeners

became much animated & excited . . . saying they had a tradition among them, which referred to similar circumstances occurring in the history of their forefathers. I related many things found recorded in this book to them & the more they learn of its contents, the more they are convinced of it furnishing ample information to account for their origin.16

To this day Maori Saints cherish the Book of Mormon as their story, the account of their people before the “Great Fleet” sailed to colonize Aotearoa (New Zealand).17 The American missionaries may have carried it to them and the Pakeha Joseph Smith may have translated it, but from their perspective, it was the story of their ancestors.

[caption] Figure 2. Ihaia Whakamairu (c. 1883), a Wairarapa chief and early convert to the LDS Church. Courtesy LDS Church Archives.[/caption]

What is striking is how the text of the Book of Mormon itself can be read to allow, if not promote, such a perspective. The book places ethnic Israel at the center of history. The title page itself declares that the Book of Mormon was written “to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever.” One of the book’s prophecies goes so far as to justify the formation of the United States in terms of its potential service to the indigenous remnants of Israel. The text declares that the “Gentiles” (non-Israelite Europeans) would be “established in [America], and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that [the Book of Mormon] might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O House of Israel” (3 Nephi 21:4).

Envisioning the foundation of a “free” country in the Americas to facilitate the carrying of the restored gospel and its accompanying text to native peoples was a rather remarkable inversion of the social hierarchies of the day. Pakeha Gentile colonizers could repent, “come in unto the covenant, and be numbered among this the remnant of Jacob,” but their blessings were to come through “adoption” into the House of Israel by being “numbered among” the Maori and other indigenous Israelite remnants, not vice-versa.18 In the Book of Mormon, the Pakeha are portrayed as servants, not masters; as royal nursemaids rather than powerful kings; and as adopted rather than natural children. Though the Book of Mormon presents Israel’s current condition as a faint shadow of its former self, the book is also replete with promises of their ultimate restoration, both spiritual and temporal.19 Such images would have had an obvious appeal to those Maori looking for eschatological hope or even scriptural grist for present social criticism; for Maori so inclined, the Book of Mormon could be a powerful tool in shaping their understanding of the past, present, and future.

Spiritual Gifts and the Maori

Another resonance between what was sought by certain Maori and what was offered in Mormonism was the ability and willingness to invoke and wield divine power. European Christianity had long since abandoned belief in the contemporary possibility of what were termed the “spiritual gifts”—miraculous healings, prophecies, visions, and so forth. As in colonial Africa, European missionary indifference to the more fundamental spiritual concerns of the Maori, specifically in relation to disease, infertility, exorcism, and makutu (sorcery), left a void that new Maori religious movements and Mormonism were able to fill.20 Maori belief in a lively and present interaction between the spiritual and natural realms had always been fundamental to their worldview. The Christian rationalism of the Pakeha, which downplayed, if not denied, such interactions, probably seemed strange and incomplete to the Maori. Such a void, however, did not take place in their experience with the Mormons. Chided from the beginning by other Christians for their vigorous affirmation and demonstration of the thinness of the veil between this world and the spirit realm, Latter-day Saint missionaries to Aotearoa encountered a people every bit as believing and accustomed to spiritual experience as they were.

Accounts of miraculous healings and spiritual giftedness fill the diaries of the Mormon missionaries. Indeed, the very first Maori branch seems to have been raised up when a chief’s daughter was dramatically restored to health in the Waikato region.21 The Maori felt that the Mormons had great mana (power, prestige) and that they wielded it effectively in a variety of contexts. Even against makutu was their mana manifested. In 1889 a female sorceress reportedly placed a curse on the Mormon elders and warned local Maori against associating with them. The elders later confronted the sorceress, who had climbed a tree. Before a group of assembled Maori, the elders called for divine assistance and then ordered the sorceress to descend. In what seemed a replay of Elijah’s humiliation of the priests of Baal on Mt. Carmel, the sorceress complied, and the elders cast the evil spirits out of the woman. As a result of these events, the next day fifty-two people joined the Church.22

Maori Prophets Anticipate the Mormons’ Arrival

Among LDS Maori, the most frequently mentioned attraction to the Church was that various Maori matakite (seers) were understood to have predicted the coming of the Mormon elders and to have directed their descendants to accept the message when it came. That God inspires individuals outside the Church, especially with the intent of preparing them for reception of the restored gospel, has long been acknowledged in Latter-day Saint theology. The Book of Mormon prophet Alma, for example, affirmed that “the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have” (Alma 29:8). In 1890, when Wovoka, the Paiute Indian prophet, gained public attention in the United States, Joseph F. Smith prepared a letter to the editor of the Young Woman’s Journal explaining his views on the matter: “It is in perfect harmony with the order of heaven, for ministering spirits or messengers from God or Christ to visit the Lamanites or any other people, as Cornelius of old was visited, and as Christ visited Saul, and for the same purposes.” With regard to these Native Americans, President Smith spoke of God “hasten[ing] their enlightenment by means of dreams, visions, and heavenly manifestations.” Joseph F. Smith also made it clear that

the object to be attained by such manifestations as the Lamanites claim to have had, admitting the same to be true and from God, can be no other than to begin the preparation of the Lamanites to receive a correct knowledge of God and of their fathers, and of the holy gospel already revealed and established among men, that they might believe, obey and be saved thereby.23

Such preparation appears to have been common among the Maori. One prophecy account comes from Hirini Whaanga, son of prominent nineteenth-century Te Mahia chief Ihaka Whaanga and one of the most important early converts to the Church:

I desire to tell you of a prophecy by one of my forefathers, Arama Toiroa. Amongst our people this chief was regarded as a seer. . . . In the year 1830 this Arama Toiroa gathered his children, grandchildren and relatives together. At this time most of his descendants had joined the church of England, and the aged chief, addressing them, said: “My dear friends, you must leave that church, for it is not the true church of the God of heaven. The church you have joined is from the earth and not from heaven.” Upon hearing this his people asked, “Where then can we find a church, where we can worship the true God?” Arama Toiroa answered, “There will come to you a true form of worship, it will be brought from the east, even from beyond the heavens. It will be brought across the great ocean and you will hear of it coming to Poneke (Wellington) . . . and afterwards its representatives will come to Te Mahia. . . . When this ‘Karakia’ (form of worship) is introduced among you, you will know it, for one shall stand and raise both hands to heaven. When you see this sign enter into that church.”

A half century later, Mormon missionaries arrived in the Mahia district. According to Whaanga, “when the descendants of the old chief saw the Elders in prayer, with hands uplifted to heaven, they marveled and said, ‘This is indeed the church for us, for did not our revered forefather, Arama Toiroa, prophesy about it?’ In that year (1884) my people were baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.”24

King Tawhiao and the Coming of the Mormons

Maori Saints also claim that King Tawhiao predicted the coming of the Mormons. Again these reports come very early. In fact, during John Ferris’s extended 1881 effort to teach the Maori, he reported to the mission president, William Bromley, that “more than a year ago the king said a White man would come across the sea and preach to them the true gospel and they affirm that they believe [I am] the man.”25 Presumably to convince the king that he was indeed the one foreseen in vision, Ferris “sent [his] photograph and a letter to Te-ko-ta [Te Kooti], the counselor to the king, in the high mountains of the Chat-e-Chat, by Chief Makatarina Tamaru [Makarini Tamarau].”26 That this unlettered miner from southern Utah attracted the attention and involvement of one Makarini Tamarau, one of the preeminent chiefs of the large Tuhoe tribe, attests to the mana bestowed upon him by being identified in Maori prophecy.27

It would be another two months before Ferris learned of the impact of Tamarau’s visit (and his photograph) to King country. When he did, the reply was delivered by several other chiefs, including Kereru Te Pukenui, paramount chief of the nearby Ngati Rongo hapu (subtribe) of the Tuhoe tribe. Ferris was thrilled with the message that Te Pukenui and his delegation bore. They began by acknowledging that Ferris was now known throughout “all of the upper country . . . of the Urawera [Urewera wilderness],” and that they had heard about him from many of their people. Even more impressive, the connection to the prophecy was reiterated:

Tekota [Te Kooti] told them that I was the same man that he had told them about two years ago that would come from a far country and give them the good church, and that Tekota [Te Kooti] said there were two more coming, and then the Maories would have no more war, but they would have peace, and many good things would come to them, and that they would know the good way.28

An oral tradition ascribed to Roma Ruruka, a Maori convert to the Church in 1893, also tells of him hearing King Tawhiao in the 1860s say that the true ministers would come to New Zealand from over the Sea of Kiwa (Pacific Ocean), traveling in pairs and teaching the people in their own tongue. When Ruruka saw the Mormon elders and their mode of teaching in the Maori language, he was baptized.29 Charles Anderson, the first LDS missionary to actually gain an audience with King Tawhiao (fig. 4), recorded in his journal that when he asked the King’s permission “to go in his country and among his people preaching the gospel,” Tawhiao “assured me of his approval and he heartily gave his consent.” Anderson added that the king “seemed well pleased and told me to come to Whatiwhatihoe (his headquarters) and anywhere I chose to go in his country.”30 Independent support for Latter-day Saint traditions about Tawhiao’s sympathies comes from a March 1883 account in a Wairarapa newspaper. Though the account seems exaggerated, the writer recorded Tawhiao’s words thus: “I was some time ago converted to a belief in the Mormon faith, and I now altogether hold to it. My people in the North are believers also in Mormonism, and it is my wish that all the Maori should be of that faith.”31

Paora Potangaroa’s Famous Prophecy

Perhaps the most famous prophecy is one delivered by Paora Potangaroa, the Ngati Kahungunu prophet and rangatira, to a group of several thousand Maori gathered to commemorate the completion of a carved house in the Wairarapa area.32 Several traditions survive as to what occurred.33 Potangaroa repeatedly decried the alienation of the land and encouraged Maori to cling to it. He spoke of the spiritual impotency of missionary Christianity, evidenced both by a lack of contemporary miracles and by its division into numerous denominations. According to one report, the people pressed Potangaroa to declare which was the church for the Maori. After meditation and prayer, Potangaroa is reported to have announced that “there is a religious denomination coming for us; perhaps it will come from the sea, perhaps it will emerge here. . . . There will be a time when a religion will emerge for you and I and the Maori people.”34 Another account elaborated:

You will recognize it when it comes. Its missionaries will travel in pairs. They will come from the rising sun. They will visit us in our homes. They will learn our language and teach the gospel in our own tongue. When they pray, they will raise their right hands.35

During this gathering, Potangaroa dictated “He Kawenata” (the covenant), which contained some of his prophecies. He then had it sealed in a monument that still stands on the Te Ore Ore marae (fig. 5). It predicted that 1883 would be the year of “great faith” in which “tribute” would be rendered “to whom tribute is due.” Potangaroa added, “we will learn of the Scepter of Judah . . . of the Kingdom of Heaven [and] of the Sacred Church with a large wall surrounding.”36 For years Maori Mormons have pointed to this prophecy as an inspired anticipation of the establishment of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints among them.37 Everything seemed to match up precisely. Elders Alma Greenwood and Ira Hinckley entered the Wairarapa Valley right on prophetic schedule in 1883, and in a year of “great faith” they converted hundreds of Kahungunu Maori.

After the close of the year 1883, the new mission president, W. T. Stewart, reported to President John Taylor that

two or three years ago [the Maori] had a man here among them whom they regarded as a prophet, they say. He told them in 1883 that the true Gospel would be brought [to] them. . . . Some of them firmly believe the Book of Mormon, being presented them in this year, to be the exact fulfillment of the predictions of their prophecy.38

Later, these Maori also learned of a “sacred church with a large wall surrounding”—the LDS temple inside Temple Square in Salt Lake City, Utah.

Each of the prophecies discussed above—Toiroa’s, Tawhiao’s, and Potangaroa’s—achieved a final form that became standard among Maori Church members. Just as form and redaction criticism have shown that the canonical biblical text passed through various earlier stages, these prophecies, too, have a “tradition history” of their own. Beyond their historical development, an important question is why these prophetic traditions came to occupy such a prominent place in the story of the rise of the gospel among the Maori. The brief answer is that they provided a mechanism by which the Maori could readily domesticate a foreign message. If the arrival of the LDS missionaries had been anticipated by Maori prophets, then it was possible for Maori rangatira and their people to welcome the Church as an authentic part of their destiny rather than as another foreign intrusion. It was a way to lay claim to the mana of the past. The LDS missionaries may have been Pakeha (though rarely the unpopular British variety), but they were serving Maori-determined ends.

Thus, to embrace Mormonism was no capitulation to colonialism. For over a century, Maori Church members have told and retold these stories as a way to place a Maori stamp on being Latter-day Saint as well as to celebrate the spiritual insight of their own people. Such apparent evidence of divine guidance clearly paralleled the biblical account of the people of God being led by living prophets and provided yet another reinforcement for the idea that the tangata whenua (people of the land) were indeed of the House of Israel.

Conclusion

What, then, are we to make of the rise of the gospel among the Maori? To thousands of Maori a century ago and even to the present day, the restored gospel has offered an array of ideas and religious practices that resonated with something deep inside them. Whether it revealed or merely reinforced their sense of royal birthright; whether it disclosed a mana never before encountered or simply built on the spiritual power already accepted by Maori as being present in their midst and in their heritage; and whether Mormonism was conceived of as the restoration of pure knowledge and ceremony held anciently among the Maori or merely as acceptable elaborations and adaptations, there was a clear sense that in joining this church, one was not abandoning Maori culture to become a brown Pakeha. If in the past hundred years, in the relationship between Maoritanga and Mormonism, there has been ebb and flow, accommodation and adjustment, it has always been with the perception that there is a fundamental and ancient compatibility between the two.

1e:T73ed,

1. Grant Underwood, “Mormonism, the Maori, and Cultural Authenticity,” Journal of Pacific History 35 (August 2000): 133–46.

2. Ramsay MacMullen, Christianity and Paganism in the Fourth to Eighth Centuries (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1997), ii. Studies pertaining to the Pacific include Cliff Wright and Leslie Fugui, Christ in South Pacific Cultures: Articles by South Pacific Islanders about the Relationship of Traditional Culture to Christian Faith (Suva, Fiji: Lotu Pasifika, 1986); John Barker, Christianity in Oceania: Ethnographic Perspectives (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1990); James A. Boutilier and others, eds, Mission, Church, and Sect in Oceania (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1978); John Garrett, Footsteps in the Sea: Christianity in Oceania to World War II (Suva, Fiji: Institute of Pacific Studies, USP, 1992). More theoretically informed is Robert W. Hefner, ed., Conversion to Christianity: Historical and Anthropological Perspectives on a Great Transformation (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993); and Peter G. Stromberg, Language and Self-Transformation: A Study of the Christian Conversion Narrative (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993).

3. The story of Mormon beginnings in New Zealand can be found in several general histories: Brian W. Hunt, Zion in New Zealand: A History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in New Zealand, 1854–1977 (Temple View, N.Z.: Church College of New Zealand, 1977); and R. Lanier Britsch, Unto the Islands of the Sea: A History of the Latter-day Saints in the Pacific (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986). Still helpful in some aspects is Ian R. Barker, “The Connexion: The Mormon Church and the Maori People” (Master’s thesis, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand, 1967). A shorter, specialized study valuable for its focus on the period under consideration is Peter Lineham, “The Mormon Message in the Context of Maori Culture,” Journal of Mormon History 17 (1991): 62–93. Carrying the story of Mormon-Maori cultural interaction into the twentieth century is Ian Barber, “Between Biculturalism and Assimilation: The Changing Place of Maori Culture in the Twentieth-Century New Zealand Mormon Church,” New Zealand Journal of History 29 (October 1995): 142–69.

The first Mormon baptisms in New Zealand occurred in the 1850s among European, primarily British, settlers, called Pakeha by the Maori. Prior to the 1880s, only sporadic missionary contact was made with the Maori. During the 1880s, however, a concerted outreach yielded thousands of Maori converts, and the center of gravity in the LDS Church in New Zealand shifted away from the Pakeha who, during the previous quarter century, had never numbered more than several hundred.

4. Dependable, up-to-date overviews of the nineteenth century can be found in James Belich, Making Peoples: A History of the New Zealanders, from Polynesian Settlement to the End of the Nineteenth Century (Auckland: Penguin, 1996); the relevant chapters of Geoffrey W. Rice, ed., The Oxford History of New Zealand, 2d ed. (Auckland: Oxford University Press, 1992); and Keith Sinclair, ed., The Oxford Illustrated History of New Zealand (Auckland: Oxford University Press, 1990). Also valuable is Judith Binney, Judith Bassett, and Erik Olssen, The People and the Land (Te Tangata me Te Whenua): An Illustrated History of New Zealand, 1820–1920 (Auckland: Bridget Williams Books, 1993).

5. The best population estimates come from Ian Pool, Te Iwi Maori: A New Zealand Population Past, Present, and Projected (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 1991).

In 1882 the renowned Dr. A. K. Newman spoke to the New Zealand Institute on “The Causes Leading to the Extinction of the Maori,” and in 1885, Isaac Featherstone uttered his famous phrase justifying a humane policy towards the Maori as “smoothing the pillow” before a dying race. Cited in Belich, Making Peoples, 247–48. This was actually part of the larger late nineteenth-century Western infatuation with theories of social Darwinism in which the inevitable, evolutionary extinction or assimilation of indigenous populations within European colonies was widely assumed.

6. Alan Ward, A Show of Justice: Racial “Amalgamation” in Nineteenth Century New Zealand (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 1978).

7. The most detailed overview of these groups is found in a pair of books by Bronwyn Elsmore: Like Them That Dream: The Maori and the Old Testament (Tauranga, New Zealand: Tauranga Moana Press, 1985); and Mana from Heaven: A Century of Maori Prophets in New Zealand (Tauranga, New Zealand: Tauranga Moana Press, 1989). Judith Binney also provides an excellent, brief overview in a chapter entitled “Ancestral Voices: Maori Prophet Leaders,” in Oxford Illustrated History of New Zealand, 153–84.

Specialized studies include Paul Clark, Hauhau: The Pai Marire Search for Maori Identity (Auckland: Oxford University Press, 1975); Dick Scott, Ask That Mountain: The Story of Parihaka (Auckland: Southern Cross, 1975), on the community led by prophets Te Whiti and Tohu; several works by Judith Binney on Te Kooti and the Ringatu church—Binney and Gillian Chaplin, Nga Morehu: The Survivors (Auckland: Oxford University Press, 1986); and Binney, Redemption Songs: A Life of Te Kooti Arikirangi Te Turuki (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 1995).

8. Lee Cormie, “Revolution in Reading the Bible,” in The Bible and the Politics of Exegesis, ed. David Jobling and others (Cleveland: Pilgrim Press, 1991); Anthony C. Thiselton, New Horizons in Hermeneutics (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1992); Fernando F. Segovia and Mary Ann Tolbert, eds., Reading from This Place: Social Location and Biblical Interpretation (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1993); James Earl Massey, “Reading the Bible from Particular Social Locations,” in The New Interpreter’s Bible, vol. 1 (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1994), 150–53.

9. See, especially, Elsmore, Like Them That Dream. The notion that the Maori descended from ancient Israel has a history of its own apart from the new religions and the Mormons. See M. P. K. Sorrenson, Maori Origins and Migrations (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 1979). Indeed, the idea is not unique to the Maori. See Alan Howard, “Polynesian Origins and Migrations: A Review of Two Centuries of Speculation and Theory,” in Polynesian Culture History, ed. Genevieve A. Highland and others (Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press, 1967).

10. This is discussed briefly in the sources mentioned in note 3, as well as in William A. Cole and Elwin W. Jensen, Israel in the Pacific (Salt Lake City: Genealogical Society, 1961); and Norman Douglas, “The Sons of Lehi and the Seed of Cain: Racial Myths in Mormon Scripture and Their Relevance to the Pacific Islands,” Journal of Religious History 8 (June 1974): 90–104.

11. The phrase “white man’s burden” entered the English language after Rudyard Kipling, in 1899, at the height of an imperialistic age, published a poem by the same title. It became a catch phrase to describe (or parody) the sense of racial noblesse oblige on the part of certain whites who saw it as their moral duty to bring the benefits of “civilization” (and rule) to “inferior” peoples of color.

12. One of numerous examples of this belief is told by prominent LDS Maori Stuart Meha of the journey to America by a party of Maori Latter-day Saints in 1913. Upon his arrival, he telegraphed these words to his hosts: “Who knows but that some of Hagoth’s people have arrived, pea.” He notes, “I added the little word ‘pea’ (perhaps) not because of any element of doubt on my part but I wanted to raise comment which I succeeded in doing.” Leading LDS Church authorities, including then President Joseph F. Smith, held a reception for the Maori Saints. Among other things, Meha remembers President Smith saying, “You brethren and sisters from New Zealand, I want you to know that you are from the people of Hagoth and there is no ‘pea’ about it.” For Meha, the connection was clear. “This is the word of a prophet of God,” he concluded, “and we need go no further to look for proof of the origin of the Maori.” Stuart Meha, “The Origin of the Maori” (address delivered April 15, 1962), in New Zealand: A Short Collection of Items of History, ed. Glen L. Rudd (Salt Lake City: Privately published, 1993), 4–5. Non-Mormon support for this position is assessed in Jerry K. Loveland, “Hagoth and the Polynesian Tradition,” BYU Studies 17 (autumn 1976): 59–73.

13. John Solomon Ferris, “The Diary of John S. Ferris from Marys Vale [Marysvale] Utah, Mormon Elder,” June 12, 1881, Church Archives, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah (hereafter cited as LDS Church Archives). Ferris left several accounts of his mission. This one, more of a daybook, was kept in a book titled daily journal 1881, purchased at J. J. Evans Stationer, Printer, and Blank Book Manufacturer, San Francisco, on his way to New Zealand.

14. Fred Bromley Hodson, ed., None Shall Excel Thee: The Life and Journals of William Michael Bromley (Yorba Linda, Calif.: Shumway Family History Services, 1990), 155 (July 14, 1881).

15. John S. Ferris to the Editor, September 11, 1881, Deseret Evening News, November 10, 1881.

16. Alma Greenwood, “Mission Journal for 1883,” July 7 and October 13, holograph, L. Tom Perry Special Collections Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah. Though Greenwood entered the mission field in 1882 and served until late 1884, only his 1883 journal has been donated to a public repository.

17. Numerous Maori chants, songs, and whakapapa (genealogies) refer to the founding voyage of the “Great Fleet,” a group of seven canoes which sailed from a legendary homeland, Hawaiki, to settle Aotearoa. The traditional interpretation has been that the Fleet sailed from the Society Islands around 1350 a.d. See Te Rangi Hiroa (Peter H. Buck), The Coming of the Maori, 2d ed. (Wellington: Maori Purposes Fund Board, 1949). Predictable Pakeha dismissal of the legend is found in D. R. Simmons, The Great New Zealand Myth: A Study of the Discovery and Origin Traditions of the Maori (Wellington: Reed, 1976). Another interpretation of the meaning of the Book of Mormon to the Maori is Louis C. Midgley, “A Singular Reading: The Maori and the Book of Mormon,” in Mormons, Scripture, and the Ancient World, Davis Bitton, ed. (Provo, Ut: FARMS, 1997) 245–76.

18. 1 Nephi 14:1–2; 2 Nephi 10:18–22; 30:1–2; 3 Nephi 16:13; 21:6, 22–24; 29:1–9; 30:1–2; are examples of Book of Mormon passages where this perspective is evident.

19. The Book of Mormon view of the eschatological restoration of Israel and the role the Gentiles will play in this is discussed at greater length in Grant Underwood, The Millenarian World of Early Mormonism (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1993), 29–31, 67–69, 77–83, 90–92.

20. The quest for a religion and for religious functionaries with the greatest mana is powerfully portrayed in the Maori novel, Pat Barker, The Strongest God (Whatamongo Bay, New Zealand: Cape Catley, 1990). The contrast in Africa between European and indigenous approaches to sickness is explored in Norman Etherington, “Missionary Doctors and African Healers in MidVictorian South Africa,” South African Historical Journal 19 (November 1987): 77–91.

21. The most contemporary account of this particular healing and associated conversions can be found in the journal (December 24, 1882–January 2, 1883) of President William Bromley, who assisted in the administration. See Hodson, None Shall Excel Thee, 293–98. A later reminiscent account by another principal in the story is William J. McDonnel, “The Start of the Mission among the Maoris of New Zealand,” unpublished manuscript, LDS Church Archives. An account so similar that it likely refers to the same event, despite the fact that a different name (Miriana Rotorana) is used for the young woman, is reported in the scrapbook “New Zealand Mission History” under the date of March 17, 1883, LDS Church Archives.

22. Recounted in the New Zealand Mormon periodical Te Karere 51 (August 1957): 282.

23. Quoted in Gospel Doctrine: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1939), 378–81. According to Maori scholar Bronwyn Elsmore, “prophecy was such a normal part of Maori tradition” that nearly all rangatira (chiefs, leaders) “could therefore claim this designation.” Elsmore, Mana from Heaven, 14.

24. Hirini Whaanga, “A Maori Prophet,” Juvenile Instructor 37 (March 1902): 152–53. See Binney, Redemption Songs, 13.

25. Hodson, None Shall Excel Thee, 148 (June 16, 1881).

26. Ferris to Editor. Neither the original letter nor a copy of it has survived. Te Kooti was a notorious antigovernment rebel and founder of the Ringatu faith who was living at the time in “King Country” under political asylum from Tawhiao.

27. Tamarau was no passing player on the stage of Maori affairs in the latter part of the nineteenth century. He held chiefly rank in Ngati Koura, Ngai Te Riu, Ngati Muriwai, and Ngati Hinekura hapu (subtribes) and was one of the most influential members of the Tuhoe governing body, Te Whitu Tekau (the Seventy). Tamarau had represented tribal interests with the government since the 1860s. Later he recorded Tuhoe traditions and whakapapa for the Urewera Land Commission and was the chief informant for Eldson Best’s famous Tuhoe: Children of the Mist. See “Tamarau Waiari,” in The Dictionary of New Zealand Biography, vol. 2, 1870–1900 (Wellington, N.Z.: Allen and Unwin, 1990), 499–500; and Binney, Redemption Songs, 155, 227, 249–50, 395–96, 476.

28. Ferris to Editor. This Te Kooti prophecy is similar to the one ascribed to King Tawhiao earlier. Since Ferris did not speak Maori, it is possible that names and details may have been confused. Whoever said it, it seems clear that someone of stature, either the spiritual leader of Ringatu, the king himself, or both, was willing to consider Ferris as a divinely sent ally in their efforts to help their people.

29. Recounted in The Mormon Temple (Hamilton, N.Z.: Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1958), 7. Tawhiao is also said to have predicted the site of the building of the Mormon Temple in New Zealand. Mormon Temple, 13.

30. “Daily Journal of Chas. [Charles] O. Anderson called on Mission to New Zealand in March 1884,” November 18, 1884, copy in possession of author.

31. Wairarapa Standard, March 7, 1883. If the report is accurate, an associated irony is that the article also records the reprimand about believing in Mormonism delivered to Tawhiao by the great Wairarapa chief Manihera Rangitakaiwaho, who himself would be baptized only a few months later.

32. This story was widely disseminated by Matthew Cowley, one of the most beloved Mormon missionaries and mission presidents ever to have labored in New Zealand. After years of service in New Zealand, he was called to the Quorum of Twelve Apostles. As an Apostle, Cowley told the story of Potangaroa, and thus it came to be celebrated outside of New Zealand. The most frequently cited account is Cowley, “Maori Chief Predicts Coming of L.D.S. Missionaries,” Improvement Era 53 (September 1950): 696–98, 754–56. With the exception of one or two corrections, it is conveniently reproduced in its entirety in Glen L. Rudd, ed., Matthew Cowley Speaks: Discourses of Elder Matthew Cowley of the Quorum of the Twelve of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1954), 200–205. Potangaroa’s mana in making the prophecy and Cowley’s mana in proclaiming it have combined to immortalize the account. R. Lanier Britsch discussed it in a segment of the Church’s 1997 video An Ensign to the Nations.

33. Potangaroa and the March 1881 prophecies associated with the hui are discussed in Elsmore, Mana from Heaven, 278–88; Angela Ballarat and Keith Cairns, “Paora Te Potangaroa: Ngati Kahungunu Rangitira, Leader, Prophet,” in Dictionary of New Zealand Biography (1993); R. Lanier Britsch, “Maori Traditions and the Mormon Church,” New Era 11 (June 1981): 38–46; and the Cowley materials cited in the previous note.

34. Cited in Elsmore, Mana from Heaven, 284.

35. Cited in Cowley, “Maori Chief Predicts Coming,” 697.

36. The English translation of the Covenant used in these quotations is found in Elsmore, Mana from Heaven, 286. A virtually identical translation is offered by Cowley in “Maori Chief Predicts Coming,” 697–98.

37. What appears to be the earliest attestation to this prophecy comes from the diary of Alma Greenwood. His entry for April 5, 1883, tells of attending a gathering of the “leading chiefs & men” of the valley. This gathering occurred before Greenwood had developed fluency in the language. One of the chiefs reported to Greenwood and his companion that “some three years ago a native said, ‘that an angel came to him & told him [that] in ’82 or ’83 all the religions among the Maoris would be done away with & a new religion would come, but did not know where it would come from.’ Some think that the religion we preach is the new one which was to come. Many of these men came over to the chief’s tent & talked until twelve.” The fact that the unnamed “native” who received the angelic visitation (Greenwood later called him “a Maori Prophet”) singled out 1883 makes it reasonably certain that it was Potangaroa.

38. W. T. Stewart to John Taylor, January 31, 1884, as reproduced in Mary Stewart Lee and Marion Stewart Peterson, ed., History of William Thomas Stewart (Provo: J. Grant Stevenson, 1972), 25.

1f:T89c3,

Human beings are constantly in the process of shaping and proclaiming their cultural identity. Historically, these impulses have been closely related to religion through creation lore and a multitude of rituals, which tell people who they are and how they can prosper in life. Careful study reveals that these stories and identity-bequeathing performances are not static entities that move unchanged across time and space. They are constantly, if subtly and perhaps not altogether consciously, being shaped and reshaped. Religious conversion is part of this process. It is the act of adding to, subtracting from, and otherwise modifying one’s personal identity in realms that have been designated “religious.” It does not imply that all previous ideas and activities are erased. Conversion is a process “not of obliteration but of widening embrace and assimilation,” a fundamentally creative act by which people’s ideas and behavior are modified to more effectively comprehend and control the temporal and spiritual worlds in which they live.2

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints launched a sustained mission to the Maori beginning in the 1880s. Within a few years, thousands had been converted. By the turn of the twentieth century, the Church counted nearly a tenth of the total Maori population as members, with a significantly higher percentage in certain pas (settlements) along the east coast of the North Island from the southern Wairarapa to Poverty Bay and beyond (map 1).3 From one perspective, the reason a significant minority of Maori converted to the LDS Church in the final decades of the nineteenth century and why the religion will continue to thrive among them in the twenty-first century is that it provided an unusually rich, culturally compatible resource for defining their identity as a people.

Map 1

When Faith in British Christianity Flickered

The history of Maori religious development in the second half of the nineteenth century is inextricably tied to the events through which the Maori lived.4 When the Church was officially organized in 1830 in upstate New York, halfway around the world New Zealand was firmly in the hands of the Maori. A total of several thousand Pakeha (European) traders, whalers, and missionaries and a handful of settlers clung precariously to their few coastal outposts, which were made possible by the patronage of Maori rangatira (chiefs). At this time, the Maori population is estimated to have been well in excess of one hundred thousand. Fifty years later, as the Mormons began to establish a mission among them, the Maori population was close to its all-time low of less than fifty thousand, and predictions of their extinction were regularly being pronounced.5 It was assumed that the Maori would be absorbed by the dominant Pakeha society, just as the neighboring Tasmanians had been. The humanitarian objective had long been “amalgamation” (assimilation), and the rationale was that the only way to save the Maori race was to extinguish Maori culture through Europeanizing Maori law, labor, loves, and, especially, land.6 By the 1880s, Pakeha settlers not only outnumbered the Maori by more than ten to one, but they had managed to acquire millions of acres of their land, often through deceit and avarice. Perhaps no other development in the years following the 1840 Treaty of Waitangi (supposedly set up to protect the Maori from Pakeha cupidity) weighed upon the Maori more heavily than the alienation of their land.

When the Pakeha’s lust for land led to wars and property confiscations in the 1860s, and especially when many of the English missionaries allied themselves against their Maori converts, faith in British Christianity flickered. This led to the rise of a number of new religious movements like the Pai Marire, Tariao, and Te Ringatu, which, though still based on the Bible, were profoundly influenced by a Maori worldview.7 Instead of a retreat into irrationality and fanaticism, as some contemporary Pakeha assumed, what actually may have been happening was that the Maori were reasserting their right to express their religious personality, to shape their own manifestations of taha wairua (spirituality). Both these indigenous religions and the newly arrived Latter-day Saint faith provided avenues for a refusal to be circumscribed by European Christian conceptualizations of religion.

The Maori-Israel Connection

Scholars today recognize that all Bible readers, including Pakeha Protestants, largely make sense of the scriptural text from within a particular “social location” (that is, as members of a particular social community).8 Not surprisingly, neither the Maori Saints nor those involved in the new Maori religious movements read the Bible the same way their former Pakeha missionary teachers did. Judeo-Christian communities that experience oppression or marginalization often seek understanding and affirmation in biblical texts that echo their experience. For many Maori converts, the narratives and imagery of the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament) were especially meaningful. In their struggles they readily identified with Israelite oppression at the hands of the Egyptians, Philistines, or Babylonians. They shared in the Israelite dreams of deliverance and eventual restoration and triumph. So completely did their history seem to parallel that of ancient Israel that a number of new religious groups incorporated the Israelite saga into Maori history. These Maori referred to themselves as “Hurai” or “Tiu” (Jews) and to their island as “Canaan.”9

The Maori-Israelite connection was greatly reinforced by the Church’s theology. Nineteenth-century Latter-day Saints held a rather exalted view of the identity of indigenous peoples in the western hemisphere and in Polynesia. They believed that the Maori were a literal “remnant” of Israel, rather than just another people with situational similarities.10 This made the Mormon missionaries noticeably more admiring of the Maori people and more comfortable with Maoritanga (Maori culture) than other Pakeha. Although they were not immune to the racial assumptions of their age, these American Mormons seemed to wear the “white man’s burden” more lightly than their Pakeha counterparts; and generally they did not assume, as did certain Protestant missionaries, that islanders had to be “civilized” before being Christianized.11

The Book of Mormon and the Maori

The Book of Mormon, in particular, was read to offer crucial documentary proof of a literal Maori connection to Canaan. The book gives a brief account of Hagoth and several boatloads of people who set sail and “were never heard of more” (Alma 63:5–8). In time, Hagoth’s voyagers would be recognized by Mormon Maori to be part of their people’s ancestors.12 The missionaries who began the work among the Maori encountered considerable interest in their message about the Book of Mormon. In 1881, in what was the first sustained but ultimately unsuccessful attempt to bring the Maori into the Mormon fold, John S. Ferris used the Book of Mormon to emphasize the Israelite heritage of the Maori (fig. 1). Within two weeks, he was “surrounded by the Maoris that want to talk on the Gospel and learn all about the Book of Mormon.”13 These Bay of Plenty Maori had connections to the powerful “King movement” in the central part of the island. A month later, Ferris reported to the mission president, William Bromley, that he had received word that the Maori king, Tawhiao, “wishes the book of Mormon translated in to the Maori language.”14 In time, Ferris was invited to go to “the King in the High Mountains of the Chate-chat and learn the Maorie language and talk to all the King’s people.” Ferris wrote, “I have agreed to live with them four years and learn their language and teach them the Book of Mormon and the doctrines of the Church, unless I am called home.”15 For a variety of reasons, these particular plans never materialized. Nonetheless, keen interest had been manifested in the Book of Mormon.

Figure 1. John Solomon Ferris (c. 1880), the first LDS missionary to make a sustained effort to teach the New Zealand Maori. Courtesy LDS Church Archives.

Two years later, Alma Greenwood and his companion, Ira Hinckley, witnessed the first of several waves of Maori conversions that soon established the east coast of the North Island as the stronghold of Mormonism among the Maori. Greenwood linked the conversion of a prominent Ngati Kahungunu chief, Ihaia Whakamairu (fig. 2), to the Book of Mormon. On July 7, 1883, Greenwood recorded in his diary that he continued discussing with Whakamairu “the coming forth of the Book of Mormon & the giving the origin of the Maoris . . . in the evening Isaiah [Ihaia] asked for baptism.” Three months later, Greenwood “occupied most of the day reading the ‘Book of Mormon’” to the Maori. At one point, his listeners

became much animated & excited . . . saying they had a tradition among them, which referred to similar circumstances occurring in the history of their forefathers. I related many things found recorded in this book to them & the more they learn of its contents, the more they are convinced of it furnishing ample information to account for their origin.16

To this day Maori Saints cherish the Book of Mormon as their story, the account of their people before the “Great Fleet” sailed to colonize Aotearoa (New Zealand).17 The American missionaries may have carried it to them and the Pakeha Joseph Smith may have translated it, but from their perspective, it was the story of their ancestors.

Figure 2. Ihaia Whakamairu (c. 1883), a Wairarapa chief and early convert to the LDS Church. Courtesy LDS Church Archives.

What is striking is how the text of the Book of Mormon itself can be read to allow, if not promote, such a perspective. The book places ethnic Israel at the center of history. The title page itself declares that the Book of Mormon was written “to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever.” One of the book’s prophecies goes so far as to justify the formation of the United States in terms of its potential service to the indigenous remnants of Israel. The text declares that the “Gentiles” (non-Israelite Europeans) would be “established in [America], and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that [the Book of Mormon] might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O House of Israel” (3 Nephi 21:4).

Envisioning the foundation of a “free” country in the Americas to facilitate the carrying of the restored gospel and its accompanying text to native peoples was a rather remarkable inversion of the social hierarchies of the day. Pakeha Gentile colonizers could repent, “come in unto the covenant, and be numbered among this the remnant of Jacob,” but their blessings were to come through “adoption” into the House of Israel by being “numbered among” the Maori and other indigenous Israelite remnants, not vice-versa.18 In the Book of Mormon, the Pakeha are portrayed as servants, not masters; as royal nursemaids rather than powerful kings; and as adopted rather than natural children. Though the Book of Mormon presents Israel’s current condition as a faint shadow of its former self, the book is also replete with promises of their ultimate restoration, both spiritual and temporal.19 Such images would have had an obvious appeal to those Maori looking for eschatological hope or even scriptural grist for present social criticism; for Maori so inclined, the Book of Mormon could be a powerful tool in shaping their understanding of the past, present, and future.

Spiritual Gifts and the Maori

Another resonance between what was sought by certain Maori and what was offered in Mormonism was the ability and willingness to invoke and wield divine power. European Christianity had long since abandoned belief in the contemporary possibility of what were termed the “spiritual gifts”—miraculous healings, prophecies, visions, and so forth. As in colonial Africa, European missionary indifference to the more fundamental spiritual concerns of the Maori, specifically in relation to disease, infertility, exorcism, and makutu (sorcery), left a void that new Maori religious movements and Mormonism were able to fill.20 Maori belief in a lively and present interaction between the spiritual and natural realms had always been fundamental to their worldview. The Christian rationalism of the Pakeha, which downplayed, if not denied, such interactions, probably seemed strange and incomplete to the Maori. Such a void, however, did not take place in their experience with the Mormons. Chided from the beginning by other Christians for their vigorous affirmation and demonstration of the thinness of the veil between this world and the spirit realm, Latter-day Saint missionaries to Aotearoa encountered a people every bit as believing and accustomed to spiritual experience as they were.

Accounts of miraculous healings and spiritual giftedness fill the diaries of the Mormon missionaries. Indeed, the very first Maori branch seems to have been raised up when a chief’s daughter was dramatically restored to health in the Waikato region.21 The Maori felt that the Mormons had great mana (power, prestige) and that they wielded it effectively in a variety of contexts. Even against makutu was their mana manifested. In 1889 a female sorceress reportedly placed a curse on the Mormon elders and warned local Maori against associating with them. The elders later confronted the sorceress, who had climbed a tree. Before a group of assembled Maori, the elders called for divine assistance and then ordered the sorceress to descend. In what seemed a replay of Elijah’s humiliation of the priests of Baal on Mt. Carmel, the sorceress complied, and the elders cast the evil spirits out of the woman. As a result of these events, the next day fifty-two people joined the Church.22

Maori Prophets Anticipate the Mormons’ Arrival

Among LDS Maori, the most frequently mentioned attraction to the Church was that various Maori matakite (seers) were understood to have predicted the coming of the Mormon elders and to have directed their descendants to accept the message when it came. That God inspires individuals outside the Church, especially with the intent of preparing them for reception of the restored gospel, has long been acknowledged in Latter-day Saint theology. The Book of Mormon prophet Alma, for example, affirmed that “the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have” (Alma 29:8). In 1890, when Wovoka, the Paiute Indian prophet, gained public attention in the United States, Joseph F. Smith prepared a letter to the editor of the Young Woman’s Journal explaining his views on the matter: “It is in perfect harmony with the order of heaven, for ministering spirits or messengers from God or Christ to visit the Lamanites or any other people, as Cornelius of old was visited, and as Christ visited Saul, and for the same purposes.” With regard to these Native Americans, President Smith spoke of God “hasten[ing] their enlightenment by means of dreams, visions, and heavenly manifestations.” Joseph F. Smith also made it clear that

the object to be attained by such manifestations as the Lamanites claim to have had, admitting the same to be true and from God, can be no other than to begin the preparation of the Lamanites to receive a correct knowledge of God and of their fathers, and of the holy gospel already revealed and established among men, that they might believe, obey and be saved thereby.23

Such preparation appears to have been common among the Maori. One prophecy account comes from Hirini Whaanga, son of prominent nineteenth-century Te Mahia chief Ihaka Whaanga and one of the most important early converts to the Church:

I desire to tell you of a prophecy by one of my forefathers, Arama Toiroa. Amongst our people this chief was regarded as a seer. . . . In the year 1830 this Arama Toiroa gathered his children, grandchildren and relatives together. At this time most of his descendants had joined the church of England, and the aged chief, addressing them, said: “My dear friends, you must leave that church, for it is not the true church of the God of heaven. The church you have joined is from the earth and not from heaven.” Upon hearing this his people asked, “Where then can we find a church, where we can worship the true God?” Arama Toiroa answered, “There will come to you a true form of worship, it will be brought from the east, even from beyond the heavens. It will be brought across the great ocean and you will hear of it coming to Poneke (Wellington) . . . and afterwards its representatives will come to Te Mahia. . . . When this ‘Karakia’ (form of worship) is introduced among you, you will know it, for one shall stand and raise both hands to heaven. When you see this sign enter into that church.”

A half century later, Mormon missionaries arrived in the Mahia district. According to Whaanga, “when the descendants of the old chief saw the Elders in prayer, with hands uplifted to heaven, they marveled and said, ‘This is indeed the church for us, for did not our revered forefather, Arama Toiroa, prophesy about it?’ In that year (1884) my people were baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.”24

King Tawhiao and the Coming of the Mormons

Maori Saints also claim that King Tawhiao predicted the coming of the Mormons. Again these reports come very early. In fact, during John Ferris’s extended 1881 effort to teach the Maori, he reported to the mission president, William Bromley, that “more than a year ago the king said a White man would come across the sea and preach to them the true gospel and they affirm that they believe [I am] the man.”25 Presumably to convince the king that he was indeed the one foreseen in vision, Ferris “sent [his] photograph and a letter to Te-ko-ta [Te Kooti], the counselor to the king, in the high mountains of the Chat-e-Chat, by Chief Makatarina Tamaru [Makarini Tamarau].”26 That this unlettered miner from southern Utah attracted the attention and involvement of one Makarini Tamarau, one of the preeminent chiefs of the large Tuhoe tribe, attests to the mana bestowed upon him by being identified in Maori prophecy.27

It would be another two months before Ferris learned of the impact of Tamarau’s visit (and his photograph) to King country. When he did, the reply was delivered by several other chiefs, including Kereru Te Pukenui, paramount chief of the nearby Ngati Rongo hapu (subtribe) of the Tuhoe tribe. Ferris was thrilled with the message that Te Pukenui and his delegation bore. They began by acknowledging that Ferris was now known throughout “all of the upper country . . . of the Urawera [Urewera wilderness],” and that they had heard about him from many of their people. Even more impressive, the connection to the prophecy was reiterated:

Tekota [Te Kooti] told them that I was the same man that he had told them about two years ago that would come from a far country and give them the good church, and that Tekota [Te Kooti] said there were two more coming, and then the Maories would have no more war, but they would have peace, and many good things would come to them, and that they would know the good way.28

An oral tradition ascribed to Roma Ruruka, a Maori convert to the Church in 1893, also tells of him hearing King Tawhiao in the 1860s say that the true ministers would come to New Zealand from over the Sea of Kiwa (Pacific Ocean), traveling in pairs and teaching the people in their own tongue. When Ruruka saw the Mormon elders and their mode of teaching in the Maori language, he was baptized.29 Charles Anderson, the first LDS missionary to actually gain an audience with King Tawhiao (fig. 4), recorded in his journal that when he asked the King’s permission “to go in his country and among his people preaching the gospel,” Tawhiao “assured me of his approval and he heartily gave his consent.” Anderson added that the king “seemed well pleased and told me to come to Whatiwhatihoe (his headquarters) and anywhere I chose to go in his country.”30 Independent support for Latter-day Saint traditions about Tawhiao’s sympathies comes from a March 1883 account in a Wairarapa newspaper. Though the account seems exaggerated, the writer recorded Tawhiao’s words thus: “I was some time ago converted to a belief in the Mormon faith, and I now altogether hold to it. My people in the North are believers also in Mormonism, and it is my wish that all the Maori should be of that faith.”31

Paora Potangaroa’s Famous Prophecy

Perhaps the most famous prophecy is one delivered by Paora Potangaroa, the Ngati Kahungunu prophet and rangatira, to a group of several thousand Maori gathered to commemorate the completion of a carved house in the Wairarapa area.32 Several traditions survive as to what occurred.33 Potangaroa repeatedly decried the alienation of the land and encouraged Maori to cling to it. He spoke of the spiritual impotency of missionary Christianity, evidenced both by a lack of contemporary miracles and by its division into numerous denominations. According to one report, the people pressed Potangaroa to declare which was the church for the Maori. After meditation and prayer, Potangaroa is reported to have announced that “there is a religious denomination coming for us; perhaps it will come from the sea, perhaps it will emerge here. . . . There will be a time when a religion will emerge for you and I and the Maori people.”34 Another account elaborated:

You will recognize it when it comes. Its missionaries will travel in pairs. They will come from the rising sun. They will visit us in our homes. They will learn our language and teach the gospel in our own tongue. When they pray, they will raise their right hands.35

During this gathering, Potangaroa dictated “He Kawenata” (the covenant), which contained some of his prophecies. He then had it sealed in a monument that still stands on the Te Ore Ore marae (fig. 5). It predicted that 1883 would be the year of “great faith” in which “tribute” would be rendered “to whom tribute is due.” Potangaroa added, “we will learn of the Scepter of Judah . . . of the Kingdom of Heaven [and] of the Sacred Church with a large wall surrounding.”36 For years Maori Mormons have pointed to this prophecy as an inspired anticipation of the establishment of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints among them.37 Everything seemed to match up precisely. Elders Alma Greenwood and Ira Hinckley entered the Wairarapa Valley right on prophetic schedule in 1883, and in a year of “great faith” they converted hundreds of Kahungunu Maori.

After the close of the year 1883, the new mission president, W. T. Stewart, reported to President John Taylor that

two or three years ago [the Maori] had a man here among them whom they regarded as a prophet, they say. He told them in 1883 that the true Gospel would be brought [to] them. . . . Some of them firmly believe the Book of Mormon, being presented them in this year, to be the exact fulfillment of the predictions of their prophecy.38

Later, these Maori also learned of a “sacred church with a large wall surrounding”—the LDS temple inside Temple Square in Salt Lake City, Utah.

Each of the prophecies discussed above—Toiroa’s, Tawhiao’s, and Potangaroa’s—achieved a final form that became standard among Maori Church members. Just as form and redaction criticism have shown that the canonical biblical text passed through various earlier stages, these prophecies, too, have a “tradition history” of their own. Beyond their historical development, an important question is why these prophetic traditions came to occupy such a prominent place in the story of the rise of the gospel among the Maori. The brief answer is that they provided a mechanism by which the Maori could readily domesticate a foreign message. If the arrival of the LDS missionaries had been anticipated by Maori prophets, then it was possible for Maori rangatira and their people to welcome the Church as an authentic part of their destiny rather than as another foreign intrusion. It was a way to lay claim to the mana of the past. The LDS missionaries may have been Pakeha (though rarely the unpopular British variety), but they were serving Maori-determined ends.

Thus, to embrace Mormonism was no capitulation to colonialism. For over a century, Maori Church members have told and retold these stories as a way to place a Maori stamp on being Latter-day Saint as well as to celebrate the spiritual insight of their own people. Such apparent evidence of divine guidance clearly paralleled the biblical account of the people of God being led by living prophets and provided yet another reinforcement for the idea that the tangata whenua (people of the land) were indeed of the House of Israel.

Conclusion

What, then, are we to make of the rise of the gospel among the Maori? To thousands of Maori a century ago and even to the present day, the restored gospel has offered an array of ideas and religious practices that resonated with something deep inside them. Whether it revealed or merely reinforced their sense of royal birthright; whether it disclosed a mana never before encountered or simply built on the spiritual power already accepted by Maori as being present in their midst and in their heritage; and whether Mormonism was conceived of as the restoration of pure knowledge and ceremony held anciently among the Maori or merely as acceptable elaborations and adaptations, there was a clear sense that in joining this church, one was not abandoning Maori culture to become a brown Pakeha. If in the past hundred years, in the relationship between Maoritanga and Mormonism, there has been ebb and flow, accommodation and adjustment, it has always been with the perception that there is a fundamental and ancient compatibility between the two.

12:["$","$L1c",null,{"book":{"id":30,"title":"Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","subtitle":"Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","image_id":"website-files-bucket/books/book_cover_images/book-voyages.jpg","excerpt":"","book_series_id":null,"series_ordering":0,"ebook_link_kindle":null,"ebook_link_deseret":null,"ebook_link_nook":null,"free_book":0,"pdf_id":null,"footnotes":null,"public":1,"slug":"voyages-of-faith","wp_id":77384,"product_link":"product/voyages-of-faith-explorations-in-mormon-pacific-history","author_id":null},"chapter":{"id":539,"title":"Mormonism and the Shaping of Maori Religious Identity","subtitle":null,"online_book_id":30,"excerpt":null,"content":"$1d","intro_text":"

Trained as a historian of religion and long associated with LDS religious education,\n Grant Underwood, now with the Joseph Fielding Smith Institute for Latter-day Saint History at BYU,\n taught in the Religion Division of BYU–Hawai‘i during the 1990s. While there he regularly offered a\n course on LDS Church history in the Pacific and served on the board and as president of the MPHS. A\n desire to better understand the notable success of LDS missionaries among the New Zealand Maori led to\n several years of archival and field research. Underwood presented his findings at the 1996 MPHS annual\n conference. Portions of his paper, set in a more theoretical context, were subsequently published in\n the Journal of Pacific History.1

","page_number":107,"previous_chapter":"east-wind-to-hawaii-history-and-contributions-of-chinese-and-japanese-latter-day-saints-in-hawaii","next_chapter":"twentieth-century-voyages","pdf_id":null,"footnotes":"$1e","slug":"mormonism-and-the-shaping-of-maori-religious-identity","public":1,"wp_id":null,"test":"538","podcast_file_id":null,"section_heading":null,"chapter_author":null},"topics":[],"scriptures":[],"authors":[],"processedContent":{"html":"$1f","headings":[{"id":"heading-0","textContent":"When Faith in British Christianity Flickered","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-1","textContent":"The Maori-Israel Connection","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-2","textContent":"The Book of Mormon and the Maori","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-3","textContent":"Spiritual Gifts and the Maori","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-4","textContent":"Maori Prophets Anticipate the Mormons’ Arrival","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-5","textContent":"King Tawhiao and the Coming of the Mormons","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-6","textContent":"Paora Potangaroa’s Famous Prophecy","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-7","textContent":"Conclusion","tagName":"H2"}]}}]