On no less than three occasions during the past twenty years, the alleged December 7, 1941, attempt to bomb the Hawai‘i Temple has been discussed at MPHS annual conferences. Two of the Society’s most intrepid researchers—Kenneth W. Baldridge and Lance D. Chase, MPHS co-founders and former colleagues in the BYU–Hawai‘i Division of Social Sciences—took up the subject.

An edited version of Kenneth Baldridge’s 1988 MPHS presentation held in the Lā‘ie Hawai‘i Temple Visitors’ Center appears here. Although presented in 1988, the bulk of the research and writing had taken place in the 1970s. Baldridge pulled together the results of his extensive research on the topic for the 1978 rededication of the Lā‘ie Hawai‘i Temple. Baldridge’s piece is an impressive bit of detective work, but it did not lay the matter to rest.

In the 1980s, Lance Chase continued the quest and presented his findings at the same 1988 MPHS meeting. Ten years later, at the 1998 MPHS meeting in Hilo, Hawai‘i, he presented a modestly updated version. His piece here is an edited combination of his two presentations. Chase chose to analyze the two “best” sources: Robert Kahawaii and Robert Stout. Moreover, Chase’s avocational interest in military aircraft enabled him to assess the plausibility of various technical details in these accounts, thus enhancing his overall evaluation.

16:{"metadata":[["$","title","0",{"children":"The Purported December 7, 1941, Attack on the Hawaiʻi Temple - Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History"}],["$","meta","1",{"name":"description","content":"$1b"}],["$","meta","2",{"name":"keywords","content":"The Purported December 7, 1941, Attack on the Hawaiʻi Temple, Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History, online books, BYU Studies"}],["$","link","3",{"rel":"canonical","href":"https://byustudies.byu.edu/online-book/voyages-of-faith/the-purported-december-7-1941-attack-on-the-hawaii-temple"}],["$","link","4",{"rel":"icon","href":"/favicon.ico","type":"image/x-icon","sizes":"16x16"}],["$","$L1c","5",{}]],"error":null,"digest":"$undefined"} 1a:"$16:metadata" 1d:I[66263,["1120","static/chunks/1120-75f909259fd067cc.js","5466","static/chunks/5466-b96f3c00376edc43.js","8534","static/chunks/8534-7ca745715241e193.js","9126","static/chunks/9126-91257ba5fa5d06c5.js","8387","static/chunks/8387-2bdb776aa3fa620b.js","6874","static/chunks/6874-bf14f6d1ebc153cc.js","9383","static/chunks/9383-5debb36c04efe52f.js","3063","static/chunks/3063-404186ec4ce8f075.js","7132","static/chunks/7132-1bf9ca313709cfa3.js","5858","static/chunks/5858-a921a795a1989287.js","9233","static/chunks/9233-cd31d8c4ef751ef5.js","8361","static/chunks/8361-ec429c2d2a4b8505.js","7594","static/chunks/app/(site)/(containers)/(content)/online-book/%5BbookId%5D/%5BchapterId%5D/page-aca9af7241f107d8.js"],"default"] 1e:Tf7e2,

In Search of a Tale: A Personal Account Kenneth W. Baldridge

The general outline of events of December 7, 1941, has been retold countless times through congressional investigations, personal accounts, books, and motion pictures. About six o’clock on that Sunday morning, 183 planes took off from a Japanese task force of six aircraft carriers, two battleships, and about two dozen other craft for the three-hundred-mile flight to Pearl Harbor. A second flight of 170 planes was launched from the carriers at 7:15 a.m., a few minutes before the first group had passed over at Kahuku Point. The object of both flights was to destroy the U.S. Pacific Fleet, especially the aircraft carriers Enterprise and Lexington, which fortunately for the U.S. were at sea. To carry out this objective safely, it was necessary for the Japanese to neutralize U.S. military air defenses at the bases at Kaneohe, Ford Island, Hickam Field, ‘Ewa, Wheeler, and Bellows. Maps depicting the attack routes show that the first wave divided north of O‘ahu: some planes went along the north shore toward Hale‘iwa, while others paralleled the windward coast toward Kaneohe Naval Air Station. The squadron acted quickly and decisively. Before the day was through, approximately 3,500 Americans had been killed or wounded. The once proud U.S. Pacific Fleet was in shambles.

Lā‘ie in the early 1940s was largely a sleepy Mormon community, composed primarily of Hawaiians and some Samoans, near the northeast corner of the island of O‘ahu. The people farmed, fished, and worked at various trades. The only building of any size was the beautiful, white Hawai‘i Temple, dedicated by President Heber J. Grant in 1919. For decades stories have circulated among Church members about an attempted bombing of the temple during the surprise raid on Pearl Harbor. What did or did not happen in the skies over Lā‘ie that December day in 1941 has been the subject of considerable curiosity and some controversy. This article is an account of the various stories related to that day, an attempt to evaluate their validity and the extent to which they have spread, and finally, an appeal for perspective.

The Purported Attack

Since the late 1960s, the story of the Pearl Harbor raid has been told among the people of Lā‘ie and elsewhere to Latter-day Saints’ joy or consternation, depending upon the listener’s point of view. Although several variations of the story exist, the most common one, broken into its two distinct although related segments, runs along these lines.

Soon after reaching the Hawai‘i shoreline, one of the Japanese dive-bomber pilots en route to Pearl Harbor spotted the white Mormon temple in Lā‘ie and concluded that a building of that size—obviously out of place in its immediate surroundings—must have military significance (fig. 1). He left his squadron to attack the building. His bomb release failed to function, however, so he tried again and once more failed. After trying and failing a third time, he rejoined his comrades and flew on his way to Pearl Harbor.1

[caption] Figure 1. An aerial photograph of the Hawai‘i Temple in Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i, taken prior to World War II. Courtesy LDS Church Archives.[/caption]

Part two of the story is equally intriguing. After failing to discharge his bomb over Lā‘ie, the pilot continued on his way, successfully dropping his load at Pearl Harbor or Kaneohe. After the war and still puzzled by his inability to destroy that mysterious white building, the pilot attempted to learn more about it. His search led him to the Church and, impressed by the power obviously present at the Hawai‘i Temple, he was baptized. He told audiences in various parts of the Pacific about his participation in the raid and his subsequent conversion.

Reports of this story have surfaced in Japan, Australia, Korea, Hawai‘i, Canada, and mainland America. Perhaps by now it has spread even further. My search for truth has produced some interesting results. For example, there are at least four variations of the bombing attempt besides the one previously cited. One states that the pilot blacked out as he attacked the building and was therefore unable to release his bomb. A second variation says that the pilots were not distracted on the way to Pearl Harbor but, noting the temple location on their maps, came back after the raid to destroy it. On their return, however, they were either unable to find the temple at the coordinates noted, or clouds had formed, hiding the temple from view. A correspondent in Utah added a third variation by stating that according to the account she heard, even the suicide pilots couldn’t dive into it. Yet another account describes a mysterious force that prevented the pilot from getting his plane over the building.

What is the possibility that an attempted bombing might have happened? The odds against it are staggering. First, the raid was planned and conducted in great secrecy. Surprise was the necessary element for success. The primary objective was the destruction of the American fleet, and Pearl Harbor was the first target hit. (Kaneohe was hit about the same time; there is even a possibility that the first bomb fell there a minute or two before Pearl Harbor was attacked.) Although the Japanese passed over the huge army post at Schofield Barracks and the two Army Air Corps bases at Wheeler and Hickam Fields, these were not attacked until after the first bombs fell on “Battleship Row” alongside Ford Island. It is not likely that a plane would be dispatched to bomb some unknown building while still some fifteen minutes from the primary target. Second, some versions describe the pilot as flying off on his own unauthorized bombing mission. Anyone who has served in the armed forces of either the United States or Japan finds this possibility difficult to accept. Third, the attacking planes bombed only confirmed military targets.2

An Eyewitness Account

The evidence in favor of an attempted bombing of the temple is not particularly compelling. A single individual in Lā‘ie is the only witness. Although he died a faithful Church member, Robert Kahawaii was inactive in 1941 and was then quite a partygoer. He states that on Saturday night, December 6, he returned home from an evening of drinking with his friends to find that his wife had locked him out of the house, which was located about 150 yards from the temple. Fearing that pounding on the door would arouse neighbors, Kahawaii spent the night under a tree in his backyard. When he awoke in the morning to the sound of planes, according to his later reminiscence, he saw the pilot’s three unsuccessful attempts to release his bomb.3 Although he confessed to drinking the night before, he insisted he was sober that morning. When I asked Kahawaii why he had not told anyone of the incident until nearly thirty years after the event, he replied that no one had asked him about it so he didn’t think it was important.4

Kahawaii apparently began telling his story locally in the late 1960s, a move generated perhaps by the activities connected with the fiftieth anniversary of the temple’s dedication. There are, however, accounts of earlier recitals, which have been reported on neighbor islands. One of my principal correspondents, Clinton Kanahele, states that he first heard the story on Kauai before ever asking Kahawaii about it; another individual recalls her father telling the story on Maui in the 1950s. Yet, neither account provides many details for the incident.

When questioned later, other Lā‘ie residents of the time say that they saw no such planes. A close neighbor of the supposed eyewitness states that she heard planes but only at a distance. In fact, the Koizumi family lived about seventy yards from the temple, and they were unaware of any aerial activity. The question then arises as to whether Kahawaii fabricated the entire story or whether he had, in fact, seen something. Although many of his acquaintances dismissed the account as the product of a hangover, for years Kahawaii stoutly defended his story’s accuracy.

A possible explanation for what Kahawaii saw lies with the civilian plane reportedly attacked as recounted in Walter Lord’s Day of Infamy. The author tells of a civilian pilot, Tommy Tommerlin, who was giving flight instructions to Jim Duncan, a civilian working at Pearl Harbor. “They had just passed the Mormon Temple near Kahuku Point”—actually about six miles separate the two—“when they heard machine-gun fire and the plane gave a heavy lurch.” Duncan dived, swerved, and escaped back down the windward coast, managing to get safely back across the island to John Rogers Airport near Pearl Harbor.5 Perhaps Kahawaii saw either the evasive action of the American civilians or the pursuing Japanese planes flying over Lā‘ie and assumed the temple was the target of the activity. However, even this possibility is weakened by the fact that no one else saw this event, nor does it explain the open bomb bay of the diving plane, that Kahawaii reported. Attempts to find either the civilian flight instructor or the student to gather further information have proved unproductive so far. I did, however, talk to Marguerite G. Wood, another civilian flight instructor. She saw the attacking planes over Wahiawā and confirmed that Tommerlin, one of her former students, was unaware that his plane had been hit until he returned to John Rogers airport.6

There are other problems with the eyewitness story. How could Kahawaii assess that the pilot attempted to “dislodge” a bomb and do it three times? Moreover, in telling me his account, Kahawaii said that the pilot was successful in discharging his bomb over Kaneohe, a statement he could not have made based on his own observation. When I questioned this, he introduced me to the second part of the story.

According to Kahawaii, in 1971 Elder Cecil McGavin was serving as a guide at the Bureau of Information attached to the Hawai‘i Temple. In a conversation with Clinton Kanahele, Elder McGavin reportedly said that his bishop in Utah related the conversion story of the previously frustrated pilot. The bishop, in turn, had heard it from the pilot in Japan while serving there as a missionary. On arriving here in Hawai‘i, Elder McGavin sought further information. Trying to help, Kanahele then asked a fellow Lā‘ie resident, who turned out to be Kahawaii, the previously described eyewitness. This brought the two stories together, and since then they have often been recited as one.

Rulon B. Hinckley, who served with Elder McGavin at the Bureau of Information, tells the story somewhat differently. He told me in 1978 that both he and Elder McGavin had heard the conversion story from a visitor on the temple grounds, but that neither had accepted the report as reliable. He feels that Elder McGavin did not believe the story and that if he had repeated the tale, it was more by way of idle curiosity than anything else. In an interview with Taylor Macdonald of the BYU–Hawai‘i faculty in 1972, McGavin denied knowing much about the story and insisted that he not be connected with it. He also denied receiving the story from his bishop.7

“So-and-so” Told Me

The number of those who have heard someone else say that they heard the pilot is inestimable. When I checked back with someone who presumably had heard the firsthand account, the response usually was, “No, I didn’t actually hear him myself, but ‘so-and-so’ heard him and told me.” On checking with “so-and-so,” I would invariably get the same response.

I thought I had finally encountered someone who had heard the story firsthand when a student told me he had heard the pilot speak at a testimony meeting in the Lā‘ie Third Ward in the latter part of 1976. Further inquiry revealed that the student had not actually heard it himself, but that his former wife had. She lived on the mainland, so I drew another blank. He was to check with her and contact me with any information. I have not heard from him, and my attempts to contact him have been unsuccessful. Sione Feinga was the Lā‘ie Third Ward bishop at the time and does not recall any such experience. Other ward members agree. Another story claims that the pilot appeared in a similar meeting in the Lā‘ie First Ward, but former Bishop Joseph Ah Quin states this did not occur.

A different Lā‘ie source reported to Hawai‘i Temple President Max Moody that Edward L. Clissold, former president of the Hawai‘i Mission, the O‘ahu Stake, and the Hawai‘i Temple, had heard the story in Japan when he presided over the reopened Japanese mission in 1948. According to this source, President Clissold accepted the story as factual. However, this, too, proved to be an error. In March 1978, President Clissold wrote me, saying that he had heard the story many times and “may have repeated it as hearsay once or twice.” However, he always made sure to stress his “own conviction that the story was a figment of someone’s imagination.” As a U.S. intelligence officer in Hawai‘i during the war, prominent Church leader, and longtime resident of Lā‘ie, his disclaimer must be considered of great significance. His letter also contains a possible explanation of the bombing account. In 1943, Brother Clissold accompanied a U.S. bombing group that included in its training program a simulated attack on Lā‘ie. He reports that as the planes approached the little community, “the temple glistened white in the green fields.” After passing over Lā‘ie, the flight headed out to sea. Later, he related the story on several occasions and from this, perhaps, came a story of an “attack” on the temple.

The Quest to Unravel the Mystery

The pilot story has long had its detectives. Lloyd Walch, president of the Hawai‘i Temple from 1971 to 1976, who investigated the story, felt its veracity was highly unlikely. In February 1976, he told me of a temple patron visiting from Utah who reported hearing the pilot relate his experience at a fireside or testimony meeting in Provo. The patron was to return home and send more details. Unfortunately, he never did. Another person reported to President Walch that he had heard someone tell of the incident at a meeting in Honolulu. However, according to President Walch, no one else from the same meeting mentioned this. President Harry Brooks, Walch’s predecessor, expressed annoyance that the story was being circulated, since it appeared to be a clumsy attempt to add luster to an already sacred building.8

Walch’s successor carried on the quest. In 1978, Hawai‘i Temple President Max Moody, Hawai‘i Mission President William Cannon, and Area Supervisor John Groberg were all interested in seeing the bombing story either verified or laid to rest. Samuel K. Lowe, called as first counselor in the Hawai‘i Temple presidency in 1978, was assigned to investigate the bombing story. Brother Lowe carefully interviewed Robert Kahawaii, who stuck to his story, claiming that a discrepancy had crept in, at no fault of his own, since the story was first told. Kahawaii stated that he learned about the pilot joining the Church from Clinton Kanahele, who “had talked to the pilot.” Kanahele never made this claim and suggested that Kahawaii was confused on that part of the story.

The attempted bombing story has attracted the attention of many, some of whom are also endeavoring to unravel the mystery. In March 1978, I received a letter from Kathryn D. Clausen, a Latter-day Saint writer compiling material for a story on the Hawai‘i Temple for a ward newspaper. Fortunately, she wanted to verify the story before she printed anything. She had checked with the Church Historical Department and from it received the brief account that had been submitted in the early 1970s by a former faculty member of the Church College of Hawai‘i (now BYU–Hawai‘i). The author of that account had been in Lā‘ie from about 1968 to 1970 and had probably heard the Kahawaii version, which started circulating about that time. According to the faculty member’s story—which I recall having heard as well—a bishop who had been standing on the beach verified the eyewitness account. Interestingly, that is the only account in which the “verifying bishop” occurs. Along with the story, the Church Historical Department warned that there was no documentation of the incident or knowledge of the bishop’s name.9

The Tale Evolves

For several years, guides at the Hawai‘i Temple Visitors’ Center related the story, but, in time, they also became concerned enough to seek verification. Ironically, additional variations have originated from that quarter. Several versions are provided by Frank Leishman, who in 1978 was serving as a guide at the Hawai‘i Temple. He reports hearing about the converted pilot while he was serving in a similar capacity at the Oakland Temple from 1974 to 1976. Sometime in 1975, according to Leishman, he was showing a visiting group around the grounds when an LDS American serviceman told him of an experience he had had while serving in Korea. The serviceman had attended a fast and testimony meeting where one of the other servicemen introduced himself as a former pilot in the Japanese navy who had attempted to bomb the Hawai‘i Temple. According to this story, the Japanese pilot not only joined the Church, but ended up in the American Air Force as well. Yes, it must be admitted, the story gets “curiouser and curiouser.” In addition to that recital, Brother Leishman heard the same story from another serviceman just one month later. He gave the matter little thought, however, until he was conversing with a former missionary couple from Sunset, Utah. This couple had been guiding tourists through the Joseph Smith home in Palmyra, New York, when a Japanese man identified himself as the elusive pilot. Brother Leishman wrote to inquire about the man’s name, but there was no response.10

Another version of the story has the pilot visiting his missed target after the war. In 1972, for example, someone told a story to a Church News writer who, in turn, asked Norman L. Nielsen to investigate the story’s truth. Nielsen was then in charge of public affairs for the Church College of Hawai‘i. According to information he received from the Church News reporter, Stephen W. Gibson, a gardener then working at the temple had been one of the Japanese pilots during the bombing of Pearl Harbor. His mission was to bomb the temple and surrounding buildings. He flew over the temple several times but couldn’t see it, so he continued on and dropped his bombs elsewhere. Several years after the war, he came to Hawai‘i and wanted to see the building that he’d been assigned to destroy years before. While visiting the temple grounds, he learned of the Church and was later baptized. The Church News correspondent concluded his letter by asking Nielsen to “verify the story, interview him, and provide us with a picture of him working on the temple grounds with the temple in the background.”11 Needless to say, the story never materialized.

The best piece of evidence comes from Brother Frank Thorup, who also attempted to gather more information but while doing so encountered yet another version. In 1977 he visited with President Robert Stout, who was passing through Hawai‘i on his way to preside over the Japan-Kobe Mission. When President Stout was serving as a young missionary in Japan in the 1950s, he and his companion were out tracting. They introduced themselves to a man who told them that he had attempted to “bomb their temple” during the Pearl Harbor raid. Apparently he had struck at military targets that morning, but at the end of his mission he still had one bomb remaining. Flying near Lā‘ie on his way back to his ship, he spotted the glistening white temple and selected that as his final target. As he told President Stout—who told Brother Thorup, who told me—he was unable to get his plane over the temple in spite of several attempts. This mysterious force convinced him of the presence of “evil spirits,” which he wanted nothing to do with, so he flew on and jettisoned his bomb in the ocean. I have been unable to confirm this story. In 1978, I mailed a letter to President Stout requesting more information but heard no response. Then in September 1983, President Stout sent Robert Finlayson, president of the Hawai‘i Temple, pages from his journal in which he told of meeting the man who claimed to be the pilot.12

“A Silly Story”

Tracking down the alleged pilot did not seem like an impossible task. Either there was such a person or there was not. He had either joined the Church or he had not. I directed my first inquiry to Paul Andrus, former mission president in Japan and regional representative in the Far East. He had heard the story but knew of nothing to verify it. He then asked President Kenji Tanaka, first president of the Tokyo Stake and later president of the Japan-Nagoya mission, and Katsuhiko Inomata of the Tokyo Stake high council if they could verify the story. They had also heard it but knew of no Japanese Latter-day Saint who had participated in the raid. Neither did Kotaro Koizumi nor Adney Komatsu—both of whom lived in Hawai‘i in 1941 and later served as mission presidents in Japan. Koizumi, in fact, was living in Lā‘ie at the time about a hundred yards from the temple. In October 1977, I interviewed Masao Watabe, recently arrived from Japan to serve as a temple guide. He had heard the first part of the story in Japan but had heard nothing about the pilot joining the Church. Watabe was baptized in 1949 after military service in World War II, and to his knowledge, there were very few other Japanese World War II veterans in the Church. I also spoke with Ruth Nakanishi Ohsiek, a long-time member in Lā‘ie who knew most of the Japanese Saints. She told me there were no Pearl Harbor veterans among them. In April 1978, she asked President Kamio of the Osaka North-Japan Stake and President Kihachiro Ichimichi of the Osaka-Japan Stake for leads. These two had no information, and President Ichimichi dismissed these tales as “a silly story.” Kiyoshi Sakai, director of the Tokyo Distribution Center, said that he regarded the story of the attempted bombing as a “groundless rumor” and recommended that I “not pay attention to it.”13

Although no one in Japan seems to know anything about the pilot joining the Church, a possible explanation lies in an account in which the pilot first traveled to Hawai‘i and the mainland, telling his story and then moving to Australia. My attempt to question bishops in Australia in the early 1970s was discouraged by Elder Robert L. Simpson of the First Quorum of the Seventy, who was then Area Supervisor for Australia and New Zealand. Naturally reluctant to see busy bishops plagued with more paperwork, he protested that “our Oriental population in the area is practically nil.” He added his testimony of the matter by stating, “Frankly, I have little faith in the story in question, and have felt quite uncomfortable each time I have heard it alluded to.”14

Since Church sources in Japan yielded no information about the pilot, I began checking on possible survivors of the raid. I asked Hiroshi Ueno, an official of the National Diet Library (the Japanese counterpart of America’s Library of Congress) whether any books or memoirs of survivors are extant, but there are none. His response in 1978 was negative. The likelihood of there being many survivors is negligible since in 1966 Commander Mitsuo Fuchida reported that most were killed during the Battle of Midway, six months after the Pearl Harbor attack. An inquiry to Professor Hisao Iwashima, Chief of the Office of War History Research of the National Defense College, likewise yielded nothing.

The Original Kernel

Surely there must be some explanation for the alleged bombing story, I thought. Behind nearly every rumor there is a grain of truth that served as the original kernel from which the story grew. But the question was how to find that kernel.

My guess is that the idea of the pilot joining the Church could have resulted from the story of Commander Fuchida’s conversion to Christianity.15 Fuchida was converted in Japan during the Tojo war crimes trials in 1945. He later became a traveling evangelist, telling his story many times in Japan and North America in his speech “From Pearl Harbor to Calvary.”16 It is possible that some Mormons heard the story, repeated it once or twice, and over time it evolved into its present form. Another possibility relates to Fuchida’s visit to Hawai‘i on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the attack to assist with the production of a film on his life, One Who Came Back. Reportedly, Fuchida was being shown around O‘ahu by his host, the Reverend Abraham Akaka of Honolulu’s famed Kawaihao Church. On visiting the temple in Lā‘ie, Fuchida is quoted as saying, “Oh, that’s the building we tried to bomb.”17 Yet correspondence with Reverend Akaka in February 1976 revealed that he did not bring Fuchida to Lā‘ie nor was there any mention made of the temple. (My hopes of contacting Fuchida were frustrated by his death in Japan in late May 1976.)

In the end, the purported Hawai‘i Temple attack seems to be a study in the creation of folklore. Admittedly, the first part of the alleged bombing story seems to be better grounded because an individual claims he saw an attacking plane, and another individual talked to a man claiming to be the pilot. In spite of the absence of any other bombing attacks on civilian targets; in spite of the fact that no one else in Lā‘ie saw any such incident; in spite of the lack of corroboration from supposedly supporting sources; in spite of the somewhat unusual circumstances that put Robert Kahawaii in a situation to view that Sunday morning activity; in spite of any evidence, save the elusive Stout journal entry, Kahawaii stuck to his claim. As Latter-day Saints, we are aware that there have been previous occasions when only one person has had a particular experience. Perhaps this is such a time. Ironically, the confusion seems to stem not from the absence of what might be called information, but rather from its overabundance. There are just too many versions of the story.

Conclusion

After an extensive investigation, it is my recommendation that the tale be confined to the vast collection of Mormon legends and not be repeated as an actual faith-promoting incident. As a historian, I have been motivated to get to the bottom of the story and find the truth. Yet I have been unable to verify it. In the process, I occasionally found myself acting as an amateur folklorist as I traced variations in the stories and the different places where they surfaced. I still encounter people who offer yet another lead, another locale, another witness. Long ago my wife suggested this scenario: someday, somewhere, an elderly Japanese man will tap me on the shoulder and say, “I was in on the bombing of Pearl Harbor and had a most interesting experience. I understand you have been looking for me.” A possibility, perhaps, but one I do not think likely.

The Attempted Attack on the Hawai‘i Temple, December 7, 1941 Lance D. Chase

For members of the Church, one of the most widely told stories about Hawai‘i is the purported attempt to bomb and strafe the Hawai‘i Temple on the morning of December 7, 1941.18 Speaking of stories such as these, President Harold B. Lee, at the October 1972 general conference, told the audience: “It never ceases to amaze me how gullible some of our Church members are in broadcasting these sensational stories.”19 Yet the Bible and Book of Mormon are full of “sensational stories” that portray miraculous events and divine intervention. What distinguishes those stories from ones that President Lee counseled the Saints to avoid? The challenge to the investigator of the Hawai‘i Temple bombing story is finding the original source or sources. When followed to their source, most accounts result in dead ends, or they can be explained as outgrowths of one single source. Past attempts at understanding the story’s origin have been inconclusive. Finally, however, two individuals who claimed to have firsthand knowledge were found and interviewed. What follows is a discussion of those firsthand sources and an analysis of their validity.20

In 1983, Brother and Sister Robert Thomas Stout of Boise, Idaho, visited the Hawai‘i Temple on their twenty-fifth wedding anniversary. After the session, they spoke with the temple president, Robert Finlayson, a long-time Hawai‘i resident. Stout told President Finlayson about meeting a Japanese pilot in September 1957 (when Stout was a missionary serving in Matsumoto City, Japan) who claimed to have attempted the bombing.21 President Finlayson had previously heard a version of the temple bombing story from Robert Kahawaii, a temple worker and a professed eyewitness. Later in September 1983, a few days after this meeting between Stout and Finlayson, Stout sent his journal account of the temple bombing attempt to the Hawai‘i Temple archives. At last a “Japanese” source for the legend had emerged, and his account could be compared with that of the only identified eyewitness in Hawai‘i, Robert Kahawaii.

Kahawaii freely and frequently shared his version during the later years of his life. Kahawaii’s account was recorded by Professor Ken Baldridge for the oral history program at BYU–Hawai‘i in 1976. Those who had heard Kahawaii tell his story knew that his accounts varied; and some listeners felt the variations undermined Kahawaii’s credibility. His many versions do, in fact, pose unresolved problems, yet there are variations even in the accounts of theophanies in the visions of the Apostle Paul and the Prophet Joseph Smith. Unfortunately, Kahawaii’s stories, unlike these theophanies, contain unresolvable difficulties. Kahawaii’s account not only contradicts Stout’s story but also those told by Walter Lord and Gordon Prange, professional historians of the Pearl Harbor attack.

Robert Kahawaii’s Account

Robert Kahawaii was born in Waialua, O‘ahu, on May 22, 1909. For a large part of his life, he resided in Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i. He married Bessie Hee in 1950, and the couple had two sons. After the Pearl Harbor attack, Kahawaii was employed in security work for the U.S. Army. He became active in the Church between 1955 and 1960 and eventually served as a temple worker. Robert Kahawaii died on July 4, 1986, and was buried in the Lā‘ie cemetery.

According to Kahawaii, he came home drunk early Sunday morning, December 7, 1941. He was then living at 55-112 Po‘ohaili Street in Lā‘ie, perhaps a quarter mile from the temple, which stood on a nearby hill. Kahawaii had attended the University of Hawai‘i–Willamette University football game, the Shrine Classic, at Honolulu Stadium that Saturday. Rather than staying in Honolulu that night, Kahawaii returned to Lā‘ie because he had a fishing trip planned with two friends the next morning. When Kahawaii came home, his wife realized he was drunk and locked him out before he could enter. Unable to get in, he spent the remainder of the night under a coconut tree in the yard. Later that morning, according to his later testimony, he awoke and saw a plane diving toward the temple. He described the bomb as “not to[o] big, a smaller bomb, and long, just like a torpedo,” hanging down as though it were on a hook. The bomb did not fall. Kahawaii saw the plane make at least one pass before it flew away. On the basis of this evidence, Kahawaii concluded that the bomber had attempted to bomb the Hawai‘i Temple.

Hours later, while at the fishing site at Hukilau Beach, close to the Cooke boathouse on Lā‘ie Bay, Kahawaii saw an American B-17 bomber flying toward Kahuku, three miles to the north. He could not have known then that the U.S. Flying Fortress, having arrived with others from California at the very time of the first attack that morning on Pearl Harbor, made an emergency landing on the Kahuku golf course.22 Kahawaii’s spotting of the American plane after the alleged temple attack indicates that the attempt to bomb the temple occurred during the first Japanese strike rather than the second.

There were no witnesses to corroborate Kahawaii’s testimony. It is noteworthy that Kotaro Koizumi, who later became a mission president in Japan, was living within three hundred feet of the temple on December 7, 1941. When interviewed, Koizumi said he would have been on his way to church about the time of the first Japanese attack that Sunday morning but said that he neither saw nor heard any aircraft.23

Moreover, Tom Nakayama, one of the men Robert Kahawaii went fishing with on the morning of December 7, 1941, reported that he heard planes that morning, but he did not actually see any. There was a cloud cover over the island that broke only as the first Japanese planes approached Pearl Harbor. Nakayama does not remember Kahawaii telling him about the attempted attack on the temple. The other man who fished with Nakayama and Kahawaii that morning, Ralph Makaiau, has died. No other witnesses to the events Kahawaii described have been found.

Robert Stout’s Account

The scriptures tell us that two witnesses are required to establish the validity of a story. In this case there are two known witnesses.24 Sixteen years elapsed between the 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor and 1957 when Robert Stout, a twenty-year-old missionary serving in Matsumoto City, Japan, recorded in his journal meeting the supposed Japanese pilot who attempted the bombing.25 On a Thursday afternoon in September 1957, Stout and his senior companion, Gary Hatch Wright, were proselyting between Matsumoto Castle and the high school in Matsumoto City. It was very hot and humid, so many homes had open doors and windows. With their doors open, the Japanese could not easily refuse the missionaries entrance without at least visually confronting them.

At later recountings, neither missionary said that he was certain that “Okawa,” “Ohara,” or “Ogawa San” (they were not clear on the name) invited them into the house as Elder Stout gave the door approach through the open door. Stout, perhaps misunderstanding or interpreting the lack of a direct refusal in the most positive way, led his companion into the house. Elder Wright thought the Japanese man told them he was fine as he was, indicating they did not have permission to enter. After all, the man did not even rise to greet the entering elders, which would have been consistent with Japanese custom. But the two young men entered anyway, and the man offered them sake (an alcoholic beverage made from fermented rice) and appeared, at least to Stout, to be offended when they declined. According to Elder Stout, the Japanese man had salt and pepper hair, did not look healthy, but was not inebriated. Japanese, a language of considerable ambiguity, is difficult to translate into English and coupled with the missionaries’ somewhat rudimentary knowledge of Japanese, made the whole experience challenging. Not fluent in the Japanese language, Elders Wright and Stout were in Japan without the benefit of the weeks of intense language training now characteristic of English-speaking missionaries assigned to Japan. Thus, Stout, who had been out only five months, could easily have misunderstood Ogawa San’s story.

As the missionaries talked with the Japanese man, he asked them what a prophet was. As Elder Stout searched for a picture of the First Presidency to show him, the man saw a picture of the Hawai‘i Temple (fig. 2). Stout’s journal account, apparently recorded the day of the actual encounter, notes that the man seemed shocked and grew pale when he saw the picture. He then proceeded to tell the missionaries about his experience with that building. He spoke in both English and Japanese and used a lot of hand gestures to help the elders understand the narrative.

[caption] Figure 2. An aerial view of the Hawai‘i Temple taken in the early twentieth century. Courtesy LDS Church Archives.[/caption]

Stout’s journal states the man reported that he had piloted a fighter-bomber during the Pearl Harbor attack. Having a large bomb left after leaving the south side of O‘ahu, Ogawa San hoped to find a significant target on which to release the bomb before returning to his ship. He was about to leave the northeast point of O‘ahu when he saw the temple. (At this point in the narrative, Ogawa San pointed to the aerial view of the Hawai‘i Temple that Elder Stout held.) Circling back to the temple, he dived, but the bomb would not release. He tried again and again to release the bomb, but he felt as though some power prevented his action. Becoming angry, he tried to strafe the temple, but his guns would not shoot. Ogawa San felt sure the building was famous, and he wanted to demoralize the Americans and make them fearful of the great power of Japan. Disgusted at the failure of his attempts to bomb and strafe the temple, Ogawa San even considered jisatsu, a suicide dive, but on his last try to destroy the building, his controls froze. He became frightened. He felt that a great power protected the white building with its blue pools. Two minutes later, now flying over the sea, Ogawa San dropped his bomb and fired his guns, hitting nothing. He felt disgraced for having used his bomb on empty ocean and realized he could not report his failure. Since his controls now functioned perfectly, he decided to try again to strafe the mysterious building with its magical power. Once again, his controls would not respond. He felt he had angered God and was now so fearful that, without a backward glance, he flew away toward his ship.

Elder Stout told the Japanese man he could not destroy the temple because it was the House of the Lord. The man replied: “It has a giant power that protects it. You two missionaries make me feel those feelings again. You must leave me alone and not torment my mind and heart (kokoro). Please excuse me. I am very busy.”26 Elder Stout took notes of the man’s narrative on a map his companion carried, though Elder Wright was unhappy about Stout’s writing all over his map with a ball point pen. That evening, Stout rerecorded the account in his journal. Stout later copied the information on the map into his journal.

Elder Stout reported the experience to at least one Japanese Latter-day Saint, a Sister Momose. When Stout related the man’s words at the initial greeting, she explained that the man had said he was not interested. Stout wrote that he was glad he was ignorant or else he would not have heard that testimony from the former Japanese pilot.27 Soon after Wright and Stout’s interview with the Japanese man, Stout went to Tokyo and Wright was transferred to the Korean Mission. Stout indicated that after his mission he was married (on November 13, 1959) in the Hawai‘i Temple by President Ray Dillman and that he told the temple bombing story again.

Stout returned to Japan more than fifty times following this 1957 incident and even tried to find the Japanese man again. Unfortunately, the man had died—perhaps of orneriness, Stout was told. Stout was never able to verify the events by a second conversation. Elder Wright, a possible second witness to Stout’s story, died in a plane crash in 1969 without ever having recorded Ogawa San’s story. Wright had not been a faithful journal-keeper on his mission, and his journal makes no reference to Okawa San and the bombing story. Wright recorded: “I am a real flopper when it comes to journal writing.” None of the letters he wrote to his brother George in Utah mention the story either.28

The Witnesses’ Characters

Are the characters of the witnesses relevant in validating their accounts? Robert Kahawaii probably did have a hangover when he observed the attempted bombing. But Kahawaii later served three missions for the Church and was a temple worker until his death in July 1986; he sometimes related his temple bombing story in the Hawai‘i Temple.29

Robert Stout worked for the Church Education System for twelve years and earned a doctorate at Arizona State University. He served as mission president of the Japan-Kobe Mission from 1977 to 1980 and, despite a serious and debilitating car accident, worked in the temple following his service as mission president. Though not offered the job, Stout was one of two finalists for a BYU–Hawai‘i Religion Department position.

By 1976, thirty-four years after the event, Kahawaii was sufficiently conscious of the significance of his story to have his account notarized. A copy can be found in the Oral History Office at BYU–Hawai‘i. Kahawaii lived with his son and daughter-in-law Emma for some years prior to 1965. However, until 1965, Kahawaii never told Emma, or apparently anyone else, of the events he said he witnessed.30 Is it possible that by then he had heard the story circulated by Stout and imagined at least some of the scene he said he witnessed that Sunday morning? After all, why have no other witnesses come forward to corroborate what Kahawaii reported?

Japanese Military Aircraft and the Bombing Story

Because Kahawaii described the aircraft he saw that morning, a comparison can be made between his description and the three types of aircraft used by the Japanese at Pearl Harbor. Knowing the ordnance the planes carried and the specific missions and capabilities of each type of plane can also help determine which plane Kahawaii might have seen. There were two bomber types, the Nakajima B5N2, nicknamed the “Kate” by the Americans, and the Aichi D3A1, or “Val” as it was called by Americans. These bombers were escorted by the famed Japanese Zero (Zeke), or Mitsubishi A6M2 fighter plane, which was almost certainly not involved in an attempted bombing of the temple, for this airplane carried no bombs and was assigned only bomber protection and strafing duties.31

Kahawaii claims that he saw bomb bay doors under the fuselage of the Japanese plane. However, none of the Japanese carrier aircraft in 1941 had bomb bays. Rather, the bombs were affixed externally under the wings and to the fuselage of the aircraft involved in the attack. The Kate (type 97) bombers were the only planes armed with bombs that looked like torpedoes, but they carried only one bomb each. Their bombs were designed to be dropped from high altitudes in horizontal flight on American ships. These facts tend to rule out the Kate, since Kahawaii described the plane he saw as diving and carrying a torpedolike bomb, and Stout claimed the pilot dived toward the temple to bomb it.

The Val (type 98) dive bomber, with two crew members, is the more likely candidate for the attack. The Vals did not carry torpedo-shaped bombs but did dive to deliver their ordnance. However, none of the Vals in the first attack carried multiple bombs, so it would not be likely that one would have “a bomb left,” as Stout understood from Ogawa San’s story. None of the attack aircraft in the second attack carried torpedoes or torpedo-shaped bombs.

Bob Kahawaii’s report of the bomb he saw is significant. It was “not to[o] big, a smaller bomb, and long just like a torpedo.” One of the three types of Japanese aircraft involved in the Pearl Harbor attack carried ordnance roughly fitting Kahawaii’s description. The Kate bomber carried a 1,760-pound bomb encased in a torpedo housing, but the bomb was designed for dropping on sea, not land targets. There was only one such piece of ordnance attached to each of the Kates in the first of the two attacks, so the pilot probably would not have had this type of bomb left when he returned to his ship. The Kates in the second wave that morning carried multiple bombs, but none of these was torpedo shaped. The details of Kahawaii’s story indicate that the alleged bomber was part of the first wave of the Pearl Harbor attack.

Another of Kahawaii’s details may be significant in helping investigate the veracity of his account. He recorded that the bomb was hanging down just as if it were on a hook, though it did not fall. Actually, the Japanese had to design and create special equipment for releasing their bombs, since at least two types of bombs dropped were specially designed for the Pearl Harbor attack. The release mechanisms were so new that they were still being installed and adjusted right up to the time the thirty-vessel Japanese task force reached Hitokappu Bay in the Kurrle Islands, the gathering point for the task force. Thus, a Japanese pilot may have had difficulty dropping his bomb because of mechanical failure, although no report of such has come forth.32

The area around Kahawaii’s home was close to the center of Lā‘ie (as it was layed out in 1941). Surely, even in a sleepy village others would have stood alert. Especially on a Sunday morning, other people besides Kahawaii should have observed (and reported) the Japanese bomber if it had dived toward the temple. Moreover, both the Val dive bombers and the Kate torpedo and high-level bombers had multiple crew members. Unfortunately, no additional crew member is mentioned as part of either man’s story.

The possible name of the pilot, as recorded in Stout’s journal, could be a clue to help verify Kahawaii’s and Stout’s stories. Professor Ikuhiko Hata of Tokyo compiled a roster of the Japanese flyers at Pearl Harbor. Unfortunately, the roster was not translated into English and part of it is missing. Many Pearl Harbor pilots were killed in the Battle of Midway. However, if Stout’s story is true, the pilot in question survived the war.33

Stout recalled that the name outside the Matsumoto City house he and Wright tracted was Nishimoto, but since the house was a duplex, Stout concluded that the name belonged to the other party in the dwelling. Of the three variant names for the pilot in Stout’s journal—Okawa, Ohara, and Ogawa—the first and last are common Japanese names, but no lead related to these names has developed.34

An Evaluation of the Story’s Details

One of the central issues to consider is the designated targets of the Japanese attack. The primary targets for the Japanese aircraft were U.S. naval vessels, military air bases, and aircraft at these bases. Japanese leaders considered it vital to cripple the American fleet and aircraft on the ground. Japan wanted to operate for at least six months relatively unimpeded by American involvement as it pursued its conquest of the South Pacific and Asian rim. Nevertheless, Zero fighters did strafe homes, pedestrians, and cars.35 Moreover, the Shokaku and Zuikaku, the newest aircraft carriers in the Japanese fleet, had relatively untrained pilots. They were assigned only land targets that were considered large enough for inexperienced pilots to hit on their maiden combat missions.36 Certainly one of these pilots could have had his target obscured by smoke or clouds or have had a malfunction of his bomb release mechanism. No pilot would have returned to his ship and tried to land with a bomb attached and dangling precariously from its hanger. World War II planes customarily jettisoned unused bombs over water, if possible, and without arming the bombs, so they would not explode. Thus, in this respect, Stout’s story fits reality better than Kahawaii’s.

Another question concerns the assertion in Stout’s journal that the pilot thought he would suicide dive, jisatsu, on his last try at the temple. The kamikaze phase of the war did not occur until late in 1944 and 1945. Stout’s account thus appears, at first, to be an anachronism. However, Gordon W. Prange’s brilliant thirty-seven year study of the Pearl Harbor attack reveals that Japanese pilots did discuss diving their stricken aircraft onto American targets, and some may have done so before 1944.37

A geographical issue concerns the flight path of the attacking and returning Japanese aircraft. No outbound flight plans show any plane within five miles of Lā‘ie. Planes returning to their carriers were to use a rendezvous point twenty miles northwest of Ka‘ena Point, far from Lā‘ie.38 However, prior to the attack on Pearl Harbor, Japanese fighters had never taken offensive action more than a hundred miles from their base, and the planes had no homing devices.39 In the excitement and confusion of combat conditions, it is conceivable that a Japanese plane could have passed over Lā‘ie. The return to the carriers was much less orderly than the inbound flight. American radar sites could obtain no definite plot for the returning planes.40

Skepticism about the Story

The late D. Arthur Haycock, who served as a missionary in Hawai‘i in his youth, as a mission president in his middle age, and as president of the Hawai‘i Temple after his retirement, had strong feelings about the temple bombing story. His skepticism arose from the still-developing language skills of the two Mormon missionaries in Japan. He did not believe that two missionaries whose Japanese was so elementary they did not understand their “contact” was not interested could have understood the detailed account Stout scribbled on Wright’s map. Paul Andrus, Stout’s mission president and later a regional representative for the Twelve, also had his doubts. When contacted about the story, he indicated that Stout never told him about the interview with the Japanese pilot while Stout and Andrus were in Japan, nor did Stout mention it to him after his mission. Andrus, however, did recall hearing the story from Kahawaii prior to reading Stout’s account in 1983.*

On Stout’s 1977 return trip to Matsumoto City, Japan, he found another member of the Church who had known the alleged pilot. However, this member knew nothing about any involvement of the Japanese man with the purported attack on the Hawai‘i Temple. By the 1970s, folklore was circulating in abundance. Some reports had the pilot joining the Church and even visiting the building he had attempted to destroy. These rumors, as Ken Baldridge has pointed out, could have arisen from the fact that Commander Mitsuo Fuchida, the brilliant pilot and leader of the Pearl Harbor attack, later became a Christian and toured the United States as a nondenominational evangelist.

Some critics of the temple bombing story have asked how it could be true when God apparently did not see fit to protect his other temples, such as Solomon’s temple, the Nauvoo temple, and others. Incidents like these have caused many to wonder why God did not act to prevent damage or invasion. But the Polynesian people have a strong faith, perhaps powerful enough to move Deity to protect “their” sacred building from imminent destruction. However, no one had any reason to believe that the temple was being threatened at the time, nor would anyone wish to suggest that the faith of the Jews or of the Mormons in Nauvoo was any less great.

Conclusion

Of the two first-person accounts of the purported attack, Stout’s is harder to explain away. Stout’s lack of experience in Japanese never prevented him from understanding the alleged bomber’s hand motions, pidgin English, and facial expressions when he saw the picture of the Hawai‘i Temple. Stout remains convinced that the events recorded in his journal demonstrate that God protected his temple. Stout has pondered the remarkable interview with the Japanese pilot for over forty years, and to him, at least, divine intervention occurred in Lā‘ie on that fateful day in December 1941. Yet, if someone with a better command of the language could have interviewed the pilot, perhaps he or she would find that Stout’s own imperfect language skills coupled with his religious and theological orientation shaped the Japanese pilot’s story as it was written on Elder Wright’s map. An alternative explanation for the Japanese pilot’s story is that he did attempt to attack the temple, but his own theological beliefs prevented him from operating his aircraft as he had been trained to do. As historian Benedetto Croce wrote: “There is no history that completely satisfies us because any construction of ours generates new facts and new problems and solicits new solutions.”41

So was there an attempt to bomb the Hawai‘i Temple, and if so, was it prevented by divine intervention? That remains uncertain. As Plutarch observed, “How difficult a matter it is to trace and find out the truth of anything by history.”42 Nonetheless increased knowledge and understanding resulting from historical studies can be satisfying and rewarding processes in themselves.

1f:T60e,

On no less than three occasions during the past twenty years, the alleged December 7, 1941, attempt to bomb the Hawai‘i Temple has been discussed at MPHS annual conferences. Two of the Society’s most intrepid researchers—Kenneth W. Baldridge and Lance D. Chase, MPHS co-founders and former colleagues in the BYU–Hawai‘i Division of Social Sciences—took up the subject.

An edited version of Kenneth Baldridge’s 1988 MPHS presentation held in the Lā‘ie Hawai‘i Temple Visitors’ Center appears here. Although presented in 1988, the bulk of the research and writing had taken place in the 1970s. Baldridge pulled together the results of his extensive research on the topic for the 1978 rededication of the Lā‘ie Hawai‘i Temple. Baldridge’s piece is an impressive bit of detective work, but it did not lay the matter to rest.

In the 1980s, Lance Chase continued the quest and presented his findings at the same 1988 MPHS meeting. Ten years later, at the 1998 MPHS meeting in Hilo, Hawai‘i, he presented a modestly updated version. His piece here is an edited combination of his two presentations. Chase chose to analyze the two “best” sources: Robert Kahawaii and Robert Stout. Moreover, Chase’s avocational interest in military aircraft enabled him to assess the plausibility of various technical details in these accounts, thus enhancing his overall evaluation.

20:T3bc2,

1. Another version of the story says the squadron was headed for Kaneohe Naval Air Station instead.

2. One possible exception to planes bombing only military targets was near the Hawaiian Electrical Company powerhouse in Honolulu. The damage to civilian targets that was initially thought to have come from Japanese bombs was later determined to have resulted from our own hastily and improperly fused antiaircraft shells, which exploded on obeying the law of gravity. See Walter Lord, Day of Infamy (New York: Bantam Books, 1957), 160, 127, 134, 140.

3. In earlier recitals, he claimed to have been fishing at a local beach.

4. Robert Kahawaii, interview by Kenneth W. Baldridge, April 24, 1976, notes in possession of author.

5. Lord, Day of Infamy, 82.

6. Marguerite G. Wood, interview by Kenneth W. Baldridge, July 11, 1978, notes in possession of author.

7. Rulon B. Hinckley, interview by Kenneth W. Baldridge, 1978, notes in possession of author.

8. Lloyd Walch, interview by Kenneth W. Baldridge, 1970, notes in possession of author.

9. Kathryn D. Clausen to Kenneth W. Baldridge, March 17, 1978, in possession of author.

10. Frank Leishman, conversation with Kenneth W. Baldridge, April 27, 1978, notes in possession of author.

11. Stephen W. Gibson to Norman L. Nielsen, April 20, 1972, copy in possession of author.

12. Photocopy of journal pages in possession of author.

13. Kiyoshi Sakai to Kenneth W. Baldridge, March 2, 1978, copy in possession of author.

14. Robert L. Simpson to Kenneth W. Baldridge, February 28, 1978, copy in possession of author.

15. Gordon W. Prange, At Dawn We Slept: The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor (New York: Penguin Books, 1982), x.

16. Honolulu Star Bulletin, June 3, 1976.

17. Ishmael W. Stagner, interview by Kenneth W. Baldridge, February 21, 1976, notes in possession of author. Stagner could not recall where he heard of Fuchida’s supposed statement.

18. The story, currently more than fifty years old, may now qualify as a legend—an unverified popular story handed down from earlier times.

19. Harold B. Lee, “Admonitions for the Priesthood of God,” Ensign 3 (January 1973): 105.

20. Just as many of us have drunk at wells we did not dig, so have I benefited in my research from the generosity of Kenneth Baldridge, retired as Professor of History at BYU–Hawai‘i. Ken researched this story for many years, wrote about it, and graciously and generously made available to me the results of his research, much of which is included in the preceding section of this chapter.

21. Stout is a great grandson of early Mormon pioneer leader Hosea Stout. He served in the Korean Mission. Matsumoto City, Japan is, coincidentally, the sister city of the headquarters of Mormonism, Salt Lake City, Utah.

22. Walter Lord, Day of Infamy (New York: Henry Holt, 1957), 109, 151.

23. I personally interviewed Brother Kotaro Koizumi in the temple concerning his recollection of the morning of December 7, 1941. It was apparent to me that he was quite skeptical concerning Kahawaii’s account.

24. “In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established” (2 Corinthians 13:1).

25. In comparison, Kahawaii’s account was not recorded until 1976, thirty-five years after the attack. About that time, he was prompted to have the document notarized.

26. This quote and the information summarized in the preceding paragraphs is taken from Robert Thomas Stout, Journal, September 9, 1957, Lā‘ie Hawai‘i Temple Archives.

27. Elder Stout’s enthusiasm for his essential task, bearing testimony of the LDS Church to members of other faiths in Japan, demonstrates his sincerity and commitment.

28. I examined Gary Wright’s journal, which his brother George G. Wright of Mapleton, Utah, was kind enough to locate for me. I found no entries remotely close to September 1957 nor any reference in the occasionally kept journal to anything related to the temple bombing attempt. George Wright also searched for letters from his brother that might have mentioned the episode but found none.

29. I personally heard Kahawaii tell the story in the Hawai‘i Temple. I had no question about his sincerity, but despite my having lived in Hawai‘i for some time and having spoken some pidgin myself, I found his heavy pidgin somewhat difficult to interpret.

30. Emma confirmed this in a conversation at in her home in 1988.

31. Gordon W. Prange, December 7, 1941 (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1988), 84.

32. Prange, At Dawn We Slept, 350.

33. I have a copy of that Pearl Harbor roster in my possession, but its author admits that part of the roster has been lost. This roster lists an “Ohara” from the carrier Shokaku who did not survive the war and thus could not be Stout’s pilot. But there is also a pilot named Iwao Okada from the carrier Kaga who was alive after the war, and the Kaga did have aircraft in the first attack wave. I wish to thank BYU–Hawai‘i professor Greg Gubler, who knows Japanese, for helping me with the research pertaining to Japan.

34. There would probably have been about 720 flyers involved in the two Pearl attacks, perhaps some 350 of them pilots. So far as I can tell, none of the names on the Pearl Harbor roster of men known to have survived the war matches these three. However, the roster is missing a number of air crew names.

35. Prange, At Dawn We Slept, 532.

36. Prange, At Dawn We Slept, 266, 269.

37. Prange, At Dawn We Slept, 491, 533.

38. Prange, At Dawn We Slept, 374.

39. Prange, At Dawn We Slept, 163; Prange, December 7, 1941, 259.

40. Prange, December 7, 1941, 304.

* [Regarding the statement on p. 186 that Paul Andrus “also had his doubts,” we are informed that he firmly believes the attack occurred and has so believed since he read Stout’s journal in 1983. We appreciate this correction. —The Editors]

41. Benedetto Croce, History: Its Theory and Practice, trans. Douglas Ainslee (New York: Russell and Russell, 1920), 46, as quoted in Michael T. Isenberg, Puzzles of the Past (College Station: Texas A & M University Press, 1985), 38.

42. Plutarch’s Lives, trans. Dryden (New York: Modern Library, n.d.), 194, as quoted in Isenberg, Puzzles of the Past, 30.

21:Tf8e8,

In Search of a Tale: A Personal Account Kenneth W. Baldridge

The general outline of events of December 7, 1941, has been retold countless times through congressional investigations, personal accounts, books, and motion pictures. About six o’clock on that Sunday morning, 183 planes took off from a Japanese task force of six aircraft carriers, two battleships, and about two dozen other craft for the three-hundred-mile flight to Pearl Harbor. A second flight of 170 planes was launched from the carriers at 7:15 a.m., a few minutes before the first group had passed over at Kahuku Point. The object of both flights was to destroy the U.S. Pacific Fleet, especially the aircraft carriers Enterprise and Lexington, which fortunately for the U.S. were at sea. To carry out this objective safely, it was necessary for the Japanese to neutralize U.S. military air defenses at the bases at Kaneohe, Ford Island, Hickam Field, ‘Ewa, Wheeler, and Bellows. Maps depicting the attack routes show that the first wave divided north of O‘ahu: some planes went along the north shore toward Hale‘iwa, while others paralleled the windward coast toward Kaneohe Naval Air Station. The squadron acted quickly and decisively. Before the day was through, approximately 3,500 Americans had been killed or wounded. The once proud U.S. Pacific Fleet was in shambles.

Lā‘ie in the early 1940s was largely a sleepy Mormon community, composed primarily of Hawaiians and some Samoans, near the northeast corner of the island of O‘ahu. The people farmed, fished, and worked at various trades. The only building of any size was the beautiful, white Hawai‘i Temple, dedicated by President Heber J. Grant in 1919. For decades stories have circulated among Church members about an attempted bombing of the temple during the surprise raid on Pearl Harbor. What did or did not happen in the skies over Lā‘ie that December day in 1941 has been the subject of considerable curiosity and some controversy. This article is an account of the various stories related to that day, an attempt to evaluate their validity and the extent to which they have spread, and finally, an appeal for perspective.

The Purported Attack

Since the late 1960s, the story of the Pearl Harbor raid has been told among the people of Lā‘ie and elsewhere to Latter-day Saints’ joy or consternation, depending upon the listener’s point of view. Although several variations of the story exist, the most common one, broken into its two distinct although related segments, runs along these lines.

Soon after reaching the Hawai‘i shoreline, one of the Japanese dive-bomber pilots en route to Pearl Harbor spotted the white Mormon temple in Lā‘ie and concluded that a building of that size—obviously out of place in its immediate surroundings—must have military significance (fig. 1). He left his squadron to attack the building. His bomb release failed to function, however, so he tried again and once more failed. After trying and failing a third time, he rejoined his comrades and flew on his way to Pearl Harbor.1

Figure 1. An aerial photograph of the Hawai‘i Temple in Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i, taken prior to World War II. Courtesy LDS Church Archives.

Part two of the story is equally intriguing. After failing to discharge his bomb over Lā‘ie, the pilot continued on his way, successfully dropping his load at Pearl Harbor or Kaneohe. After the war and still puzzled by his inability to destroy that mysterious white building, the pilot attempted to learn more about it. His search led him to the Church and, impressed by the power obviously present at the Hawai‘i Temple, he was baptized. He told audiences in various parts of the Pacific about his participation in the raid and his subsequent conversion.

Reports of this story have surfaced in Japan, Australia, Korea, Hawai‘i, Canada, and mainland America. Perhaps by now it has spread even further. My search for truth has produced some interesting results. For example, there are at least four variations of the bombing attempt besides the one previously cited. One states that the pilot blacked out as he attacked the building and was therefore unable to release his bomb. A second variation says that the pilots were not distracted on the way to Pearl Harbor but, noting the temple location on their maps, came back after the raid to destroy it. On their return, however, they were either unable to find the temple at the coordinates noted, or clouds had formed, hiding the temple from view. A correspondent in Utah added a third variation by stating that according to the account she heard, even the suicide pilots couldn’t dive into it. Yet another account describes a mysterious force that prevented the pilot from getting his plane over the building.

What is the possibility that an attempted bombing might have happened? The odds against it are staggering. First, the raid was planned and conducted in great secrecy. Surprise was the necessary element for success. The primary objective was the destruction of the American fleet, and Pearl Harbor was the first target hit. (Kaneohe was hit about the same time; there is even a possibility that the first bomb fell there a minute or two before Pearl Harbor was attacked.) Although the Japanese passed over the huge army post at Schofield Barracks and the two Army Air Corps bases at Wheeler and Hickam Fields, these were not attacked until after the first bombs fell on “Battleship Row” alongside Ford Island. It is not likely that a plane would be dispatched to bomb some unknown building while still some fifteen minutes from the primary target. Second, some versions describe the pilot as flying off on his own unauthorized bombing mission. Anyone who has served in the armed forces of either the United States or Japan finds this possibility difficult to accept. Third, the attacking planes bombed only confirmed military targets.2

An Eyewitness Account

The evidence in favor of an attempted bombing of the temple is not particularly compelling. A single individual in Lā‘ie is the only witness. Although he died a faithful Church member, Robert Kahawaii was inactive in 1941 and was then quite a partygoer. He states that on Saturday night, December 6, he returned home from an evening of drinking with his friends to find that his wife had locked him out of the house, which was located about 150 yards from the temple. Fearing that pounding on the door would arouse neighbors, Kahawaii spent the night under a tree in his backyard. When he awoke in the morning to the sound of planes, according to his later reminiscence, he saw the pilot’s three unsuccessful attempts to release his bomb.3 Although he confessed to drinking the night before, he insisted he was sober that morning. When I asked Kahawaii why he had not told anyone of the incident until nearly thirty years after the event, he replied that no one had asked him about it so he didn’t think it was important.4

Kahawaii apparently began telling his story locally in the late 1960s, a move generated perhaps by the activities connected with the fiftieth anniversary of the temple’s dedication. There are, however, accounts of earlier recitals, which have been reported on neighbor islands. One of my principal correspondents, Clinton Kanahele, states that he first heard the story on Kauai before ever asking Kahawaii about it; another individual recalls her father telling the story on Maui in the 1950s. Yet, neither account provides many details for the incident.

When questioned later, other Lā‘ie residents of the time say that they saw no such planes. A close neighbor of the supposed eyewitness states that she heard planes but only at a distance. In fact, the Koizumi family lived about seventy yards from the temple, and they were unaware of any aerial activity. The question then arises as to whether Kahawaii fabricated the entire story or whether he had, in fact, seen something. Although many of his acquaintances dismissed the account as the product of a hangover, for years Kahawaii stoutly defended his story’s accuracy.

A possible explanation for what Kahawaii saw lies with the civilian plane reportedly attacked as recounted in Walter Lord’s Day of Infamy. The author tells of a civilian pilot, Tommy Tommerlin, who was giving flight instructions to Jim Duncan, a civilian working at Pearl Harbor. “They had just passed the Mormon Temple near Kahuku Point”—actually about six miles separate the two—“when they heard machine-gun fire and the plane gave a heavy lurch.” Duncan dived, swerved, and escaped back down the windward coast, managing to get safely back across the island to John Rogers Airport near Pearl Harbor.5 Perhaps Kahawaii saw either the evasive action of the American civilians or the pursuing Japanese planes flying over Lā‘ie and assumed the temple was the target of the activity. However, even this possibility is weakened by the fact that no one else saw this event, nor does it explain the open bomb bay of the diving plane, that Kahawaii reported. Attempts to find either the civilian flight instructor or the student to gather further information have proved unproductive so far. I did, however, talk to Marguerite G. Wood, another civilian flight instructor. She saw the attacking planes over Wahiawā and confirmed that Tommerlin, one of her former students, was unaware that his plane had been hit until he returned to John Rogers airport.6

There are other problems with the eyewitness story. How could Kahawaii assess that the pilot attempted to “dislodge” a bomb and do it three times? Moreover, in telling me his account, Kahawaii said that the pilot was successful in discharging his bomb over Kaneohe, a statement he could not have made based on his own observation. When I questioned this, he introduced me to the second part of the story.

According to Kahawaii, in 1971 Elder Cecil McGavin was serving as a guide at the Bureau of Information attached to the Hawai‘i Temple. In a conversation with Clinton Kanahele, Elder McGavin reportedly said that his bishop in Utah related the conversion story of the previously frustrated pilot. The bishop, in turn, had heard it from the pilot in Japan while serving there as a missionary. On arriving here in Hawai‘i, Elder McGavin sought further information. Trying to help, Kanahele then asked a fellow Lā‘ie resident, who turned out to be Kahawaii, the previously described eyewitness. This brought the two stories together, and since then they have often been recited as one.

Rulon B. Hinckley, who served with Elder McGavin at the Bureau of Information, tells the story somewhat differently. He told me in 1978 that both he and Elder McGavin had heard the conversion story from a visitor on the temple grounds, but that neither had accepted the report as reliable. He feels that Elder McGavin did not believe the story and that if he had repeated the tale, it was more by way of idle curiosity than anything else. In an interview with Taylor Macdonald of the BYU–Hawai‘i faculty in 1972, McGavin denied knowing much about the story and insisted that he not be connected with it. He also denied receiving the story from his bishop.7

“So-and-so” Told Me

The number of those who have heard someone else say that they heard the pilot is inestimable. When I checked back with someone who presumably had heard the firsthand account, the response usually was, “No, I didn’t actually hear him myself, but ‘so-and-so’ heard him and told me.” On checking with “so-and-so,” I would invariably get the same response.

I thought I had finally encountered someone who had heard the story firsthand when a student told me he had heard the pilot speak at a testimony meeting in the Lā‘ie Third Ward in the latter part of 1976. Further inquiry revealed that the student had not actually heard it himself, but that his former wife had. She lived on the mainland, so I drew another blank. He was to check with her and contact me with any information. I have not heard from him, and my attempts to contact him have been unsuccessful. Sione Feinga was the Lā‘ie Third Ward bishop at the time and does not recall any such experience. Other ward members agree. Another story claims that the pilot appeared in a similar meeting in the Lā‘ie First Ward, but former Bishop Joseph Ah Quin states this did not occur.

A different Lā‘ie source reported to Hawai‘i Temple President Max Moody that Edward L. Clissold, former president of the Hawai‘i Mission, the O‘ahu Stake, and the Hawai‘i Temple, had heard the story in Japan when he presided over the reopened Japanese mission in 1948. According to this source, President Clissold accepted the story as factual. However, this, too, proved to be an error. In March 1978, President Clissold wrote me, saying that he had heard the story many times and “may have repeated it as hearsay once or twice.” However, he always made sure to stress his “own conviction that the story was a figment of someone’s imagination.” As a U.S. intelligence officer in Hawai‘i during the war, prominent Church leader, and longtime resident of Lā‘ie, his disclaimer must be considered of great significance. His letter also contains a possible explanation of the bombing account. In 1943, Brother Clissold accompanied a U.S. bombing group that included in its training program a simulated attack on Lā‘ie. He reports that as the planes approached the little community, “the temple glistened white in the green fields.” After passing over Lā‘ie, the flight headed out to sea. Later, he related the story on several occasions and from this, perhaps, came a story of an “attack” on the temple.

The Quest to Unravel the Mystery

The pilot story has long had its detectives. Lloyd Walch, president of the Hawai‘i Temple from 1971 to 1976, who investigated the story, felt its veracity was highly unlikely. In February 1976, he told me of a temple patron visiting from Utah who reported hearing the pilot relate his experience at a fireside or testimony meeting in Provo. The patron was to return home and send more details. Unfortunately, he never did. Another person reported to President Walch that he had heard someone tell of the incident at a meeting in Honolulu. However, according to President Walch, no one else from the same meeting mentioned this. President Harry Brooks, Walch’s predecessor, expressed annoyance that the story was being circulated, since it appeared to be a clumsy attempt to add luster to an already sacred building.8

Walch’s successor carried on the quest. In 1978, Hawai‘i Temple President Max Moody, Hawai‘i Mission President William Cannon, and Area Supervisor John Groberg were all interested in seeing the bombing story either verified or laid to rest. Samuel K. Lowe, called as first counselor in the Hawai‘i Temple presidency in 1978, was assigned to investigate the bombing story. Brother Lowe carefully interviewed Robert Kahawaii, who stuck to his story, claiming that a discrepancy had crept in, at no fault of his own, since the story was first told. Kahawaii stated that he learned about the pilot joining the Church from Clinton Kanahele, who “had talked to the pilot.” Kanahele never made this claim and suggested that Kahawaii was confused on that part of the story.

The attempted bombing story has attracted the attention of many, some of whom are also endeavoring to unravel the mystery. In March 1978, I received a letter from Kathryn D. Clausen, a Latter-day Saint writer compiling material for a story on the Hawai‘i Temple for a ward newspaper. Fortunately, she wanted to verify the story before she printed anything. She had checked with the Church Historical Department and from it received the brief account that had been submitted in the early 1970s by a former faculty member of the Church College of Hawai‘i (now BYU–Hawai‘i). The author of that account had been in Lā‘ie from about 1968 to 1970 and had probably heard the Kahawaii version, which started circulating about that time. According to the faculty member’s story—which I recall having heard as well—a bishop who had been standing on the beach verified the eyewitness account. Interestingly, that is the only account in which the “verifying bishop” occurs. Along with the story, the Church Historical Department warned that there was no documentation of the incident or knowledge of the bishop’s name.9

The Tale Evolves

For several years, guides at the Hawai‘i Temple Visitors’ Center related the story, but, in time, they also became concerned enough to seek verification. Ironically, additional variations have originated from that quarter. Several versions are provided by Frank Leishman, who in 1978 was serving as a guide at the Hawai‘i Temple. He reports hearing about the converted pilot while he was serving in a similar capacity at the Oakland Temple from 1974 to 1976. Sometime in 1975, according to Leishman, he was showing a visiting group around the grounds when an LDS American serviceman told him of an experience he had had while serving in Korea. The serviceman had attended a fast and testimony meeting where one of the other servicemen introduced himself as a former pilot in the Japanese navy who had attempted to bomb the Hawai‘i Temple. According to this story, the Japanese pilot not only joined the Church, but ended up in the American Air Force as well. Yes, it must be admitted, the story gets “curiouser and curiouser.” In addition to that recital, Brother Leishman heard the same story from another serviceman just one month later. He gave the matter little thought, however, until he was conversing with a former missionary couple from Sunset, Utah. This couple had been guiding tourists through the Joseph Smith home in Palmyra, New York, when a Japanese man identified himself as the elusive pilot. Brother Leishman wrote to inquire about the man’s name, but there was no response.10

Another version of the story has the pilot visiting his missed target after the war. In 1972, for example, someone told a story to a Church News writer who, in turn, asked Norman L. Nielsen to investigate the story’s truth. Nielsen was then in charge of public affairs for the Church College of Hawai‘i. According to information he received from the Church News reporter, Stephen W. Gibson, a gardener then working at the temple had been one of the Japanese pilots during the bombing of Pearl Harbor. His mission was to bomb the temple and surrounding buildings. He flew over the temple several times but couldn’t see it, so he continued on and dropped his bombs elsewhere. Several years after the war, he came to Hawai‘i and wanted to see the building that he’d been assigned to destroy years before. While visiting the temple grounds, he learned of the Church and was later baptized. The Church News correspondent concluded his letter by asking Nielsen to “verify the story, interview him, and provide us with a picture of him working on the temple grounds with the temple in the background.”11 Needless to say, the story never materialized.

The best piece of evidence comes from Brother Frank Thorup, who also attempted to gather more information but while doing so encountered yet another version. In 1977 he visited with President Robert Stout, who was passing through Hawai‘i on his way to preside over the Japan-Kobe Mission. When President Stout was serving as a young missionary in Japan in the 1950s, he and his companion were out tracting. They introduced themselves to a man who told them that he had attempted to “bomb their temple” during the Pearl Harbor raid. Apparently he had struck at military targets that morning, but at the end of his mission he still had one bomb remaining. Flying near Lā‘ie on his way back to his ship, he spotted the glistening white temple and selected that as his final target. As he told President Stout—who told Brother Thorup, who told me—he was unable to get his plane over the temple in spite of several attempts. This mysterious force convinced him of the presence of “evil spirits,” which he wanted nothing to do with, so he flew on and jettisoned his bomb in the ocean. I have been unable to confirm this story. In 1978, I mailed a letter to President Stout requesting more information but heard no response. Then in September 1983, President Stout sent Robert Finlayson, president of the Hawai‘i Temple, pages from his journal in which he told of meeting the man who claimed to be the pilot.12

“A Silly Story”

Tracking down the alleged pilot did not seem like an impossible task. Either there was such a person or there was not. He had either joined the Church or he had not. I directed my first inquiry to Paul Andrus, former mission president in Japan and regional representative in the Far East. He had heard the story but knew of nothing to verify it. He then asked President Kenji Tanaka, first president of the Tokyo Stake and later president of the Japan-Nagoya mission, and Katsuhiko Inomata of the Tokyo Stake high council if they could verify the story. They had also heard it but knew of no Japanese Latter-day Saint who had participated in the raid. Neither did Kotaro Koizumi nor Adney Komatsu—both of whom lived in Hawai‘i in 1941 and later served as mission presidents in Japan. Koizumi, in fact, was living in Lā‘ie at the time about a hundred yards from the temple. In October 1977, I interviewed Masao Watabe, recently arrived from Japan to serve as a temple guide. He had heard the first part of the story in Japan but had heard nothing about the pilot joining the Church. Watabe was baptized in 1949 after military service in World War II, and to his knowledge, there were very few other Japanese World War II veterans in the Church. I also spoke with Ruth Nakanishi Ohsiek, a long-time member in Lā‘ie who knew most of the Japanese Saints. She told me there were no Pearl Harbor veterans among them. In April 1978, she asked President Kamio of the Osaka North-Japan Stake and President Kihachiro Ichimichi of the Osaka-Japan Stake for leads. These two had no information, and President Ichimichi dismissed these tales as “a silly story.” Kiyoshi Sakai, director of the Tokyo Distribution Center, said that he regarded the story of the attempted bombing as a “groundless rumor” and recommended that I “not pay attention to it.”13

Although no one in Japan seems to know anything about the pilot joining the Church, a possible explanation lies in an account in which the pilot first traveled to Hawai‘i and the mainland, telling his story and then moving to Australia. My attempt to question bishops in Australia in the early 1970s was discouraged by Elder Robert L. Simpson of the First Quorum of the Seventy, who was then Area Supervisor for Australia and New Zealand. Naturally reluctant to see busy bishops plagued with more paperwork, he protested that “our Oriental population in the area is practically nil.” He added his testimony of the matter by stating, “Frankly, I have little faith in the story in question, and have felt quite uncomfortable each time I have heard it alluded to.”14

Since Church sources in Japan yielded no information about the pilot, I began checking on possible survivors of the raid. I asked Hiroshi Ueno, an official of the National Diet Library (the Japanese counterpart of America’s Library of Congress) whether any books or memoirs of survivors are extant, but there are none. His response in 1978 was negative. The likelihood of there being many survivors is negligible since in 1966 Commander Mitsuo Fuchida reported that most were killed during the Battle of Midway, six months after the Pearl Harbor attack. An inquiry to Professor Hisao Iwashima, Chief of the Office of War History Research of the National Defense College, likewise yielded nothing.

The Original Kernel

Surely there must be some explanation for the alleged bombing story, I thought. Behind nearly every rumor there is a grain of truth that served as the original kernel from which the story grew. But the question was how to find that kernel.

My guess is that the idea of the pilot joining the Church could have resulted from the story of Commander Fuchida’s conversion to Christianity.15 Fuchida was converted in Japan during the Tojo war crimes trials in 1945. He later became a traveling evangelist, telling his story many times in Japan and North America in his speech “From Pearl Harbor to Calvary.”16 It is possible that some Mormons heard the story, repeated it once or twice, and over time it evolved into its present form. Another possibility relates to Fuchida’s visit to Hawai‘i on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the attack to assist with the production of a film on his life, One Who Came Back. Reportedly, Fuchida was being shown around O‘ahu by his host, the Reverend Abraham Akaka of Honolulu’s famed Kawaihao Church. On visiting the temple in Lā‘ie, Fuchida is quoted as saying, “Oh, that’s the building we tried to bomb.”17 Yet correspondence with Reverend Akaka in February 1976 revealed that he did not bring Fuchida to Lā‘ie nor was there any mention made of the temple. (My hopes of contacting Fuchida were frustrated by his death in Japan in late May 1976.)

In the end, the purported Hawai‘i Temple attack seems to be a study in the creation of folklore. Admittedly, the first part of the alleged bombing story seems to be better grounded because an individual claims he saw an attacking plane, and another individual talked to a man claiming to be the pilot. In spite of the absence of any other bombing attacks on civilian targets; in spite of the fact that no one else in Lā‘ie saw any such incident; in spite of the lack of corroboration from supposedly supporting sources; in spite of the somewhat unusual circumstances that put Robert Kahawaii in a situation to view that Sunday morning activity; in spite of any evidence, save the elusive Stout journal entry, Kahawaii stuck to his claim. As Latter-day Saints, we are aware that there have been previous occasions when only one person has had a particular experience. Perhaps this is such a time. Ironically, the confusion seems to stem not from the absence of what might be called information, but rather from its overabundance. There are just too many versions of the story.

Conclusion

After an extensive investigation, it is my recommendation that the tale be confined to the vast collection of Mormon legends and not be repeated as an actual faith-promoting incident. As a historian, I have been motivated to get to the bottom of the story and find the truth. Yet I have been unable to verify it. In the process, I occasionally found myself acting as an amateur folklorist as I traced variations in the stories and the different places where they surfaced. I still encounter people who offer yet another lead, another locale, another witness. Long ago my wife suggested this scenario: someday, somewhere, an elderly Japanese man will tap me on the shoulder and say, “I was in on the bombing of Pearl Harbor and had a most interesting experience. I understand you have been looking for me.” A possibility, perhaps, but one I do not think likely.

The Attempted Attack on the Hawai‘i Temple, December 7, 1941 Lance D. Chase

For members of the Church, one of the most widely told stories about Hawai‘i is the purported attempt to bomb and strafe the Hawai‘i Temple on the morning of December 7, 1941.18 Speaking of stories such as these, President Harold B. Lee, at the October 1972 general conference, told the audience: “It never ceases to amaze me how gullible some of our Church members are in broadcasting these sensational stories.”19 Yet the Bible and Book of Mormon are full of “sensational stories” that portray miraculous events and divine intervention. What distinguishes those stories from ones that President Lee counseled the Saints to avoid? The challenge to the investigator of the Hawai‘i Temple bombing story is finding the original source or sources. When followed to their source, most accounts result in dead ends, or they can be explained as outgrowths of one single source. Past attempts at understanding the story’s origin have been inconclusive. Finally, however, two individuals who claimed to have firsthand knowledge were found and interviewed. What follows is a discussion of those firsthand sources and an analysis of their validity.20

In 1983, Brother and Sister Robert Thomas Stout of Boise, Idaho, visited the Hawai‘i Temple on their twenty-fifth wedding anniversary. After the session, they spoke with the temple president, Robert Finlayson, a long-time Hawai‘i resident. Stout told President Finlayson about meeting a Japanese pilot in September 1957 (when Stout was a missionary serving in Matsumoto City, Japan) who claimed to have attempted the bombing.21 President Finlayson had previously heard a version of the temple bombing story from Robert Kahawaii, a temple worker and a professed eyewitness. Later in September 1983, a few days after this meeting between Stout and Finlayson, Stout sent his journal account of the temple bombing attempt to the Hawai‘i Temple archives. At last a “Japanese” source for the legend had emerged, and his account could be compared with that of the only identified eyewitness in Hawai‘i, Robert Kahawaii.

Kahawaii freely and frequently shared his version during the later years of his life. Kahawaii’s account was recorded by Professor Ken Baldridge for the oral history program at BYU–Hawai‘i in 1976. Those who had heard Kahawaii tell his story knew that his accounts varied; and some listeners felt the variations undermined Kahawaii’s credibility. His many versions do, in fact, pose unresolved problems, yet there are variations even in the accounts of theophanies in the visions of the Apostle Paul and the Prophet Joseph Smith. Unfortunately, Kahawaii’s stories, unlike these theophanies, contain unresolvable difficulties. Kahawaii’s account not only contradicts Stout’s story but also those told by Walter Lord and Gordon Prange, professional historians of the Pearl Harbor attack.

Robert Kahawaii’s Account

Robert Kahawaii was born in Waialua, O‘ahu, on May 22, 1909. For a large part of his life, he resided in Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i. He married Bessie Hee in 1950, and the couple had two sons. After the Pearl Harbor attack, Kahawaii was employed in security work for the U.S. Army. He became active in the Church between 1955 and 1960 and eventually served as a temple worker. Robert Kahawaii died on July 4, 1986, and was buried in the Lā‘ie cemetery.

According to Kahawaii, he came home drunk early Sunday morning, December 7, 1941. He was then living at 55-112 Po‘ohaili Street in Lā‘ie, perhaps a quarter mile from the temple, which stood on a nearby hill. Kahawaii had attended the University of Hawai‘i–Willamette University football game, the Shrine Classic, at Honolulu Stadium that Saturday. Rather than staying in Honolulu that night, Kahawaii returned to Lā‘ie because he had a fishing trip planned with two friends the next morning. When Kahawaii came home, his wife realized he was drunk and locked him out before he could enter. Unable to get in, he spent the remainder of the night under a coconut tree in the yard. Later that morning, according to his later testimony, he awoke and saw a plane diving toward the temple. He described the bomb as “not to[o] big, a smaller bomb, and long, just like a torpedo,” hanging down as though it were on a hook. The bomb did not fall. Kahawaii saw the plane make at least one pass before it flew away. On the basis of this evidence, Kahawaii concluded that the bomber had attempted to bomb the Hawai‘i Temple.

Hours later, while at the fishing site at Hukilau Beach, close to the Cooke boathouse on Lā‘ie Bay, Kahawaii saw an American B-17 bomber flying toward Kahuku, three miles to the north. He could not have known then that the U.S. Flying Fortress, having arrived with others from California at the very time of the first attack that morning on Pearl Harbor, made an emergency landing on the Kahuku golf course.22 Kahawaii’s spotting of the American plane after the alleged temple attack indicates that the attempt to bomb the temple occurred during the first Japanese strike rather than the second.

There were no witnesses to corroborate Kahawaii’s testimony. It is noteworthy that Kotaro Koizumi, who later became a mission president in Japan, was living within three hundred feet of the temple on December 7, 1941. When interviewed, Koizumi said he would have been on his way to church about the time of the first Japanese attack that Sunday morning but said that he neither saw nor heard any aircraft.23

Moreover, Tom Nakayama, one of the men Robert Kahawaii went fishing with on the morning of December 7, 1941, reported that he heard planes that morning, but he did not actually see any. There was a cloud cover over the island that broke only as the first Japanese planes approached Pearl Harbor. Nakayama does not remember Kahawaii telling him about the attempted attack on the temple. The other man who fished with Nakayama and Kahawaii that morning, Ralph Makaiau, has died. No other witnesses to the events Kahawaii described have been found.

Robert Stout’s Account

The scriptures tell us that two witnesses are required to establish the validity of a story. In this case there are two known witnesses.24 Sixteen years elapsed between the 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor and 1957 when Robert Stout, a twenty-year-old missionary serving in Matsumoto City, Japan, recorded in his journal meeting the supposed Japanese pilot who attempted the bombing.25 On a Thursday afternoon in September 1957, Stout and his senior companion, Gary Hatch Wright, were proselyting between Matsumoto Castle and the high school in Matsumoto City. It was very hot and humid, so many homes had open doors and windows. With their doors open, the Japanese could not easily refuse the missionaries entrance without at least visually confronting them.

At later recountings, neither missionary said that he was certain that “Okawa,” “Ohara,” or “Ogawa San” (they were not clear on the name) invited them into the house as Elder Stout gave the door approach through the open door. Stout, perhaps misunderstanding or interpreting the lack of a direct refusal in the most positive way, led his companion into the house. Elder Wright thought the Japanese man told them he was fine as he was, indicating they did not have permission to enter. After all, the man did not even rise to greet the entering elders, which would have been consistent with Japanese custom. But the two young men entered anyway, and the man offered them sake (an alcoholic beverage made from fermented rice) and appeared, at least to Stout, to be offended when they declined. According to Elder Stout, the Japanese man had salt and pepper hair, did not look healthy, but was not inebriated. Japanese, a language of considerable ambiguity, is difficult to translate into English and coupled with the missionaries’ somewhat rudimentary knowledge of Japanese, made the whole experience challenging. Not fluent in the Japanese language, Elders Wright and Stout were in Japan without the benefit of the weeks of intense language training now characteristic of English-speaking missionaries assigned to Japan. Thus, Stout, who had been out only five months, could easily have misunderstood Ogawa San’s story.

As the missionaries talked with the Japanese man, he asked them what a prophet was. As Elder Stout searched for a picture of the First Presidency to show him, the man saw a picture of the Hawai‘i Temple (fig. 2). Stout’s journal account, apparently recorded the day of the actual encounter, notes that the man seemed shocked and grew pale when he saw the picture. He then proceeded to tell the missionaries about his experience with that building. He spoke in both English and Japanese and used a lot of hand gestures to help the elders understand the narrative.

Figure 2. An aerial view of the Hawai‘i Temple taken in the early twentieth century. Courtesy LDS Church Archives.

Stout’s journal states the man reported that he had piloted a fighter-bomber during the Pearl Harbor attack. Having a large bomb left after leaving the south side of O‘ahu, Ogawa San hoped to find a significant target on which to release the bomb before returning to his ship. He was about to leave the northeast point of O‘ahu when he saw the temple. (At this point in the narrative, Ogawa San pointed to the aerial view of the Hawai‘i Temple that Elder Stout held.) Circling back to the temple, he dived, but the bomb would not release. He tried again and again to release the bomb, but he felt as though some power prevented his action. Becoming angry, he tried to strafe the temple, but his guns would not shoot. Ogawa San felt sure the building was famous, and he wanted to demoralize the Americans and make them fearful of the great power of Japan. Disgusted at the failure of his attempts to bomb and strafe the temple, Ogawa San even considered jisatsu, a suicide dive, but on his last try to destroy the building, his controls froze. He became frightened. He felt that a great power protected the white building with its blue pools. Two minutes later, now flying over the sea, Ogawa San dropped his bomb and fired his guns, hitting nothing. He felt disgraced for having used his bomb on empty ocean and realized he could not report his failure. Since his controls now functioned perfectly, he decided to try again to strafe the mysterious building with its magical power. Once again, his controls would not respond. He felt he had angered God and was now so fearful that, without a backward glance, he flew away toward his ship.

Elder Stout told the Japanese man he could not destroy the temple because it was the House of the Lord. The man replied: “It has a giant power that protects it. You two missionaries make me feel those feelings again. You must leave me alone and not torment my mind and heart (kokoro). Please excuse me. I am very busy.”26 Elder Stout took notes of the man’s narrative on a map his companion carried, though Elder Wright was unhappy about Stout’s writing all over his map with a ball point pen. That evening, Stout rerecorded the account in his journal. Stout later copied the information on the map into his journal.

Elder Stout reported the experience to at least one Japanese Latter-day Saint, a Sister Momose. When Stout related the man’s words at the initial greeting, she explained that the man had said he was not interested. Stout wrote that he was glad he was ignorant or else he would not have heard that testimony from the former Japanese pilot.27 Soon after Wright and Stout’s interview with the Japanese man, Stout went to Tokyo and Wright was transferred to the Korean Mission. Stout indicated that after his mission he was married (on November 13, 1959) in the Hawai‘i Temple by President Ray Dillman and that he told the temple bombing story again.

Stout returned to Japan more than fifty times following this 1957 incident and even tried to find the Japanese man again. Unfortunately, the man had died—perhaps of orneriness, Stout was told. Stout was never able to verify the events by a second conversation. Elder Wright, a possible second witness to Stout’s story, died in a plane crash in 1969 without ever having recorded Ogawa San’s story. Wright had not been a faithful journal-keeper on his mission, and his journal makes no reference to Okawa San and the bombing story. Wright recorded: “I am a real flopper when it comes to journal writing.” None of the letters he wrote to his brother George in Utah mention the story either.28

The Witnesses’ Characters

Are the characters of the witnesses relevant in validating their accounts? Robert Kahawaii probably did have a hangover when he observed the attempted bombing. But Kahawaii later served three missions for the Church and was a temple worker until his death in July 1986; he sometimes related his temple bombing story in the Hawai‘i Temple.29

Robert Stout worked for the Church Education System for twelve years and earned a doctorate at Arizona State University. He served as mission president of the Japan-Kobe Mission from 1977 to 1980 and, despite a serious and debilitating car accident, worked in the temple following his service as mission president. Though not offered the job, Stout was one of two finalists for a BYU–Hawai‘i Religion Department position.

By 1976, thirty-four years after the event, Kahawaii was sufficiently conscious of the significance of his story to have his account notarized. A copy can be found in the Oral History Office at BYU–Hawai‘i. Kahawaii lived with his son and daughter-in-law Emma for some years prior to 1965. However, until 1965, Kahawaii never told Emma, or apparently anyone else, of the events he said he witnessed.30 Is it possible that by then he had heard the story circulated by Stout and imagined at least some of the scene he said he witnessed that Sunday morning? After all, why have no other witnesses come forward to corroborate what Kahawaii reported?

Japanese Military Aircraft and the Bombing Story

Because Kahawaii described the aircraft he saw that morning, a comparison can be made between his description and the three types of aircraft used by the Japanese at Pearl Harbor. Knowing the ordnance the planes carried and the specific missions and capabilities of each type of plane can also help determine which plane Kahawaii might have seen. There were two bomber types, the Nakajima B5N2, nicknamed the “Kate” by the Americans, and the Aichi D3A1, or “Val” as it was called by Americans. These bombers were escorted by the famed Japanese Zero (Zeke), or Mitsubishi A6M2 fighter plane, which was almost certainly not involved in an attempted bombing of the temple, for this airplane carried no bombs and was assigned only bomber protection and strafing duties.31

Kahawaii claims that he saw bomb bay doors under the fuselage of the Japanese plane. However, none of the Japanese carrier aircraft in 1941 had bomb bays. Rather, the bombs were affixed externally under the wings and to the fuselage of the aircraft involved in the attack. The Kate (type 97) bombers were the only planes armed with bombs that looked like torpedoes, but they carried only one bomb each. Their bombs were designed to be dropped from high altitudes in horizontal flight on American ships. These facts tend to rule out the Kate, since Kahawaii described the plane he saw as diving and carrying a torpedolike bomb, and Stout claimed the pilot dived toward the temple to bomb it.

The Val (type 98) dive bomber, with two crew members, is the more likely candidate for the attack. The Vals did not carry torpedo-shaped bombs but did dive to deliver their ordnance. However, none of the Vals in the first attack carried multiple bombs, so it would not be likely that one would have “a bomb left,” as Stout understood from Ogawa San’s story. None of the attack aircraft in the second attack carried torpedoes or torpedo-shaped bombs.

Bob Kahawaii’s report of the bomb he saw is significant. It was “not to[o] big, a smaller bomb, and long just like a torpedo.” One of the three types of Japanese aircraft involved in the Pearl Harbor attack carried ordnance roughly fitting Kahawaii’s description. The Kate bomber carried a 1,760-pound bomb encased in a torpedo housing, but the bomb was designed for dropping on sea, not land targets. There was only one such piece of ordnance attached to each of the Kates in the first of the two attacks, so the pilot probably would not have had this type of bomb left when he returned to his ship. The Kates in the second wave that morning carried multiple bombs, but none of these was torpedo shaped. The details of Kahawaii’s story indicate that the alleged bomber was part of the first wave of the Pearl Harbor attack.

Another of Kahawaii’s details may be significant in helping investigate the veracity of his account. He recorded that the bomb was hanging down just as if it were on a hook, though it did not fall. Actually, the Japanese had to design and create special equipment for releasing their bombs, since at least two types of bombs dropped were specially designed for the Pearl Harbor attack. The release mechanisms were so new that they were still being installed and adjusted right up to the time the thirty-vessel Japanese task force reached Hitokappu Bay in the Kurrle Islands, the gathering point for the task force. Thus, a Japanese pilot may have had difficulty dropping his bomb because of mechanical failure, although no report of such has come forth.32

The area around Kahawaii’s home was close to the center of Lā‘ie (as it was layed out in 1941). Surely, even in a sleepy village others would have stood alert. Especially on a Sunday morning, other people besides Kahawaii should have observed (and reported) the Japanese bomber if it had dived toward the temple. Moreover, both the Val dive bombers and the Kate torpedo and high-level bombers had multiple crew members. Unfortunately, no additional crew member is mentioned as part of either man’s story.

The possible name of the pilot, as recorded in Stout’s journal, could be a clue to help verify Kahawaii’s and Stout’s stories. Professor Ikuhiko Hata of Tokyo compiled a roster of the Japanese flyers at Pearl Harbor. Unfortunately, the roster was not translated into English and part of it is missing. Many Pearl Harbor pilots were killed in the Battle of Midway. However, if Stout’s story is true, the pilot in question survived the war.33

Stout recalled that the name outside the Matsumoto City house he and Wright tracted was Nishimoto, but since the house was a duplex, Stout concluded that the name belonged to the other party in the dwelling. Of the three variant names for the pilot in Stout’s journal—Okawa, Ohara, and Ogawa—the first and last are common Japanese names, but no lead related to these names has developed.34

An Evaluation of the Story’s Details

One of the central issues to consider is the designated targets of the Japanese attack. The primary targets for the Japanese aircraft were U.S. naval vessels, military air bases, and aircraft at these bases. Japanese leaders considered it vital to cripple the American fleet and aircraft on the ground. Japan wanted to operate for at least six months relatively unimpeded by American involvement as it pursued its conquest of the South Pacific and Asian rim. Nevertheless, Zero fighters did strafe homes, pedestrians, and cars.35 Moreover, the Shokaku and Zuikaku, the newest aircraft carriers in the Japanese fleet, had relatively untrained pilots. They were assigned only land targets that were considered large enough for inexperienced pilots to hit on their maiden combat missions.36 Certainly one of these pilots could have had his target obscured by smoke or clouds or have had a malfunction of his bomb release mechanism. No pilot would have returned to his ship and tried to land with a bomb attached and dangling precariously from its hanger. World War II planes customarily jettisoned unused bombs over water, if possible, and without arming the bombs, so they would not explode. Thus, in this respect, Stout’s story fits reality better than Kahawaii’s.

Another question concerns the assertion in Stout’s journal that the pilot thought he would suicide dive, jisatsu, on his last try at the temple. The kamikaze phase of the war did not occur until late in 1944 and 1945. Stout’s account thus appears, at first, to be an anachronism. However, Gordon W. Prange’s brilliant thirty-seven year study of the Pearl Harbor attack reveals that Japanese pilots did discuss diving their stricken aircraft onto American targets, and some may have done so before 1944.37

A geographical issue concerns the flight path of the attacking and returning Japanese aircraft. No outbound flight plans show any plane within five miles of Lā‘ie. Planes returning to their carriers were to use a rendezvous point twenty miles northwest of Ka‘ena Point, far from Lā‘ie.38 However, prior to the attack on Pearl Harbor, Japanese fighters had never taken offensive action more than a hundred miles from their base, and the planes had no homing devices.39 In the excitement and confusion of combat conditions, it is conceivable that a Japanese plane could have passed over Lā‘ie. The return to the carriers was much less orderly than the inbound flight. American radar sites could obtain no definite plot for the returning planes.40

Skepticism about the Story

The late D. Arthur Haycock, who served as a missionary in Hawai‘i in his youth, as a mission president in his middle age, and as president of the Hawai‘i Temple after his retirement, had strong feelings about the temple bombing story. His skepticism arose from the still-developing language skills of the two Mormon missionaries in Japan. He did not believe that two missionaries whose Japanese was so elementary they did not understand their “contact” was not interested could have understood the detailed account Stout scribbled on Wright’s map. Paul Andrus, Stout’s mission president and later a regional representative for the Twelve, also had his doubts. When contacted about the story, he indicated that Stout never told him about the interview with the Japanese pilot while Stout and Andrus were in Japan, nor did Stout mention it to him after his mission. Andrus, however, did recall hearing the story from Kahawaii prior to reading Stout’s account in 1983.*

On Stout’s 1977 return trip to Matsumoto City, Japan, he found another member of the Church who had known the alleged pilot. However, this member knew nothing about any involvement of the Japanese man with the purported attack on the Hawai‘i Temple. By the 1970s, folklore was circulating in abundance. Some reports had the pilot joining the Church and even visiting the building he had attempted to destroy. These rumors, as Ken Baldridge has pointed out, could have arisen from the fact that Commander Mitsuo Fuchida, the brilliant pilot and leader of the Pearl Harbor attack, later became a Christian and toured the United States as a nondenominational evangelist.

Some critics of the temple bombing story have asked how it could be true when God apparently did not see fit to protect his other temples, such as Solomon’s temple, the Nauvoo temple, and others. Incidents like these have caused many to wonder why God did not act to prevent damage or invasion. But the Polynesian people have a strong faith, perhaps powerful enough to move Deity to protect “their” sacred building from imminent destruction. However, no one had any reason to believe that the temple was being threatened at the time, nor would anyone wish to suggest that the faith of the Jews or of the Mormons in Nauvoo was any less great.

Conclusion

Of the two first-person accounts of the purported attack, Stout’s is harder to explain away. Stout’s lack of experience in Japanese never prevented him from understanding the alleged bomber’s hand motions, pidgin English, and facial expressions when he saw the picture of the Hawai‘i Temple. Stout remains convinced that the events recorded in his journal demonstrate that God protected his temple. Stout has pondered the remarkable interview with the Japanese pilot for over forty years, and to him, at least, divine intervention occurred in Lā‘ie on that fateful day in December 1941. Yet, if someone with a better command of the language could have interviewed the pilot, perhaps he or she would find that Stout’s own imperfect language skills coupled with his religious and theological orientation shaped the Japanese pilot’s story as it was written on Elder Wright’s map. An alternative explanation for the Japanese pilot’s story is that he did attempt to attack the temple, but his own theological beliefs prevented him from operating his aircraft as he had been trained to do. As historian Benedetto Croce wrote: “There is no history that completely satisfies us because any construction of ours generates new facts and new problems and solicits new solutions.”41

So was there an attempt to bomb the Hawai‘i Temple, and if so, was it prevented by divine intervention? That remains uncertain. As Plutarch observed, “How difficult a matter it is to trace and find out the truth of anything by history.”42 Nonetheless increased knowledge and understanding resulting from historical studies can be satisfying and rewarding processes in themselves.

12:["$","$L1d",null,{"book":{"id":30,"title":"Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","subtitle":"Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","image_id":"website-files-bucket/books/book_cover_images/book-voyages.jpg","excerpt":"","book_series_id":null,"series_ordering":0,"ebook_link_kindle":null,"ebook_link_deseret":null,"ebook_link_nook":null,"free_book":0,"pdf_id":null,"footnotes":null,"public":1,"slug":"voyages-of-faith","wp_id":77384,"product_link":"product/voyages-of-faith-explorations-in-mormon-pacific-history","author_id":null},"chapter":{"id":542,"title":"The Purported December 7, 1941, Attack on the Hawaiʻi Temple","subtitle":null,"online_book_id":30,"excerpt":null,"content":"$1e","intro_text":"$1f","page_number":165,"previous_chapter":"a-jewel-in-the-gardens-of-paradise-the-art-and-architecture-of-the-hawaii-temple","next_chapter":"search-for-a-site-selection-of-the-church-college-of-hawaii-campus","pdf_id":null,"footnotes":"$20","slug":"the-purported-december-7-1941-attack-on-the-hawaii-temple","public":1,"wp_id":null,"test":"541","podcast_file_id":null,"section_heading":null,"chapter_author":null},"topics":[],"scriptures":[],"authors":[],"processedContent":{"html":"$21","headings":[{"id":"heading-0","textContent":"In Search of a Tale: A Personal Account Kenneth W. Baldridge","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-1","textContent":"The Purported Attack","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-2","textContent":"An Eyewitness Account","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-3","textContent":"“So-and-so” Told Me","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-4","textContent":"The Quest to Unravel the Mystery","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-5","textContent":"The Tale Evolves","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-6","textContent":"“A Silly Story”","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-7","textContent":"The Original Kernel","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-8","textContent":"Conclusion","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-9","textContent":"Robert Kahawaii’s Account","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-10","textContent":"Robert Stout’s Account","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-11","textContent":"The Witnesses’ Characters","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-12","textContent":"Japanese Military Aircraft and the Bombing Story","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-13","textContent":"An Evaluation of the Story’s Details","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-14","textContent":"Skepticism about the Story","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-15","textContent":"Conclusion","tagName":"H3"}]}}]