Kenneth W. Baldridge taught history for twenty-five years in the Division of Social Sciences at BYU–Hawai‘i before retiring in 1993. One of his long-term research interests was to produce a full-scale history of the university. As part of that still-awaited history, Baldridge, at the 1983 MPHS annual conference, offered this behind-the-scenes glimpse at the deliberations that went into deciding what kind of school should be built in Hawai‘i and where it should be located. All along President David O. McKay favored Lā‘ie as the ideal site. Yet local Church leaders and members preferred to have the school in Kaneohe or Honolulu, where more Saints lived, since building it in either location would not require the added expense for constructing and maintaining dormitories. After extended deliberations, the school finally opened in Lā‘ie. At the end of the twentieth century, BYU–Hawai‘i’s student body numbers 2,200—ten times what was originally anticipated—and the problem is not unneeded dorms, but not enough dorms. Moreover, commute-capable Hawai‘i residents now make up less than 30 percent of the student body. An absence of dorms would have made the school’s eventual expansion into the South Pacific and Asia virtually impossible.

16:{"metadata":[["$","title","0",{"children":"Search for a Site: Selection of the Church College of Hawaiʻi Campus - Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History"}],["$","meta","1",{"name":"description","content":"$1b"}],["$","meta","2",{"name":"keywords","content":"Search for a Site: Selection of the Church College of Hawaiʻi Campus, Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History, online books, BYU Studies"}],["$","link","3",{"rel":"canonical","href":"https://byustudies.byu.edu/online-book/voyages-of-faith/search-for-a-site-selection-of-the-church-college-of-hawaii-campus"}],["$","link","4",{"rel":"icon","href":"/favicon.ico","type":"image/x-icon","sizes":"16x16"}],["$","$L1c","5",{}]],"error":null,"digest":"$undefined"} 1a:"$16:metadata" 1d:I[66263,["1120","static/chunks/1120-75f909259fd067cc.js","5466","static/chunks/5466-b96f3c00376edc43.js","8534","static/chunks/8534-7ca745715241e193.js","9126","static/chunks/9126-91257ba5fa5d06c5.js","8387","static/chunks/8387-2bdb776aa3fa620b.js","6874","static/chunks/6874-bf14f6d1ebc153cc.js","9383","static/chunks/9383-5debb36c04efe52f.js","3063","static/chunks/3063-404186ec4ce8f075.js","7132","static/chunks/7132-1bf9ca313709cfa3.js","5858","static/chunks/5858-a921a795a1989287.js","9233","static/chunks/9233-cd31d8c4ef751ef5.js","8361","static/chunks/8361-ec429c2d2a4b8505.js","7594","static/chunks/app/(site)/(containers)/(content)/online-book/%5BbookId%5D/%5BchapterId%5D/page-aca9af7241f107d8.js"],"default"] 1e:Taf59,

In December 1958, approximately three years after breaking ground for the Church College of Hawai‘i, students prepared to move from the temporary campus near the temple to the present campus. The campus awaiting them was considerably smaller then. Familiar buildings such as the Aloha Center, Cannon Center, Snow Administration Building, or even the Little Theater did not exist. The library was much smaller, and there were no Temple View Apartments—in fact the campus began with only two dormitories instead of the six on campus now. “Faculty row” stretched out along Kamehameha Highway between the Lā‘ie Shopping Center and the old Laniloa Lodge, instead of on Moana Street.1 The campus had no faculty townhouses, and the faculty itself numbered fewer than two dozen. I would like to consider, however, an earlier period, prior even to the temporary campus, to see what the genesis of the Church College of Hawai‘i, now known as Brigham Young University–Hawai‘i, reveals. My purpose is to trace the rather tortuous path that planning for the school took over the years and to show that the establishment of the Church College of Hawai‘i in Lā‘ie was not quite as cut-and-dried as often believed because local leaders struggled for several years through delays and disagreements before settling on a site for their church college (fig. 1).

[caption] Figure 1. Newly constructed campus, Church College of Hawai‘i, 1958. Courtesy BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.[/caption]

The History of Church Education in Lā‘ie

The earliest Church schooling in Lā‘ie began soon after property there was purchased in early 1865. Sister Mildred Randall conducted two schools—one for the Hawaiian children and one for the haole (Caucasian) children—until her return to Utah in November 1866.2 Subsequent schools were conducted in Lā‘ie ’s first two chapels until a separate schoolhouse was constructed around 1887. This was located just to the Kahuku-side of the Lā‘ie chapel, which was completed in 1882. When construction of the temple began during World War I, the chapel was literally rolled down the hill about a hundred yards to a site on Lanihuli Street. The schoolhouse was given to those doing some of the art and sculpture work for the temple, and a new school was built adjacent to the relocated chapel. The new schoolhouse consisted of five classrooms and an assembly hall. In 1927 the Church turned it over to the Territory of Hawai‘i and went out of the education business in Lā‘ie for nearly three decades.

A Look into the Future

It was at this school, though, that our story really begins. In 1921, Elder David O. McKay, then a member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, and Hugh J. Cannon, president of the Salt Lake Liberty Stake, began their historic journey around the world to visit the missions of the Church. Shortly after their arrival in Lā‘ie in February 1921, the two brethren witnessed a flag-raising ceremony at the school. Many modern Latter-day Saints are under the assumption that the commencement of the Church College of Hawai‘i in the 1950s was a direct fulfillment of what Elder McKay felt and said on that occasion. The event was subsequently memorialized in a mural at the entrance to the foyer of the college’s David O. McKay Building.

The day after the flag-raising ceremony, Elders McKay and Cannon traveled to Maui, and there, as Elder Samuel H. Hurst recorded in his diary, a very inspirational meeting took place with the missionaries. Elder McKay asked them what they felt was the greatest need of the mission. Hurst reported that all the missionaries felt the greatest need was for a church-sponsored high school. McKay, an educator himself, agreed with them and promised to write a letter to the First Presidency with such a recommendation. At the close of his remarks he commented on the resolution “to build a school at Lā‘ie, O‘ahu.”3 Little did he know that he himself would be the instrument to put that recommendation into effect.

In a 1976 oral history interview, longtime Hawai‘i Church leader Edward L. Clissold stated that David O. McKay kept the idea of a school at Lā‘ie in mind constantly. Elder McKay talked about the school when he visited Lā‘ie in 1936 and again in 1940 and 1941 when he stayed at the Clissold home. Brother Clissold was then serving as first counselor in the O‘ahu Stake presidency. As Clissold remembered it, President McKay asked, “Brother Clissold, what are we doing about the school?” Clissold replied, “President McKay, we’re waiting on you Brethren to set it up.”4

The Search for a Site

It was several years later, however, before the next documented step was taken. On June 7, 1949, Ralph E. Woolley, president of the O‘ahu Stake, appointed four members of his high council to a special committee “to re-investigate and report . . . the advisability of establishing an L.D.S. Church School in Hawai‘i.” Clinton Kanahele, a prominent Hawaiian educator, chaired the committee, and the other members were J. Frank Woolley, Lawrence Peterson, and George Zabriskie. The charge to “re-investigate” and the committee report stating that “this same problem has been investigated before by Clinton Kanahele” are convincing evidence that at least some study had been given to the situation previously.5 On July 13, 1949, the committee and President Woolley met with bishops of the six wards and presidents of the three branches on O‘ahu to hear reports concerning Latter-day Saint attendance at private schools on O‘ahu. The leaders reported that about 150 Church members were attending non-sectarian schools such as Kamehameha and Punahou, and that about 50 others attended sectarian schools, primarily Catholic. After this presentation, 15 of the 85 other people present took the opportunity to express their views. Some felt there was an academic inadequacy in the public schools but were reluctant to expose their children to the religious orientation of the private schools.

Although nearly everyone seemed to agree on the desirability of a Latter-day Saint school, the consensus ended there. The location of the school and the grades to be included were especially controversial. Various sites in Honolulu and Lā‘ie were suggested, and grades ranging from kindergarten to high school were recommended, either to be established all at once or one grade at a time.6 According to the minutes, no one suggested a junior college, although committee member George Zabriskie later thought he remembered that there was some mention of the idea.7 Moreover, the report does list among the advantages of a Lā‘ie location the availability of land should expansion to the junior college level ever be desirable.

Lā‘ie vs. Honolulu

Although Honolulu and Lā‘ie were the only two contenders, the advantages and disadvantages of each were carefully analyzed. The report pointed out that about 75 percent of the Latter-day Saint population resided in the Honolulu area. This, of course, was also cited as the principal disadvantage of the Lā‘ie location. The Lā‘ie advantages, however, included the six thousand acres in and around Lā‘ie that the Church already owned and the low cost of land, considering the aforementioned possibility of future physical plant expansion. The rural environment also lent itself to the possibility of agricultural training for the students, as well as making lower costs possible by raising some of the necessary food items. Although it appears to have been given no more emphasis than some of the other reasons, the committee did mention that the presence of the Hawai‘i Temple and the fact that Lā‘ie, as a Mormon community, should foster development of a Latter-day Saint way of life.8

The next step along the path of school establishment took place the following year. About fourteen miles from Lā‘ie, along the North Shore toward Hale‘iwa (where the Crawford Convalescent Home and University of Hawai‘i Tropical Facility are located), the old Waiale‘e Training School had its campus. In the late 1940s, however, the school vacated the premises and moved to the Kailua area. In November 1950, President Woolley and President Clissold, then in the Hawai‘i Mission presidency, discussed the possibility of using the grounds and buildings for a school. Woolley appointed his counselors Fred E. Lunt and George Kekauoha, along with Elmer Jenkins and Ruby Enos, president of the stake Young Women’s Mutual Improvement Association, to look into the possibilities. According to a later statement by one of the principals, the committee regarded the site favorably and recommended its utilization.9 I have since interviewed two of the three surviving members of the committee, however, and they tell me there was, in fact, no such recommendation.10 Ruby Enos felt the land on the ma kai (ocean) side of the highway was too low and suitable only for taro, while the ma uka (mountainside) land was too limited in area. Fred Lunt recalled visiting the site one day, after a conference in Wahiawā, with Elder Henry D. Moyle and several local leaders. The consensus at that time was that being away from the spiritual environment of Lā‘ie would not be in the students’ best interest.

There were also others who did not agree that the Waiale‘e Training School, a former detention home, was a suitable location for the Latter-day Saint school. LDS educator Eldon Morrell felt the Mormon students would have enough difficulty with acceptance without the added stigma that the former detention facility might provide.11 Perhaps even more conclusive was the negative report of Clarence Silver of the Church Building Committee who, while vacationing in Hawai‘i in 1950, was asked to report on the Waiale‘e site. As a result of his observations, the Waiale‘e possibility appears to have been shelved pending further investigation.12

The Advisory Committee

On April 9, 1951, David O. McKay was sustained as president of the Church, and the momentum for a school in Hawai‘i increased considerably. Less than three months later, the First Presidency appointed an advisory committee to look into school matters on O‘ahu with the idea of starting a school in the coming fall. The committee consisted of President Woolley and his current counselors, Arthur K. Parker and Fred E. Lunt; Edward L. Clissold, recently released as president of the Hawai‘i Mission; his successor Ernest Nelson; and Po‘i Kekauoha, bishop of the Lā‘ie Ward.13

Soon thereafter, the First Presidency sent seminary principal Frank McGhie of Salt Lake City to Hawai‘i to meet with the committee. McGhie had been director of seminaries in Hawai‘i from 1944 to 1946 and then again in 1947 until the existing program was declared unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court. According to the notice in the Deseret News, McGhie was to make a survey of the facilities that might be available “for a junior college to be opened in Lā‘ie this fall.”14 From that statement, it appears that the type of school, the location, and even the date of opening had been determined. One of the committee’s unanimous decisions, however, was that it would be impossible to begin school within the desired timetable. The committee met with O‘ahu bishops and surveyed Church members to determine educational needs and potential enrollments. In what appears to have been a classic example of reinventing the wheel, the committee again considered several possible sites.15 McGhie, in the meantime, visited several schools on Maui and O‘ahu and suggested that the committee consider a location in or near Honolulu. This was discussed, but the committee was not swayed. The report submitted to the First Presidency reads, in part:

After careful consideration of the objectives of a church school program in Hawai‘i and the best means of obtaining them, the committee came to the following general conclusions:

1. That the school should be located at Lā‘ie, O‘ahu.

2. That it should be predominantly a boarding school.

3. That it should eventually embrace the last two years of high school and the first two years of college.

4. That the curriculum should include many vocational courses.

5. That the school should begin in September, 1952.

6. That the first year (1952–53) courses should be limited to junior year high school students to be followed by one additional grade each year for the next three years until in the fourth year (1955–56) the full four-year course would be established.16

It might be noted that in 1951, the proposed configuration of the school as a four-year combination of two high school years and two junior college years was not as unorthodox as it might seem today. The proposal was in keeping with the 6–4–4 idea that was enjoying some popularity in public education at that time.17

The McGhie Study

According to the Church News article concerning his assignment in Hawai‘i, McGhie was to return after three weeks to report to the First Presidency, then he was to leave again for Hawai‘i “to take charge of the development of the new institution.”18 The committee’s report also implied that he was expected to become the school’s principal or president. When I later interviewed him, McGhie told me he did not have that understanding.19 In any case, he was not willing to locate in Lā‘ie, and friction developed between him and committee members during his visit to Hawai‘i. McGhie returned to Utah to file his minority report.20 Although there had been a lengthy Church News article about his departure for the assignment, only a brief paragraph in the Improvement Era mentioned his return on July 25, with the message that the “opening of an LDS high school at Lā‘ie . . . will be postponed for at least one year.” That September he was again serving as a seminary principal in Salt Lake City.21

The Hawai‘i committee, however, realized the importance of continued input from Church headquarters and wrote to the First Presidency,

Since Brother McGhie has apparently withdrawn himself from the picture, we request that another man be appointed as soon as practicable to head up the project. If you concur in the conclusion reached by the committee we can begin with the new appointee to lay the groundwork for the opening of the school.22

Nothing happened as a result of the McGhie study, perhaps due to the connected controversy, and another year passed. In May 1952, President Clissold again attempted to get the project moving. Two months later, Professor Wesley P. Lloyd from BYU was scheduled to be in Hawai‘i on his return from Japan. As a result of Clissold’s urging, Dr. Lloyd was assigned by the First Presidency to conduct another survey of the educational needs of the Hawai‘i Saints. Consequently, Dr. Lloyd met with individuals concerning the same issues previously surveyed (what type of school should be established and where it should be located). Lloyd met with stake and mission officers at the Honolulu Tabernacle on July 31, 1952, and as President Clissold reported, “The consensus of this meeting was that a junior college, offering largely vocational courses, be established at Lā‘ie.”23 Lloyd’s written report to the First Presidency supported the recommendation and added that the school could probably be opened in 1953, should the decision be made to proceed.24

Additional meetings were held in October and November 1952. More reports were sent to leaders in Salt Lake City recommending that someone be appointed to head the school in order to provide additional direction and momentum to the ongoing studies. In June 1953, President McKay assured Clissold that this would shortly be done. Nearly one year later, in May 1954, President McKay told Clissold that a selection had been made and that another survey committee would go to Hawai‘i soon.25 On Wednesday, July 21, 1954, the First Presidency made the long-awaited announcement. Dr. Reuben D. Law, dean of the College of Education of Brigham Young University, was named as the president of the new institution, finally designated officially as a junior college.

Another Evaluation

It would seem that by this stage the problems of site and format would have been resolved, and Law could set about the work of establishing the school. Such was not the case, and it was evidently felt necessary to repeat the same evaluative procedures that had been pursued so many times before. Another meeting was called by Edward L. Clissold, who by this time had succeeded Ralph E. Woolley as president of the O‘ahu Stake. Those present at the stake tabernacle in Honolulu had an opportunity to express themselves, and although there were still some who wanted a dormitory high school, President Clissold maintained that the younger students should remain at home under family and church influence rather than being sent off to a boarding school. This idea prevailed, and the report of the survey committee stated that they “had a distinct feeling that all but a few people feel it is wise for the new school to concentrate on the college years.”26

The survey committee visited the four larger islands and talked extensively to church and educational leaders of Hawai‘i. As a result of the month-long study, the committee arrived at the following conclusions concerning the general purposes of the school:

1. To build strong Latter-day Saints.

2. To develop leadership—spiritual and temporal.

3. To provide opportunities for exploratory work in both academic and vocational lines.

4. To provide general education for all students.

5. To offer two-year terminal courses in the trades and vocations for those whose talents and inclinations point toward immediate employment rather than further academic work.

6. To provide preparatory programs for those who will continue on to senior colleges and universities.27

After looking at various sites, the committee concluded that only Honolulu, Lā‘ie, and Kaneohe were worth “final consideration.”28 Honolulu and Lā‘ie, of course, had been recommended by various committees in previous years, but this was the first time that Kaneohe had been mentioned as a possibility. And that mention was to be significant.

Law’s survey committee pointed out that both Honolulu and Lā‘ie had “loyal defenders and determined opponents.” Although admitting that Honolulu had several obvious advantages, the committee cited three principal reasons for rejection of that city: the high cost of land, then running between $1.25 and $2.50 per square foot; the difficulty of finding a plot of at least one hundred acres, which they felt would be the minimum possible for the plant desired; and what they referred to as an “environmental disadvantage” created by the presence of great numbers of military personnel and the crewmen of passing ships.29

Consideration had been given to the site of an unused naval hospital at Aiea, which was described as an excellent site. However, the committee felt that the buildings spread over too extensive an area and maintenance costs would be prohibitive. In addition, if a lease were to become available, it would be for a limited term only and would require evacuation by the school on short notice if the Navy wished to reclaim the property.30 Considering the “environmental disadvantage,” it seems unlikely that the committee seriously entertained the thought of a school so close to Pearl Harbor Naval Base.

The committee repeated most of the arguments that had been previously offered in behalf of Lā‘ie’s candidacy. They mentioned the availability of good land, not only for the site of the institution itself but also for the agricultural pursuits that, it was assumed, would be part of the college’s activities. They also noted that Lā‘ie had an ample supply of underground water. Another Lā‘ie advantage, shared with Kaneohe but for some reason not attributed to Honolulu, was proximity to the sea. The committee felt that the seaside location would lend itself to the study of marine life and also provide access to fishing opportunities, enabling the college to meet some of its food needs.31

The committee also cited the “religious tradition” and the “spiritual atmosphere” as reasons why Lā‘ie might be considered.32 Among the religious traditions referred to, the committee mentioned the oft-cited prophecy attributed to Joseph F. Smith concerning the blessings that would come to Lā‘ie and its residents.33 As a result, the report stated, Lā‘ie is “looked upon as a land of promise, a gathering place for the Saints in Hawai‘i.” The committee’s next sentence may come as a surprise to recent generations of Lā‘ie residents and BYU–Hawai‘i students: “However, a study by President Edward L. Clissold of prophecies and dedicatory prayers on record in Hawai‘i finds no reference to a college at Lā‘ie.”34 Here the survey committee is denying an explicit link between Elder McKay’s supposed 1921 reference to a school of higher learning and the community of Lā‘ie. This is interesting because in his 1972 history of the college, Law makes several references to the vision of the college that McKay supposedly experienced during the 1921 flag-raising ceremony and cites McKay’s diary as the source of the information.35

Yet, while describing the flag-raising in great detail, McKay’s diary contains no reference to a college being located in this community. Elder Samuel Hurst did report the subsequent meeting in Maui, during which he heard Elder McKay speak of his resolution, in response to the collective recommendation of the gathered missionaries, to urge the First Presidency to establish a Church high school in Lā‘ie. Yet even Hurst says nothing about the vision at the flag-raising ceremony that has since become part of Latter-day Saint Hawai‘i folklore. It was President McKay himself who made the most direct link when he spoke at the Church College of Hawai‘i groundbreaking ceremony on February 12, 1955. He stated on that occasion, “This is the beginning of the realization of a vision I saw thirty-four years ago when one morning President Hugh J. Cannon, President E. Wesley Smith, others and I witnessed a flag-raising ceremony by students of the church school here in Hawai‘i in Lā‘ie.”36 Another one of the religious traditions cited by the committee mentions a conference in Lā‘ie at which Thorpe B. Isaacson, then a counselor to the Presiding Bishop, reportedly spoke of a future school in Lā‘ie where people “would come for their spiritual and academic education.”37

The disadvantages of Lā‘ie identified by the committee were numerous, though some of the objections seemed to overlap. Most serious, the committee felt, was the distance from the main center of population. Obviously, there were not enough students in Lā‘ie to justify a college, and the financial problems created by the need either to travel or to stay in dormitories were regarded as excessive. The committee drew an arc of twenty miles from Lā‘ie and determined that only 25 percent of the Latter-day Saint population of O‘ahu lived within that distance. On the other hand, a similar arc from Kaneohe contained 95 percent of the Latter-day Saint population.38 The absence of regular public transportation and the distance of travel involved made access to Lā‘ie difficult. Most significantly, the small population and lack of transportation would necessitate the considerable expense of having to build dormitories. Costs were projected to be about $3,000 per student. Thus,

by locating the school near enough to Honolulu so that even 100 students could live in their own homes or the homes of relatives we would save in capital outlay alone approximately $300,000. A difference of 200 non-dormitory students would amount to approximately $600,000 which would probably offset the cost of land for a campus elsewhere, and this without consideration of the added costs to students living in the dormitories.39

Moreover, according to Max Moody, a Church member and partner of Walker-Moody Contractors, estimated building costs in Lā‘ie would be from 5 to 10 percent higher than in more accessible parts of the island. Although Clissold admitted costs would be higher, he was less pessimistic than Moody in this regard.40 The committee stated that in addition to the difficulties of distance, the related factor of isolation would inhibit enrollment. Several “prominent citizens of Honolulu, including members of the Stake High Council” reportedly told members of the committee that they would send their children to the mainland before enrolling them in a boarding school in Lā‘ie.41 This reluctance did not extend to Kaneohe, in some cases at least, because their children could live at home and commute.

The advantages listed for Kaneohe over Lā‘ie were based primarily on the greater population base, easier accessibility, and the lower costs involved. More people could be served due to local transportation facilities, and fewer dormitories would be necessary. Local educators not affiliated with the Church also recommended Kaneohe as a site superior to Lā‘ie. Kaneohe’s greater size offered significant advantages. Students, especially women, would enjoy greater opportunity for part-time employment in Kaneohe than in Lā‘ie. There would be lower costs for construction and maintenance of the school facilities, and repair and supply services would be more readily available. Yet another reason mentioned—perhaps more strategic than economic—was that the Catholic Church had supposedly been negotiating for one hundred acres in the Kaneohe area for a school of its own. The report stated that “it seems unwise to place our school in comparatively isolated Lā‘ie while the other church establishes itself in the more desirable and rapidly growing Kaneohe district.”42 Besides, a school in Kaneohe would better meet the increasing educational needs of Latter-day Saint military personnel in the islands who found Lā‘ie too far away to do them much good. In what might be considered an attempt to neutralize Lā‘ie ’s chief economic asset, the availability of land, the report stated that any agricultural facilities available at Lā‘ie could just as easily be found in Kaneohe. Then the report asked almost plaintively: “If the Church did not now own the land at Lā‘ie, would we now buy land and build the school there?” The final advantage cited referred to a recent dispute in Rexburg, Idaho, growing out of the proposal to remove Ricks College to the more populous Idaho Falls. To avoid such a dilemma in years to come, the committee stated: “It is our hope that the college in Hawai‘i will be built where we shall want it fifty and more years from now.”43

The Selection of a Site

The committee recommended that the school be located in Kaneohe, “not as a compromise, but as a place that offers more advantages and fewer disadvantages than either of the others.” Although President Clissold was not a member of the committee, he had traveled many miles with them and, as stake president, was asked to sign the report. He said he could not sign it since he felt the school should be in Lā‘ie rather than Kaneohe or Honolulu.44 In recalling the role of Clissold several years later, Reuben D. Law remarked, “President Clissold wanted it in Lā‘ie, but he was a good sport about taking us to all the other locations that we wanted to be taken to. He was president of the stake at the time and he didn’t hesitate to indicate that he wanted it to be in Lā‘ie but he was willing to help us in any of our activities.”45

Law and the committee arrived back in Provo, Utah, on Sunday, August 29, 1954, after completing their survey work in Hawai‘i. Though work on the report had actually commenced before the committee left Hawai‘i, Law kept two and sometimes three secretaries busy typing on it for the next week. On Friday, September 3, the committee met with BYU President Ernest L. Wilkinson to examine the report in detail. Ten days later, Law completed the table of contents for the five copies and then delivered the original to President McKay’s office and the other copies to committee members Ernest Wilkinson, Clarence Cottam, and Kenneth Bennion.46

With general conference coming in early October, the committee could not meet with President McKay until November 4, although they had a preliminary meeting with his counselor, Stephen L. Richards, on October 26.47 Clissold, however, talked with President McKay in the interim. Probably in conjunction with October conference business, Clissold visited President McKay in his office, and he remembers their conversation as follows:

He had me come around behind his desk and sit in a chair right by him. He put his hands on my knees. He said, “Brother Clissold, what about our school?” I said, “Well, the brethren came down and made a report.” Then he said, “That’s right. Where’s Kaneohe?” I replied, “Kaneohe is over the Pali from Honolulu, about a fifteen-minute ride.” He just kept looking at me. I added, “President McKay, I can’t forget Lā‘ie,” He slapped my knee—I think I still have the mark on it—and said, “Good. I thought you had gone along with them. Now we have their report, we appreciate it, but the school will be in Lā‘ie.”48

Of the November meeting with the prophet, Law recorded in his diary that President McKay stated that the First Presidency had “definitely decided that the college should be built at Lā‘ie even though the survey admittedly showed many excellent reasons in support of the Kaneohe area as a possible location nearer to Honolulu.”49 In a later oral history interview, Law added this recollection of that memorable meeting. President McKay said “we’re going to overrule you on one thing. The college is really to be at Lā‘ie, and I know that’s where the Lord wants it, and that’s where it is going to be.” As Law concluded, “Well, that settled that. There couldn’t be any question about that.”50

On November 12, Law again met with President McKay and received further counsel and instructions concerning budgets, buildings, and his relationship with what McKay called the continuing advisory committee. The president also had two possible names for the college, since the name suggested by the survey committee had suffered the same fate as the suggested location. The First Presidency requested that the advisory committee consider either “The Church College of Hawai‘i” or possibly “The Church Hawai‘i College.” Law and the committee chose “The Church College of Hawai‘i,” which became the school’s name for the next two decades.

Although Lā‘ie was now accepted as the home of the school, the exact location still had to be determined. Law arrived in Hawai‘i on November 22 and went to work immediately. One of the main agenda items for the committee meeting on November 24 was consideration of possible sites within the Lā‘ie community (fig. 2). Further discussions were held with Harold and Douglas Burton (the father-and-son team of architects), and on December 8 the decision was made. At a meeting in Lā‘ie, the committee unanimously agreed to locate the buildings “on the higher cane land south east of the temple and south of the village—in other words, where the school is today.

[caption] Figure 2. Reuben D. Law (far right), the first president of the Church College of Hawai‘i, with his wife Leda and others, surveys the site selected for the permanent campus. Courtesy BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.[/caption]

Ralph Woolley and Harold Burton, based on their extensive experience, convinced the rest of the committee that it would take four to six months to adequately prepare the drawings and blueprints. They believed that to construct the buildings before summer 1956 would not be economical. The committee agreed that an explanatory letter should be drafted to that effect, which Law and Burton would then personally deliver to President McKay.

On returning to the mainland, Law met with President McKay and J. Reuben Clark concerning the recommendations of what by now was simply being called the continuing committee. McKay was unhappy about the postponement. Law quotes him as saying, “Oh! We’ve waited too long already to establish that college. We must start this fall even if we have to start in temporary quarters.” Before the day was over, Law telephoned Clissold and discussed with him the possibility of holding classes the first year in the O‘ahu Stake Tabernacle. The tabernacle plan never materialized, however, and soon the continuing committee began looking elsewhere. Law’s diary states that on March 9, 1955, he and Clissold were looking at the old social hall and the plantation store buildings in Lā‘ie to see if they could be remodeled in a suitable manner. They also discussed the temporary use of the Lā‘ie chapel. In the meantime, Lillian Kondo of Kapa‘a, Kauai, became the first student to return her application to the college. Ethel Whitford (now Almodova) became the registrar and the first to offer oral acceptance of a position, and librarian Kenneth Slack provided the first written acceptance. From April 1 to June 25, Law was on the mainland, during which time Clissold had arranged for several war surplus buildings to be trucked to Lā‘ie and placed near the Lā‘ie chapel as temporary quarters for the college.

Conclusion

The temporary and permanent sites for the school were finally determined, and by 1955 ground was broken for the permanent campus. Despite years of discouraging postponements, Church leaders and Saints in Hawai‘i finally accepted Lā‘ie as a suitable site for their church college. More than thirty years after Elder McKay’s resolution to “build a school at Lā‘ie,” crews began construction on the permanent campus while classes began in temporary facilities (fig. 3). The school, scheduled to open in September 1955, hired 20 faculty members and prepared to receive 223 freshmen and sophomores.51 Changes, frustrations, and disappointments still lay ahead, but through the guidance of a prophet and the work of many others, the school could begin serving the Saints in Hawai‘i.

[caption] Figure 3. Church College of Hawai‘i main complex (later David O. McKay Building) under construction. Courtesy LDS Church Archives. [/caption]1f:T56b,

Kenneth W. Baldridge taught history for twenty-five years in the Division of Social Sciences at BYU–Hawai‘i before retiring in 1993. One of his long-term research interests was to produce a full-scale history of the university. As part of that still-awaited history, Baldridge, at the 1983 MPHS annual conference, offered this behind-the-scenes glimpse at the deliberations that went into deciding what kind of school should be built in Hawai‘i and where it should be located. All along President David O. McKay favored Lā‘ie as the ideal site. Yet local Church leaders and members preferred to have the school in Kaneohe or Honolulu, where more Saints lived, since building it in either location would not require the added expense for constructing and maintaining dormitories. After extended deliberations, the school finally opened in Lā‘ie. At the end of the twentieth century, BYU–Hawai‘i’s student body numbers 2,200—ten times what was originally anticipated—and the problem is not unneeded dorms, but not enough dorms. Moreover, commute-capable Hawai‘i residents now make up less than 30 percent of the student body. An absence of dorms would have made the school’s eventual expansion into the South Pacific and Asia virtually impossible.

20:T42b5,

1. Jerry Loveland, Wiley Swapp, and Joseph Spurrier, conversation with author, Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i, April 26, 1983.

2. George Nebeker to Brigham Young, October 17, 1865, and November 19, 1866, Archives Division, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City (hereafter cited as LDS Church Archives), as cited in R. Lanier Britsch, Unto the Islands of the Sea: A History of the Latter-day Saints in the Pacific (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986), 131.

3. Reuben D. Law, The Founding and Early Development of the Church College of Hawaii (St. George, Utah: Dixie College Press, 1972), 29.

4. Edward L. Clissold, Oral History, interview by R. Lanier Britsch, June 11, 21, 1976, typescript, 18, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives.

5. Special LDS School Committee, “Report to Oahu Stake Presidency,” typewritten, Law/Wootton Papers, Archives and Special Collections, Joseph F. Smith Library, Brigham Young University–Hawai‘i, Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i (hereafter cited as BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections).

6. Special LDS School Committee, George O. Zabriskie (acting recorder), Minutes of Meeting held at O‘ahu Stake Tabernacle, Honolulu, Hawai‘i, July 13, 1949, to discuss the problem of an LDS Church School in Hawai‘i, typewritten, BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

7. George O. Zabriskie, interview by author, Honolulu, Hawai‘i, April 28, 1983, in possession of author.

8. Special LDS School Committee, “Report to O‘ahu Stake Presidency.”

9. Law, Development of the Church College of Hawaii, 37–38.

10. Fred E. Lunt, interview by author, Honolulu, Hawai‘i, April 25, 1983, in possession of author; Ruby Enos, interview by author, Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i, April 27, 1983, in possession of author.

11. Eldon Morrell, interview by author, Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i, February 16, 1983, copy in possession of author.

12. Law, Development of the Church College of Hawaii, 38.

13. Ralph E. Woolley, Arthur K. Parker, Fred E. Lunt, Edward L. Clissold, and Po‘i Kekauoha to the First Presidency, n.d., Law/Wootton Papers, BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

14. “Seminary Principal Flies to Hawaii on Special Mission for Presidency,” Deseret News, Church Section, July 11, 1951, 2.

15. Waiale‘e was discarded when the committee learned it was no longer available.

16. Woolley, Parker, Lunt, Clissold, and Kekauoha to First Presidency.

17. The first number was for first through sixth grades; the second number represented grades 7 through 10; the last number was for grades 11 and 12 and the first two years of college.

18. “Seminary Principal Flies,” Deseret News.

19. Frank W. McGhie, telephone interview with author, Salt Lake City, April 27, 1983. McGhie indicated in this conversation that he had recommended Kaneohe, although the other reports available from that period state that he had then recommended Honolulu. In a letter to the author, April 29, 1983, he stated, “I with many others thought the school should be nearer the center of population—either Kaneohe or Honolulu.” In our phone conversation McGhie described Lā‘ie in 1951 as a “sleepy little village” which he felt inadequate to accommodate the school as planned.

20. The implication of friction is found in a statement by Edward L. Clissold in Law, Development of the Church College of Hawaii, 36; Woolley, Parker, Lunt, Clissold, and Kekauoha to First Presidency; and other informants who wish to remain anonymous. When asked about this, McGhie responded by saying that the problems existed more between other members of the committee and “I just got caught in the middle.” McGhie, telephone interview. Additional information on McGhie’s recommendations may be found in “Confidential Memorandum of Conference with Frank McGhie held on July 19, 1954. Re: junior college in Hawai‘i.” Although unsigned, this appears to have been written by Reuben D. Law and is found in his papers in the BYU–Hawai‘i Archives. However, Law’s diary gives no indication of a conversation with McGhie on that date. (Law’s diary begins with his notification of his assignment July 7, 1954. A copy is located in the BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.) On July 16, Law met with Drs. Harvey D. Taylor, Ernest L. Wilkinson, Willard E. Givens, and Wesley P. Lloyd, all LDS educators with special knowledge or interest in the project. On July 19—the date of the “confidential memorandum”—the only entry concerns other matters entirely.

21. “The Church Moves On,” Improvement Era 54 (September 1951): 665; “Seminary Principals, Teachers Named for 1951–52,” Deseret News, Church Section, September 5, 1951, 3.

22. Woolley, Parker, Lunt, Clissold, and Kekauoha to First Presidency. The enrollment for an opening in 1952 was anticipated at between seventy-five and one hundred students.

23. Law, Development of the Church College of Hawaii, 38.

24. Wesley P. Lloyd to the First Presidency, August 9, 1952, Law/Wootton Papers, BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

25. Law, Development of the Church College of Hawaii, 39.

26. Reuben D. Law, Clarence Cottam, and Kenneth S. Bennion, “Report of Survey Pertaining to the New College in Hawaii,” 7, September 3, 1954, Owen J. Cook Papers, BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

27. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 32.

28. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 45.

29. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 46.

30. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 46.

31. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 46.

32. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 46–47.

33. See also Harold S. Davis “The Iosepa Origin of Joseph F. Smith’s ‘Laie Prophecy,’” BYU Studies 33 (1993): 81–108. Evidence presented in this article casts doubt on whether Joseph F. Smith ever made such a prophecy about Lā‘ie.

34. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 47.

35. Law, Development of the Church College of Hawaii, 25, 33, 56.

36. President David O. McKay, Dedicatory Service, Church College of Hawai‘i Groundbreaking, February 12, 1955, Law/Wooton Papers, BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

37. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 47. President Clissold also told me of that same conference.

38. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 48.

39. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 51.

40. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 51.

41. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 51.

42. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 56.

43. Law, Cottam, and Bennion, “New College in Hawaii,” 57.

44. Clissold Oral History, 19.

45. Reuben D. Law, Oral History, interview by Kenneth W. Baldridge, March 6, 1980, typescript, 4, Oral History Program, BYU–Hawai‘i, Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i.

46. Law, Diary, August 31, September 2, 3, 13, 1954.

47. Law, Diary, November 4, 1954.

48. Clissold Oral History, 19.

49. Law, Diary, November 4, 1954.

50. Law Oral History, 5. At the same time, President McKay announced the decision to appoint a local advisory committee consisting of Edward L. Clissold, Ralph E. Woolley, and D. Arthur Haycock with an additional member the three were to select. See Law, Diary, November 4, 1954.

51. Enrollment figures (Law, Development of the Church College of Hawaii, 293) list 145 regular and 88 special students.

21:Taff8,

In December 1958, approximately three years after breaking ground for the Church College of Hawai‘i, students prepared to move from the temporary campus near the temple to the present campus. The campus awaiting them was considerably smaller then. Familiar buildings such as the Aloha Center, Cannon Center, Snow Administration Building, or even the Little Theater did not exist. The library was much smaller, and there were no Temple View Apartments—in fact the campus began with only two dormitories instead of the six on campus now. “Faculty row” stretched out along Kamehameha Highway between the Lā‘ie Shopping Center and the old Laniloa Lodge, instead of on Moana Street.1 The campus had no faculty townhouses, and the faculty itself numbered fewer than two dozen. I would like to consider, however, an earlier period, prior even to the temporary campus, to see what the genesis of the Church College of Hawai‘i, now known as Brigham Young University–Hawai‘i, reveals. My purpose is to trace the rather tortuous path that planning for the school took over the years and to show that the establishment of the Church College of Hawai‘i in Lā‘ie was not quite as cut-and-dried as often believed because local leaders struggled for several years through delays and disagreements before settling on a site for their church college (fig. 1).

Figure 1. Newly constructed campus, Church College of Hawai‘i, 1958. Courtesy BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

The History of Church Education in Lā‘ie

The earliest Church schooling in Lā‘ie began soon after property there was purchased in early 1865. Sister Mildred Randall conducted two schools—one for the Hawaiian children and one for the haole (Caucasian) children—until her return to Utah in November 1866.2 Subsequent schools were conducted in Lā‘ie ’s first two chapels until a separate schoolhouse was constructed around 1887. This was located just to the Kahuku-side of the Lā‘ie chapel, which was completed in 1882. When construction of the temple began during World War I, the chapel was literally rolled down the hill about a hundred yards to a site on Lanihuli Street. The schoolhouse was given to those doing some of the art and sculpture work for the temple, and a new school was built adjacent to the relocated chapel. The new schoolhouse consisted of five classrooms and an assembly hall. In 1927 the Church turned it over to the Territory of Hawai‘i and went out of the education business in Lā‘ie for nearly three decades.

A Look into the Future

It was at this school, though, that our story really begins. In 1921, Elder David O. McKay, then a member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, and Hugh J. Cannon, president of the Salt Lake Liberty Stake, began their historic journey around the world to visit the missions of the Church. Shortly after their arrival in Lā‘ie in February 1921, the two brethren witnessed a flag-raising ceremony at the school. Many modern Latter-day Saints are under the assumption that the commencement of the Church College of Hawai‘i in the 1950s was a direct fulfillment of what Elder McKay felt and said on that occasion. The event was subsequently memorialized in a mural at the entrance to the foyer of the college’s David O. McKay Building.

The day after the flag-raising ceremony, Elders McKay and Cannon traveled to Maui, and there, as Elder Samuel H. Hurst recorded in his diary, a very inspirational meeting took place with the missionaries. Elder McKay asked them what they felt was the greatest need of the mission. Hurst reported that all the missionaries felt the greatest need was for a church-sponsored high school. McKay, an educator himself, agreed with them and promised to write a letter to the First Presidency with such a recommendation. At the close of his remarks he commented on the resolution “to build a school at Lā‘ie, O‘ahu.”3 Little did he know that he himself would be the instrument to put that recommendation into effect.

In a 1976 oral history interview, longtime Hawai‘i Church leader Edward L. Clissold stated that David O. McKay kept the idea of a school at Lā‘ie in mind constantly. Elder McKay talked about the school when he visited Lā‘ie in 1936 and again in 1940 and 1941 when he stayed at the Clissold home. Brother Clissold was then serving as first counselor in the O‘ahu Stake presidency. As Clissold remembered it, President McKay asked, “Brother Clissold, what are we doing about the school?” Clissold replied, “President McKay, we’re waiting on you Brethren to set it up.”4

The Search for a Site

It was several years later, however, before the next documented step was taken. On June 7, 1949, Ralph E. Woolley, president of the O‘ahu Stake, appointed four members of his high council to a special committee “to re-investigate and report . . . the advisability of establishing an L.D.S. Church School in Hawai‘i.” Clinton Kanahele, a prominent Hawaiian educator, chaired the committee, and the other members were J. Frank Woolley, Lawrence Peterson, and George Zabriskie. The charge to “re-investigate” and the committee report stating that “this same problem has been investigated before by Clinton Kanahele” are convincing evidence that at least some study had been given to the situation previously.5 On July 13, 1949, the committee and President Woolley met with bishops of the six wards and presidents of the three branches on O‘ahu to hear reports concerning Latter-day Saint attendance at private schools on O‘ahu. The leaders reported that about 150 Church members were attending non-sectarian schools such as Kamehameha and Punahou, and that about 50 others attended sectarian schools, primarily Catholic. After this presentation, 15 of the 85 other people present took the opportunity to express their views. Some felt there was an academic inadequacy in the public schools but were reluctant to expose their children to the religious orientation of the private schools.

Although nearly everyone seemed to agree on the desirability of a Latter-day Saint school, the consensus ended there. The location of the school and the grades to be included were especially controversial. Various sites in Honolulu and Lā‘ie were suggested, and grades ranging from kindergarten to high school were recommended, either to be established all at once or one grade at a time.6 According to the minutes, no one suggested a junior college, although committee member George Zabriskie later thought he remembered that there was some mention of the idea.7 Moreover, the report does list among the advantages of a Lā‘ie location the availability of land should expansion to the junior college level ever be desirable.

Lā‘ie vs. Honolulu

Although Honolulu and Lā‘ie were the only two contenders, the advantages and disadvantages of each were carefully analyzed. The report pointed out that about 75 percent of the Latter-day Saint population resided in the Honolulu area. This, of course, was also cited as the principal disadvantage of the Lā‘ie location. The Lā‘ie advantages, however, included the six thousand acres in and around Lā‘ie that the Church already owned and the low cost of land, considering the aforementioned possibility of future physical plant expansion. The rural environment also lent itself to the possibility of agricultural training for the students, as well as making lower costs possible by raising some of the necessary food items. Although it appears to have been given no more emphasis than some of the other reasons, the committee did mention that the presence of the Hawai‘i Temple and the fact that Lā‘ie, as a Mormon community, should foster development of a Latter-day Saint way of life.8

The next step along the path of school establishment took place the following year. About fourteen miles from Lā‘ie, along the North Shore toward Hale‘iwa (where the Crawford Convalescent Home and University of Hawai‘i Tropical Facility are located), the old Waiale‘e Training School had its campus. In the late 1940s, however, the school vacated the premises and moved to the Kailua area. In November 1950, President Woolley and President Clissold, then in the Hawai‘i Mission presidency, discussed the possibility of using the grounds and buildings for a school. Woolley appointed his counselors Fred E. Lunt and George Kekauoha, along with Elmer Jenkins and Ruby Enos, president of the stake Young Women’s Mutual Improvement Association, to look into the possibilities. According to a later statement by one of the principals, the committee regarded the site favorably and recommended its utilization.9 I have since interviewed two of the three surviving members of the committee, however, and they tell me there was, in fact, no such recommendation.10 Ruby Enos felt the land on the ma kai (ocean) side of the highway was too low and suitable only for taro, while the ma uka (mountainside) land was too limited in area. Fred Lunt recalled visiting the site one day, after a conference in Wahiawā, with Elder Henry D. Moyle and several local leaders. The consensus at that time was that being away from the spiritual environment of Lā‘ie would not be in the students’ best interest.

There were also others who did not agree that the Waiale‘e Training School, a former detention home, was a suitable location for the Latter-day Saint school. LDS educator Eldon Morrell felt the Mormon students would have enough difficulty with acceptance without the added stigma that the former detention facility might provide.11 Perhaps even more conclusive was the negative report of Clarence Silver of the Church Building Committee who, while vacationing in Hawai‘i in 1950, was asked to report on the Waiale‘e site. As a result of his observations, the Waiale‘e possibility appears to have been shelved pending further investigation.12

The Advisory Committee

On April 9, 1951, David O. McKay was sustained as president of the Church, and the momentum for a school in Hawai‘i increased considerably. Less than three months later, the First Presidency appointed an advisory committee to look into school matters on O‘ahu with the idea of starting a school in the coming fall. The committee consisted of President Woolley and his current counselors, Arthur K. Parker and Fred E. Lunt; Edward L. Clissold, recently released as president of the Hawai‘i Mission; his successor Ernest Nelson; and Po‘i Kekauoha, bishop of the Lā‘ie Ward.13

Soon thereafter, the First Presidency sent seminary principal Frank McGhie of Salt Lake City to Hawai‘i to meet with the committee. McGhie had been director of seminaries in Hawai‘i from 1944 to 1946 and then again in 1947 until the existing program was declared unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court. According to the notice in the Deseret News, McGhie was to make a survey of the facilities that might be available “for a junior college to be opened in Lā‘ie this fall.”14 From that statement, it appears that the type of school, the location, and even the date of opening had been determined. One of the committee’s unanimous decisions, however, was that it would be impossible to begin school within the desired timetable. The committee met with O‘ahu bishops and surveyed Church members to determine educational needs and potential enrollments. In what appears to have been a classic example of reinventing the wheel, the committee again considered several possible sites.15 McGhie, in the meantime, visited several schools on Maui and O‘ahu and suggested that the committee consider a location in or near Honolulu. This was discussed, but the committee was not swayed. The report submitted to the First Presidency reads, in part:

After careful consideration of the objectives of a church school program in Hawai‘i and the best means of obtaining them, the committee came to the following general conclusions:

1. That the school should be located at Lā‘ie, O‘ahu.

2. That it should be predominantly a boarding school.

3. That it should eventually embrace the last two years of high school and the first two years of college.

4. That the curriculum should include many vocational courses.

5. That the school should begin in September, 1952.

6. That the first year (1952–53) courses should be limited to junior year high school students to be followed by one additional grade each year for the next three years until in the fourth year (1955–56) the full four-year course would be established.16

It might be noted that in 1951, the proposed configuration of the school as a four-year combination of two high school years and two junior college years was not as unorthodox as it might seem today. The proposal was in keeping with the 6–4–4 idea that was enjoying some popularity in public education at that time.17

The McGhie Study

According to the Church News article concerning his assignment in Hawai‘i, McGhie was to return after three weeks to report to the First Presidency, then he was to leave again for Hawai‘i “to take charge of the development of the new institution.”18 The committee’s report also implied that he was expected to become the school’s principal or president. When I later interviewed him, McGhie told me he did not have that understanding.19 In any case, he was not willing to locate in Lā‘ie, and friction developed between him and committee members during his visit to Hawai‘i. McGhie returned to Utah to file his minority report.20 Although there had been a lengthy Church News article about his departure for the assignment, only a brief paragraph in the Improvement Era mentioned his return on July 25, with the message that the “opening of an LDS high school at Lā‘ie . . . will be postponed for at least one year.” That September he was again serving as a seminary principal in Salt Lake City.21

The Hawai‘i committee, however, realized the importance of continued input from Church headquarters and wrote to the First Presidency,

Since Brother McGhie has apparently withdrawn himself from the picture, we request that another man be appointed as soon as practicable to head up the project. If you concur in the conclusion reached by the committee we can begin with the new appointee to lay the groundwork for the opening of the school.22

Nothing happened as a result of the McGhie study, perhaps due to the connected controversy, and another year passed. In May 1952, President Clissold again attempted to get the project moving. Two months later, Professor Wesley P. Lloyd from BYU was scheduled to be in Hawai‘i on his return from Japan. As a result of Clissold’s urging, Dr. Lloyd was assigned by the First Presidency to conduct another survey of the educational needs of the Hawai‘i Saints. Consequently, Dr. Lloyd met with individuals concerning the same issues previously surveyed (what type of school should be established and where it should be located). Lloyd met with stake and mission officers at the Honolulu Tabernacle on July 31, 1952, and as President Clissold reported, “The consensus of this meeting was that a junior college, offering largely vocational courses, be established at Lā‘ie.”23 Lloyd’s written report to the First Presidency supported the recommendation and added that the school could probably be opened in 1953, should the decision be made to proceed.24

Additional meetings were held in October and November 1952. More reports were sent to leaders in Salt Lake City recommending that someone be appointed to head the school in order to provide additional direction and momentum to the ongoing studies. In June 1953, President McKay assured Clissold that this would shortly be done. Nearly one year later, in May 1954, President McKay told Clissold that a selection had been made and that another survey committee would go to Hawai‘i soon.25 On Wednesday, July 21, 1954, the First Presidency made the long-awaited announcement. Dr. Reuben D. Law, dean of the College of Education of Brigham Young University, was named as the president of the new institution, finally designated officially as a junior college.

Another Evaluation

It would seem that by this stage the problems of site and format would have been resolved, and Law could set about the work of establishing the school. Such was not the case, and it was evidently felt necessary to repeat the same evaluative procedures that had been pursued so many times before. Another meeting was called by Edward L. Clissold, who by this time had succeeded Ralph E. Woolley as president of the O‘ahu Stake. Those present at the stake tabernacle in Honolulu had an opportunity to express themselves, and although there were still some who wanted a dormitory high school, President Clissold maintained that the younger students should remain at home under family and church influence rather than being sent off to a boarding school. This idea prevailed, and the report of the survey committee stated that they “had a distinct feeling that all but a few people feel it is wise for the new school to concentrate on the college years.”26

The survey committee visited the four larger islands and talked extensively to church and educational leaders of Hawai‘i. As a result of the month-long study, the committee arrived at the following conclusions concerning the general purposes of the school:

1. To build strong Latter-day Saints.

2. To develop leadership—spiritual and temporal.

3. To provide opportunities for exploratory work in both academic and vocational lines.

4. To provide general education for all students.

5. To offer two-year terminal courses in the trades and vocations for those whose talents and inclinations point toward immediate employment rather than further academic work.

6. To provide preparatory programs for those who will continue on to senior colleges and universities.27

After looking at various sites, the committee concluded that only Honolulu, Lā‘ie, and Kaneohe were worth “final consideration.”28 Honolulu and Lā‘ie, of course, had been recommended by various committees in previous years, but this was the first time that Kaneohe had been mentioned as a possibility. And that mention was to be significant.

Law’s survey committee pointed out that both Honolulu and Lā‘ie had “loyal defenders and determined opponents.” Although admitting that Honolulu had several obvious advantages, the committee cited three principal reasons for rejection of that city: the high cost of land, then running between $1.25 and $2.50 per square foot; the difficulty of finding a plot of at least one hundred acres, which they felt would be the minimum possible for the plant desired; and what they referred to as an “environmental disadvantage” created by the presence of great numbers of military personnel and the crewmen of passing ships.29

Consideration had been given to the site of an unused naval hospital at Aiea, which was described as an excellent site. However, the committee felt that the buildings spread over too extensive an area and maintenance costs would be prohibitive. In addition, if a lease were to become available, it would be for a limited term only and would require evacuation by the school on short notice if the Navy wished to reclaim the property.30 Considering the “environmental disadvantage,” it seems unlikely that the committee seriously entertained the thought of a school so close to Pearl Harbor Naval Base.

The committee repeated most of the arguments that had been previously offered in behalf of Lā‘ie’s candidacy. They mentioned the availability of good land, not only for the site of the institution itself but also for the agricultural pursuits that, it was assumed, would be part of the college’s activities. They also noted that Lā‘ie had an ample supply of underground water. Another Lā‘ie advantage, shared with Kaneohe but for some reason not attributed to Honolulu, was proximity to the sea. The committee felt that the seaside location would lend itself to the study of marine life and also provide access to fishing opportunities, enabling the college to meet some of its food needs.31

The committee also cited the “religious tradition” and the “spiritual atmosphere” as reasons why Lā‘ie might be considered.32 Among the religious traditions referred to, the committee mentioned the oft-cited prophecy attributed to Joseph F. Smith concerning the blessings that would come to Lā‘ie and its residents.33 As a result, the report stated, Lā‘ie is “looked upon as a land of promise, a gathering place for the Saints in Hawai‘i.” The committee’s next sentence may come as a surprise to recent generations of Lā‘ie residents and BYU–Hawai‘i students: “However, a study by President Edward L. Clissold of prophecies and dedicatory prayers on record in Hawai‘i finds no reference to a college at Lā‘ie.”34 Here the survey committee is denying an explicit link between Elder McKay’s supposed 1921 reference to a school of higher learning and the community of Lā‘ie. This is interesting because in his 1972 history of the college, Law makes several references to the vision of the college that McKay supposedly experienced during the 1921 flag-raising ceremony and cites McKay’s diary as the source of the information.35

Yet, while describing the flag-raising in great detail, McKay’s diary contains no reference to a college being located in this community. Elder Samuel Hurst did report the subsequent meeting in Maui, during which he heard Elder McKay speak of his resolution, in response to the collective recommendation of the gathered missionaries, to urge the First Presidency to establish a Church high school in Lā‘ie. Yet even Hurst says nothing about the vision at the flag-raising ceremony that has since become part of Latter-day Saint Hawai‘i folklore. It was President McKay himself who made the most direct link when he spoke at the Church College of Hawai‘i groundbreaking ceremony on February 12, 1955. He stated on that occasion, “This is the beginning of the realization of a vision I saw thirty-four years ago when one morning President Hugh J. Cannon, President E. Wesley Smith, others and I witnessed a flag-raising ceremony by students of the church school here in Hawai‘i in Lā‘ie.”36 Another one of the religious traditions cited by the committee mentions a conference in Lā‘ie at which Thorpe B. Isaacson, then a counselor to the Presiding Bishop, reportedly spoke of a future school in Lā‘ie where people “would come for their spiritual and academic education.”37

The disadvantages of Lā‘ie identified by the committee were numerous, though some of the objections seemed to overlap. Most serious, the committee felt, was the distance from the main center of population. Obviously, there were not enough students in Lā‘ie to justify a college, and the financial problems created by the need either to travel or to stay in dormitories were regarded as excessive. The committee drew an arc of twenty miles from Lā‘ie and determined that only 25 percent of the Latter-day Saint population of O‘ahu lived within that distance. On the other hand, a similar arc from Kaneohe contained 95 percent of the Latter-day Saint population.38 The absence of regular public transportation and the distance of travel involved made access to Lā‘ie difficult. Most significantly, the small population and lack of transportation would necessitate the considerable expense of having to build dormitories. Costs were projected to be about $3,000 per student. Thus,

by locating the school near enough to Honolulu so that even 100 students could live in their own homes or the homes of relatives we would save in capital outlay alone approximately $300,000. A difference of 200 non-dormitory students would amount to approximately $600,000 which would probably offset the cost of land for a campus elsewhere, and this without consideration of the added costs to students living in the dormitories.39

Moreover, according to Max Moody, a Church member and partner of Walker-Moody Contractors, estimated building costs in Lā‘ie would be from 5 to 10 percent higher than in more accessible parts of the island. Although Clissold admitted costs would be higher, he was less pessimistic than Moody in this regard.40 The committee stated that in addition to the difficulties of distance, the related factor of isolation would inhibit enrollment. Several “prominent citizens of Honolulu, including members of the Stake High Council” reportedly told members of the committee that they would send their children to the mainland before enrolling them in a boarding school in Lā‘ie.41 This reluctance did not extend to Kaneohe, in some cases at least, because their children could live at home and commute.

The advantages listed for Kaneohe over Lā‘ie were based primarily on the greater population base, easier accessibility, and the lower costs involved. More people could be served due to local transportation facilities, and fewer dormitories would be necessary. Local educators not affiliated with the Church also recommended Kaneohe as a site superior to Lā‘ie. Kaneohe’s greater size offered significant advantages. Students, especially women, would enjoy greater opportunity for part-time employment in Kaneohe than in Lā‘ie. There would be lower costs for construction and maintenance of the school facilities, and repair and supply services would be more readily available. Yet another reason mentioned—perhaps more strategic than economic—was that the Catholic Church had supposedly been negotiating for one hundred acres in the Kaneohe area for a school of its own. The report stated that “it seems unwise to place our school in comparatively isolated Lā‘ie while the other church establishes itself in the more desirable and rapidly growing Kaneohe district.”42 Besides, a school in Kaneohe would better meet the increasing educational needs of Latter-day Saint military personnel in the islands who found Lā‘ie too far away to do them much good. In what might be considered an attempt to neutralize Lā‘ie ’s chief economic asset, the availability of land, the report stated that any agricultural facilities available at Lā‘ie could just as easily be found in Kaneohe. Then the report asked almost plaintively: “If the Church did not now own the land at Lā‘ie, would we now buy land and build the school there?” The final advantage cited referred to a recent dispute in Rexburg, Idaho, growing out of the proposal to remove Ricks College to the more populous Idaho Falls. To avoid such a dilemma in years to come, the committee stated: “It is our hope that the college in Hawai‘i will be built where we shall want it fifty and more years from now.”43

The Selection of a Site

The committee recommended that the school be located in Kaneohe, “not as a compromise, but as a place that offers more advantages and fewer disadvantages than either of the others.” Although President Clissold was not a member of the committee, he had traveled many miles with them and, as stake president, was asked to sign the report. He said he could not sign it since he felt the school should be in Lā‘ie rather than Kaneohe or Honolulu.44 In recalling the role of Clissold several years later, Reuben D. Law remarked, “President Clissold wanted it in Lā‘ie, but he was a good sport about taking us to all the other locations that we wanted to be taken to. He was president of the stake at the time and he didn’t hesitate to indicate that he wanted it to be in Lā‘ie but he was willing to help us in any of our activities.”45

Law and the committee arrived back in Provo, Utah, on Sunday, August 29, 1954, after completing their survey work in Hawai‘i. Though work on the report had actually commenced before the committee left Hawai‘i, Law kept two and sometimes three secretaries busy typing on it for the next week. On Friday, September 3, the committee met with BYU President Ernest L. Wilkinson to examine the report in detail. Ten days later, Law completed the table of contents for the five copies and then delivered the original to President McKay’s office and the other copies to committee members Ernest Wilkinson, Clarence Cottam, and Kenneth Bennion.46

With general conference coming in early October, the committee could not meet with President McKay until November 4, although they had a preliminary meeting with his counselor, Stephen L. Richards, on October 26.47 Clissold, however, talked with President McKay in the interim. Probably in conjunction with October conference business, Clissold visited President McKay in his office, and he remembers their conversation as follows:

He had me come around behind his desk and sit in a chair right by him. He put his hands on my knees. He said, “Brother Clissold, what about our school?” I said, “Well, the brethren came down and made a report.” Then he said, “That’s right. Where’s Kaneohe?” I replied, “Kaneohe is over the Pali from Honolulu, about a fifteen-minute ride.” He just kept looking at me. I added, “President McKay, I can’t forget Lā‘ie,” He slapped my knee—I think I still have the mark on it—and said, “Good. I thought you had gone along with them. Now we have their report, we appreciate it, but the school will be in Lā‘ie.”48

Of the November meeting with the prophet, Law recorded in his diary that President McKay stated that the First Presidency had “definitely decided that the college should be built at Lā‘ie even though the survey admittedly showed many excellent reasons in support of the Kaneohe area as a possible location nearer to Honolulu.”49 In a later oral history interview, Law added this recollection of that memorable meeting. President McKay said “we’re going to overrule you on one thing. The college is really to be at Lā‘ie, and I know that’s where the Lord wants it, and that’s where it is going to be.” As Law concluded, “Well, that settled that. There couldn’t be any question about that.”50

On November 12, Law again met with President McKay and received further counsel and instructions concerning budgets, buildings, and his relationship with what McKay called the continuing advisory committee. The president also had two possible names for the college, since the name suggested by the survey committee had suffered the same fate as the suggested location. The First Presidency requested that the advisory committee consider either “The Church College of Hawai‘i” or possibly “The Church Hawai‘i College.” Law and the committee chose “The Church College of Hawai‘i,” which became the school’s name for the next two decades.

Although Lā‘ie was now accepted as the home of the school, the exact location still had to be determined. Law arrived in Hawai‘i on November 22 and went to work immediately. One of the main agenda items for the committee meeting on November 24 was consideration of possible sites within the Lā‘ie community (fig. 2). Further discussions were held with Harold and Douglas Burton (the father-and-son team of architects), and on December 8 the decision was made. At a meeting in Lā‘ie, the committee unanimously agreed to locate the buildings “on the higher cane land south east of the temple and south of the village—in other words, where the school is today.

Figure 2. Reuben D. Law (far right), the first president of the Church College of Hawai‘i, with his wife Leda and others, surveys the site selected for the permanent campus. Courtesy BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

Ralph Woolley and Harold Burton, based on their extensive experience, convinced the rest of the committee that it would take four to six months to adequately prepare the drawings and blueprints. They believed that to construct the buildings before summer 1956 would not be economical. The committee agreed that an explanatory letter should be drafted to that effect, which Law and Burton would then personally deliver to President McKay.

On returning to the mainland, Law met with President McKay and J. Reuben Clark concerning the recommendations of what by now was simply being called the continuing committee. McKay was unhappy about the postponement. Law quotes him as saying, “Oh! We’ve waited too long already to establish that college. We must start this fall even if we have to start in temporary quarters.” Before the day was over, Law telephoned Clissold and discussed with him the possibility of holding classes the first year in the O‘ahu Stake Tabernacle. The tabernacle plan never materialized, however, and soon the continuing committee began looking elsewhere. Law’s diary states that on March 9, 1955, he and Clissold were looking at the old social hall and the plantation store buildings in Lā‘ie to see if they could be remodeled in a suitable manner. They also discussed the temporary use of the Lā‘ie chapel. In the meantime, Lillian Kondo of Kapa‘a, Kauai, became the first student to return her application to the college. Ethel Whitford (now Almodova) became the registrar and the first to offer oral acceptance of a position, and librarian Kenneth Slack provided the first written acceptance. From April 1 to June 25, Law was on the mainland, during which time Clissold had arranged for several war surplus buildings to be trucked to Lā‘ie and placed near the Lā‘ie chapel as temporary quarters for the college.

Conclusion

The temporary and permanent sites for the school were finally determined, and by 1955 ground was broken for the permanent campus. Despite years of discouraging postponements, Church leaders and Saints in Hawai‘i finally accepted Lā‘ie as a suitable site for their church college. More than thirty years after Elder McKay’s resolution to “build a school at Lā‘ie,” crews began construction on the permanent campus while classes began in temporary facilities (fig. 3). The school, scheduled to open in September 1955, hired 20 faculty members and prepared to receive 223 freshmen and sophomores.51 Changes, frustrations, and disappointments still lay ahead, but through the guidance of a prophet and the work of many others, the school could begin serving the Saints in Hawai‘i.

Figure 3. Church College of Hawai‘i main complex (later David O. McKay Building) under construction. Courtesy LDS Church Archives.

12:["$","$L1d",null,{"book":{"id":30,"title":"Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","subtitle":"Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","image_id":"website-files-bucket/books/book_cover_images/book-voyages.jpg","excerpt":"","book_series_id":null,"series_ordering":0,"ebook_link_kindle":null,"ebook_link_deseret":null,"ebook_link_nook":null,"free_book":0,"pdf_id":null,"footnotes":null,"public":1,"slug":"voyages-of-faith","wp_id":77384,"product_link":"product/voyages-of-faith-explorations-in-mormon-pacific-history","author_id":null},"chapter":{"id":543,"title":"Search for a Site: Selection of the Church College of Hawaiʻi Campus","subtitle":null,"online_book_id":30,"excerpt":null,"content":"$1e","intro_text":"$1f","page_number":191,"previous_chapter":"the-purported-december-7-1941-attack-on-the-hawaii-temple","next_chapter":"the-polynesian-cultural-center-reflections-and-recollections","pdf_id":null,"footnotes":"$20","slug":"search-for-a-site-selection-of-the-church-college-of-hawaii-campus","public":1,"wp_id":null,"test":"542","podcast_file_id":null,"section_heading":null,"chapter_author":null},"topics":[],"scriptures":[],"authors":[],"processedContent":{"html":"$21","headings":[{"id":"heading-0","textContent":"The History of Church Education in Lā‘ie","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-1","textContent":"A Look into the Future","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-2","textContent":"The Search for a Site","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-3","textContent":"Lā‘ie vs. Honolulu","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-4","textContent":"The Advisory Committee","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-5","textContent":"The McGhie Study","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-6","textContent":"Another Evaluation","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-7","textContent":"The Selection of a Site","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-8","textContent":"Conclusion","tagName":"H2"}]}}]