The Polynesian Cultural Center (PCC), located adjacent to BYU–Hawai‘i in Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i, is a forty-two-acre “cultural theme attraction”—designed to be part living museum and part entertainment—which (re)presents Hawaiian, Tahitian, Samoan, Tongan, Maori, Fijian, and Marquesan culture to nearly a million visitors annually. For many years, Vernice Wineera was an executive at the PCC; she has since become the director of the BYU–Hawai‘i Institute for Polynesian Studies. Her personal knowledge of the PCC’s programs and personnel, her cultural heritage as a New Zealand Maori, her academic training (Ph.D. from the University of Hawai‘i) and long-standing devotion to the Church make her unusually well qualified to provide a thoughtful analysis of the relationship between culture, religion, and personal identity at the PCC. Unlike the other selections in this volume, all of which were presented at MPHS annual conferences, Wineera’s reflections appear here for the first time. She was invited to offer them as a companion piece to Rubina Rivers Forester’s institutional history.

During her nearly fifteen years of employment at the PCC, Rubina Forester worked in various capacities, including tour guide, supervisor, and editor. It was her association with the PCC’s oral history project, however, that helped her prepare this history of the Center’s first two decades for the 1986 MPHS annual conference. The PCC oral histories provide an important basis for her history, but they are not her only sources. Pacific Islanders like Forester recognize the value of—and naturally incorporate in their histories—local oral tradition, informal conversations, and personal observations, which, though not reducible to endnote references, are fundamental to traditional ways of knowing. The result is a well-informed history of the PCC that reflects both approaches to the past.

16:{"metadata":[["$","title","0",{"children":"The Polynesian Cultural Center: Reflections and Recollections - Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History"}],["$","meta","1",{"name":"description","content":"$1b"}],["$","meta","2",{"name":"keywords","content":"The Polynesian Cultural Center: Reflections and Recollections, Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History, online books, BYU Studies"}],["$","link","3",{"rel":"canonical","href":"https://byustudies.byu.edu/online-book/voyages-of-faith/the-polynesian-cultural-center-reflections-and-recollections"}],["$","link","4",{"rel":"icon","href":"/favicon.ico","type":"image/x-icon","sizes":"16x16"}],["$","$L1c","5",{}]],"error":null,"digest":"$undefined"} 1a:"$16:metadata" 1d:I[66263,["1120","static/chunks/1120-75f909259fd067cc.js","5466","static/chunks/5466-b96f3c00376edc43.js","8534","static/chunks/8534-7ca745715241e193.js","9126","static/chunks/9126-91257ba5fa5d06c5.js","8387","static/chunks/8387-2bdb776aa3fa620b.js","6874","static/chunks/6874-bf14f6d1ebc153cc.js","9383","static/chunks/9383-5debb36c04efe52f.js","3063","static/chunks/3063-404186ec4ce8f075.js","7132","static/chunks/7132-1bf9ca313709cfa3.js","5858","static/chunks/5858-a921a795a1989287.js","9233","static/chunks/9233-cd31d8c4ef751ef5.js","8361","static/chunks/8361-ec429c2d2a4b8505.js","7594","static/chunks/app/(site)/(containers)/(content)/online-book/%5BbookId%5D/%5BchapterId%5D/page-aca9af7241f107d8.js"],"default"] 1e:T1154b,

Culture and Church at the Polynesian Cultural Center Vernice Wineera

The Polynesian Cultural Center was one of the earliest cultural theme parks in the United States. Its cultural description stems from its presentation of seven Polynesian “villages” or “islands.” Fiji has been included because of its close proximity and historical and cultural connections to the islands of Polynesia. The PCC’s planners and builders hoped to construct a site that would be educational and entertaining, a type of museum and cultural theme park rolled into one. The organizers also wanted it to be an effective missionary tool to introduce visitors to the LDS Church. This multifaceted vision has necessarily influenced the Center’s growth and development. Directed today by a full-time management team of mostly Polynesians, PCC employees—primarily college students—(re)present their island traditions in village demonstrations of material culture, food preparation, arts and crafts, weaponry usage, dance and song, a canoe pageant, and an evening show, the finale to each day’s activity. It is these village performances presented several times daily that are most significant to the way in which Polynesian cultures are represented in the PCC.

President David O. McKay made it clear that visitors would come to Lā‘ie and that their experiences there would have a lasting impact on their lives. President McKay’s dedicatory prayer at the groundbreaking of the Church College of Hawai‘i (now BYU–Hawai‘i) gave prophetic vision to Lā‘ie’s Church entities, which remains the key element in their mission statements. He prayed “that this college, and the temple, and the town of Lā‘ie may become a missionary factor, influencing not thousands, not tens of thousands, but millions of people who will come seeking to know what this town and its significance are.”1 At the time of this pronouncement, the PCC did not exist; yet, by the year 2000, nearly 27 million people had passed through the little town of Lā‘ie while visiting the Center, the single most important entity in the fulfillment of this prophecy.2

At the end of the twentieth century, travel and tourism accounted for one out of every nine jobs in the United States, and tourism was the leading industry in thirty-seven states.3 It has been noted that “by 2010, more than 182 million parkgoers [tourists] are expected to hit U.S. turnstiles, up from today’s 161 million.”4 It requires little imagination to realize that an LDS tourist site visited by hundreds of thousands of people annually has great potential for proselyting. The Lā‘ie Hawai‘i Temple, dedicated in 1919, has been a regular stop for tour buses since the 1960s. A natural extension of this was to offer PCC visitors a trolley ride through Lā‘ie with a brief stop at the front foyer of the BYU–Hawai‘i campus and a thirty-minute visit to the temple visitors’ center, allowing them to walk through the gardens and attend a short film and lecture about the Church, its practices and principles.

At the PCC, education and entertainment are brought together by the Spirit. Those who guided the founding of the Polynesian Cultural Center sought to blend the cultural with the educational and the spiritual, thus creating a unity and identity in a place unlike any other in existence.

The Educational and Entertainment Elements

The PCC’s organizers foresaw a place that would be both educational and entertaining.5 Balancing marketing rhetoric with real cultural issues while at the same time attempting to attract tourists over a three-decade period of changing visitor expectations has proved challenging. It underscores a continuing dilemma for the PCC: how to accomplish its mission of educating students while providing visitors with an entertaining experience that will ultimately pique their interest in the Church and assist in missionary work. Not only that, but the Center must accomplish these goals with students who, in the strictest sense of the term, can only be described as amateurs, while fulfilling the tourist industry’s demand for professionalism. The packed amphitheater of tourists wait to be entertained, expect to be impressed, and judge, throughout the performance, what they see and hear.

It should be noted that the PCC’s student employees are members of a global generation of TV-watching, McDonalds-frequenting, name brand-buying youth who embrace American popular culture as well as their own. Yet they wear the ta‘ovala (a waist mat signifying respect) to church on Sundays and pray in their own languages. The dancing, singing, poetry writing, weaving, carving, canoe-building, house building, mat-making, food preparation, and every other aspect of the PCC’s activities were already known to most of those who came to work in the new Center. This varied knowledge brought to the PCC also included, among other things, the languages of Samoa, Tonga and Fiji; the high skill in traditional decorative arts and marae (central meeting area of village) protocol of the Maori; and the exciting dance forms and costuming of Tahiti and Hawai‘i. In short, they brought their island cultures with them to the PCC’s program of performances and activities.

Most PCC visitors bring with them some expectation of Polynesian cultures and peoples. These expectations have been shaped by many educational and entertainment sources and condition what tourists expect to see and experience. How employees deal with such expectations in presenting themselves to others is an important aspect of this cultural site because most visitors do not know that it is sponsored by the Church. The PCC is not a theme park representing Latter-day Saint culture. However, through their conduct, the employees, particularly the student employees, represent both their culture and their church.

Visitor responses to these student employees are overwhelmingly positive. A late 1990s marketing study revealed: “Visitors have never been (or rarely been) immersed in an environment of people who are so genuine, pure-hearted and filled with a radiant spirit of love and brotherhood. Most visitors feel this and are moved as they seldom have been by any other tourist experience.”6 This report also noted that when visitors learn that most of the Center’s employees are students and that their PCC jobs are the means of gaining a college education, they become more positive toward the Center and feel even better about the money they spend (fig. 1). While this and other reports do not determine whether the values represented by the PCC student employees could be attributed to their culture, religion, corporation, or a combination of the three, as an insider, I believe it is the blend of culture and religion through which such cross-cultural poise is learned as the students grow up both Polynesian and Latter-day Saint.

[caption] Figure 1. Cast of the original PCC "Styles of the Isles" show (left to right): Halomia Chase, Ofisi Pututau, Vatau Galeai, Don Burke, Noelani Kauhane, Vida (last name unknown), Erena Mapuhi, Nicholas Levy, Mele Fonua, Joe Apiti, Juliana Turagabeci. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.[/caption]

The Spiritual Component

Polynesian Saints feel a depth of connection, a sense of belonging as members of the LDS Church. They believe they belong by birthright, spiritually as well as genealogically. For Polynesians, the restored gospel confirms traditional cultural beliefs in the connection between heaven and earth, spiritual and physical existences. The Book of Mormon sustains Polynesian identity as a covenant people of the Lord. In this way, Polynesian Church members feel confirmed in their heritage by birth, by blood, and by blessing. These Pacific Islanders bring to their jobs at the PCC their characteristic blend of intuitive traditional spirituality and the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

From the time the PCC opened, its managers believed in this inherent spiritual empowerment as they fine-tuned the organization and its aims. In a letter to Lā‘ie Church leader Edward L. Clissold, PCC Project Construction Manager Wendell B. Mendenhall wrote:

I am sure that we are united in being hopeful that we can make of the Polynesian Cultural Center something which will express the greatest spiritual values which will give yearning on the part of all who enter therein to further seek interest in the Church and to express the highest cultural manifestations in song and dance which also encourage all who enter to seek the truth, to keep the Center simple, clean and authentic and to produce the kind of performances which will elevate every person who sees the same. This is our task. I am sure we have not begun to see the value of the Center as it relates to the missionary service of the Church.7

Preceding his dedicatory prayer with remarks, Elder Howard W. Hunter, then a member of the Quorum of the Twelve and chairman of the PCC’s Board of Directors, said that “a great spirit emanates from the young people who are the heart and soul of the PCC.” He told how the Center’s organizers wished to provide opportunities for young Polynesians and said “if we have been helpful to a boy or a girl—one of you—we will feel that our efforts have been much worthwhile. . . . God lives, this is his work. The PCC is one of his institutions the same as stakes and schools that we have built for the lifting up of the children of men.” Elder Hunter’s prayer dedicating the new theater and other structures concluded with a request for continued blessings:

Carry forward the work of the great PCC, oh Father, continue to bless the people of these islands wherever they may be that [they] may continue to bring about good. Establish here a showcase of the cultures. May it be an ensign to those who come—an example of that which can be built with man’s hands when he has a testimony of the gospel of Christ. Bless the young people who work here. Bless the visitors who come [that they may] receive the Spirit here and have joy.8

At the dedication of the PCC’s new theater on July 4, 1976, then General Manager William Cravens stated four reasons for building the Center: (1) Church leaders were directed by the Lord; (2) Lā‘ie’s Polynesian community base would be able to support the Center at the same time that the PCC would provide work for families; (3) the PCC would help support BYU–Hawai‘i financially; and (4) the Center would help perpetuate and present Polynesian culture to the world.9 While the Center’s programs and activities evolved over the years, of prime importance throughout its history has been the PCC’s significant financial support of BYU–Hawai‘i. It is this assistance, tied to the Center’s success in stimulating interest in the Church, which ensures the Church’s continuing support of the enterprise.

Two student employees of the PCC also spoke at the dedication. Samoan student Rowena Pili, a BYU–Hawai‘i valedictorian that year, remarked, “I came here in 1973 with a negative attitude because I didn’t want to come to a small college. But every leisure moment I had, I came to PCC. . . . [and] I learned a lot of things about my culture that I didn’t learn back home.” She went on to explain that her people lacked money for education and then said that “the Lord [had] prepared a way for us to accomplish the goal of getting an education by working here at PCC—to learn here, not only academically but culturally.”10 Semisi Lauvaka, also a valedictorian of that year’s graduating class, believed that he was “fulfilling a prophecy” as a PCC employee. The Center had become “a refuge” for him: “When I came from Tonga I had no money. I got a job in the Tongan village. Working here helps me discover who I really am. PCC is a mission, and I am a missionary, not necessarily by preaching but by my actions.”11

The gospel exerts a harmonizing influence upon the lives of members of diverse groups, encompassing the PCC, the university, and the whole Lā‘ie community. In hindsight, former PCC General Manager William Cravens realized that although the Church institutions in Lā‘ie had been built in a small community far from the center of O‘ahu’s population base, Lā‘ie “is not just a cultural center, it’s an educational and religious center.” Enlarging this thought he revealed:

There hasn’t been a day that has passed since I’ve been here that I have not felt the spirituality of the Polynesian Cultural Center. That’s going on eight years. . . . In the most negative, most discouraging, most depressing moments, or when something has happened, I have never felt the disconnection of the Spirit. If there’s ever a time when I feel kind of troubled or something, I just have to walk through these grounds and know that the Lord really has his hand [in the PCC’s affairs].12

The Results: Unity and Identity

From the beginning, everyone expected to be a working part of the Center’s daily activities, and as in villages throughout the Pacific, the whole community of Lā‘ie expected to be involved in all important PCC events. Although the Lā‘ie Hawai‘i Temple functions as the spiritual center and BYU–Hawai‘i as the educational center, the PCC is the cultural heart of the Lā‘ie, Kahuku, and Hau‘ula Polynesian communities. By the last half of the twentieth century, Lā‘ie, a traditional Hawaiian pu‘uhonua (place of refuge), had become a unique site of the Mormon Polynesian diaspora, and the PCC was its cultural stage.

What the PCC gives in return to these expatriate Polynesians for their work is, in the Maori term, turangawaewae, or a place to stand—a place to stand with pride as tangata whenua (local tribal people) of the PCC marae. Occupying this place, employees daily cross boundaries of culture, church, and corporate enterprise as they respond to the requirements of their identities’ separate components and the demands of the job of representing themselves to others.

This Polynesian concept of a place to stand from which to represent oneself to strangers and visitors is inherent in the authenticity of the place itself. From the point of view of my own cultural identity, the PCC’s Maori marae and carved house, Te Aroha o te Iwi Maori (the love of the Maori people) are important in ways tourists usually do not comprehend (fig. 2). I remember helping hand paint the kowhaiwhai patterns (designs representing foods from nature) on the rafters when the house was still under construction in early 1963 (fig. 3.). The carvings inside are representative of famous historical chiefs of New Zealand’s tribes, including my own ancestor Toa Rangatira. As his descendant, I feel a compelling sense of belonging and a keen appreciation of my genealogical legacy whenever I enter this wharenui (large house). Because the house is pan-tribal in its history and diasporic location, every Maori has a right to stand, speak, and engage in the formulaic ceremonials within it. Moreover, the presence of the carved figures and icons of the genealogical histories of New Zealand tribes authenticates the house and marae at an esoteric level beyond the comprehension of the casual non-Maori visitor. Members of Lā‘ie ’s Maori community, however, recognize and respect the significance of the site, are comfortable with its relevance to their identity, yet have no difficulty belonging in the worlds of both their church and their culture.

[caption] Figure 2. Entrance to the Maori village at the PCC. On the entry way beam is carved Aotearoa (The Land of the Long White Cloud), the Maori name for New Zealand. Courtesy Justin Colver.[/caption] [caption] Figure 3. Kowhaiwhai patterns on the rafters of the Maori carved house at the PCC. Courtesy Justin Colver.[/caption]

The PCC as a “showcase of the cultures” regularly hosts visitors from the Pacific and around the world, including cultural and government leaders. Dr. Sione Latukefu, a visiting scholar, gave a spontaneous speech to employees while visiting the PCC. As a young man in Tonga, he recalled, “I received a scholarship to go to a university in Australia. I was ashamed to be a Tongan. I didn’t wear my ta‘ovala. I combed my hair differently. I didn’t want to look or be Tongan.” And he told the large audience of Polynesian employees: “What you are doing here is making these young people proud to be Polynesian, proud to be Tongans, which gives them that self-esteem that they really need to be successful in their lives.”13

Although cultural identities are not formed at the PCC, Polynesian student employees find that such identities are nourished there and often come to full flower as they work their way through four years of employment. Moreover, these cultural identities are nurtured by a Polynesian LDS community that involves itself in PCC cultural activities. Because the community’s Polynesians are largely Latter-day Saint, ethnic differences that might normally be expected to divide people are transcended by the Church’s culture, which draws them together (fig 4.). All are loyal to the same religious culture, even though they come from different Polynesian cultures. The principles of this pervasive religious culture determine both individual and group relations in the town.

[caption] Figure 4. Distinguished Samoan Chiefs of Lāʻie stand together for a photograph in the mid-1960s. Left to right: Fuaileleo Leʻi, Tautua Tagoaʻi, Vatau Galeaʻi (seated), Pasi Fuamatu, Savea Moe. All are members of the Church. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.[/caption]

The text of the earliest PCC brochure quotes Maori anthropologist Sir Peter Buck expressing the hope that his work will “reach my kinsmen on the scattered islands of Polynesia and draw us together in the bond of the spirit. We have a glorious heritage, for we come of the blood that conquered the Pacific with stone-age vessels.” The Polynesian Cultural Center, the text continues, “gives full-hearted echo to Sir Peter’s words. For he describes what the Cultural Center is—a drawing together of Polynesians in the bond of the spirit.”14

Over the years, both management and employees of the PCC have used the phrase “the spirit” in a number of ways. In the religious sense, it usually means the spirit of God, the spirit of Christ, or the spirit of the gospel. In the Polynesian cultural sense, it refers to those values held by Polynesians such as giving, sharing, respecting elders, generous hosting of visitors, and other duties. In a way unique to the PCC, the idea of spirit combines religion and culture, so that the spirit of the PCC is reflected both in the way employees work together for a common good in accordance with gospel principles and in the way they convey attributes of their individual and group cultural identities by (re)presenting both Polynesia and the Center. This concept influences the employees as they strongly identify with their cultural heritage. Buck’s reference to the spirit was in the context of Polynesia’s shared cultural heritage. This shared heritage is an important unifying element among many employees that is not diminished but rather enlarged by the gospel heritage that they also share.

The PCC’s student employees overwhelmingly express confirmation of their cultural and religious identity in their work experiences. A student dancer who describes herself as Hawaiian, Filipina, and haole and who identifies primarily with her Hawaiian ancestry comments: “Religion and Hawai‘i work together to form my culture. Both were instilled in me at birth.” She says that changes in the culture do not bother her, but “I think the Church is our first culture,” thus, “I dance in the Hawaiian section the way that it is taught—I trust that means that I do it properly and traditionally.”15

A freshman from Western Samoa who describes himself as Samoan “with a little bit Palagi (Caucasian)” explains, “in our culture it is hard to find an atheist. Everyone believes in God. We also respect our elders, observe the Sabbath day, and respect all religions.” Although he works as a canoe pusher, he enjoys the PCC’s Samoan village, which, he says, is “much nicer” than any in Samoa. He also feels that changes in the culture can be good. “I think that Samoans are very creative,” he says, “they like to change culture because they are very innovative.” Nevertheless, when asked which he would choose between his Church and his culture if he had to, he answered simply, “the Church is first.”16

This affirmation of spirituality within the PCC is mentioned over and over by employees and Lā‘ie residents alike. As a student noted, “Every day [at work at PCC] someone asks me about the Church. I try to answer them the best way possible. Today it is no problem to be both Mormon and Samoan. The stake president has as much, if not more, prestige than a chief.”17 A Hawaiian student studying information systems grew up in New Jersey, “Haole [Caucasian] style, but in a house where we learned Hawaiian culture.” He does not have a problem putting the Church before his culture, “but at the same time I do understand that it is important to link yourself to your ancestors.” For him and his family, he explains, “the Church is our number one culture but the way PCC reflects my culture is congruent with my identity.”18 Another student, describing himself as 75 percent Hawaiian and 25 percent Chinese, says “the Church and culture both work together. It’s a lifestyle that intertwines. I suppose it is that way for me because I was born and brought up in the Church. I always feel that the Church is first, but I still love my culture.”19

In significant ways, the coming together of religion, culture, and commerce at the PCC is an extension of its participants’ identities as Polynesian Latter-day Saints. Particularly in its infancy, the Center was viewed as “our place” by Church members who had worked hard and long, contributing time, talents, and personal artifacts to build a place of their special and deeply valued cultural identities. This fostered a pride of ownership—their careful handiwork graced the kowhaiwhai (rafter designs) and carvings in the Maori village, the pola (coconut leaf weavings) and fine mats in Samoa, and the ornate masi (bark cloth) in Fiji. Local Church members felt that they had built a monument out of their faith, a living memorial of who they were as Saints of Polynesia, that they had created the PCC with their own hands, constructing a public site to represent their personal cultural identity both as Polynesians and Latter-day Saints. Thus, they felt that they belonged there, and they were delighted and proud to share the symbols of their individual cultures in the villages and shows.

The marvelous story of the Polynesians’ first and lasting contact with the West, their losses and their survival, their continually flourishing confidence in their ability to walk in both worlds (Polynesian and post-colonial), to wear more than one identity, and to adapt and evolve their arts, histories, customs and values, is relevant to the (re)presentation of Polynesia at the PCC. Here, storytellers of all ages and many mixed cultures daily enact their cultural present and foreshadow a confident future. To their rich Church heritage must be added the equally rich cultural heritage in which lines of blood and descent are intertwined in the identities and history of Polynesian members of the Lā‘ie community and employees of the PCC. Thus, the history of Lā‘ie’s Polynesians is one of religion, education, and culture, and for the most part, the community is bound together by shared strands of faith and belief.

As one writer has noted, the search for authenticity “is ultimately a search for a spiritual essence.”20 This is an idea with which all the PCC’s employees are very familiar. They are living their twin religious and ethnic identities, not just on stage performing before the tourists but in the authenticity of their everyday lives in the community. One young student employee commented that she found a unique opportunity at the PCC: “I create a more Polynesian identity for myself.” In doing so she articulates a feeling shared by most employees who are (re)creating themselves even as they (re)present themselves daily in the PCC’s villages and shows. The reflexive nature of her statement also reveals Polynesians’ confidence in the Church, which encourages ethnic strength and empowerment as understood in an oft-quoted saying that the Church does not take away one’s cultural identity but rather makes Maoris better Maoris, Tongans better Tongans, Hawaiians better Hawaiians, and so on.

It is also important that under the unifying principles of the restored gospel, differences in education, class, career, and culture are respected but kept in their proper place as all are governed by the same transcendent spirit that informs the Church. In this way, the gospel of Christ functions as a canopy, sheltering and protecting everyone gathered within its shade.

An Insider’s Conclusion

From my insider experience as a mixed-race, mixed-culture, Latter-day Saint PCC employee, I have come to better appreciate the strengths of the Mormon Polynesian identity as exemplified in the lives and responses of other employees of the PCC. These strengths include: the religious nature of PCC employees; the essential mixed culture of these same employees as a reflection of the community of Lā‘ie, wherein members have a strong awareness of and commitment to both their ethnic identities and to the Church; the deep and enduring pride employees have in representing their own islander cultures in the PCC; the confidence in choosing those cultures out of the personal mix with which they primarily or mostly identify; the genuine interest in each other’s cultures and delight in learning and participating in them at both BYU–Hawai‘i and the PCC; the cosmopolitan confidence with the inclusionary nature of employees’ pan-Pacific relationships with other Polynesians in their professional and personal lives. Other strengths are the individual agency in making cross-cultural decisions on their own behalf and in the daily negotiation of loyalties on the job; the celebration of personal and group cultural diversity, which the Church encourages; the recognition of the PCC as representative of the Church and that PCC employees represent the Church.

Thus, as they enter a new century and millennium, BYU–Hawai‘i and the PCC together function as a catalyst for the internationalization of the Church as the small community of Lā‘ie spearheads this transformational process of what all indicators signify will be the century of global Mormonism.

The First Twenty Years: The Realization Has Extended Far Beyond the Dream Rubina Rivers Forester

The title for my presentation comes from a statement by Edward LaVaun Clissold, one of the members of the original committee assigned to make the PCC dream a reality: “Usually dreams are never obtained, but we had dreams and they had some limits and the realization has extended far beyond the dream.”21 The Polynesian Cultural Center began as a glimmer in the eye of four dreamers: David O. McKay, president of the Church, 1951–70; Matthew Cowley, member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, 1945–53; Wendell Mendenhall, chairman of the Church Building Committee, 1953–64; and Edward LaVaun Clissold, O‘ahu Stake president, 1951–63. This institutional history of the Center discusses the dreamers, the forerunners, the managers, and the directors who helped build and shape the Polynesian Cultural Center during its first twenty years.

The Dreamers

President McKay was a member of the Quorum of the Twelve in 1921 when he witnessed a flag-raising ceremony at Lā‘ie School that became the impetus for his lifelong dream to educate and provide opportunities for the intellectual growth and spiritual development of the Church members in the Pacific. I believe President McKay became particularly mindful of the Polynesians because of the many warm and loving receptions he received from them during his visits to places such as Sauniatu, Western Samoa; Temple View, New Zealand; and Aitutaki, Cook Islands. He was thus receptive and supportive of proposals and programs benefiting Polynesia, such as employing students at the newly established Church College of Hawai‘i (CCH, now BYU–Hawai‘i) and continuing the cultural values and practices of islander Latter-day Saints.

Elder Matthew Cowley served as a missionary and mission president in New Zealand, where it is said he became a Polynesian at heart. Matthew Cowley is credited as one of the founders of the PCC. In 1951 he proposed the idea of a hospitality center in Lā‘ie, where South Pacific Saints could be housed and sustained while attending the Hawai‘i Temple after having journeyed long distances at great personal sacrifice. Elder Cowley is remembered as saying that one day Lā‘ie would have a Maori village where Maori people could come and stay. He acknowledged that there already was a Samoan village of sorts in Lā‘ie and added that a Tongan village would arise as well. O‘ahu Stake President Edward L. Clissold said that Elder Cowley certainly surprised him at a stake conference in Honolulu when he made this prophetic declaration about Maori communal houses and other village houses being built in Lā‘ie.22 Cowley understood island hospitality. He had experienced many Hui Tau (large-scale church meetings) in New Zealand at which Maori cultural performances were given, to the great pleasure of all in attendance (fig. 5).

[caption] Figure 5. Maori village workers Waitohi Elkington and Millie TeNgaio pose with a model for an early PCC brochure, c. 1960s. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.[/caption]

As a young man, Wendell B. Mendenhall served a three-year mission in New Zealand under Matthew Cowley, and his experiences among the Maori also instilled in him a desire to assist Polynesians. He was serving in two significant capacities—chairman of the Church Building Committee and chairman of the Pacific Board of Education—when the proposal to build a Polynesian village in Lā‘ie was approved. In his capacity, Mendenhall had a great deal of power and influence in these matters, and he used available resources to bring about the completion of many Church building projects in the Pacific, including the CCH and the PCC. The general feeling was, “Were it not for the persistence of men like Wendell Mendenhall and the faith and confidence of a man like President David O. McKay, we probably would not have the Cultural Center.”

Former PCC oral historian Kalili Hunt interviewed Edward L. Clissold and wrote:

President Clissold should be noted [as] the man who conceived the idea as to the feasibility and actualization of such a Center. It was his tireless efforts as a community leader and his faith in the Polynesian cultures that influenced the other three [President McKay, Matthew Cowley, Wendell Mendenhall] to consider such a project.23

Clissold was a close friend of Matthew Cowley, had spent many years in Hawai‘i, was fluent in the Hawaiian language, and had strong faith, spiritual depth, and profound knowledge. All these qualities made him an effective leader.

The strength of Clissold’s commitment lay in what I believe was a personal revelation he received while attending a Boy Scout Jamboree in Denver, Colorado. There, as he viewed cultural displays of the Native Americans, he was strongly impressed with the possibility of establishing a similar display featuring Pacific Islander activities and traditions in Hawai‘i. At this time, Clissold was serving as the O‘ahu Stake president and had already served as Hawai‘i Temple president; he was concurrently a manager at Zion’s Securities and of the local bank. Clissold was intimately aware of the strong need to develop a secure economic base for Lā‘ie. He also recognized the cost-effectiveness of Polynesian entertainment and how readily the Polynesian personality can win over non-Polynesians. Thus, he too felt that a Polynesian cultural center would be feasible and successful and would help defray the boarding costs of temple patrons traveling from great distances in the Pacific.

The Forerunners

Several prior institutions and activities paved the way for the PCC. Foremost was the successful monthly hukilau (fishing with a seine) operated by the local Lā‘ie wards. Publicized throughout the islands, the event was highly recommended by the Hawai‘i Visitors Bureau. It included the actual hukilau, a lū‘au meal, and entertainment on the beach. The hukilau demonstrated that Lā‘ieans could organize themselves for a common purpose, that there was much talent in the community, and that tourists were willing to come all the way from Honolulu to see the attraction. Then there was Hui Laulima O Lā‘ie, a local community association whose members met and discussed ideas to benefit the community. This group considered making the hukilau a daily operation and invested in a hotel or a small resort development locally, pursuing Clissold’s idea of a Polynesian display center like the Native American programs he had observed in Colorado. The Hawai‘i Temple certainly had an impact on the PCC’s history. It was a major tourist attraction for around-the-island bus tours. The first cultural village plans located the PCC next to the temple in order to attract visitors after they had toured the temple grounds, but with further discussion and study and the realization of the inappropriateness of that proximity, the Center was moved to its present location adjacent to BYU–Hawai‘i. The student and community show “Polynesian Panorama,” organized under the direction of Wylie W. Swapp, can be credited with establishing the first PCC night show. Highlighting the songs and dances of Polynesia, the show had previously been performed in Honolulu and had received very favorable reviews.

A final element in the background of the PCC was the CCH. Once the college was built, the pressure was on to ensure its continued existence. Financial means had to be provided to help students complete their college educations. With very few job opportunities in Lā‘ie and on O‘ahu’s north shore, the proposed PCC would become the primary employer of CCH students and would enable them to meet their financial needs. Another contributing organization was the Polynesian Institute, the forerunner of today’s Institute for Polynesian Studies. As part of CCH, the institute was charged with exploring the idea of having the local community build and operate a series of Polynesian villages. The institute’s involvement, however, was primarily academic, and the villages were intended to be used for cultural research.

The Critics

Though sentiment has been overwhelmingly positive, the PCC has had its share of criticism. The predominant concern in the early years was the welfare of the students, because it was feared that in focusing on entertainment skills they might be diverted to seek employment in the tourist industry of Waikīkī and abandon their educations. Some critics felt that the Center kept Polynesians “in their place” and exploited them for its purposes. It was feared that the marketing of the students’ natural social ability and cultural skills would change them from Polynesians in the heart to Polynesians “by design only.”

Practical concerns were also raised. For example, would the PCC actually work? Fears were expressed concerning the distance of Lā‘ie from Honolulu, the ability of little Lā‘ie and Lā‘ieans to rise to the challenge of sustaining a long-term, entertainment-based cultural village, and the possibility of no tourist interest in a cultural site. Many Church members became very vocal with their opinions. They felt the Church had no business in a commercial venture; they supposed the temple would play second fiddle to the PCC; they felt that the Center would be a detriment to the spirituality of the Lā‘ie Saints. They worried about the impact of coffee drinking, smoking, and non-Church dress standards on the students and community. Some were confused about where the members’ Church obligations ended and the cultural and economic needs began. There were also those who loved the old hukilaus and wished for their continuance. “Why spend money on a new thing?” they asked, “Why not improve something that already works?”

Some local Hawaiians feared that the PCC might bring an increase in population to the small windward community; they expressed a wariness of “invasion” and being crowded out. Brief cultural clashes had occurred in the community, and some people supposed more would take place with an increase of incoming Polynesians, especially Samoans, who might gravitate in even larger numbers to Lā‘ie. In addition, during most of the PCC’s history, there have been strong community perceptions of a lack of long-term career opportunities available to Polynesians or locals at the top levels of the PCC management because from its establishment these positions have been filled predominantly by mainland Caucasians. Lastly, for many years there was a sentiment in the community that the PCC was something that had been railroaded through without the knowledge or input of the local people who would be intimately involved.

The Early Managers (1963–68)

I have chosen to organize my review of the PCC’s first twenty years around the managers who headed the Center. What follows is based largely on my reading of PCC oral histories and on my own experience as a longtime PCC employee. The first manager of the Polynesian Cultural Center was Howard W. Stone (fig. 6.), who had come to Hawai‘i just two years before to head up Zion’s Securities and who had previously served as a mission president in Samoa. In March 1963, he was called as president of the O‘ahu Stake, and seven months later, on October 12, 1963, the PCC was dedicated. His term as manager lasted only a few months because it was too demanding to run both Zion’s Securities and the PCC. Howard Stone’s contribution to the PCC lay in his knowledge of Polynesian customs, his fluency in the Samoan language, and in his Church experience. He is credited with holding the people together and maintaining enthusiasm, employee morale, and a contributory spirit.

[caption] Figure 6. Howard W. Stone, head of Zion's Securities Corporation in Lāʻie, was the initial manager of the PCC when it opened in 1963. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.[/caption]

The second manager of the PCC was Radburn Robinson, who served from May to July of 1964. Robinson was a professional entertainer, but he soon resigned because of differences with the Center’s other management.

The third manager was Lester Hawthorne, who served from 1964 to 1965. His primary contribution was advancing the construction of the Maori village. Because of his experience while serving as a labor missionary in New Zealand, Hawthorne oversaw the construction of the three carved houses in the PCC’s Maori village, which were duplicates of the carvings and the tukutuku (woven decorative panels) from the Nuhaka carved meetinghouse on New Zealand’s North Island. Hawthorne also pushed for completion of the Maori war canoe by carvers who had been called together to the New Zealand LDS community of Temple View to prepare the village carvings for shipping to the PCC.

As manager, Hawthorne was in charge of all employees and all operations at the Center except the night show, which was a semi-independent unit. Although the night show performers began as members of CCH’s “Polynesian Panorama” under the direction of Wylie Swapp, they were later put under the direction of Mike Grilikhes, a Hollywood producer and husband of well-known Mormon actress Larraine Day. Grilikhes also brought in Jack Regas, a choreographer who later joined the Church as a result of his PCC association. A forceful pair of professionals, Regas and Grilikhes knew what they wanted and set about doing their jobs. The entertainment presented at the dedication of the PCC was under their direction, and it was a spectacular production. Their first night shows set a high standard for all those that followed.

Hawthorne considered his first six months at the PCC a mission—a continuation of his service in New Zealand. He claimed that all who worked in the PCC villages were on missions, that the Center as a whole was considered a missionary effort (fig. 7). Apparently only a few professionals, such as full-time electricians, were paid. The fact that only some people were paid during those early years of building was a sore point among the locals for many years. Hawthorne’s alternative payment came in giving frequent tribute to the people he worked with. He praised their missionary spirit and common commitment to do everything they could to make the PCC a success. However, more than a labor of love was needed to make the PCC profitable.

[caption] Figure 7. Jubilee Maʻiolā Logan, chief of the PCC Hawaiian village, talks to one of thousands of visiotrs who came to the Center each year during the 1960s. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.[/caption]

Wayne Glaus began as the acting general manager in January 1965 and served in that capacity for two-and-a-half years, resigning in summer 1967. Glaus came to the PCC from the Church College of New Zealand, where he had been treasurer and business manager. Glaus felt Mendenhall chose him for the job because he had a reputation of being conservative with finances. This particular strength was needed at the time of his appointment because the PCC was having serious financial problems. The original hope that visitors would flock to the Center had not yet been realized. The PCC was frequently borrowing money to meet payroll, the Church guaranteeing the loans. In addition, the travel industry was taking advantage of the Center’s liberal ticket sales policy. During this period, Bert Thomas, a fifteen-year veteran of the travel industry, was appointed as a marketing director. He regularly visited all the local travel agents to sell them on the PCC. At his invitation, Bob McGregor, president of Trade Wind Tours, came to the PCC, liked what he saw, and showcased it in his brochures, thereby making the PCC a regular stop for his company’s bus tours. When other companies followed suit, the PCC was on its way to success.

According to the original intent of the PCC developers, the villages were supposed to be the dominant visitor activity, but the night show soon took over that position, making the villages what Glaus described as “just something tacked onto the sides.”24 Thus, one of his biggest challenges was to build the villages into something more than a museum attraction. This was opposed by the night show directors, who feared competition with their show. After all, their show was the highlight of the Center.

Glaus’s cause was championed by David Hannemann who, though he later left the Center, returned to serve as a vice president. Glaus and many of his contemporaries credit Hannemann with the birth of the “Pageant of the Long Canoes” and with revitalizing many village activities and programs. The village activity that Glaus remembers best was the flag-raising ceremony every morning at which the employees sang “Hawai‘i Pono‘ī.” Local families were invited into the Center for free, but they were required to dress in traditional costumes under the admonition: “You’re on stage at the PCC. As soon as you enter the gate you are on stage to the public.”25 During this time, the Hawai‘i Visitor Attraction Association was formed with the PCC, Sea Life Park, Hawai‘i Wax Museum, and the Bishop Museum as charter members. This association’s objective was to develop good relations among the four entities and to share in cooperative advertising. In 1967 an on-street Waikīkī Jaycees survey placed PCC second to Waikīkī as the attraction visitors to Hawai‘i would remember most. That year Wayne Glaus resigned from the PCC to accept an education job in Salt Lake City. He treasured most what he termed the “spirit” of the Center but regretted that the PCC never developed into the quality museum that was originally planned.26

The next manager was Lawrence Haneberg (fig. 8), who received the assignment while serving on the PCC Board of Directors. His term, 1967–68, was a period of “holding the reins” while a permanent general manager was sought, but he began to want to make real changes in the Center’s activities rather than just apply band-aid solutions to challenges. While the construction of the PCC was still a dream, Hanneberg, on behalf of the CCH, had unsuccessfully tried to provide employment for the college students and local residents by getting a garment manufacturer and other businesses to establish factories in Lā‘ie.

[caption] Figure 8. A mid-1950s photograph taken in Lā‘ie of part-Hawaiian Lawrence I. Haneberg (far right) with other prominent local church leaders, some of whom later would play a significant role in founding the PCC. Left to right: George Q. Cannon, D. Arthur Haycock, Edward L. Clissold, Ralph E. Wooley. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.[/caption]

One of Hanneberg’s memorable challenges was dealing with the town bus drivers, who tended to bypass the PCC. Hanneberg noted the reluctance on the part of the PCC management to give bus drivers incentives to stop at the Center. In the visitor industry, such incentives were usually not only money but also free meals and other special concessions. It was the general feeling among PCC personnel that the drivers would sooner or later be forced to stop by the sheer attraction and quality of the show. Thus, it was supposed that the bus companies would gladly tie in the PCC and the temple. In fact, the bus companies resented the extra time spent in Lā‘ie. I also feel that the bus drivers’ anti-Mormon feeling was a major factor in their lack of cooperation with the PCC management. Despite conflicts such as these, Hanneberg was always proud of his association with the PCC and of his contribution as a Polynesian (he was part Hawaiian).27

The Later Managers/Presidents (1968–88)

Vernon Hardisty came to the Center in August 1968 and left in March 1975. He was a retired lieutenant colonel with a strong background in planning military operations. His first function was to create a basic management organization comprised of departments—theater, cultural presentations, village operations, food services, accounting, gift shop, and maintenance. Although Hardisty was designated director of operations and acted as the general manager, in truth he was co-director of the PCC with Steve Bennett, director of sales and marketing. It must be remembered that at this time the night show (under Mike Grilikhes) remained an independent entity. Hardisty freely admitted to personality conflicts during his seven years in administration but maintained that he and Bennett always tried to appear to be going in the same direction and solving problems successfully, in spite of the organization that the Board of Directors had mandated.28

Hardisty (fig. 9) began sending executive associates to management workshops and seminars, and he developed a hospitality program for the entire Center with the slogan “take a step toward a guest.” He also oversaw considerable improvement in food services. Hardisty worked hard to keep the employees’ spirit focused on something more than a paycheck and encouraged them to feel a personal commitment to the PCC. He also paid special attention to maintaining the buildings by keeping the plumbing up-to-date and attending to other needs. Hardisty paid tribute to Steve Bennett for his efficiency in keeping extremely good records, which enabled them to chart the happenings in every department every day and every week. He was also grateful for Bennett’s healthy yet firm relationship with tourist companies—especially for Bennett’s seeing the need to provide a special building for the tour drivers and to feed them well. He commended Bennett’s skillful handling of public relations and his anticipating the importance of repeat business to the PCC.

[caption] Figure 9. Vernon Hardisty was the first PCC manager to serve for an extended period of time, from 1968 to 1975. Agnes Kanahele is performing in the background. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.[/caption]

Hardisty began the expansion of the Center with new construction on the original orientation building, which later became the Gateway Restaurant and a new administration building. He moved the Hawaiian village from its original area to its present location, added the Marquesan village designed by Jerry Loveland, director of the Institute for Polynesian Studies, and acquired fifteen house lots to provide housing for certain employee families. Hardisty then turned his attention to problems in the village areas. For example, the villagers needed constant supervision to stay alert, pay attention, and remain at their jobs and not wander off with friends and familiar guests; the villages and what was presented in them from day-to-day were inconsistent in quality and information; and sometimes the villages were left completely empty during certain periods of the day due to low energy and enthusiasm among the employees.

In 1972, the fifth year of Hardisty’s and Bennett’s co-directorship, the PCC Executive Board stepped in and named a third director, creating what was locally termed the “three-headed monster.” Hardisty became director of financial operations overseeing the business office, food services, maintenance, and Shop Polynesia; Bennett continued to direct sales and marketing; and Norman Nielson was designated director of cultural productions. The years 1972 to 1975 were very hard, especially 1975 when morale became low. Hardisty himself admitted feeling the decline and described the time as “a strange period.” Basically what occurred was that each director was reporting directly to the board. There was no clear management procedure to follow and this caused confusion among employees in terms of their loyalties. The PCC Executive Board members became behind-the-scenes controllers, eventually pitting two directors against one. Hardisty submitted his resignation in May 1974 but did not leave until 1975 when a new general manager was found. Nielson left the Center about six months into the next manager’s term and Bennett sometime later.29

In 1975, Samoan William H. Cravens (fig. 10) was chosen to fulfill what the Executive Board determined was needed—a Polynesian in the PCC’s leadership position. The Board of Directors felt it would make a difference to the local community, which had become more agitated each succeeding year with what it termed the “Big White Brother” leadership at the Center. Cravens’s appointment, however, was not met with universal approval in Lā‘ie. While locals admired his qualifications as the former president of a bank, former stake president, and former football star, they worried because he was Samoan. Because of the structure of traditional Samoan society, there were fears that the PCC would become a Samoan Cultural Center, with Samoans filling most of the supervisory and management jobs.

[caption] Figure 10. Samoan William H. Cravens was the first Polynesian president of the PCC. He served as manager, then as president from 1975 to 1982. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.[/caption]

Cravens served until 1982. His first year fulfilled some of these fears. In restructuring his new management team, he dismissed over a dozen employees. He hired his best friend and fellow Samoan as the manager of the theater; the community interpreted this as the beginning of fa‘a Samoa (the Samoan way). Even though Cravens was a Polynesian, he did not come from the local ranks and did not know the pulse of the community. On the other hand, Cravens had dreams for the Polynesians, and he tried to fulfill them during his seven years of leadership. He wanted Polynesians to live up to their strong faith and spirituality. He wanted both the tourists and the locals to see a Polynesian life beyond weaving mats and climbing coconut trees. He wanted Polynesians to be integrated into a gospel lifestyle rather than just a cultural one. He wanted Polynesians to retain their traditional abilities, to share and to be charitable; and he wanted them to succeed academically and professionally.

Before Cravens’s tenure, the Board of Directors essentially managed the Center. Cravens was the first manager to insist on management authority over the board with the board functioning only as advisors, except in major decisions. The board became more businesslike in its attitudes and policies, even approving Cravens’s compensation according to comparative industry-level managers.

The Cravens years were challenging and changing years with peaks and valleys. Airline travel became affordable, consequently the number of tourists visiting the PCC hit a million a year. Also during his tenure, the Internal Revenue Service continued court hearings regarding the profit or non-profit status of the Center. As director, Bill Cravens presented to Pacific Islanders the reality of a Polynesian corporate leader. He conducted a large-scale expansion program, including construction of a new employee orientation building, a new maintenance and purchasing warehouse, a new theater, and a new administration building. He enclosed the front entrance and enlarged the parking lot, built and enclosed the Gateway Restaurant, established the Graphics Department, and contracted with local designer Baba Kea for new professionally made uniforms for the whole Center. He introduced a new night show, “Invitation to Paradise,” and improved programs with the Hawai‘i Temple Visitors’ Center, bringing about great success in missionary work.30

Though Cravens presented a clear-cut role model for young Polynesians, he also bent so far in accommodating Polynesians that the line between charity and business often blurred (his generosity can be partly attributed to his role as president of the Lā‘ie Stake). Cravens resigned in 1982, which shocked many who admired his leadership and remembered his class, approachability, and spirituality. He was replaced by Ralph Rodgers Jr., a former missionary and mission president in Samoa, director of the Promised Valley Playhouse as well as various Church pageants and productions, and a Regional Representative of the Twelve.

Rodgers differed from other general managers in that he was especially innovative and creative, having the flair and authority to make his ideas a reality. During his term, from 1982 to 1988, he was a most productive leader, accomplishing a formidable list of projects: he initiated a program called “Walking around the Center” that familiarized management with all aspects of the PCC’s operations; he landscaped the Hale Aloha theater, converting it into a new lagoon pageant theater; and he was responsible for initiating several new buildings, including the mission home, chapel, Fijian spirit house, village museum, Tahiti fishing hut, and Yoshimura Store. He renovated the Gateway Restaurant and revitalized the Center with new signs and a new entryway into the villages with a bridge crossing over the lagoon to the Samoan village. He produced and directed a new night show; directed the Center’s own advertising campaign, “If you haven’t been to the PCC, you haven’t seen Hawai‘i”; funded the Fijian camakau canoe project; and brought the muralist Wyland to paint Whaling Wall IX on the side of the employee building.

The Dream Continues31

Rodgers continued as head of the PCC until 1988. Following Rodgers, James P. Christensen, a former Tonga Mission president, served from 1988 to 1991. Under his direction, the Center opened its Ali‘i Lū‘au, which presented authentic island foods served in a dinner-show setting; completed its IMAX theater and premiered the film Polynesian Odyssey, both of which were begun by Rodgers; and launched the Ambassador Dining experience, offering a top-of-the-line prime rib and seafood meal.

Eric B. Shumway, then BYU–Hawai‘i Vice President for Academics, served as interim president of the Center for six months in 1991 while a search was conducted for a new president. He strengthened corporate and Church values and fostered employees’ rededication to the PCC’s mission and vision. Lester W. B. Moore (fig. 11), former president of Deli Express premade sandwich company, was PCC president from October 1991 to June 2000. He built an enlarged food preparation and kitchen facility, moved the Ali‘i Lū‘au to a new location, opened a Treasures of Polynesia retail shopping area, and added retail kiosks throughout the villages. He also trained employees in strategic marketing and strengthened the Center’s financial base. Von Orgill, former vice president of client business development with the Franklin Covey Company, assumed his position as the new PCC president June 1, 2000.

[caption] Figure 11. Lester W. B. Moore was president of the PCC longer than any other general manager or president serving from 1991 to 2000. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.[/caption]

Throughout its history, the Center has been led by visionary men with a range of skills and talents who brought their particular expertise to the job at the times when it was needed. Thus, the combination of employees skilled in their cultural traditions and managers with both business acumen and leadership experience have produced steady, progressive growth and overall financial success. These accomplishments are equally matched, if not exceeded, by the Center’s significant success in influencing people’s interest in the Church.

Conclusion

The PCC has achieved a number of impressive results. First, it has helped preserve the material culture and traditions of Polynesia. Many college students have come from parts of the Pacific where the way of life is changing, and in some cases disappearing, in the face of modern technology and ideas. Second, the Center has been a great missionary tool, stimulating many to investigate the Church. It has also produced much goodwill for the Church among governments worldwide and provided fertile ground for cultivating international friendships. Third, the PCC has contributed significantly to the local community by providing full-time employment for adults, thus reducing the need to commute an hour or two each way to Honolulu for work. Fourth, the PCC has functioned as an educational center for tourists, for the workers themselves, for community families, and for academic researchers. The Center has become a place where Polynesia can be studied and its culture perpetuated.

The comments of Edward Clissold, long-time supporter of the Center and original member of the Executive Board, provide an appropriate conclusion:

I have nothing but commendation for the people that are in charge now and what they are doing. I think if I were in charge, I’d probably do some things a little differently, but I can’t be critical because I wouldn’t go back to the old ways, the old dreams, and the old plans. These (ways, dreams, plans) are so much more forward-looking and greater than the ones we had, that I can do nothing but support them.32

For those of us who have had a long association with the Polynesian Cultural Center and who put aside passing dissatisfactions, it is easy to feel a genuine affection for the “good old PCC.” This affection may focus on a person, a particular activity, or a special experience. However produced, it is real and lasting. The PCC is like family, and like family, it will always be a part of us.

1f:T82a,

The Polynesian Cultural Center (PCC), located adjacent to BYU–Hawai‘i in Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i, is a forty-two-acre “cultural theme attraction”—designed to be part living museum and part entertainment—which (re)presents Hawaiian, Tahitian, Samoan, Tongan, Maori, Fijian, and Marquesan culture to nearly a million visitors annually. For many years, Vernice Wineera was an executive at the PCC; she has since become the director of the BYU–Hawai‘i Institute for Polynesian Studies. Her personal knowledge of the PCC’s programs and personnel, her cultural heritage as a New Zealand Maori, her academic training (Ph.D. from the University of Hawai‘i) and long-standing devotion to the Church make her unusually well qualified to provide a thoughtful analysis of the relationship between culture, religion, and personal identity at the PCC. Unlike the other selections in this volume, all of which were presented at MPHS annual conferences, Wineera’s reflections appear here for the first time. She was invited to offer them as a companion piece to Rubina Rivers Forester’s institutional history.

During her nearly fifteen years of employment at the PCC, Rubina Forester worked in various capacities, including tour guide, supervisor, and editor. It was her association with the PCC’s oral history project, however, that helped her prepare this history of the Center’s first two decades for the 1986 MPHS annual conference. The PCC oral histories provide an important basis for her history, but they are not her only sources. Pacific Islanders like Forester recognize the value of—and naturally incorporate in their histories—local oral tradition, informal conversations, and personal observations, which, though not reducible to endnote references, are fundamental to traditional ways of knowing. The result is a well-informed history of the PCC that reflects both approaches to the past.

20:T2589,

1. Reuben D. Law, The Founding and Early Development of the Church College of Hawaii (St. George: Dixie College, 1972), 69.

2. PCC statistic, June 14, 2000, received from Raymond Magalei, Sales and Marketing administrative assistant.

3. Edward T. McMahon, “The Tourism Trap: How Can a Community Attract Visitors and Their Money without Losing Its Soul?” Washington Post National Weekly Edition, September 8, 1997, 22.

4. T. Trent Gegax, “Booming Amusement Parks: The Theme Is Extreme,” Newsweek, March 30, 1998, 12.

5. In his book, Richard Kurin describes the PCC as “featuring somewhat stereotypic depictions of exotic Pacific Island life.” Kurin notes that islander people are learning that they can support their economies by preserving and promoting their culture to visitors and points out that a great goal for both museums and other cultural sites is to serve as “gathering places” and “focal points” where people come together “at the grassroots—to create, debate, and manipulate their culture, and to share it with others.” See Richard Kurin, Reflections of a Cultural Broker: A View from the Smithsonian (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1997), 282.

6. FJCN/W&R Advertising Agency, “Brand Development Research Report,” December 19, 1997, copy in possession of author.

7. Wendell B. Mendenhall to Edward L. Clissold, October 23, 1963, Polynesian Cultural Center papers, Archives and Special Collections, Joseph F. Smith Library, Brigham Young University–Hawai‘i, Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i (hereafter cited as BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections).

8. “Dedication Services for the New PCC Theater,” July 4, 1976, video recording, personal transcript, BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

9. “Dedication Services.” When I quote second language speakers of English, as in this instance, I edit somewhat so that their natural accent comes through while also representing the integrity and depth of their intellect and ideas.

10. “Dedication Services.”

11. “Dedication Services.”

12. William H. Cravens, interview by Kalili Hunt, October 21, 1982, typescript, 18, BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

13. Sione Latukefu, at a PCC employee meeting, reported to author by Semisi Fakatava, June 1999.

14. David W. Cummings, Polynesian Cultural Center in Picturesque Laie Hawaii (Laie, Hawaii: Polynesian Cultural Center, n.d.), n.p.

15. Ronal Fermentez, interview by Isaiah and Rebekah Walker, July 16, 1997, typescript, 35, Institute for Polynesian Studies.

16. Poe Burgess, interview by Isaiah and Rebekah Walker, July 16, 1997, typescript, 36, Institute for Polynesian Studies.

17. Camilla Stevenson, interview by Isaiah and Rebekah Walker, August 16, 1997, typescript, 67, Institute for Polynesian Studies, Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i.

18. Joseph Palani Hohaia, interview by Isaiah and Rebekah Walker, July 30, 1997, typescript, 53, Institute for Polynesian Studies.

19. Lanceford Kealaka‘i Aina, interview by Isaiah and Rebekah Walker, June 1997, typescript, 61, Institute for Polynesian Studies.

20. Regina Bendix, In Search of Authenticity: The Formation of Folklore Studies (Madison: University of Wisconsin, 1997), 17.

21. Edward LaVaun Clissold, interview by Baden Pere, April 8, 1982, typescript, 7, BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

22. Clissold interview, 1–2.

23. Kalili Hunt, “Short Biography of Edward L. Clissold,” 2, BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

24. F. Wayne Glaus, interview by Kalili Hunt, September 10, 1982, typescript, 3, BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

25. F. Wayne Glaus, interview, 10.

26. F. Wayne Glaus, interview, 15–16.

27. Lawrence Haneberg, interview by Kalili Hunt, July 12, 1982, typescript, 9, BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

28. Vernon Hardisty, interview by Kenneth W. Baldridge, March 30, 1978, typescript, 24, BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

29. Vernon Hardisty, interview, 24.

30. William H. Cravens, interview by Kalili Hunt, October 21, 1982, typescript, 13–14, BYU–Hawai‘i Archives and Special Collections.

31. This section was written by Vernice Wineera in September 2000 to bring the article up to date.

32. Edward L. Clissold, interview, 7.

21:T11649,

Culture and Church at the Polynesian Cultural Center Vernice Wineera

The Polynesian Cultural Center was one of the earliest cultural theme parks in the United States. Its cultural description stems from its presentation of seven Polynesian “villages” or “islands.” Fiji has been included because of its close proximity and historical and cultural connections to the islands of Polynesia. The PCC’s planners and builders hoped to construct a site that would be educational and entertaining, a type of museum and cultural theme park rolled into one. The organizers also wanted it to be an effective missionary tool to introduce visitors to the LDS Church. This multifaceted vision has necessarily influenced the Center’s growth and development. Directed today by a full-time management team of mostly Polynesians, PCC employees—primarily college students—(re)present their island traditions in village demonstrations of material culture, food preparation, arts and crafts, weaponry usage, dance and song, a canoe pageant, and an evening show, the finale to each day’s activity. It is these village performances presented several times daily that are most significant to the way in which Polynesian cultures are represented in the PCC.

President David O. McKay made it clear that visitors would come to Lā‘ie and that their experiences there would have a lasting impact on their lives. President McKay’s dedicatory prayer at the groundbreaking of the Church College of Hawai‘i (now BYU–Hawai‘i) gave prophetic vision to Lā‘ie’s Church entities, which remains the key element in their mission statements. He prayed “that this college, and the temple, and the town of Lā‘ie may become a missionary factor, influencing not thousands, not tens of thousands, but millions of people who will come seeking to know what this town and its significance are.”1 At the time of this pronouncement, the PCC did not exist; yet, by the year 2000, nearly 27 million people had passed through the little town of Lā‘ie while visiting the Center, the single most important entity in the fulfillment of this prophecy.2

At the end of the twentieth century, travel and tourism accounted for one out of every nine jobs in the United States, and tourism was the leading industry in thirty-seven states.3 It has been noted that “by 2010, more than 182 million parkgoers [tourists] are expected to hit U.S. turnstiles, up from today’s 161 million.”4 It requires little imagination to realize that an LDS tourist site visited by hundreds of thousands of people annually has great potential for proselyting. The Lā‘ie Hawai‘i Temple, dedicated in 1919, has been a regular stop for tour buses since the 1960s. A natural extension of this was to offer PCC visitors a trolley ride through Lā‘ie with a brief stop at the front foyer of the BYU–Hawai‘i campus and a thirty-minute visit to the temple visitors’ center, allowing them to walk through the gardens and attend a short film and lecture about the Church, its practices and principles.

At the PCC, education and entertainment are brought together by the Spirit. Those who guided the founding of the Polynesian Cultural Center sought to blend the cultural with the educational and the spiritual, thus creating a unity and identity in a place unlike any other in existence.

The Educational and Entertainment Elements

The PCC’s organizers foresaw a place that would be both educational and entertaining.5 Balancing marketing rhetoric with real cultural issues while at the same time attempting to attract tourists over a three-decade period of changing visitor expectations has proved challenging. It underscores a continuing dilemma for the PCC: how to accomplish its mission of educating students while providing visitors with an entertaining experience that will ultimately pique their interest in the Church and assist in missionary work. Not only that, but the Center must accomplish these goals with students who, in the strictest sense of the term, can only be described as amateurs, while fulfilling the tourist industry’s demand for professionalism. The packed amphitheater of tourists wait to be entertained, expect to be impressed, and judge, throughout the performance, what they see and hear.

It should be noted that the PCC’s student employees are members of a global generation of TV-watching, McDonalds-frequenting, name brand-buying youth who embrace American popular culture as well as their own. Yet they wear the ta‘ovala (a waist mat signifying respect) to church on Sundays and pray in their own languages. The dancing, singing, poetry writing, weaving, carving, canoe-building, house building, mat-making, food preparation, and every other aspect of the PCC’s activities were already known to most of those who came to work in the new Center. This varied knowledge brought to the PCC also included, among other things, the languages of Samoa, Tonga and Fiji; the high skill in traditional decorative arts and marae (central meeting area of village) protocol of the Maori; and the exciting dance forms and costuming of Tahiti and Hawai‘i. In short, they brought their island cultures with them to the PCC’s program of performances and activities.

Most PCC visitors bring with them some expectation of Polynesian cultures and peoples. These expectations have been shaped by many educational and entertainment sources and condition what tourists expect to see and experience. How employees deal with such expectations in presenting themselves to others is an important aspect of this cultural site because most visitors do not know that it is sponsored by the Church. The PCC is not a theme park representing Latter-day Saint culture. However, through their conduct, the employees, particularly the student employees, represent both their culture and their church.

Visitor responses to these student employees are overwhelmingly positive. A late 1990s marketing study revealed: “Visitors have never been (or rarely been) immersed in an environment of people who are so genuine, pure-hearted and filled with a radiant spirit of love and brotherhood. Most visitors feel this and are moved as they seldom have been by any other tourist experience.”6 This report also noted that when visitors learn that most of the Center’s employees are students and that their PCC jobs are the means of gaining a college education, they become more positive toward the Center and feel even better about the money they spend (fig. 1). While this and other reports do not determine whether the values represented by the PCC student employees could be attributed to their culture, religion, corporation, or a combination of the three, as an insider, I believe it is the blend of culture and religion through which such cross-cultural poise is learned as the students grow up both Polynesian and Latter-day Saint.

Figure 1. Cast of the original PCC "Styles of the Isles" show (left to right): Halomia Chase, Ofisi Pututau, Vatau Galeai, Don Burke, Noelani Kauhane, Vida (last name unknown), Erena Mapuhi, Nicholas Levy, Mele Fonua, Joe Apiti, Juliana Turagabeci. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.

The Spiritual Component

Polynesian Saints feel a depth of connection, a sense of belonging as members of the LDS Church. They believe they belong by birthright, spiritually as well as genealogically. For Polynesians, the restored gospel confirms traditional cultural beliefs in the connection between heaven and earth, spiritual and physical existences. The Book of Mormon sustains Polynesian identity as a covenant people of the Lord. In this way, Polynesian Church members feel confirmed in their heritage by birth, by blood, and by blessing. These Pacific Islanders bring to their jobs at the PCC their characteristic blend of intuitive traditional spirituality and the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

From the time the PCC opened, its managers believed in this inherent spiritual empowerment as they fine-tuned the organization and its aims. In a letter to Lā‘ie Church leader Edward L. Clissold, PCC Project Construction Manager Wendell B. Mendenhall wrote:

I am sure that we are united in being hopeful that we can make of the Polynesian Cultural Center something which will express the greatest spiritual values which will give yearning on the part of all who enter therein to further seek interest in the Church and to express the highest cultural manifestations in song and dance which also encourage all who enter to seek the truth, to keep the Center simple, clean and authentic and to produce the kind of performances which will elevate every person who sees the same. This is our task. I am sure we have not begun to see the value of the Center as it relates to the missionary service of the Church.7

Preceding his dedicatory prayer with remarks, Elder Howard W. Hunter, then a member of the Quorum of the Twelve and chairman of the PCC’s Board of Directors, said that “a great spirit emanates from the young people who are the heart and soul of the PCC.” He told how the Center’s organizers wished to provide opportunities for young Polynesians and said “if we have been helpful to a boy or a girl—one of you—we will feel that our efforts have been much worthwhile. . . . God lives, this is his work. The PCC is one of his institutions the same as stakes and schools that we have built for the lifting up of the children of men.” Elder Hunter’s prayer dedicating the new theater and other structures concluded with a request for continued blessings:

Carry forward the work of the great PCC, oh Father, continue to bless the people of these islands wherever they may be that [they] may continue to bring about good. Establish here a showcase of the cultures. May it be an ensign to those who come—an example of that which can be built with man’s hands when he has a testimony of the gospel of Christ. Bless the young people who work here. Bless the visitors who come [that they may] receive the Spirit here and have joy.8

At the dedication of the PCC’s new theater on July 4, 1976, then General Manager William Cravens stated four reasons for building the Center: (1) Church leaders were directed by the Lord; (2) Lā‘ie’s Polynesian community base would be able to support the Center at the same time that the PCC would provide work for families; (3) the PCC would help support BYU–Hawai‘i financially; and (4) the Center would help perpetuate and present Polynesian culture to the world.9 While the Center’s programs and activities evolved over the years, of prime importance throughout its history has been the PCC’s significant financial support of BYU–Hawai‘i. It is this assistance, tied to the Center’s success in stimulating interest in the Church, which ensures the Church’s continuing support of the enterprise.

Two student employees of the PCC also spoke at the dedication. Samoan student Rowena Pili, a BYU–Hawai‘i valedictorian that year, remarked, “I came here in 1973 with a negative attitude because I didn’t want to come to a small college. But every leisure moment I had, I came to PCC. . . . [and] I learned a lot of things about my culture that I didn’t learn back home.” She went on to explain that her people lacked money for education and then said that “the Lord [had] prepared a way for us to accomplish the goal of getting an education by working here at PCC—to learn here, not only academically but culturally.”10 Semisi Lauvaka, also a valedictorian of that year’s graduating class, believed that he was “fulfilling a prophecy” as a PCC employee. The Center had become “a refuge” for him: “When I came from Tonga I had no money. I got a job in the Tongan village. Working here helps me discover who I really am. PCC is a mission, and I am a missionary, not necessarily by preaching but by my actions.”11

The gospel exerts a harmonizing influence upon the lives of members of diverse groups, encompassing the PCC, the university, and the whole Lā‘ie community. In hindsight, former PCC General Manager William Cravens realized that although the Church institutions in Lā‘ie had been built in a small community far from the center of O‘ahu’s population base, Lā‘ie “is not just a cultural center, it’s an educational and religious center.” Enlarging this thought he revealed:

There hasn’t been a day that has passed since I’ve been here that I have not felt the spirituality of the Polynesian Cultural Center. That’s going on eight years. . . . In the most negative, most discouraging, most depressing moments, or when something has happened, I have never felt the disconnection of the Spirit. If there’s ever a time when I feel kind of troubled or something, I just have to walk through these grounds and know that the Lord really has his hand [in the PCC’s affairs].12

The Results: Unity and Identity

From the beginning, everyone expected to be a working part of the Center’s daily activities, and as in villages throughout the Pacific, the whole community of Lā‘ie expected to be involved in all important PCC events. Although the Lā‘ie Hawai‘i Temple functions as the spiritual center and BYU–Hawai‘i as the educational center, the PCC is the cultural heart of the Lā‘ie, Kahuku, and Hau‘ula Polynesian communities. By the last half of the twentieth century, Lā‘ie, a traditional Hawaiian pu‘uhonua (place of refuge), had become a unique site of the Mormon Polynesian diaspora, and the PCC was its cultural stage.

What the PCC gives in return to these expatriate Polynesians for their work is, in the Maori term, turangawaewae, or a place to stand—a place to stand with pride as tangata whenua (local tribal people) of the PCC marae. Occupying this place, employees daily cross boundaries of culture, church, and corporate enterprise as they respond to the requirements of their identities’ separate components and the demands of the job of representing themselves to others.

This Polynesian concept of a place to stand from which to represent oneself to strangers and visitors is inherent in the authenticity of the place itself. From the point of view of my own cultural identity, the PCC’s Maori marae and carved house, Te Aroha o te Iwi Maori (the love of the Maori people) are important in ways tourists usually do not comprehend (fig. 2). I remember helping hand paint the kowhaiwhai patterns (designs representing foods from nature) on the rafters when the house was still under construction in early 1963 (fig. 3.). The carvings inside are representative of famous historical chiefs of New Zealand’s tribes, including my own ancestor Toa Rangatira. As his descendant, I feel a compelling sense of belonging and a keen appreciation of my genealogical legacy whenever I enter this wharenui (large house). Because the house is pan-tribal in its history and diasporic location, every Maori has a right to stand, speak, and engage in the formulaic ceremonials within it. Moreover, the presence of the carved figures and icons of the genealogical histories of New Zealand tribes authenticates the house and marae at an esoteric level beyond the comprehension of the casual non-Maori visitor. Members of Lā‘ie ’s Maori community, however, recognize and respect the significance of the site, are comfortable with its relevance to their identity, yet have no difficulty belonging in the worlds of both their church and their culture.

Figure 2. Entrance to the Maori village at the PCC. On the entry way beam is carved Aotearoa (The Land of the Long White Cloud), the Maori name for New Zealand. Courtesy Justin Colver.

Figure 3. Kowhaiwhai patterns on the rafters of the Maori carved house at the PCC. Courtesy Justin Colver.

The PCC as a “showcase of the cultures” regularly hosts visitors from the Pacific and around the world, including cultural and government leaders. Dr. Sione Latukefu, a visiting scholar, gave a spontaneous speech to employees while visiting the PCC. As a young man in Tonga, he recalled, “I received a scholarship to go to a university in Australia. I was ashamed to be a Tongan. I didn’t wear my ta‘ovala. I combed my hair differently. I didn’t want to look or be Tongan.” And he told the large audience of Polynesian employees: “What you are doing here is making these young people proud to be Polynesian, proud to be Tongans, which gives them that self-esteem that they really need to be successful in their lives.”13

Although cultural identities are not formed at the PCC, Polynesian student employees find that such identities are nourished there and often come to full flower as they work their way through four years of employment. Moreover, these cultural identities are nurtured by a Polynesian LDS community that involves itself in PCC cultural activities. Because the community’s Polynesians are largely Latter-day Saint, ethnic differences that might normally be expected to divide people are transcended by the Church’s culture, which draws them together (fig 4.). All are loyal to the same religious culture, even though they come from different Polynesian cultures. The principles of this pervasive religious culture determine both individual and group relations in the town.

Figure 4. Distinguished Samoan Chiefs of Lāʻie stand together for a photograph in the mid-1960s. Left to right: Fuaileleo Leʻi, Tautua Tagoaʻi, Vatau Galeaʻi (seated), Pasi Fuamatu, Savea Moe. All are members of the Church. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.

The text of the earliest PCC brochure quotes Maori anthropologist Sir Peter Buck expressing the hope that his work will “reach my kinsmen on the scattered islands of Polynesia and draw us together in the bond of the spirit. We have a glorious heritage, for we come of the blood that conquered the Pacific with stone-age vessels.” The Polynesian Cultural Center, the text continues, “gives full-hearted echo to Sir Peter’s words. For he describes what the Cultural Center is—a drawing together of Polynesians in the bond of the spirit.”14

Over the years, both management and employees of the PCC have used the phrase “the spirit” in a number of ways. In the religious sense, it usually means the spirit of God, the spirit of Christ, or the spirit of the gospel. In the Polynesian cultural sense, it refers to those values held by Polynesians such as giving, sharing, respecting elders, generous hosting of visitors, and other duties. In a way unique to the PCC, the idea of spirit combines religion and culture, so that the spirit of the PCC is reflected both in the way employees work together for a common good in accordance with gospel principles and in the way they convey attributes of their individual and group cultural identities by (re)presenting both Polynesia and the Center. This concept influences the employees as they strongly identify with their cultural heritage. Buck’s reference to the spirit was in the context of Polynesia’s shared cultural heritage. This shared heritage is an important unifying element among many employees that is not diminished but rather enlarged by the gospel heritage that they also share.

The PCC’s student employees overwhelmingly express confirmation of their cultural and religious identity in their work experiences. A student dancer who describes herself as Hawaiian, Filipina, and haole and who identifies primarily with her Hawaiian ancestry comments: “Religion and Hawai‘i work together to form my culture. Both were instilled in me at birth.” She says that changes in the culture do not bother her, but “I think the Church is our first culture,” thus, “I dance in the Hawaiian section the way that it is taught—I trust that means that I do it properly and traditionally.”15

A freshman from Western Samoa who describes himself as Samoan “with a little bit Palagi (Caucasian)” explains, “in our culture it is hard to find an atheist. Everyone believes in God. We also respect our elders, observe the Sabbath day, and respect all religions.” Although he works as a canoe pusher, he enjoys the PCC’s Samoan village, which, he says, is “much nicer” than any in Samoa. He also feels that changes in the culture can be good. “I think that Samoans are very creative,” he says, “they like to change culture because they are very innovative.” Nevertheless, when asked which he would choose between his Church and his culture if he had to, he answered simply, “the Church is first.”16

This affirmation of spirituality within the PCC is mentioned over and over by employees and Lā‘ie residents alike. As a student noted, “Every day [at work at PCC] someone asks me about the Church. I try to answer them the best way possible. Today it is no problem to be both Mormon and Samoan. The stake president has as much, if not more, prestige than a chief.”17 A Hawaiian student studying information systems grew up in New Jersey, “Haole [Caucasian] style, but in a house where we learned Hawaiian culture.” He does not have a problem putting the Church before his culture, “but at the same time I do understand that it is important to link yourself to your ancestors.” For him and his family, he explains, “the Church is our number one culture but the way PCC reflects my culture is congruent with my identity.”18 Another student, describing himself as 75 percent Hawaiian and 25 percent Chinese, says “the Church and culture both work together. It’s a lifestyle that intertwines. I suppose it is that way for me because I was born and brought up in the Church. I always feel that the Church is first, but I still love my culture.”19

In significant ways, the coming together of religion, culture, and commerce at the PCC is an extension of its participants’ identities as Polynesian Latter-day Saints. Particularly in its infancy, the Center was viewed as “our place” by Church members who had worked hard and long, contributing time, talents, and personal artifacts to build a place of their special and deeply valued cultural identities. This fostered a pride of ownership—their careful handiwork graced the kowhaiwhai (rafter designs) and carvings in the Maori village, the pola (coconut leaf weavings) and fine mats in Samoa, and the ornate masi (bark cloth) in Fiji. Local Church members felt that they had built a monument out of their faith, a living memorial of who they were as Saints of Polynesia, that they had created the PCC with their own hands, constructing a public site to represent their personal cultural identity both as Polynesians and Latter-day Saints. Thus, they felt that they belonged there, and they were delighted and proud to share the symbols of their individual cultures in the villages and shows.

The marvelous story of the Polynesians’ first and lasting contact with the West, their losses and their survival, their continually flourishing confidence in their ability to walk in both worlds (Polynesian and post-colonial), to wear more than one identity, and to adapt and evolve their arts, histories, customs and values, is relevant to the (re)presentation of Polynesia at the PCC. Here, storytellers of all ages and many mixed cultures daily enact their cultural present and foreshadow a confident future. To their rich Church heritage must be added the equally rich cultural heritage in which lines of blood and descent are intertwined in the identities and history of Polynesian members of the Lā‘ie community and employees of the PCC. Thus, the history of Lā‘ie’s Polynesians is one of religion, education, and culture, and for the most part, the community is bound together by shared strands of faith and belief.

As one writer has noted, the search for authenticity “is ultimately a search for a spiritual essence.”20 This is an idea with which all the PCC’s employees are very familiar. They are living their twin religious and ethnic identities, not just on stage performing before the tourists but in the authenticity of their everyday lives in the community. One young student employee commented that she found a unique opportunity at the PCC: “I create a more Polynesian identity for myself.” In doing so she articulates a feeling shared by most employees who are (re)creating themselves even as they (re)present themselves daily in the PCC’s villages and shows. The reflexive nature of her statement also reveals Polynesians’ confidence in the Church, which encourages ethnic strength and empowerment as understood in an oft-quoted saying that the Church does not take away one’s cultural identity but rather makes Maoris better Maoris, Tongans better Tongans, Hawaiians better Hawaiians, and so on.

It is also important that under the unifying principles of the restored gospel, differences in education, class, career, and culture are respected but kept in their proper place as all are governed by the same transcendent spirit that informs the Church. In this way, the gospel of Christ functions as a canopy, sheltering and protecting everyone gathered within its shade.

An Insider’s Conclusion

From my insider experience as a mixed-race, mixed-culture, Latter-day Saint PCC employee, I have come to better appreciate the strengths of the Mormon Polynesian identity as exemplified in the lives and responses of other employees of the PCC. These strengths include: the religious nature of PCC employees; the essential mixed culture of these same employees as a reflection of the community of Lā‘ie, wherein members have a strong awareness of and commitment to both their ethnic identities and to the Church; the deep and enduring pride employees have in representing their own islander cultures in the PCC; the confidence in choosing those cultures out of the personal mix with which they primarily or mostly identify; the genuine interest in each other’s cultures and delight in learning and participating in them at both BYU–Hawai‘i and the PCC; the cosmopolitan confidence with the inclusionary nature of employees’ pan-Pacific relationships with other Polynesians in their professional and personal lives. Other strengths are the individual agency in making cross-cultural decisions on their own behalf and in the daily negotiation of loyalties on the job; the celebration of personal and group cultural diversity, which the Church encourages; the recognition of the PCC as representative of the Church and that PCC employees represent the Church.

Thus, as they enter a new century and millennium, BYU–Hawai‘i and the PCC together function as a catalyst for the internationalization of the Church as the small community of Lā‘ie spearheads this transformational process of what all indicators signify will be the century of global Mormonism.

The First Twenty Years: The Realization Has Extended Far Beyond the Dream Rubina Rivers Forester

The title for my presentation comes from a statement by Edward LaVaun Clissold, one of the members of the original committee assigned to make the PCC dream a reality: “Usually dreams are never obtained, but we had dreams and they had some limits and the realization has extended far beyond the dream.”21 The Polynesian Cultural Center began as a glimmer in the eye of four dreamers: David O. McKay, president of the Church, 1951–70; Matthew Cowley, member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, 1945–53; Wendell Mendenhall, chairman of the Church Building Committee, 1953–64; and Edward LaVaun Clissold, O‘ahu Stake president, 1951–63. This institutional history of the Center discusses the dreamers, the forerunners, the managers, and the directors who helped build and shape the Polynesian Cultural Center during its first twenty years.

The Dreamers

President McKay was a member of the Quorum of the Twelve in 1921 when he witnessed a flag-raising ceremony at Lā‘ie School that became the impetus for his lifelong dream to educate and provide opportunities for the intellectual growth and spiritual development of the Church members in the Pacific. I believe President McKay became particularly mindful of the Polynesians because of the many warm and loving receptions he received from them during his visits to places such as Sauniatu, Western Samoa; Temple View, New Zealand; and Aitutaki, Cook Islands. He was thus receptive and supportive of proposals and programs benefiting Polynesia, such as employing students at the newly established Church College of Hawai‘i (CCH, now BYU–Hawai‘i) and continuing the cultural values and practices of islander Latter-day Saints.

Elder Matthew Cowley served as a missionary and mission president in New Zealand, where it is said he became a Polynesian at heart. Matthew Cowley is credited as one of the founders of the PCC. In 1951 he proposed the idea of a hospitality center in Lā‘ie, where South Pacific Saints could be housed and sustained while attending the Hawai‘i Temple after having journeyed long distances at great personal sacrifice. Elder Cowley is remembered as saying that one day Lā‘ie would have a Maori village where Maori people could come and stay. He acknowledged that there already was a Samoan village of sorts in Lā‘ie and added that a Tongan village would arise as well. O‘ahu Stake President Edward L. Clissold said that Elder Cowley certainly surprised him at a stake conference in Honolulu when he made this prophetic declaration about Maori communal houses and other village houses being built in Lā‘ie.22 Cowley understood island hospitality. He had experienced many Hui Tau (large-scale church meetings) in New Zealand at which Maori cultural performances were given, to the great pleasure of all in attendance (fig. 5).

Figure 5. Maori village workers Waitohi Elkington and Millie TeNgaio pose with a model for an early PCC brochure, c. 1960s. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.

As a young man, Wendell B. Mendenhall served a three-year mission in New Zealand under Matthew Cowley, and his experiences among the Maori also instilled in him a desire to assist Polynesians. He was serving in two significant capacities—chairman of the Church Building Committee and chairman of the Pacific Board of Education—when the proposal to build a Polynesian village in Lā‘ie was approved. In his capacity, Mendenhall had a great deal of power and influence in these matters, and he used available resources to bring about the completion of many Church building projects in the Pacific, including the CCH and the PCC. The general feeling was, “Were it not for the persistence of men like Wendell Mendenhall and the faith and confidence of a man like President David O. McKay, we probably would not have the Cultural Center.”

Former PCC oral historian Kalili Hunt interviewed Edward L. Clissold and wrote:

President Clissold should be noted [as] the man who conceived the idea as to the feasibility and actualization of such a Center. It was his tireless efforts as a community leader and his faith in the Polynesian cultures that influenced the other three [President McKay, Matthew Cowley, Wendell Mendenhall] to consider such a project.23

Clissold was a close friend of Matthew Cowley, had spent many years in Hawai‘i, was fluent in the Hawaiian language, and had strong faith, spiritual depth, and profound knowledge. All these qualities made him an effective leader.

The strength of Clissold’s commitment lay in what I believe was a personal revelation he received while attending a Boy Scout Jamboree in Denver, Colorado. There, as he viewed cultural displays of the Native Americans, he was strongly impressed with the possibility of establishing a similar display featuring Pacific Islander activities and traditions in Hawai‘i. At this time, Clissold was serving as the O‘ahu Stake president and had already served as Hawai‘i Temple president; he was concurrently a manager at Zion’s Securities and of the local bank. Clissold was intimately aware of the strong need to develop a secure economic base for Lā‘ie. He also recognized the cost-effectiveness of Polynesian entertainment and how readily the Polynesian personality can win over non-Polynesians. Thus, he too felt that a Polynesian cultural center would be feasible and successful and would help defray the boarding costs of temple patrons traveling from great distances in the Pacific.

The Forerunners

Several prior institutions and activities paved the way for the PCC. Foremost was the successful monthly hukilau (fishing with a seine) operated by the local Lā‘ie wards. Publicized throughout the islands, the event was highly recommended by the Hawai‘i Visitors Bureau. It included the actual hukilau, a lū‘au meal, and entertainment on the beach. The hukilau demonstrated that Lā‘ieans could organize themselves for a common purpose, that there was much talent in the community, and that tourists were willing to come all the way from Honolulu to see the attraction. Then there was Hui Laulima O Lā‘ie, a local community association whose members met and discussed ideas to benefit the community. This group considered making the hukilau a daily operation and invested in a hotel or a small resort development locally, pursuing Clissold’s idea of a Polynesian display center like the Native American programs he had observed in Colorado. The Hawai‘i Temple certainly had an impact on the PCC’s history. It was a major tourist attraction for around-the-island bus tours. The first cultural village plans located the PCC next to the temple in order to attract visitors after they had toured the temple grounds, but with further discussion and study and the realization of the inappropriateness of that proximity, the Center was moved to its present location adjacent to BYU–Hawai‘i. The student and community show “Polynesian Panorama,” organized under the direction of Wylie W. Swapp, can be credited with establishing the first PCC night show. Highlighting the songs and dances of Polynesia, the show had previously been performed in Honolulu and had received very favorable reviews.

A final element in the background of the PCC was the CCH. Once the college was built, the pressure was on to ensure its continued existence. Financial means had to be provided to help students complete their college educations. With very few job opportunities in Lā‘ie and on O‘ahu’s north shore, the proposed PCC would become the primary employer of CCH students and would enable them to meet their financial needs. Another contributing organization was the Polynesian Institute, the forerunner of today’s Institute for Polynesian Studies. As part of CCH, the institute was charged with exploring the idea of having the local community build and operate a series of Polynesian villages. The institute’s involvement, however, was primarily academic, and the villages were intended to be used for cultural research.

The Critics

Though sentiment has been overwhelmingly positive, the PCC has had its share of criticism. The predominant concern in the early years was the welfare of the students, because it was feared that in focusing on entertainment skills they might be diverted to seek employment in the tourist industry of Waikīkī and abandon their educations. Some critics felt that the Center kept Polynesians “in their place” and exploited them for its purposes. It was feared that the marketing of the students’ natural social ability and cultural skills would change them from Polynesians in the heart to Polynesians “by design only.”

Practical concerns were also raised. For example, would the PCC actually work? Fears were expressed concerning the distance of Lā‘ie from Honolulu, the ability of little Lā‘ie and Lā‘ieans to rise to the challenge of sustaining a long-term, entertainment-based cultural village, and the possibility of no tourist interest in a cultural site. Many Church members became very vocal with their opinions. They felt the Church had no business in a commercial venture; they supposed the temple would play second fiddle to the PCC; they felt that the Center would be a detriment to the spirituality of the Lā‘ie Saints. They worried about the impact of coffee drinking, smoking, and non-Church dress standards on the students and community. Some were confused about where the members’ Church obligations ended and the cultural and economic needs began. There were also those who loved the old hukilaus and wished for their continuance. “Why spend money on a new thing?” they asked, “Why not improve something that already works?”

Some local Hawaiians feared that the PCC might bring an increase in population to the small windward community; they expressed a wariness of “invasion” and being crowded out. Brief cultural clashes had occurred in the community, and some people supposed more would take place with an increase of incoming Polynesians, especially Samoans, who might gravitate in even larger numbers to Lā‘ie. In addition, during most of the PCC’s history, there have been strong community perceptions of a lack of long-term career opportunities available to Polynesians or locals at the top levels of the PCC management because from its establishment these positions have been filled predominantly by mainland Caucasians. Lastly, for many years there was a sentiment in the community that the PCC was something that had been railroaded through without the knowledge or input of the local people who would be intimately involved.

The Early Managers (1963–68)

I have chosen to organize my review of the PCC’s first twenty years around the managers who headed the Center. What follows is based largely on my reading of PCC oral histories and on my own experience as a longtime PCC employee. The first manager of the Polynesian Cultural Center was Howard W. Stone (fig. 6.), who had come to Hawai‘i just two years before to head up Zion’s Securities and who had previously served as a mission president in Samoa. In March 1963, he was called as president of the O‘ahu Stake, and seven months later, on October 12, 1963, the PCC was dedicated. His term as manager lasted only a few months because it was too demanding to run both Zion’s Securities and the PCC. Howard Stone’s contribution to the PCC lay in his knowledge of Polynesian customs, his fluency in the Samoan language, and in his Church experience. He is credited with holding the people together and maintaining enthusiasm, employee morale, and a contributory spirit.

Figure 6. Howard W. Stone, head of Zion's Securities Corporation in Lāʻie, was the initial manager of the PCC when it opened in 1963. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.

The second manager of the PCC was Radburn Robinson, who served from May to July of 1964. Robinson was a professional entertainer, but he soon resigned because of differences with the Center’s other management.

The third manager was Lester Hawthorne, who served from 1964 to 1965. His primary contribution was advancing the construction of the Maori village. Because of his experience while serving as a labor missionary in New Zealand, Hawthorne oversaw the construction of the three carved houses in the PCC’s Maori village, which were duplicates of the carvings and the tukutuku (woven decorative panels) from the Nuhaka carved meetinghouse on New Zealand’s North Island. Hawthorne also pushed for completion of the Maori war canoe by carvers who had been called together to the New Zealand LDS community of Temple View to prepare the village carvings for shipping to the PCC.

As manager, Hawthorne was in charge of all employees and all operations at the Center except the night show, which was a semi-independent unit. Although the night show performers began as members of CCH’s “Polynesian Panorama” under the direction of Wylie Swapp, they were later put under the direction of Mike Grilikhes, a Hollywood producer and husband of well-known Mormon actress Larraine Day. Grilikhes also brought in Jack Regas, a choreographer who later joined the Church as a result of his PCC association. A forceful pair of professionals, Regas and Grilikhes knew what they wanted and set about doing their jobs. The entertainment presented at the dedication of the PCC was under their direction, and it was a spectacular production. Their first night shows set a high standard for all those that followed.

Hawthorne considered his first six months at the PCC a mission—a continuation of his service in New Zealand. He claimed that all who worked in the PCC villages were on missions, that the Center as a whole was considered a missionary effort (fig. 7). Apparently only a few professionals, such as full-time electricians, were paid. The fact that only some people were paid during those early years of building was a sore point among the locals for many years. Hawthorne’s alternative payment came in giving frequent tribute to the people he worked with. He praised their missionary spirit and common commitment to do everything they could to make the PCC a success. However, more than a labor of love was needed to make the PCC profitable.

Figure 7. Jubilee Maʻiolā Logan, chief of the PCC Hawaiian village, talks to one of thousands of visiotrs who came to the Center each year during the 1960s. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.

Wayne Glaus began as the acting general manager in January 1965 and served in that capacity for two-and-a-half years, resigning in summer 1967. Glaus came to the PCC from the Church College of New Zealand, where he had been treasurer and business manager. Glaus felt Mendenhall chose him for the job because he had a reputation of being conservative with finances. This particular strength was needed at the time of his appointment because the PCC was having serious financial problems. The original hope that visitors would flock to the Center had not yet been realized. The PCC was frequently borrowing money to meet payroll, the Church guaranteeing the loans. In addition, the travel industry was taking advantage of the Center’s liberal ticket sales policy. During this period, Bert Thomas, a fifteen-year veteran of the travel industry, was appointed as a marketing director. He regularly visited all the local travel agents to sell them on the PCC. At his invitation, Bob McGregor, president of Trade Wind Tours, came to the PCC, liked what he saw, and showcased it in his brochures, thereby making the PCC a regular stop for his company’s bus tours. When other companies followed suit, the PCC was on its way to success.

According to the original intent of the PCC developers, the villages were supposed to be the dominant visitor activity, but the night show soon took over that position, making the villages what Glaus described as “just something tacked onto the sides.”24 Thus, one of his biggest challenges was to build the villages into something more than a museum attraction. This was opposed by the night show directors, who feared competition with their show. After all, their show was the highlight of the Center.

Glaus’s cause was championed by David Hannemann who, though he later left the Center, returned to serve as a vice president. Glaus and many of his contemporaries credit Hannemann with the birth of the “Pageant of the Long Canoes” and with revitalizing many village activities and programs. The village activity that Glaus remembers best was the flag-raising ceremony every morning at which the employees sang “Hawai‘i Pono‘ī.” Local families were invited into the Center for free, but they were required to dress in traditional costumes under the admonition: “You’re on stage at the PCC. As soon as you enter the gate you are on stage to the public.”25 During this time, the Hawai‘i Visitor Attraction Association was formed with the PCC, Sea Life Park, Hawai‘i Wax Museum, and the Bishop Museum as charter members. This association’s objective was to develop good relations among the four entities and to share in cooperative advertising. In 1967 an on-street Waikīkī Jaycees survey placed PCC second to Waikīkī as the attraction visitors to Hawai‘i would remember most. That year Wayne Glaus resigned from the PCC to accept an education job in Salt Lake City. He treasured most what he termed the “spirit” of the Center but regretted that the PCC never developed into the quality museum that was originally planned.26

The next manager was Lawrence Haneberg (fig. 8), who received the assignment while serving on the PCC Board of Directors. His term, 1967–68, was a period of “holding the reins” while a permanent general manager was sought, but he began to want to make real changes in the Center’s activities rather than just apply band-aid solutions to challenges. While the construction of the PCC was still a dream, Hanneberg, on behalf of the CCH, had unsuccessfully tried to provide employment for the college students and local residents by getting a garment manufacturer and other businesses to establish factories in Lā‘ie.

Figure 8. A mid-1950s photograph taken in Lā‘ie of part-Hawaiian Lawrence I. Haneberg (far right) with other prominent local church leaders, some of whom later would play a significant role in founding the PCC. Left to right: George Q. Cannon, D. Arthur Haycock, Edward L. Clissold, Ralph E. Wooley. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.

One of Hanneberg’s memorable challenges was dealing with the town bus drivers, who tended to bypass the PCC. Hanneberg noted the reluctance on the part of the PCC management to give bus drivers incentives to stop at the Center. In the visitor industry, such incentives were usually not only money but also free meals and other special concessions. It was the general feeling among PCC personnel that the drivers would sooner or later be forced to stop by the sheer attraction and quality of the show. Thus, it was supposed that the bus companies would gladly tie in the PCC and the temple. In fact, the bus companies resented the extra time spent in Lā‘ie. I also feel that the bus drivers’ anti-Mormon feeling was a major factor in their lack of cooperation with the PCC management. Despite conflicts such as these, Hanneberg was always proud of his association with the PCC and of his contribution as a Polynesian (he was part Hawaiian).27

The Later Managers/Presidents (1968–88)

Vernon Hardisty came to the Center in August 1968 and left in March 1975. He was a retired lieutenant colonel with a strong background in planning military operations. His first function was to create a basic management organization comprised of departments—theater, cultural presentations, village operations, food services, accounting, gift shop, and maintenance. Although Hardisty was designated director of operations and acted as the general manager, in truth he was co-director of the PCC with Steve Bennett, director of sales and marketing. It must be remembered that at this time the night show (under Mike Grilikhes) remained an independent entity. Hardisty freely admitted to personality conflicts during his seven years in administration but maintained that he and Bennett always tried to appear to be going in the same direction and solving problems successfully, in spite of the organization that the Board of Directors had mandated.28

Hardisty (fig. 9) began sending executive associates to management workshops and seminars, and he developed a hospitality program for the entire Center with the slogan “take a step toward a guest.” He also oversaw considerable improvement in food services. Hardisty worked hard to keep the employees’ spirit focused on something more than a paycheck and encouraged them to feel a personal commitment to the PCC. He also paid special attention to maintaining the buildings by keeping the plumbing up-to-date and attending to other needs. Hardisty paid tribute to Steve Bennett for his efficiency in keeping extremely good records, which enabled them to chart the happenings in every department every day and every week. He was also grateful for Bennett’s healthy yet firm relationship with tourist companies—especially for Bennett’s seeing the need to provide a special building for the tour drivers and to feed them well. He commended Bennett’s skillful handling of public relations and his anticipating the importance of repeat business to the PCC.

Figure 9. Vernon Hardisty was the first PCC manager to serve for an extended period of time, from 1968 to 1975. Agnes Kanahele is performing in the background. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.

Hardisty began the expansion of the Center with new construction on the original orientation building, which later became the Gateway Restaurant and a new administration building. He moved the Hawaiian village from its original area to its present location, added the Marquesan village designed by Jerry Loveland, director of the Institute for Polynesian Studies, and acquired fifteen house lots to provide housing for certain employee families. Hardisty then turned his attention to problems in the village areas. For example, the villagers needed constant supervision to stay alert, pay attention, and remain at their jobs and not wander off with friends and familiar guests; the villages and what was presented in them from day-to-day were inconsistent in quality and information; and sometimes the villages were left completely empty during certain periods of the day due to low energy and enthusiasm among the employees.

In 1972, the fifth year of Hardisty’s and Bennett’s co-directorship, the PCC Executive Board stepped in and named a third director, creating what was locally termed the “three-headed monster.” Hardisty became director of financial operations overseeing the business office, food services, maintenance, and Shop Polynesia; Bennett continued to direct sales and marketing; and Norman Nielson was designated director of cultural productions. The years 1972 to 1975 were very hard, especially 1975 when morale became low. Hardisty himself admitted feeling the decline and described the time as “a strange period.” Basically what occurred was that each director was reporting directly to the board. There was no clear management procedure to follow and this caused confusion among employees in terms of their loyalties. The PCC Executive Board members became behind-the-scenes controllers, eventually pitting two directors against one. Hardisty submitted his resignation in May 1974 but did not leave until 1975 when a new general manager was found. Nielson left the Center about six months into the next manager’s term and Bennett sometime later.29

In 1975, Samoan William H. Cravens (fig. 10) was chosen to fulfill what the Executive Board determined was needed—a Polynesian in the PCC’s leadership position. The Board of Directors felt it would make a difference to the local community, which had become more agitated each succeeding year with what it termed the “Big White Brother” leadership at the Center. Cravens’s appointment, however, was not met with universal approval in Lā‘ie. While locals admired his qualifications as the former president of a bank, former stake president, and former football star, they worried because he was Samoan. Because of the structure of traditional Samoan society, there were fears that the PCC would become a Samoan Cultural Center, with Samoans filling most of the supervisory and management jobs.

Figure 10. Samoan William H. Cravens was the first Polynesian president of the PCC. He served as manager, then as president from 1975 to 1982. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.

Cravens served until 1982. His first year fulfilled some of these fears. In restructuring his new management team, he dismissed over a dozen employees. He hired his best friend and fellow Samoan as the manager of the theater; the community interpreted this as the beginning of fa‘a Samoa (the Samoan way). Even though Cravens was a Polynesian, he did not come from the local ranks and did not know the pulse of the community. On the other hand, Cravens had dreams for the Polynesians, and he tried to fulfill them during his seven years of leadership. He wanted Polynesians to live up to their strong faith and spirituality. He wanted both the tourists and the locals to see a Polynesian life beyond weaving mats and climbing coconut trees. He wanted Polynesians to be integrated into a gospel lifestyle rather than just a cultural one. He wanted Polynesians to retain their traditional abilities, to share and to be charitable; and he wanted them to succeed academically and professionally.

Before Cravens’s tenure, the Board of Directors essentially managed the Center. Cravens was the first manager to insist on management authority over the board with the board functioning only as advisors, except in major decisions. The board became more businesslike in its attitudes and policies, even approving Cravens’s compensation according to comparative industry-level managers.

The Cravens years were challenging and changing years with peaks and valleys. Airline travel became affordable, consequently the number of tourists visiting the PCC hit a million a year. Also during his tenure, the Internal Revenue Service continued court hearings regarding the profit or non-profit status of the Center. As director, Bill Cravens presented to Pacific Islanders the reality of a Polynesian corporate leader. He conducted a large-scale expansion program, including construction of a new employee orientation building, a new maintenance and purchasing warehouse, a new theater, and a new administration building. He enclosed the front entrance and enlarged the parking lot, built and enclosed the Gateway Restaurant, established the Graphics Department, and contracted with local designer Baba Kea for new professionally made uniforms for the whole Center. He introduced a new night show, “Invitation to Paradise,” and improved programs with the Hawai‘i Temple Visitors’ Center, bringing about great success in missionary work.30

Though Cravens presented a clear-cut role model for young Polynesians, he also bent so far in accommodating Polynesians that the line between charity and business often blurred (his generosity can be partly attributed to his role as president of the Lā‘ie Stake). Cravens resigned in 1982, which shocked many who admired his leadership and remembered his class, approachability, and spirituality. He was replaced by Ralph Rodgers Jr., a former missionary and mission president in Samoa, director of the Promised Valley Playhouse as well as various Church pageants and productions, and a Regional Representative of the Twelve.

Rodgers differed from other general managers in that he was especially innovative and creative, having the flair and authority to make his ideas a reality. During his term, from 1982 to 1988, he was a most productive leader, accomplishing a formidable list of projects: he initiated a program called “Walking around the Center” that familiarized management with all aspects of the PCC’s operations; he landscaped the Hale Aloha theater, converting it into a new lagoon pageant theater; and he was responsible for initiating several new buildings, including the mission home, chapel, Fijian spirit house, village museum, Tahiti fishing hut, and Yoshimura Store. He renovated the Gateway Restaurant and revitalized the Center with new signs and a new entryway into the villages with a bridge crossing over the lagoon to the Samoan village. He produced and directed a new night show; directed the Center’s own advertising campaign, “If you haven’t been to the PCC, you haven’t seen Hawai‘i”; funded the Fijian camakau canoe project; and brought the muralist Wyland to paint Whaling Wall IX on the side of the employee building.

The Dream Continues31

Rodgers continued as head of the PCC until 1988. Following Rodgers, James P. Christensen, a former Tonga Mission president, served from 1988 to 1991. Under his direction, the Center opened its Ali‘i Lū‘au, which presented authentic island foods served in a dinner-show setting; completed its IMAX theater and premiered the film Polynesian Odyssey, both of which were begun by Rodgers; and launched the Ambassador Dining experience, offering a top-of-the-line prime rib and seafood meal.

Eric B. Shumway, then BYU–Hawai‘i Vice President for Academics, served as interim president of the Center for six months in 1991 while a search was conducted for a new president. He strengthened corporate and Church values and fostered employees’ rededication to the PCC’s mission and vision. Lester W. B. Moore (fig. 11), former president of Deli Express premade sandwich company, was PCC president from October 1991 to June 2000. He built an enlarged food preparation and kitchen facility, moved the Ali‘i Lū‘au to a new location, opened a Treasures of Polynesia retail shopping area, and added retail kiosks throughout the villages. He also trained employees in strategic marketing and strengthened the Center’s financial base. Von Orgill, former vice president of client business development with the Franklin Covey Company, assumed his position as the new PCC president June 1, 2000.

Figure 11. Lester W. B. Moore was president of the PCC longer than any other general manager or president serving from 1991 to 2000. Courtesy Polynesian Cultural Center.

Throughout its history, the Center has been led by visionary men with a range of skills and talents who brought their particular expertise to the job at the times when it was needed. Thus, the combination of employees skilled in their cultural traditions and managers with both business acumen and leadership experience have produced steady, progressive growth and overall financial success. These accomplishments are equally matched, if not exceeded, by the Center’s significant success in influencing people’s interest in the Church.

Conclusion

The PCC has achieved a number of impressive results. First, it has helped preserve the material culture and traditions of Polynesia. Many college students have come from parts of the Pacific where the way of life is changing, and in some cases disappearing, in the face of modern technology and ideas. Second, the Center has been a great missionary tool, stimulating many to investigate the Church. It has also produced much goodwill for the Church among governments worldwide and provided fertile ground for cultivating international friendships. Third, the PCC has contributed significantly to the local community by providing full-time employment for adults, thus reducing the need to commute an hour or two each way to Honolulu for work. Fourth, the PCC has functioned as an educational center for tourists, for the workers themselves, for community families, and for academic researchers. The Center has become a place where Polynesia can be studied and its culture perpetuated.

The comments of Edward Clissold, long-time supporter of the Center and original member of the Executive Board, provide an appropriate conclusion:

I have nothing but commendation for the people that are in charge now and what they are doing. I think if I were in charge, I’d probably do some things a little differently, but I can’t be critical because I wouldn’t go back to the old ways, the old dreams, and the old plans. These (ways, dreams, plans) are so much more forward-looking and greater than the ones we had, that I can do nothing but support them.32

For those of us who have had a long association with the Polynesian Cultural Center and who put aside passing dissatisfactions, it is easy to feel a genuine affection for the “good old PCC.” This affection may focus on a person, a particular activity, or a special experience. However produced, it is real and lasting. The PCC is like family, and like family, it will always be a part of us.

12:["$","$L1d",null,{"book":{"id":30,"title":"Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","subtitle":"Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","image_id":"website-files-bucket/books/book_cover_images/book-voyages.jpg","excerpt":"","book_series_id":null,"series_ordering":0,"ebook_link_kindle":null,"ebook_link_deseret":null,"ebook_link_nook":null,"free_book":0,"pdf_id":null,"footnotes":null,"public":1,"slug":"voyages-of-faith","wp_id":77384,"product_link":"product/voyages-of-faith-explorations-in-mormon-pacific-history","author_id":null},"chapter":{"id":544,"title":"The Polynesian Cultural Center: Reflections and Recollections","subtitle":null,"online_book_id":30,"excerpt":null,"content":"$1e","intro_text":"$1f","page_number":209,"previous_chapter":"search-for-a-site-selection-of-the-church-college-of-hawaii-campus","next_chapter":"the-gospel-and-the-hawaiian-performing-arts","pdf_id":null,"footnotes":"$20","slug":"the-polynesian-cultural-center-reflections-and-recollections","public":1,"wp_id":null,"test":"543","podcast_file_id":null,"section_heading":null,"chapter_author":null},"topics":[],"scriptures":[],"authors":[],"processedContent":{"html":"$21","headings":[{"id":"heading-0","textContent":"Culture and Church at the Polynesian Cultural Center Vernice Wineera","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-1","textContent":"The Educational and Entertainment Elements","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-2","textContent":"The Spiritual Component","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-3","textContent":"The Results: Unity and Identity","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-4","textContent":"An Insider’s Conclusion","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-5","textContent":"The Dreamers","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-6","textContent":"The Forerunners","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-7","textContent":"The Critics","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-8","textContent":"The Early Managers (1963–68)","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-9","textContent":"The Later Managers/Presidents (1968–88)","tagName":"H3"},{"id":"heading-10","textContent":"Conclusion","tagName":"H3"}]}}]