Individuals unacquainted with Oceania, often use “Polynesia” as a synonym for all the Pacific Islands. In reality, most of the western “half” of the Pacific falls outside Polynesia. The upper portion, often referred to as Micronesia (literally “small islands”), includes island confederations east of the Philippines now bearing names such as Kiribati, Marshall Islands, and the Federated States of Micronesia. Below the equator lie Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, New Caledonia, and Vanuatu, which, together with Fiji, constitute a region known as Melanesia (literally “black islands”). Despite the continuous existence of Latter-day Saint congregations in Polynesia for more than a hundred and fifty years, only in the past half century has the Church established a permanent presence in Micronesia and Melanesia. That is a story that R. Lanier Britsch pieced together for the first time in his pathbreaking presentation at the 1984 MPHS annual conference; a condensed version appears here. His seminal paper formed the basis for a chapter in his equally pathbreaking 1986 volume Unto the Islands of the Sea.1 Britsch has an abiding love and appreciation for the peoples and cultures of the Pacific.

16:{"metadata":[["$","title","0",{"children":"Founding the LDS Church in Melanesia and Micronesia - Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History"}],["$","meta","1",{"name":"description","content":"$1b"}],["$","meta","2",{"name":"keywords","content":"Founding the LDS Church in Melanesia and Micronesia, Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History, online books, BYU Studies"}],["$","link","3",{"rel":"canonical","href":"https://byustudies.byu.edu/online-book/voyages-of-faith/founding-the-lds-church-in-melanesia-and-micronesia"}],["$","link","4",{"rel":"icon","href":"/favicon.ico","type":"image/x-icon","sizes":"16x16"}],["$","$L1c","5",{}]],"error":null,"digest":"$undefined"} 1a:"$16:metadata" 1d:I[66263,["1120","static/chunks/1120-75f909259fd067cc.js","5466","static/chunks/5466-b96f3c00376edc43.js","8534","static/chunks/8534-7ca745715241e193.js","9126","static/chunks/9126-91257ba5fa5d06c5.js","8387","static/chunks/8387-2bdb776aa3fa620b.js","6874","static/chunks/6874-bf14f6d1ebc153cc.js","9383","static/chunks/9383-5debb36c04efe52f.js","3063","static/chunks/3063-404186ec4ce8f075.js","7132","static/chunks/7132-1bf9ca313709cfa3.js","5858","static/chunks/5858-a921a795a1989287.js","9233","static/chunks/9233-cd31d8c4ef751ef5.js","8361","static/chunks/8361-ec429c2d2a4b8505.js","7594","static/chunks/app/(site)/(containers)/(content)/online-book/%5BbookId%5D/%5BchapterId%5D/page-aca9af7241f107d8.js"],"default"] 1e:Tb23a,

“As we have slowed down to look around,” wrote President Ebbie L. Davis in 1973, reflecting on his responsibility in the Fiji Mission, “it has become increasingly clear that there is so much to do here that we are going to get very little done.” He continued, “There are so many programs—construction, real estate, translation, leadership training, increasing [numbers of] missionaries, Church schools, localization of leadership, new areas to open, etc.—that we will only be able to push all of them forward a little way, rather than pushing a few [programs] a long way.” The Fiji Mission then encompassed six countries, each with different governments, laws, and currency. The physical distances between these countries and the various languages spoken within them also posed many challenges for missionary work. Describing the Fiji Mission, President Davis stated:

We have all three major South Pacific ethnic groups in our mission. There are Polynesians in Rarotonga and Niue; Melanesians in Fiji, the New Hebrides, and the Solomons; and Micronesians in the Gilberts and Nauru. Variations and adaptations are required in the missionary program and the leadership training program for all of these distinct peoples. It seems quite clear that this is a Mission of Missions. Some day divisions will have to be made along ethnic and cultural lines, if not national lines. Until their time comes it will be the responsibility of the mission president to try his best to make sure all areas get equal and appropriate time and care for their particular needs.2

Although President Davis was describing the Fiji Mission in 1973, his words, with only a few name changes, might well have described the Micronesia Guam Mission area in 1980. A 1984 interview with Ferron C. Losee, then president of the Micronesia Guam Mission, reported almost the same situation. He said that his mission area fulfilled the prophecies relating to “those on the isles of the sea.” He pointed out that the Micronesia Guam Mission covered a vast amount of territory—six thousand miles across—and had numerous cultural groups. At least nine island languages were spoken in different island groups (plus English, Japanese, and some Filipino dialects). At that time, there were six governing bodies within the Micronesia Guam Mission boundaries. All the problems that President Davis mentioned concerning Fiji in 1973 also applied to the Micronesia Guam Mission in 1980. Consequently, Church officials and missionaries exercised faith to overcome numerous obstacles to bring the Restored Gospel to the peoples of Melanesia and Micronesia.

The Fiji Mission Area

For the first 110 years that the Church was in the Pacific, missionary work was limited to the peoples of Polynesia and Australia. It was not until May 1954 that LDS missionary work expanded to the Melanesian islands, specifically Fiji, and then it was under the auspices of the Samoan Mission. Anthropologists generally classify the peoples of Fiji, New Caledonia, Vanuatu (formerly the New Hebrides), the Solomons, and New Guinea as part of the Pacific Negroid family. Great diversity exists, however. As a rule, the peoples of this area have black rather than brown skin, curly or kinky hair rather than the generally straighter hair of Polynesia, and a smaller but taller body build. There is little question that Mormon missionaries shied away from Melanesia during earlier times because of the restriction against blacks holding the priesthood. Until the late 1950s, however, no high-ranking Church authorities had seriously considered whether the Melanesians were eligible to hold the priesthood. Even after missionaries were assigned to Fiji in 1954, there was still some question about this matter. It was not until 1958 that President David O. McKay authorized Church leaders to ordain Fijians, who have a considerable mixture of Polynesian blood, to the priesthood. Although some Fijian families had already joined the Church, this move by President McKay overcame an important hurdle and gave the work momentum among the local people.

In August 1954, Samoan Mission President Howard B. Stone sent Elders Boyd L. Harris and Sheldon L. Abbott to Suva, Fiji. Immigration officials allowed only two missionaries in the country—and then probably only because there was a small group of Tongan members already living there.3 For several decades, Cecil B. Smith (who was part Tongan) and Mele (Mary) Vea Ashley and their families had held small Church meetings. When Elders Harris and Abbott arrived in Suva, they worked with all people who were interested in their message but concentrated their efforts on the Tongan and Samoan minority. Although this population base was too small for much success, a branch in Suva was organized on September 5, 1954.

Missionary work in Fiji received a boost in 1955 when President David O. McKay had a stopover in Suva. Evidently, President McKay was unaware of the Church’s progression in Fiji until he met Elders Harris and Abbott on the street. The obscurity of their situation was overcome when, on Sunday, January 9, President and Sister McKay, along with Elder Franklin D. Murdock, attended a sacrament meeting at the home of Brother Cecil B. Smith. President McKay told the little group of twenty-eight members that he considered the occasion significant. He explained that when he and Hugh J. Cannon visited Suva in 1921, they did not feel that the time was right to introduce the gospel. However, he felt inspired to tell the Saints that it was now time to begin building up the kingdom of God in Fiji. He emphasized the importance of example, personal missionary work, and good deeds. Then he suggested that the Saints find a piece of land upon which to build a chapel.4

In late March 1955, the Church purchased a large piece of land at Des Veuex and Berry roads, on a hill overlooking the city and harbor. President McKay, Brother Murdock, and Wendell B. Mendenhall had already seen the land. When the Church Building Committee prepared plans for the chapel, they did so with the small size of the branch in mind. President McKay, however, decided that the Suva chapel should be a manifestation of the Church’s interest in the area and proposed that a large building be constructed instead. The completed chapel was almost as big as a standard stake center and had a cultural hall with a stage, a kitchen, and classrooms. The Suva chapel was designed to allow free movement of air and had other adaptations to the tropical climate. For many years, the little branch rattled around in the structure, and even they wondered whether President McKay had made a mistake. In less than two decades, however, President Mckay’s prophecy concerning this branch was fulfilled. At a 1972 district conference the building was filled with faithful Latter-day Saints—Fijians, Indians, Rotumans, Tongans, Samoans, New Zealanders, Australians, Europeans, and Americans.

While the Suva chapel was under construction, the First Presidency decided to transfer Fiji to the Tongan Mission because its president regularly passed through Fiji while traveling from one area of his mission to another. Also, new “Zion elders”5 heading for Tonga always came through Fiji. The transfer took place on January 15, 1958.6 Ninety-three people came to the meeting, which set an attendance record.

This record was soon replaced, however, when President McKay visited Suva and dedicated the new chapel on May 4, 1958. More than three hundred people attended the dedication services, feast, and cultural entertainment. In his talk, President McKay prophesied that the time would soon come when not only the chapel but also the recreation hall would be filled to overflowing with members of the Church.

When President McKay arrived in Suva on May 2, he voiced his concern that the government was still allowing only two proselyting missionaries into the country. The day following the dedication, President McKay, Mission President Fred W. Stone, Wendell B. Mendenhall, and Church attorney Morris Scott visited Sir Ronald Garvey, governor of Fiji. Garvey had attended the dedication and told the visitors that “he was very much impressed with the dedication services of the Suva chapel and that he now [had] a better appreciation of what the Church [was] doing.” After receiving assurances that Mormon missionaries would never be a “charge or a burden” on the colony and hearing that it was LDS missionary policy to call on all people, Christian or other, Governor Garvey promised President McKay that he would discuss the matter with the council. Two weeks later, the Church received word that the missionary quota had been increased by six. This remained the quota until a coup in 1987.7

When the additional elders arrived, it was possible to broaden the field of activity. Within a year, elders were working in Lautoka, Fiji’s second largest city; in Nausori, near Suva; and in the Lau group of islands lying in the direction of Tonga. In February 1959, President M. Vernon Coombs ordained Fijian native Gideon Dolo an elder and sent him as a missionary to the Lau group along with the foreign elders. He was the first Fijian to hold the Melchizedek Priesthood.8

Progress during the 1960s was steady but not dramatic. By 1966, 150 people regularly attended district conferences in Suva. Three years later, the number had grown to almost five hundred, and the district was divided.9

In July 1971, the First Presidency approved the creation of the Fiji Mission, and Elder Howard W. Hunter presided at its organization. At that time, there were only seven branches of the Church in Fiji. Niue and the Cook Islands needed a “home,” so they were added to the mission. At the end of 1971, total mission membership was 3,097. Sherman Lindholm, who, with his wife, was serving a mission in Suva, was asked to lead the mission during its first year. In 1972, Ebbie L. Davis, a teacher at Liahona High School in Tonga, was called to fill the first three-year term as mission president. As a result of the faith of Church members and leaders, the growth and development of the Fiji Mission since 1972 has been rapid and varied. President Davis and President Kenneth M. Palmer, who followed Davis as mission president, directed the expansion of the Church into several new areas. They also presided over a redivision of the mission in 1975. Presidents Davis and Palmer strengthened the Church’s educational efforts and emphasized translation work in the seven languages spoken within the mission. Temple work was also stressed. A high point was reached in 1976 when an area conference was held in Suva where the Saints could again hear from a living prophet (fig. 1).

[caption] Figure 1. In a culturally significant gesture of great respect, a Fijian chief presents President Spencer W. Kimball with a tabua (sperm whale tooth) at the 1976 Area Conference in Suva, Fiji. Courtesy LDS Church Archives.[/caption]

In 1979 about thirty missionaries were assigned to Fiji proper. Of that number, six were from North America, four from Tonga, and the rest from Fiji. An additional ten missionaries were laboring in New Caledonia, which had been part of the mission since 1975. Eight elders from the British Commonwealth were working in the New Hebrides (now called Vanuatu), and another eight missionaries were teaching the gospel in the Gilbert Islands.

Early in the mission’s history, considerable effort was dedicated to translation projects. Because of the diversity of languages spoken in the Fiji Suva Mission however, it was difficult to make equal progress on all fronts. Some projects had to take priority. Dedicated translators worked diligently in both Fiji and Salt Lake City to prepare the Book of Mormon to be printed in Fijian. By 1980 the work was finished, and the first Fijian copies of the Book of Mormon were published.

The development of Church schools in Fiji and the establishment of the Church in New Caledonia, the New Hebrides, and the Gilbert Islands also deserves attention. Both public and private education are provided in Fiji, but most schools are operated either by local committees or by church groups. Church leaders in Suva recognized in the mid-1960s that the Suva chapel afforded an excellent facility for an LDS school. The Church School System approved the creation of the LDS Elementary School in Suva, which opened in February 1969.10 Although adjustments to the local education system had to be made, by late 1973 the school had well over a hundred students and the educational standard satisfied both the Church and the government.11

As early as 1970, mission leaders in Tonga and Fiji talked about opening a high school in Suva or Nausori. Young Latter-day Saints needed the school, and President James P. Christiansen and the Fiji missionaries believed that a high school could help attract many young people into the Church. The school could also provide a much-needed service to the people of Fiji. But the idea did not gain support among the First Presidency until early 1974, shortly after Spencer W. Kimball became president. A new school, the LDS Fiji Technical College, opened the next year. The college’s curriculum was oriented toward trades and vocations, but it also included an academic component. Perhaps the most exciting fact was that about half of the student body was composed of Indians (this was also true of the elementary school). These students, many of whom were members of the Church, may well be the future Church missionaries to India.12

On June 12, 1983, Elder Howard W. Hunter of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles organized the Suva Fiji Stake. He called Inosi Naga, a 1974 convert, as stake president.13 Since 1954, Church growth in Fiji has been steady and impressive.

The Church in New Caledonia

In 1984, New Caledonia had more than six hundred members. Church activity there began during the 1950s when a few Tahitian Latter-day Saints migrated to the French Overseas Territory to work in a nickel smelter. In July 1961, the First Presidency authorized President Kendall Young of the French-Polynesian Mission to go to Noumea, the capital of New Caledonia, and organize the city’s Tahitian members into a branch. In October, President Young visited Noumea and called Teahu Manoi, an elder in the priesthood, to be the first president of the Noumea Branch.

While in New Caledonia, President Young investigated the possibility of opening missionary work in the territory, concluding that it was time to proselyte. He sought to gain government recognition of the Church there, but it proved difficult for him to obtain visas for missionaries. In 1967, President Karl M. Richards of the French-Polynesian Mission met with the governor and high commissioner of New Caledonia, Monsieur M. Jean Risterucci, and convinced him of the need for LDS missionaries in Noumea. High Commissioner Risterucci approved visas for six Mormon missionaries in February 1967 with the understanding that the number would soon be raised to ten. President Richards then asked the First Presidency to authorize missionary work in New Caledonia.

On May 2, 1968, Elder Thomas S. Monson of the Quorum of the Twelve visited Noumea and under instructions from President David O. McKay, dedicated the land of New Caledonia for the preaching of the gospel. Two months later, on July 15, 1968, the first LDS missionaries arrived in Noumea: Harold and Jeannine Richards and their daughter Jacquelina. The son of President Karl M. Richards, Harold had learned French on his first mission in France; Jeannine was a native of France. Their knowledge of French was essential for success in this area where it was the official language of government and the language of a significant part of the population.

Although the high commissioner of New Caledonia had granted the Church permission to bring in six missionaries, the established religions, particularly the Roman Catholic Church, opposed this move. These other churches successfully delayed the entrance of additional LDS emissaries until January 1969, when Elders James A. Tatton and Lyle W. Parker received visas and entered the country.14

At the first meeting between President Richards and High Commissioner Risterucci, the commissioner had suggested that the Church buy land and build a large, impressive chapel. With this in mind, Harold Richards bought a choice piece of land. Unfortunately, someone in the Church Building Department decided that the branch in Noumea was too small to justify more than a “first phase” building. As a result, the Noumea Branch’s first building was small, consisting of little more than a chapel area. Because of this tactical error, the Church had a difficult time gaining support from French administrators in Noumea.15

Although mission leaders in Tahiti were concerned about the Saints and missionaries in New Caledonia, the distance between the two countries made it impossible for the mission president to visit New Caledonia as often as he would have liked. Although, the Church did grow during the first five years of the 1970s, it was not to the extent that might have been possible with closer supervision. To remedy the situation, the First Presidency transferred New Caledonia to the Fiji Suva Mission in June 1975.16

The New Caledonian members were soon incorporated into the mainstream of the mission. District and branch leaders attended regional meetings in Suva, and when the first area conference was held in February 1979, fifty members from New Caledonia traveled to Suva to participate. In May 1976, President Kenneth M. Palmer divided the Noumea Branch.

By 1976, through faith and hard work, the full program of the Church, including seminary, was operating in New Caledonia, according to mission records. By July 1978, there were 382 Church members, and a third branch, the Tontouta Branch, had been organized. Through careful and regular negotiations with New Caledonia government officials, President Palmer arranged to have one non-French missionary in for every two French ones, making it possible for the Church to increase the number of missionaries and to expand missionary work beyond the Noumea area. In 1984 there were more than eight hundred members in New Caledonia.

Vanuatu (The New Hebrides) and the Solomon Islands

Through the efforts and faith of Presidents Davis and Palmer, the Church established missionary work in the New Hebrides. Although the New Hebrides are made up of eighty islands and a population of close to ninety thousand people (approximately the same as Tonga), the Church has moved into the area only since 1974. The organization of the Fiji Mission created the impetus to open missionary work in this area.

The New Hebrides are racially part of Melanesia. The islands were governed through 1980 by a condominium administered jointly by the United Kingdom and France. The condominium was headed locally by French and British resident commissioners, who were assisted by a joint advisory council but who also led dual governments. English, French, and a variety of local dialects are spoken there, as well as Bislama, a kind of pidgin English and French.

The first-known Latter-day Saints to live in the New Hebrides (since World War II) were several Tongan families who migrated to Port Vila in the late 1950s. These members were not organized into a branch until July 15, 1973, when President Ebbie L. Davis created the Port Vila Branch with Lanipoto Fehoko as president. Although the area was part of the Fiji Mission, the First Presidency had not yet approved it for proselyting. As President Davis traveled from island to island, however, he determined that some of the major islands of the New Hebrides were prepared for the gospel.

President Davis visited the British resident commissioner, a Mr. Townsend, and discussed the possibility of bringing missionaries into the country. Mr. Townsend encouraged President Davis to pursue the matter as soon as Church leaders approved the move. Eight months later, in June 1974, the First Presidency gave its blessing to open the New Hebrides, the Solomons, and the Gilbert and Ellice Islands to missionary work.17

When President Davis visited Mr. Townsend again on June 11, 1974, he found that although the resident commissioner still had a favorable attitude toward the LDS Church, he could approve visas only for British Commonwealth citizens. Similarly, the French resident commissioner could approve visas only for French citizens. All other visas would have to be approved by both commissioners, and this would probably prove difficult. Nevertheless, on January 12, 1975, the first LDS missionaries entered the New Hebrides. They were Elders Mokofisi and Malohifo‘ou, native Tongans and Commonwealth citizens. Two weeks later, on January 26, 1975, President and Sister Davis flew to Port Vila, where they met with Branch President and Sister Lanipota Fehoko and Elders Mokofisi and Malohifo‘ou to dedicate the New Hebrides Islands to the preaching of the gospel. Together they climbed a small hill in Port Vila, and President Davis offered the dedicatory prayer.

Four months later, two Canadian elders, from the Canada Montreal Mission, were transferred to the New Hebrides. At that point, the immigration officer in the New Hebrides decided that four LDS missionaries were enough. His action foreshadowed greater problems to come. On July 30, 1980, the New Hebrides became the Republic of Vanuatu. The new government was hostile to LDS missionaries and soon curtailed missionary work there. Before the work stopped, however, missionaries began working in Port Vila on the island of Efate and in Santo (now Luganvile), on Espirito Santo Island. Between 1978 and 1984, Church membership grew from 83 to 120.18

Both Presidents Davis and Palmer tried to obtain permission from the government of the Solomon Islands to establish the Church in that area, but neither was successful. When President Davis applied for visas for missionaries in 1974, the Solomons were in the final stages of obtaining complete independence from the British. Government leaders desired peace and unity as the changeover approached. Because three other churches that had recently moved into the islands had caused intervillage wars, President Davis was told that no new churches would be allowed.19

Kiribati

To most people who remember World War II, the name “Gilbert Islands” represents a place in the South Pacific where thousands of servicemen lost their lives. Until 1976 the Gilbert Islands were joined with the Ellice Islands. Tarawa served as the administrative center for the Gilbert and Ellice Islands, a British Crown Colony. It is now the capital of the Republic of Kiribati (pronounced Kée-ree-boss).

In spite of the minute size of these Micronesian islands and their relatively unimportant status on the globe, since 1972 Kiribati has played an interesting and faith-promoting role in the development of the Church in the Pacific. There were no Latter-day Saints in the Gilbert Islands in 1972, but in 1984 there were more than five hundred baptized members (plus children), two branches, and a Church-run secondary school. Education missionaries were sent to Tarawa in 1976.

Living conditions in Kiribati, as in many other areas of the Pacific, can be primitive by Western standards. In December 1978, Elder Richard M. Pratt and his wife, Adline, arrived in the Gilbert Islands to teach school. In a letter written in December, Elder Pratt described the school and the people on Tarawa:

Our [five] acre campus, leased for 99 years by the Church, spreads from the ocean on the south to the road on the north next to the lagoon. . . .

Our buildings consist of 12–15 native-constructed buildings, completely made of coconut, except the two teachers’ homes have the luxury of concrete floors. . . . There are no glass windows, no doors that can be locked. The upper half of the walls are open to allow free passage of air. The often-blowing trade winds make the heat bearable. . . .

The center of the campus is dominated by the main building, some 30 by 40 feet in size, and called by the natives “maneaba” [central gathering place] (fig. 2). Its steep roof, supported on 12 coconut posts, is gracefully designed and resembles a bird in flight. This covered area is the chapel, assembly hall, and center of all campus and branch activities. The graveled floor is covered with thin coconut leaf mats. These are picked up and stored after each Sunday service. About 120 natives sit on the thin mats, no chairs, sing without accompaniment, and rejoice in the gospel from 9 until 1:30. The meetings follow each other, for these people are too poor to afford more than one bus fare a Sunday. Some come Saturday night and sleep on the gravel. It is just as good as they have at home.20

[caption] Figure 2. This Maneaba or central gathering placce, at the Moroni Community High School has been remodeled and improved since the Church Educational System assumed ownership. Courtesy Norman Faldmo Jr.[/caption]

Although Elder and Sister Pratt found the standard of living far lower than in the developed part of the world, they also found a people who desired more education for their children. It was their desire for schooling that created the opportunity for the Church to enter Kiribati.

In 1972, Church school officials in Tonga began receiving letters from Waitea Abiuta, the headmaster of a small secondary school known as AKAS, an abbreviation for Auriaria Kokoi Ataria School. Waitea, representing a number of parents and board members of the AKAS, sought permission for their children to attend Liahona High School in Tonga. The request was considered seriously by leaders of the Tongan and Fiji missions and the Church Education System.

President Davis saw Waitea’s request as an opportunity to start missionary work in the Gilbert Islands. He found the department of immigration had a policy that seemed to make it impossible to establish a new church. According to this policy “when a church has 50 adult members it will be officially recognized and will be allowed to bring foreign proselyting missionaries into the Gilbert Islands.”21

Hoping that admitting students would help resolve the Church’s entry dilema, President Davis recommended that twelve Gilbertese students be allowed to enroll at Liahona High School on a trial basis. In July 1974, the Gilbertese minister of education, a Mr. Tanentoa, told President Davis that he favored the expansion of secondary education and welcomed LDS efforts in this field.22 By the end of 1976, sixty Gilbertese students had been enrolled in Liahona High School. All these students were members of other faiths when they arrived in Tonga; however, all but three or four joined the Church. Liahona High School had successfully played its role in missionary work.

From his first visit to the Gilberts in September 1972 until he was released as mission president in 1975, President Davis talked frequently with government officials about obtaining visas for missionaries. In the meantime, Gilbertese converts from Liahona High School began serving as missionaries in their native islands. On October 20, 1975, at Betio, Tarawa, President Kenneth Palmer dedicated the Gilbert Islands (soon to be Kiribati) for the preaching of the gospel.

Soon after the Church officially registered as a legal body in 1977, the department of immigration changed its long-standing policy of allowing churches with fifty adult members to bring foreign missionaries into the country. The department of immigration declared that the Church would have to use only Gilbertese missionaries. In an effort to train and strengthen these young men, President Palmer began sending all foreign elders from the Fiji area to Tarawa for the last three or four weeks of their missions. (Gilbert Island immigration laws allowed these short stays.) The experienced missionaries helped the local elders considerably, and through faith and hard work the Church grew rapidly. There were 105 baptisms in 1977 and 95 in 1978.23

In October 1980, construction began on a new chapel, which was completed in 1982. Even though some fixtures had not yet arrived from Australia to be installed, the new branch president, Buren Ratieta (the first I-Kiribati, a person from Kiribati, to so serve since Waitea was released in 1976), held the first services in the new building in February 1982. Almost 250 people attended. When the building was dedicated, the president of Kiribati attended the services. During the festivities that followed, he told the audience that he and other leading government officials originally had objected to the establishment of the LDS Church in Kiribati, fearing it would divide the people. But his attitude changed after he saw the great contribution the Church had made to the social, educational, and cultural development of his country. A manifestation of his trust in the Church was his appointment of Baitika Toun, a branch president and member of the parliament, as minister of education. Significantly, the Church, once rejected on the basis of legal technicalities and prejudice, achieved a position of trust.

The Micronesia Guam Mission

During World War II, the Marshall, Caroline, and Mariana Islands, with their tiny islands of Majuro, Kwajalein, Ponape, Truk, Yap, and Saipan, became forever ingrained on the minds of Americans and the world. Since the war, servicemen’s groups and branches of the Church have continued on Guam.

As a territory of the United States and America’s westernmost outpost, Guam played a large role in U.S. defense during the Korean and Vietnam conflicts and remains strategically important. Although English is the official language of the island, the native Chamorro language is still widely spoken.

In 1944 the first servicemen’s group was organized. On August 25, 1955, President Joseph Fielding Smith visited Guam and dedicated it to the preaching of the gospel. In January 1957, the first full-time missionaries arrived. Elder Mark E. Petersen of the Council of the Twelve dedicated the first chapel in 1959. Until the 1970s, however, the missionaries confined their efforts almost entirely to Americans who were interested in the Church.24

Before being made the headquarters of the Micronesia Guam Mission in 1980, Guam was part of the Japanese, the Northern Far East, the Southern Far East, and the Hawai‘i Honolulu missions, and it belonged to the Kaneohe Hawai‘i Stake—even though Guam is separated from Hawai‘i by 3,300 miles of ocean. In spring 1980, Guam and Micronesia became a separate mission, with Ferron C. Losee as president.

In January 1975, President Robert E. Crandall of the Hawai‘i Honolulu Mission sent Elders Callis Carleton and Jeffery Frame to Saipan, headquarters of the U.S. Trust Territory in the Mariana Islands. This was the first real move into Micronesia proper. Elders Carleton and Frame, like elders who opened new areas elsewhere in the Pacific, encountered opposition from the Roman Catholic clergy and also had difficulty arranging for an appropriate place for meetings. These problems notwithstanding, they proselyted among the people of Saipan and soon baptized their first convert. Through the help of Alfred “Mustang” Gonzales, a member who was working on a new airport, the elders found a quonset hut for Sunday meetings and began holding services. Before long, replacements came for the original elders, and two additional missionaries brought the force to four.

Among the early converts was Brad Nago, who had come with his family to Saipan to work on the airport. There he met Brother Gonzales, and the two became good friends. The story is told that Nago saw Gonzales at a café one day, and they talked about Gonzales’ planned return to Hawai‘i. Brother Gonzales told Brad Nago that he needed a replacement as branch president for the little branch that had been formed. Brother Gonzales jokingly informed cigar-smoking Brad Nago that he was the man for the position. Subsequently, Nago and his family studied the gospel and were baptized in January 1976. Ironically, Brother Nago replaced Gonzales as president of the Saipan Branch. By July 1978, the Saipan branch had sixty-nine members.

Through the enthusiastic encouragement of Elder John H. Groberg, Area Supervisor for Hawai‘i and the South Pacific, President William W. Cannon of the Hawai‘i Honolulu Mission led the expansion of the mission into all seven districts of the U.S. Trust Territory. More than forty missionaries, many of whom were from Tonga and Samoa, began proselyting on or near Saipan, Palau, Yap, Truk, Ponape, Kwajalein, and Majuro. In March 1979, there were only five hundred Church members in these islands,25 but by 1983 the number had grown to over three thousand in nineteen branches.

Because the Trust Territory was under U.S. protection and control, the Church had no difficulty bringing missionaries into the area. In fact, the timing for entry was right because subsequent political changes may have made it more difficult later. Within Guam and Kiribati there are nine distinct cultural groups and at least nine different languages. Nevertheless, through the Church’s programs, including seminary and possibly schools, the gospel can greatly enrich the lives of many people in this far-flung part of the world.26

Papua New Guinea

With the exception of Australia, New Guinea is the most densely populated area in the Pacific. New Guinea is the second largest island in the world. Papua New Guinea’s (PNG) dense jungles, mangrove swamps, savannas, and high mountains topped with snow evidence a land of diversity and challenges for the Church. The country includes the east end of New Guinea (the west half is called Irian Jaya, part of Indonesia) and six hundred other islands.

PNG’s rivers, forests, and mountains created an isolating effect that helped preserve a multitude of nations and tribes. It has been suggested that the seven or eight hundred languages account for a sixth of the world’s tongues. Most used are English, Tok Pisin (pidgin), and hiri motu. Tok Pisin has rapidly become the lingua franca of the country. The vast majority of people in PNG are Melanesians, but within that classification are found a rich variety of cultures and customs.

LDS missionaries had visited New Guinea for twenty-five years or more before seriously attempting to gain a permanent foothold. Shortly after becoming president of the Australia Brisbane Mission in July 1980, Dennis D. Flake sent Elder and Sister L. Douglas Johnson to Port Moresby, PNG’s capital city, to open missionary work. The Johnsons and the couples who followed them devoted their time to gaining legal recognition for the Church, making friends, and meeting with those who invited the missionaries to share the restored gospel with them. The Church gained legal status in May 1981 and has the right to lease land for chapels and other church buildings (although no land is held free and clear). To date, LDS missionaries have not ventured far beyond the capital, but several branches of expatriates have been formed in some mining districts on the islands. In addition to the three or four branches in Port Moresby, there are small branches at Lae, Arawa, and Rabaul.

In April 1983, Elder L. Tom Perry of the Quorum of the Twelve and Bishop H. Burke Peterson of the Presiding Bishopric visited Port Moresby, and Elder Perry offered a prayer dedicating that land for missionary work. During their visit, these Church leaders and the mission president held planning meetings for the Church’s future development in PNG. They decided to move slowly and baptize only as many members as could be trained in doctrine, government, and church administration. The idea was to prepare the PNG members to govern themselves first and then to spread the gospel beyond Port Moresby and its immediate hinterland.

Although the missionary couples who labored there maintained a low profile and did not proselyte openly, many people asked to be taught. By late 1983, Church membership had grown to more than 750, and a chapel was constructed in 1983–84. Although the plan of Church leaders was to contain growth within the Port Moresby area, there were signs that because of the transient nature of the people the gospel was finding its way into villages and homes outside the capital.27

Post Script—The View from the Year 2000

The foregoing was written in the early 1980s. A decade and a half later, the story as told seems somewhat abrupt and truncated. Indeed it is, for history never stops. But we always want to know the latest report and the most up-to-date statistics. Fortunately, the history of the Church in Melanesia and Micronesia since 1984 has been positive. Indeed, so much progress has been made and so much growth has occurred that considerably more could be written regarding the period since 1984 than is said here of the period before that time. There has been steady growth in most areas and remarkable growth in others. For example, by 1999 Fiji had over twelve thousand Latter-day Saints—an increase of more than 200 percent since 1985—and four stakes. In 2000, President Gordon B. Hinckley dedicated a temple in Suva. Kiribati had 7,964 members and Papua New Guinea 8,954. Each country had a stake. Church growth in Kiribati increased 1,184 percent between 1985 and 1999. Growth in Papua New Guinea grew 646 percent for the same period. According to official Church statistics, the number of members in Melanesia and Micronesia grew from 9,934 in 1985 to 40,763 in 1999, an increase of 310 percent.28

Progress has occurred in other areas. Modest chapels have been constructed to serve many branches in Micronesia, and larger meetinghouses have been constructed in the more populous areas. Scriptures and gospel study manuals have been translated and published in several Micronesian languages—notably Gilberteses, Marshallese, and Palauan. In Melanesia, Church materials are now being published in Bislama, which is used in Vanuatu, and Tok Pisin, which is spoken in Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands.

The Church Education System has organized seminary classes in most of the wards and branches of this entire area. BYU–Hawai‘i now enrolls a number of students from Melanesia and Micronesia. The LDS Technical School is thriving in Fiji, and the Moroni Community School in Kiribati has grown to over four hundred pupils. Elder L. Tom Perry rededicated the islands of Kiribati, Nauru, Tuvalu, Tokelau, Wallis, Futuna, and Vanuatu on August 10, 1996, in a single prayer.29

For those who love the peoples of the South Pacific, the continued advance of the Restored Gospel into the islands of the sea is positive and exciting. Total membership figures will probably never be extremely great in this far-flung part of the world. However, the evidences of the Lord’s hand are clear among the islanders of Melanesia and Micronesia.

1f:T5e5,

Individuals unacquainted with Oceania, often use “Polynesia” as a synonym for all the Pacific Islands. In reality, most of the western “half” of the Pacific falls outside Polynesia. The upper portion, often referred to as Micronesia (literally “small islands”), includes island confederations east of the Philippines now bearing names such as Kiribati, Marshall Islands, and the Federated States of Micronesia. Below the equator lie Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, New Caledonia, and Vanuatu, which, together with Fiji, constitute a region known as Melanesia (literally “black islands”). Despite the continuous existence of Latter-day Saint congregations in Polynesia for more than a hundred and fifty years, only in the past half century has the Church established a permanent presence in Micronesia and Melanesia. That is a story that R. Lanier Britsch pieced together for the first time in his pathbreaking presentation at the 1984 MPHS annual conference; a condensed version appears here. His seminal paper formed the basis for a chapter in his equally pathbreaking 1986 volume Unto the Islands of the Sea.1 Britsch has an abiding love and appreciation for the peoples and cultures of the Pacific.

20:T26e8,

1. R. Lanier Britsch, Unto the Islands of the Sea: A History of the Latter-day Saints in the Pacific (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book), 1986.

2. Fiji Mission Historical Record, June 28, 1973, Archives Division, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City (hereafter cited as LDS Church Archives).

3. Manuscript History of the Samoan Mission, September 30, 1954, LDS Church Archives.

4. David O. McKay, Cherished Experiences from . . . President David O. McKay, rev. and enl., comp. Clare Middlemiss (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 111–12; Mary and Margaret Ashley, taped recollections, January 26, 1954, Auckland, New Zealand, in possession of author.

5. Zion elders were missionaries from the Mormon corridor from Canada to Colonial Dublan, or in other words, non-island elders. “Elders from Zion” was a phrase that was often applied to the center of the Church.

6. Manuscript History of the Samoan Mission, March 31, 1958.

7. Manuscript History of the Tongan Mission, June 30, 1958, LDS Church Archives. By 1997 there were forty foreign missionaries in Fiji, plus twenty-nine local missionaries.

8. Manuscript History of the Tongan Mission, March 31, 1959.

9. John H. Groberg, Oral History, interview by R. Lanier Britsch, 1975, 33, LDS Church Archives.

10. Harvey L. Taylor, “The Story of the LDS Church Schools,” 2 vols., typed manuscript prepared for the Church Commissioner of Education, 1971, 148, LDS Church Archives. Brother Charles Mohi came from New Zealand to serve as the first principal, and local teachers, mostly Mormons, were hired to teach the classes.

11. Alton L. Wade, interview by R. Lanier Britsch, August 1975, tape in possession of author.

12. Wade, interview; Ebbie Davis, interview by R. Lanier Britsch, August 1975, tape in possession of author. Most of the faculty were local people. Howard Wolfgramm was the first principal.

13. Mike Foley, “Schools, Saints Aid LDS Image in Fiji,” Church News, published by Deseret News, January 8, 1983, 7; “First Stake Created in Island Nation of Fiji,” Church News, July 10, 1983, 4; and “Converts: Island’s Pearls: Fijian Who Once Hid from Elders Is Now Stake Leader,” Church News, October 16, 1983, 6. President Naga is a Church Educational System (CES) administrator and director of religious education in Fiji.

14. Karl M. Richards, “Noumea-New Caledonia,” a brief unpublished sketch, copy in possession of author.

15. Karl M. Richards, Oral History, interview by R. Lanier Britsch, typescript, 49–56, James Moyle Oral History Program, LDS Church Archives.

16. Fiji Mission Historical Record, September 23, 1973; October 31, 1974; and June 7, 1975.

17. Fiji Mission Historical Record, by date.

18. Fiji Mission Historical Record, by date.

19. Fiji Mission Historical Record, see especially June 9, 1974; February 4, 6, 1975.

20. Richard M. Pratt to Ward H. Magleby, December 31, 1978, copy in possession of author.

21. Alton L. Wade, “Gilbert Island Update,” May 17, 1977, Church Education System papers, LDS Church Archives.

22. Fiji Mission Historical Record, July 16, 1974, LDS Church Archives.

23. This section has been written from the private records of Alton L. Wade, CES administrator of the South Pacific; from Fiji Suva Mission, Historical Reports, by date, LDS Church Archives; and Pratt to Magleby, December 31, 1978.

24. Alf Pratte, “The Gospel Moves to Micronesia,” Ensign 8 (February 1978): 76–77.

25. Alf Pratte, “Message Is Taken to the Pacific Isles: Gospel Is Taught to the Micronesians,” Church News, March 24, 1979. Figures in parentheses are for 1983.

26. Sources for this section include John H. Groberg, Oral History, interview by Gordon Irving, 1978, typescript, 1:26, 47, 2:26–27, 51, James Moyle Oral History Program; John H. Groberg, interview by R. Lanier Britsch, January 16, 1979, Salt Lake City; Pratte, “The Gospel Moves to Micronesia,” 76–77; Robert E. Crandall to R. Lanier Britsch, June 25, 1976, in possession of author; Judy Tudor, Pacific Islands Year Book, 235–63; Ferron C. and Fay Losee, interview by R. Lanier Britsch, February 23, 1984, Provo, Utah, tape in possession of author; Micronesia Guam Mission, Missionary Conference, October 15–18, 1982, Barrigada, Guam, copy in possession of author (this record includes brief reports and historical summaries from all parts of the mission).

27. “Branch Thrives as Church Taken to New Guinea,” Church News, June 27, 1981, 5; “Crossing Cultures to Modern Nation, First Missionaries from New Guinea,” Church News, October 2, 1983, 13; Dennis D. Flake, telephone interview with author, February 22, 1984.

28. Statistics have been derived from Deseret News Church Almanac for 1985, 1987, and 1997–98; and Management Information Center, 1999 Statistics, LDS Church Office Building.

29. Dell Van Orden, “Elder Perry Creates First Kiribati Stake, Dedicates Islands,” Church News, September 21, 1996, 3, 5.

21:Tb2b3,

“As we have slowed down to look around,” wrote President Ebbie L. Davis in 1973, reflecting on his responsibility in the Fiji Mission, “it has become increasingly clear that there is so much to do here that we are going to get very little done.” He continued, “There are so many programs—construction, real estate, translation, leadership training, increasing [numbers of] missionaries, Church schools, localization of leadership, new areas to open, etc.—that we will only be able to push all of them forward a little way, rather than pushing a few [programs] a long way.” The Fiji Mission then encompassed six countries, each with different governments, laws, and currency. The physical distances between these countries and the various languages spoken within them also posed many challenges for missionary work. Describing the Fiji Mission, President Davis stated:

We have all three major South Pacific ethnic groups in our mission. There are Polynesians in Rarotonga and Niue; Melanesians in Fiji, the New Hebrides, and the Solomons; and Micronesians in the Gilberts and Nauru. Variations and adaptations are required in the missionary program and the leadership training program for all of these distinct peoples. It seems quite clear that this is a Mission of Missions. Some day divisions will have to be made along ethnic and cultural lines, if not national lines. Until their time comes it will be the responsibility of the mission president to try his best to make sure all areas get equal and appropriate time and care for their particular needs.2

Although President Davis was describing the Fiji Mission in 1973, his words, with only a few name changes, might well have described the Micronesia Guam Mission area in 1980. A 1984 interview with Ferron C. Losee, then president of the Micronesia Guam Mission, reported almost the same situation. He said that his mission area fulfilled the prophecies relating to “those on the isles of the sea.” He pointed out that the Micronesia Guam Mission covered a vast amount of territory—six thousand miles across—and had numerous cultural groups. At least nine island languages were spoken in different island groups (plus English, Japanese, and some Filipino dialects). At that time, there were six governing bodies within the Micronesia Guam Mission boundaries. All the problems that President Davis mentioned concerning Fiji in 1973 also applied to the Micronesia Guam Mission in 1980. Consequently, Church officials and missionaries exercised faith to overcome numerous obstacles to bring the Restored Gospel to the peoples of Melanesia and Micronesia.

The Fiji Mission Area

For the first 110 years that the Church was in the Pacific, missionary work was limited to the peoples of Polynesia and Australia. It was not until May 1954 that LDS missionary work expanded to the Melanesian islands, specifically Fiji, and then it was under the auspices of the Samoan Mission. Anthropologists generally classify the peoples of Fiji, New Caledonia, Vanuatu (formerly the New Hebrides), the Solomons, and New Guinea as part of the Pacific Negroid family. Great diversity exists, however. As a rule, the peoples of this area have black rather than brown skin, curly or kinky hair rather than the generally straighter hair of Polynesia, and a smaller but taller body build. There is little question that Mormon missionaries shied away from Melanesia during earlier times because of the restriction against blacks holding the priesthood. Until the late 1950s, however, no high-ranking Church authorities had seriously considered whether the Melanesians were eligible to hold the priesthood. Even after missionaries were assigned to Fiji in 1954, there was still some question about this matter. It was not until 1958 that President David O. McKay authorized Church leaders to ordain Fijians, who have a considerable mixture of Polynesian blood, to the priesthood. Although some Fijian families had already joined the Church, this move by President McKay overcame an important hurdle and gave the work momentum among the local people.

In August 1954, Samoan Mission President Howard B. Stone sent Elders Boyd L. Harris and Sheldon L. Abbott to Suva, Fiji. Immigration officials allowed only two missionaries in the country—and then probably only because there was a small group of Tongan members already living there.3 For several decades, Cecil B. Smith (who was part Tongan) and Mele (Mary) Vea Ashley and their families had held small Church meetings. When Elders Harris and Abbott arrived in Suva, they worked with all people who were interested in their message but concentrated their efforts on the Tongan and Samoan minority. Although this population base was too small for much success, a branch in Suva was organized on September 5, 1954.

Missionary work in Fiji received a boost in 1955 when President David O. McKay had a stopover in Suva. Evidently, President McKay was unaware of the Church’s progression in Fiji until he met Elders Harris and Abbott on the street. The obscurity of their situation was overcome when, on Sunday, January 9, President and Sister McKay, along with Elder Franklin D. Murdock, attended a sacrament meeting at the home of Brother Cecil B. Smith. President McKay told the little group of twenty-eight members that he considered the occasion significant. He explained that when he and Hugh J. Cannon visited Suva in 1921, they did not feel that the time was right to introduce the gospel. However, he felt inspired to tell the Saints that it was now time to begin building up the kingdom of God in Fiji. He emphasized the importance of example, personal missionary work, and good deeds. Then he suggested that the Saints find a piece of land upon which to build a chapel.4

In late March 1955, the Church purchased a large piece of land at Des Veuex and Berry roads, on a hill overlooking the city and harbor. President McKay, Brother Murdock, and Wendell B. Mendenhall had already seen the land. When the Church Building Committee prepared plans for the chapel, they did so with the small size of the branch in mind. President McKay, however, decided that the Suva chapel should be a manifestation of the Church’s interest in the area and proposed that a large building be constructed instead. The completed chapel was almost as big as a standard stake center and had a cultural hall with a stage, a kitchen, and classrooms. The Suva chapel was designed to allow free movement of air and had other adaptations to the tropical climate. For many years, the little branch rattled around in the structure, and even they wondered whether President McKay had made a mistake. In less than two decades, however, President Mckay’s prophecy concerning this branch was fulfilled. At a 1972 district conference the building was filled with faithful Latter-day Saints—Fijians, Indians, Rotumans, Tongans, Samoans, New Zealanders, Australians, Europeans, and Americans.

While the Suva chapel was under construction, the First Presidency decided to transfer Fiji to the Tongan Mission because its president regularly passed through Fiji while traveling from one area of his mission to another. Also, new “Zion elders”5 heading for Tonga always came through Fiji. The transfer took place on January 15, 1958.6 Ninety-three people came to the meeting, which set an attendance record.

This record was soon replaced, however, when President McKay visited Suva and dedicated the new chapel on May 4, 1958. More than three hundred people attended the dedication services, feast, and cultural entertainment. In his talk, President McKay prophesied that the time would soon come when not only the chapel but also the recreation hall would be filled to overflowing with members of the Church.

When President McKay arrived in Suva on May 2, he voiced his concern that the government was still allowing only two proselyting missionaries into the country. The day following the dedication, President McKay, Mission President Fred W. Stone, Wendell B. Mendenhall, and Church attorney Morris Scott visited Sir Ronald Garvey, governor of Fiji. Garvey had attended the dedication and told the visitors that “he was very much impressed with the dedication services of the Suva chapel and that he now [had] a better appreciation of what the Church [was] doing.” After receiving assurances that Mormon missionaries would never be a “charge or a burden” on the colony and hearing that it was LDS missionary policy to call on all people, Christian or other, Governor Garvey promised President McKay that he would discuss the matter with the council. Two weeks later, the Church received word that the missionary quota had been increased by six. This remained the quota until a coup in 1987.7

When the additional elders arrived, it was possible to broaden the field of activity. Within a year, elders were working in Lautoka, Fiji’s second largest city; in Nausori, near Suva; and in the Lau group of islands lying in the direction of Tonga. In February 1959, President M. Vernon Coombs ordained Fijian native Gideon Dolo an elder and sent him as a missionary to the Lau group along with the foreign elders. He was the first Fijian to hold the Melchizedek Priesthood.8

Progress during the 1960s was steady but not dramatic. By 1966, 150 people regularly attended district conferences in Suva. Three years later, the number had grown to almost five hundred, and the district was divided.9

In July 1971, the First Presidency approved the creation of the Fiji Mission, and Elder Howard W. Hunter presided at its organization. At that time, there were only seven branches of the Church in Fiji. Niue and the Cook Islands needed a “home,” so they were added to the mission. At the end of 1971, total mission membership was 3,097. Sherman Lindholm, who, with his wife, was serving a mission in Suva, was asked to lead the mission during its first year. In 1972, Ebbie L. Davis, a teacher at Liahona High School in Tonga, was called to fill the first three-year term as mission president. As a result of the faith of Church members and leaders, the growth and development of the Fiji Mission since 1972 has been rapid and varied. President Davis and President Kenneth M. Palmer, who followed Davis as mission president, directed the expansion of the Church into several new areas. They also presided over a redivision of the mission in 1975. Presidents Davis and Palmer strengthened the Church’s educational efforts and emphasized translation work in the seven languages spoken within the mission. Temple work was also stressed. A high point was reached in 1976 when an area conference was held in Suva where the Saints could again hear from a living prophet (fig. 1).

Figure 1. In a culturally significant gesture of great respect, a Fijian chief presents President Spencer W. Kimball with a tabua (sperm whale tooth) at the 1976 Area Conference in Suva, Fiji. Courtesy LDS Church Archives.

In 1979 about thirty missionaries were assigned to Fiji proper. Of that number, six were from North America, four from Tonga, and the rest from Fiji. An additional ten missionaries were laboring in New Caledonia, which had been part of the mission since 1975. Eight elders from the British Commonwealth were working in the New Hebrides (now called Vanuatu), and another eight missionaries were teaching the gospel in the Gilbert Islands.

Early in the mission’s history, considerable effort was dedicated to translation projects. Because of the diversity of languages spoken in the Fiji Suva Mission however, it was difficult to make equal progress on all fronts. Some projects had to take priority. Dedicated translators worked diligently in both Fiji and Salt Lake City to prepare the Book of Mormon to be printed in Fijian. By 1980 the work was finished, and the first Fijian copies of the Book of Mormon were published.

The development of Church schools in Fiji and the establishment of the Church in New Caledonia, the New Hebrides, and the Gilbert Islands also deserves attention. Both public and private education are provided in Fiji, but most schools are operated either by local committees or by church groups. Church leaders in Suva recognized in the mid-1960s that the Suva chapel afforded an excellent facility for an LDS school. The Church School System approved the creation of the LDS Elementary School in Suva, which opened in February 1969.10 Although adjustments to the local education system had to be made, by late 1973 the school had well over a hundred students and the educational standard satisfied both the Church and the government.11

As early as 1970, mission leaders in Tonga and Fiji talked about opening a high school in Suva or Nausori. Young Latter-day Saints needed the school, and President James P. Christiansen and the Fiji missionaries believed that a high school could help attract many young people into the Church. The school could also provide a much-needed service to the people of Fiji. But the idea did not gain support among the First Presidency until early 1974, shortly after Spencer W. Kimball became president. A new school, the LDS Fiji Technical College, opened the next year. The college’s curriculum was oriented toward trades and vocations, but it also included an academic component. Perhaps the most exciting fact was that about half of the student body was composed of Indians (this was also true of the elementary school). These students, many of whom were members of the Church, may well be the future Church missionaries to India.12

On June 12, 1983, Elder Howard W. Hunter of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles organized the Suva Fiji Stake. He called Inosi Naga, a 1974 convert, as stake president.13 Since 1954, Church growth in Fiji has been steady and impressive.

The Church in New Caledonia

In 1984, New Caledonia had more than six hundred members. Church activity there began during the 1950s when a few Tahitian Latter-day Saints migrated to the French Overseas Territory to work in a nickel smelter. In July 1961, the First Presidency authorized President Kendall Young of the French-Polynesian Mission to go to Noumea, the capital of New Caledonia, and organize the city’s Tahitian members into a branch. In October, President Young visited Noumea and called Teahu Manoi, an elder in the priesthood, to be the first president of the Noumea Branch.

While in New Caledonia, President Young investigated the possibility of opening missionary work in the territory, concluding that it was time to proselyte. He sought to gain government recognition of the Church there, but it proved difficult for him to obtain visas for missionaries. In 1967, President Karl M. Richards of the French-Polynesian Mission met with the governor and high commissioner of New Caledonia, Monsieur M. Jean Risterucci, and convinced him of the need for LDS missionaries in Noumea. High Commissioner Risterucci approved visas for six Mormon missionaries in February 1967 with the understanding that the number would soon be raised to ten. President Richards then asked the First Presidency to authorize missionary work in New Caledonia.

On May 2, 1968, Elder Thomas S. Monson of the Quorum of the Twelve visited Noumea and under instructions from President David O. McKay, dedicated the land of New Caledonia for the preaching of the gospel. Two months later, on July 15, 1968, the first LDS missionaries arrived in Noumea: Harold and Jeannine Richards and their daughter Jacquelina. The son of President Karl M. Richards, Harold had learned French on his first mission in France; Jeannine was a native of France. Their knowledge of French was essential for success in this area where it was the official language of government and the language of a significant part of the population.

Although the high commissioner of New Caledonia had granted the Church permission to bring in six missionaries, the established religions, particularly the Roman Catholic Church, opposed this move. These other churches successfully delayed the entrance of additional LDS emissaries until January 1969, when Elders James A. Tatton and Lyle W. Parker received visas and entered the country.14

At the first meeting between President Richards and High Commissioner Risterucci, the commissioner had suggested that the Church buy land and build a large, impressive chapel. With this in mind, Harold Richards bought a choice piece of land. Unfortunately, someone in the Church Building Department decided that the branch in Noumea was too small to justify more than a “first phase” building. As a result, the Noumea Branch’s first building was small, consisting of little more than a chapel area. Because of this tactical error, the Church had a difficult time gaining support from French administrators in Noumea.15

Although mission leaders in Tahiti were concerned about the Saints and missionaries in New Caledonia, the distance between the two countries made it impossible for the mission president to visit New Caledonia as often as he would have liked. Although, the Church did grow during the first five years of the 1970s, it was not to the extent that might have been possible with closer supervision. To remedy the situation, the First Presidency transferred New Caledonia to the Fiji Suva Mission in June 1975.16

The New Caledonian members were soon incorporated into the mainstream of the mission. District and branch leaders attended regional meetings in Suva, and when the first area conference was held in February 1979, fifty members from New Caledonia traveled to Suva to participate. In May 1976, President Kenneth M. Palmer divided the Noumea Branch.

By 1976, through faith and hard work, the full program of the Church, including seminary, was operating in New Caledonia, according to mission records. By July 1978, there were 382 Church members, and a third branch, the Tontouta Branch, had been organized. Through careful and regular negotiations with New Caledonia government officials, President Palmer arranged to have one non-French missionary in for every two French ones, making it possible for the Church to increase the number of missionaries and to expand missionary work beyond the Noumea area. In 1984 there were more than eight hundred members in New Caledonia.

Vanuatu (The New Hebrides) and the Solomon Islands

Through the efforts and faith of Presidents Davis and Palmer, the Church established missionary work in the New Hebrides. Although the New Hebrides are made up of eighty islands and a population of close to ninety thousand people (approximately the same as Tonga), the Church has moved into the area only since 1974. The organization of the Fiji Mission created the impetus to open missionary work in this area.

The New Hebrides are racially part of Melanesia. The islands were governed through 1980 by a condominium administered jointly by the United Kingdom and France. The condominium was headed locally by French and British resident commissioners, who were assisted by a joint advisory council but who also led dual governments. English, French, and a variety of local dialects are spoken there, as well as Bislama, a kind of pidgin English and French.

The first-known Latter-day Saints to live in the New Hebrides (since World War II) were several Tongan families who migrated to Port Vila in the late 1950s. These members were not organized into a branch until July 15, 1973, when President Ebbie L. Davis created the Port Vila Branch with Lanipoto Fehoko as president. Although the area was part of the Fiji Mission, the First Presidency had not yet approved it for proselyting. As President Davis traveled from island to island, however, he determined that some of the major islands of the New Hebrides were prepared for the gospel.

President Davis visited the British resident commissioner, a Mr. Townsend, and discussed the possibility of bringing missionaries into the country. Mr. Townsend encouraged President Davis to pursue the matter as soon as Church leaders approved the move. Eight months later, in June 1974, the First Presidency gave its blessing to open the New Hebrides, the Solomons, and the Gilbert and Ellice Islands to missionary work.17

When President Davis visited Mr. Townsend again on June 11, 1974, he found that although the resident commissioner still had a favorable attitude toward the LDS Church, he could approve visas only for British Commonwealth citizens. Similarly, the French resident commissioner could approve visas only for French citizens. All other visas would have to be approved by both commissioners, and this would probably prove difficult. Nevertheless, on January 12, 1975, the first LDS missionaries entered the New Hebrides. They were Elders Mokofisi and Malohifo‘ou, native Tongans and Commonwealth citizens. Two weeks later, on January 26, 1975, President and Sister Davis flew to Port Vila, where they met with Branch President and Sister Lanipota Fehoko and Elders Mokofisi and Malohifo‘ou to dedicate the New Hebrides Islands to the preaching of the gospel. Together they climbed a small hill in Port Vila, and President Davis offered the dedicatory prayer.

Four months later, two Canadian elders, from the Canada Montreal Mission, were transferred to the New Hebrides. At that point, the immigration officer in the New Hebrides decided that four LDS missionaries were enough. His action foreshadowed greater problems to come. On July 30, 1980, the New Hebrides became the Republic of Vanuatu. The new government was hostile to LDS missionaries and soon curtailed missionary work there. Before the work stopped, however, missionaries began working in Port Vila on the island of Efate and in Santo (now Luganvile), on Espirito Santo Island. Between 1978 and 1984, Church membership grew from 83 to 120.18

Both Presidents Davis and Palmer tried to obtain permission from the government of the Solomon Islands to establish the Church in that area, but neither was successful. When President Davis applied for visas for missionaries in 1974, the Solomons were in the final stages of obtaining complete independence from the British. Government leaders desired peace and unity as the changeover approached. Because three other churches that had recently moved into the islands had caused intervillage wars, President Davis was told that no new churches would be allowed.19

Kiribati

To most people who remember World War II, the name “Gilbert Islands” represents a place in the South Pacific where thousands of servicemen lost their lives. Until 1976 the Gilbert Islands were joined with the Ellice Islands. Tarawa served as the administrative center for the Gilbert and Ellice Islands, a British Crown Colony. It is now the capital of the Republic of Kiribati (pronounced Kée-ree-boss).

In spite of the minute size of these Micronesian islands and their relatively unimportant status on the globe, since 1972 Kiribati has played an interesting and faith-promoting role in the development of the Church in the Pacific. There were no Latter-day Saints in the Gilbert Islands in 1972, but in 1984 there were more than five hundred baptized members (plus children), two branches, and a Church-run secondary school. Education missionaries were sent to Tarawa in 1976.

Living conditions in Kiribati, as in many other areas of the Pacific, can be primitive by Western standards. In December 1978, Elder Richard M. Pratt and his wife, Adline, arrived in the Gilbert Islands to teach school. In a letter written in December, Elder Pratt described the school and the people on Tarawa:

Our [five] acre campus, leased for 99 years by the Church, spreads from the ocean on the south to the road on the north next to the lagoon. . . .

Our buildings consist of 12–15 native-constructed buildings, completely made of coconut, except the two teachers’ homes have the luxury of concrete floors. . . . There are no glass windows, no doors that can be locked. The upper half of the walls are open to allow free passage of air. The often-blowing trade winds make the heat bearable. . . .

The center of the campus is dominated by the main building, some 30 by 40 feet in size, and called by the natives “maneaba” [central gathering place] (fig. 2). Its steep roof, supported on 12 coconut posts, is gracefully designed and resembles a bird in flight. This covered area is the chapel, assembly hall, and center of all campus and branch activities. The graveled floor is covered with thin coconut leaf mats. These are picked up and stored after each Sunday service. About 120 natives sit on the thin mats, no chairs, sing without accompaniment, and rejoice in the gospel from 9 until 1:30. The meetings follow each other, for these people are too poor to afford more than one bus fare a Sunday. Some come Saturday night and sleep on the gravel. It is just as good as they have at home.20

Figure 2. This Maneaba or central gathering placce, at the Moroni Community High School has been remodeled and improved since the Church Educational System assumed ownership. Courtesy Norman Faldmo Jr.

Although Elder and Sister Pratt found the standard of living far lower than in the developed part of the world, they also found a people who desired more education for their children. It was their desire for schooling that created the opportunity for the Church to enter Kiribati.

In 1972, Church school officials in Tonga began receiving letters from Waitea Abiuta, the headmaster of a small secondary school known as AKAS, an abbreviation for Auriaria Kokoi Ataria School. Waitea, representing a number of parents and board members of the AKAS, sought permission for their children to attend Liahona High School in Tonga. The request was considered seriously by leaders of the Tongan and Fiji missions and the Church Education System.

President Davis saw Waitea’s request as an opportunity to start missionary work in the Gilbert Islands. He found the department of immigration had a policy that seemed to make it impossible to establish a new church. According to this policy “when a church has 50 adult members it will be officially recognized and will be allowed to bring foreign proselyting missionaries into the Gilbert Islands.”21

Hoping that admitting students would help resolve the Church’s entry dilema, President Davis recommended that twelve Gilbertese students be allowed to enroll at Liahona High School on a trial basis. In July 1974, the Gilbertese minister of education, a Mr. Tanentoa, told President Davis that he favored the expansion of secondary education and welcomed LDS efforts in this field.22 By the end of 1976, sixty Gilbertese students had been enrolled in Liahona High School. All these students were members of other faiths when they arrived in Tonga; however, all but three or four joined the Church. Liahona High School had successfully played its role in missionary work.

From his first visit to the Gilberts in September 1972 until he was released as mission president in 1975, President Davis talked frequently with government officials about obtaining visas for missionaries. In the meantime, Gilbertese converts from Liahona High School began serving as missionaries in their native islands. On October 20, 1975, at Betio, Tarawa, President Kenneth Palmer dedicated the Gilbert Islands (soon to be Kiribati) for the preaching of the gospel.

Soon after the Church officially registered as a legal body in 1977, the department of immigration changed its long-standing policy of allowing churches with fifty adult members to bring foreign missionaries into the country. The department of immigration declared that the Church would have to use only Gilbertese missionaries. In an effort to train and strengthen these young men, President Palmer began sending all foreign elders from the Fiji area to Tarawa for the last three or four weeks of their missions. (Gilbert Island immigration laws allowed these short stays.) The experienced missionaries helped the local elders considerably, and through faith and hard work the Church grew rapidly. There were 105 baptisms in 1977 and 95 in 1978.23

In October 1980, construction began on a new chapel, which was completed in 1982. Even though some fixtures had not yet arrived from Australia to be installed, the new branch president, Buren Ratieta (the first I-Kiribati, a person from Kiribati, to so serve since Waitea was released in 1976), held the first services in the new building in February 1982. Almost 250 people attended. When the building was dedicated, the president of Kiribati attended the services. During the festivities that followed, he told the audience that he and other leading government officials originally had objected to the establishment of the LDS Church in Kiribati, fearing it would divide the people. But his attitude changed after he saw the great contribution the Church had made to the social, educational, and cultural development of his country. A manifestation of his trust in the Church was his appointment of Baitika Toun, a branch president and member of the parliament, as minister of education. Significantly, the Church, once rejected on the basis of legal technicalities and prejudice, achieved a position of trust.

The Micronesia Guam Mission

During World War II, the Marshall, Caroline, and Mariana Islands, with their tiny islands of Majuro, Kwajalein, Ponape, Truk, Yap, and Saipan, became forever ingrained on the minds of Americans and the world. Since the war, servicemen’s groups and branches of the Church have continued on Guam.

As a territory of the United States and America’s westernmost outpost, Guam played a large role in U.S. defense during the Korean and Vietnam conflicts and remains strategically important. Although English is the official language of the island, the native Chamorro language is still widely spoken.

In 1944 the first servicemen’s group was organized. On August 25, 1955, President Joseph Fielding Smith visited Guam and dedicated it to the preaching of the gospel. In January 1957, the first full-time missionaries arrived. Elder Mark E. Petersen of the Council of the Twelve dedicated the first chapel in 1959. Until the 1970s, however, the missionaries confined their efforts almost entirely to Americans who were interested in the Church.24

Before being made the headquarters of the Micronesia Guam Mission in 1980, Guam was part of the Japanese, the Northern Far East, the Southern Far East, and the Hawai‘i Honolulu missions, and it belonged to the Kaneohe Hawai‘i Stake—even though Guam is separated from Hawai‘i by 3,300 miles of ocean. In spring 1980, Guam and Micronesia became a separate mission, with Ferron C. Losee as president.

In January 1975, President Robert E. Crandall of the Hawai‘i Honolulu Mission sent Elders Callis Carleton and Jeffery Frame to Saipan, headquarters of the U.S. Trust Territory in the Mariana Islands. This was the first real move into Micronesia proper. Elders Carleton and Frame, like elders who opened new areas elsewhere in the Pacific, encountered opposition from the Roman Catholic clergy and also had difficulty arranging for an appropriate place for meetings. These problems notwithstanding, they proselyted among the people of Saipan and soon baptized their first convert. Through the help of Alfred “Mustang” Gonzales, a member who was working on a new airport, the elders found a quonset hut for Sunday meetings and began holding services. Before long, replacements came for the original elders, and two additional missionaries brought the force to four.

Among the early converts was Brad Nago, who had come with his family to Saipan to work on the airport. There he met Brother Gonzales, and the two became good friends. The story is told that Nago saw Gonzales at a café one day, and they talked about Gonzales’ planned return to Hawai‘i. Brother Gonzales told Brad Nago that he needed a replacement as branch president for the little branch that had been formed. Brother Gonzales jokingly informed cigar-smoking Brad Nago that he was the man for the position. Subsequently, Nago and his family studied the gospel and were baptized in January 1976. Ironically, Brother Nago replaced Gonzales as president of the Saipan Branch. By July 1978, the Saipan branch had sixty-nine members.

Through the enthusiastic encouragement of Elder John H. Groberg, Area Supervisor for Hawai‘i and the South Pacific, President William W. Cannon of the Hawai‘i Honolulu Mission led the expansion of the mission into all seven districts of the U.S. Trust Territory. More than forty missionaries, many of whom were from Tonga and Samoa, began proselyting on or near Saipan, Palau, Yap, Truk, Ponape, Kwajalein, and Majuro. In March 1979, there were only five hundred Church members in these islands,25 but by 1983 the number had grown to over three thousand in nineteen branches.

Because the Trust Territory was under U.S. protection and control, the Church had no difficulty bringing missionaries into the area. In fact, the timing for entry was right because subsequent political changes may have made it more difficult later. Within Guam and Kiribati there are nine distinct cultural groups and at least nine different languages. Nevertheless, through the Church’s programs, including seminary and possibly schools, the gospel can greatly enrich the lives of many people in this far-flung part of the world.26

Papua New Guinea

With the exception of Australia, New Guinea is the most densely populated area in the Pacific. New Guinea is the second largest island in the world. Papua New Guinea’s (PNG) dense jungles, mangrove swamps, savannas, and high mountains topped with snow evidence a land of diversity and challenges for the Church. The country includes the east end of New Guinea (the west half is called Irian Jaya, part of Indonesia) and six hundred other islands.

PNG’s rivers, forests, and mountains created an isolating effect that helped preserve a multitude of nations and tribes. It has been suggested that the seven or eight hundred languages account for a sixth of the world’s tongues. Most used are English, Tok Pisin (pidgin), and hiri motu. Tok Pisin has rapidly become the lingua franca of the country. The vast majority of people in PNG are Melanesians, but within that classification are found a rich variety of cultures and customs.

LDS missionaries had visited New Guinea for twenty-five years or more before seriously attempting to gain a permanent foothold. Shortly after becoming president of the Australia Brisbane Mission in July 1980, Dennis D. Flake sent Elder and Sister L. Douglas Johnson to Port Moresby, PNG’s capital city, to open missionary work. The Johnsons and the couples who followed them devoted their time to gaining legal recognition for the Church, making friends, and meeting with those who invited the missionaries to share the restored gospel with them. The Church gained legal status in May 1981 and has the right to lease land for chapels and other church buildings (although no land is held free and clear). To date, LDS missionaries have not ventured far beyond the capital, but several branches of expatriates have been formed in some mining districts on the islands. In addition to the three or four branches in Port Moresby, there are small branches at Lae, Arawa, and Rabaul.

In April 1983, Elder L. Tom Perry of the Quorum of the Twelve and Bishop H. Burke Peterson of the Presiding Bishopric visited Port Moresby, and Elder Perry offered a prayer dedicating that land for missionary work. During their visit, these Church leaders and the mission president held planning meetings for the Church’s future development in PNG. They decided to move slowly and baptize only as many members as could be trained in doctrine, government, and church administration. The idea was to prepare the PNG members to govern themselves first and then to spread the gospel beyond Port Moresby and its immediate hinterland.

Although the missionary couples who labored there maintained a low profile and did not proselyte openly, many people asked to be taught. By late 1983, Church membership had grown to more than 750, and a chapel was constructed in 1983–84. Although the plan of Church leaders was to contain growth within the Port Moresby area, there were signs that because of the transient nature of the people the gospel was finding its way into villages and homes outside the capital.27

Post Script—The View from the Year 2000

The foregoing was written in the early 1980s. A decade and a half later, the story as told seems somewhat abrupt and truncated. Indeed it is, for history never stops. But we always want to know the latest report and the most up-to-date statistics. Fortunately, the history of the Church in Melanesia and Micronesia since 1984 has been positive. Indeed, so much progress has been made and so much growth has occurred that considerably more could be written regarding the period since 1984 than is said here of the period before that time. There has been steady growth in most areas and remarkable growth in others. For example, by 1999 Fiji had over twelve thousand Latter-day Saints—an increase of more than 200 percent since 1985—and four stakes. In 2000, President Gordon B. Hinckley dedicated a temple in Suva. Kiribati had 7,964 members and Papua New Guinea 8,954. Each country had a stake. Church growth in Kiribati increased 1,184 percent between 1985 and 1999. Growth in Papua New Guinea grew 646 percent for the same period. According to official Church statistics, the number of members in Melanesia and Micronesia grew from 9,934 in 1985 to 40,763 in 1999, an increase of 310 percent.28

Progress has occurred in other areas. Modest chapels have been constructed to serve many branches in Micronesia, and larger meetinghouses have been constructed in the more populous areas. Scriptures and gospel study manuals have been translated and published in several Micronesian languages—notably Gilberteses, Marshallese, and Palauan. In Melanesia, Church materials are now being published in Bislama, which is used in Vanuatu, and Tok Pisin, which is spoken in Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands.

The Church Education System has organized seminary classes in most of the wards and branches of this entire area. BYU–Hawai‘i now enrolls a number of students from Melanesia and Micronesia. The LDS Technical School is thriving in Fiji, and the Moroni Community School in Kiribati has grown to over four hundred pupils. Elder L. Tom Perry rededicated the islands of Kiribati, Nauru, Tuvalu, Tokelau, Wallis, Futuna, and Vanuatu on August 10, 1996, in a single prayer.29

For those who love the peoples of the South Pacific, the continued advance of the Restored Gospel into the islands of the sea is positive and exciting. Total membership figures will probably never be extremely great in this far-flung part of the world. However, the evidences of the Lord’s hand are clear among the islanders of Melanesia and Micronesia.

12:["$","$L1d",null,{"book":{"id":30,"title":"Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","subtitle":"Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","image_id":"website-files-bucket/books/book_cover_images/book-voyages.jpg","excerpt":"","book_series_id":null,"series_ordering":0,"ebook_link_kindle":null,"ebook_link_deseret":null,"ebook_link_nook":null,"free_book":0,"pdf_id":null,"footnotes":null,"public":1,"slug":"voyages-of-faith","wp_id":77384,"product_link":"product/voyages-of-faith-explorations-in-mormon-pacific-history","author_id":null},"chapter":{"id":547,"title":"Founding the LDS Church in Melanesia and Micronesia","subtitle":null,"online_book_id":30,"excerpt":null,"content":"$1e","intro_text":"$1f","page_number":267,"previous_chapter":"the-singing-mama-ruau-of-tahiti","next_chapter":"personal-voyages","pdf_id":null,"footnotes":"$20","slug":"founding-the-lds-church-in-melanesia-and-micronesia","public":1,"wp_id":null,"test":"546","podcast_file_id":null,"section_heading":null,"chapter_author":null},"topics":[],"scriptures":[],"authors":[],"processedContent":{"html":"$21","headings":[{"id":"heading-0","textContent":"The Fiji Mission Area","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-1","textContent":"The Church in New Caledonia","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-2","textContent":"Vanuatu (The New Hebrides) and the Solomon Islands","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-3","textContent":"Kiribati","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-4","textContent":"The Micronesia Guam Mission","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-5","textContent":"Papua New Guinea","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-6","textContent":"Post Script—The View from the Year 2000","tagName":"H2"}]}}]