For nearly thirty-five years, Eric B. Shumway has been affiliated with BYU–Hawai‘i. Currently serving as its president, he has also been academic vice-president, Chair of the Division of Language, Literature, and Communication, and professor of English literature. For an even longer period of time, though, Shumway has been associated with Tonga. He filled a mission there in the late 1950s, returned in the 1960s as a Tongan linguist and language coordinator for the United States Peace Corps, and served there in the 1980s as mission president. Few pālangi (non-islanders) know the Tongan people and their language as well as Shumway. His love of the people and intimate familiarity with their culture shows through in this compassionate yet candid portrayal of one of the great Tongan Latter-day Saints of the twentieth century. Shumway’s piece, first presented at the 1985 MPHS annual conference, not only offers readers an engaging portrayal of Tēvita Muli Kinikini the man, but it provides an informative and fascinating glimpse of life into Kinikini’s generation.

16:{"metadata":[["$","title","0",{"children":"Tēvita Muli Kinikini: Portrait of a Tongan Pioneer - Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History"}],["$","meta","1",{"name":"description","content":"$1b"}],["$","meta","2",{"name":"keywords","content":"Tēvita Muli Kinikini: Portrait of a Tongan Pioneer, Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History, online books, BYU Studies"}],["$","link","3",{"rel":"canonical","href":"https://byustudies.byu.edu/online-book/voyages-of-faith/tevita-muli-kinikini-portrait-of-a-tongan-pioneer"}],["$","link","4",{"rel":"icon","href":"/favicon.ico","type":"image/x-icon","sizes":"16x16"}],["$","$L1c","5",{}]],"error":null,"digest":"$undefined"} 1a:"$16:metadata" 1d:I[66263,["1120","static/chunks/1120-75f909259fd067cc.js","5466","static/chunks/5466-b96f3c00376edc43.js","8534","static/chunks/8534-7ca745715241e193.js","9126","static/chunks/9126-91257ba5fa5d06c5.js","8387","static/chunks/8387-2bdb776aa3fa620b.js","6874","static/chunks/6874-bf14f6d1ebc153cc.js","9383","static/chunks/9383-5debb36c04efe52f.js","3063","static/chunks/3063-404186ec4ce8f075.js","7132","static/chunks/7132-1bf9ca313709cfa3.js","5858","static/chunks/5858-a921a795a1989287.js","9233","static/chunks/9233-cd31d8c4ef751ef5.js","8361","static/chunks/8361-ec429c2d2a4b8505.js","7594","static/chunks/app/(site)/(containers)/(content)/online-book/%5BbookId%5D/%5BchapterId%5D/page-aca9af7241f107d8.js"],"default"] 1e:T11a7c,

On Monday, October 8, 1984, at the Memorial Estates Chapel in Salt Lake City, the eighty-one-year-old body of Brother Tēvita Muli Kinikini rested serenely in a polished bronze casket surrounded by a forest of flowers. His wife, Le‘o, sat on the floor in front of the casket, moaning her sorrow in pitiful expressions of grief and love. Muli’s ten living children lined the wall close to the casket to greet the large numbers of mourners and friends that did not stop until 11 p.m. Sixty-two grandchildren and seventeen great-grandchildren sat around the room, mainly in the large mat-covered section of the chapel. Wearing their fluffy Sunday best and whispering in perfect Utah English, they stared at the grandeur of gifts and the stream of visitors. Grandson Va‘inga, dressed in an immaculate white suit, stood at the head of the casket to greet visitors and to quiet the wailing that rose periodically from the mourners who pressed to see and embrace the remains of one of the remarkable elders of the Church in the Tongan Islands.1

The life story of Tēvita Muli Kinikini, dictated by him in Tongan just two years before his death, is one of a truly converted man who reared a large family with small means, taught the gospel at great sacrifice, built the Church, and overcame the vicissitudes of his own upbringing and the politics of his day. It is also the fascinating saga of a man born and reared without formal education on the tiny island of ‘Uiha (in the Ha‘apai group of the Tongan Islands), but who in the 1940s, ’50s, and ’60s became one of the powerful forces in the growth of the Church and in missionary work throughout Tonga (fig. 1).

[caption] Figure 1. Tēvita Muli Kinikini and Le‘o Tukui Kinikini, c. 1970s. Courtesy Kinikini Family.[/caption]

Before discussing Brother Kinikini’s life, I want to make a brief comment about the historical document itself as he dictated it. First, Muli, who dictated his history in Tongan, spoke his history as if preaching to a large audience; as if, like King Benjamin, he had mounted a tower surrounded by his posterity to speak to them from his heart. The tone and modulation of his voice carry the distinctive characteristics of high Tongan oratory. Barely an hour into his narrative, his voice begins to fail. But he perseveres, concluding his account in a husky, barely audible whisper.

Furthermore, Muli’s narrative does not disguise his shortcomings as a human being. His fierce pride, for example, and his love for spectator applause are seen in both the weal and the woe of his long life. But one thing is certain, his testimony of Christ and the Church was real and was born of the Spirit.

Finally, although a writer of poetry and a teller of tales, Muli speaks his history in concise, almost stark language. There are no rhetorical flourishes typical of Tongan orators. He concentrates on his missionary work and his public service as a composer of music and dance. He does not try to elaborate or expound upon the meaning of his life. He simply tells it. His most often repeated expression is “thanks be to God.” The overriding testimony of his life is that Heavenly Father honors the man who honors his priesthood, and there is no limit to what a worthy man can accomplish or endure.

Muli’s Youth

Muli begins his account with a description of his father and mother. His father, Taniela Kinikini, was a member of the Free Church of Tonga, a preacher and a man of renowned psychic powers who had dreams and saw visions. His mother, Selita Valu Malupō, was the daughter of the paramount chief of the island. Three of her brothers held the title Malupō while Muli lived in ‘Uiha. As the son of the sister of Malupō, Muli had claim on the wealth and the property of his fa‘ē tangata or maternal uncle.

Muli illustrates the visionary powers of his father with a story I heard him tell many times in Tonga. His father had given the oldest son, Pekipaki, the equivalent of $80 in a small leather sack to take with him to Pangai to buy supplies for the family—flour, soap, kerosene, and so forth. Pekipaki arrived in the little boat at Pangai only to discover that the small leather pouch of money had disappeared. He came back in shame and fled to the bush and stayed there until his father sent other sons to bring him home. The father had dreamed a dream and had seen the pouch of money at the bottom of forty feet of water between the reef and a large coral head on the route from ‘Uiha to Pangai. The description was so clear that divers recovered the money instantly.

Muli says very little about his youth except that he was somewhat of a rascal, begat an illegitimate child, but was fortunate enough to marry Le‘o Tukui, whose father was a member of the LDS Church. After Le‘o and Muli’s second child was born, Le‘o’s father came to Muli and asked if they could hold a pō malanga, or religious meeting, in their home. It was a double embarrassment for Muli. He could not refuse his father-in-law, but he also could not embarrass his uncle, the high chief Malupō, who disliked the Church. The only way out was to let the Mormon missionaries use his home but not to attend the meeting himself. As he puts it, “I stood in the roadway because I hated the Mormon Church.”

The Meeting That Changed His Life

This particular meeting was to change Muli’s life and attitude about the Church. One single principle riveted Muli’s attention and stirred his interest. A young Caucasian elder, Elder Miller, stood and testified, “People of ‘Uiha, I testify to you this night that I do not receive one black cent [a Tongan expression] from the Church as payment or wage for my missionary work. I come from America, I work without pay because that is the commandment of Jesus Christ.”

Ministerial salaries in his own church, with all the attendant difficulties of a paid clergy, were problematic for Muli. He records his reaction: “I strode swiftly and stood just outside of the house by the doorway. Another man preached and testified that he too labored without pay. I moved forward even closer. After the service . . . I asked for scriptural references.” Muli took the references and asked his wife to read them from her Bible. After hearing the testimony of the scriptures he said, “I will wait no longer. I will be baptized.”

Word got out quickly into the village that Muli was to be baptized. His parents threatened a double suicide if he did, so he postponed his baptism a week. The honorable Malupō was furious at the news and threatened to take away Muli’s plantation land as well as his village lot, but the surge of faith was too great in Muli. He simply said to the noble, “Do as you please with my land. Take it away. I will go to Tongatapu, Vava‘u, Fiji, or Samoa and get an inheritance of land, but the inheritance in Heaven will not be gotten in any other church but The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.” When Muli was baptized, persecution was intense but short-lived. He was soon reconciled both to his parents and to the noble. The village still gossiped, however, and made fun of him.

An Apostle’s Promise

Muli and Le‘o continued to have more children, all boys. They hoped for a little girl, but Muli’s father, the village psychic, had seen in a dream that Muli and Le‘o would never have any girls. In 1937, Elder George Albert Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles visited Tonga. The ‘Uiha branch received instructions to prepare dances and other performances and come to the conference to be held in Pangai. Each family was asked to donate food to take care of the visitors from Tongatapu. In the prime of his life and very energetic, Muli accepted a full assignment for his family. He composed the dances, dried and salted fish, harvested his yams, boxed up his pigs and took them all to conference in Pangai. He had one thing in his mind. He was going to ask the visiting apostle to bless his wife to have a baby girl. The request was granted by Elder Smith in very specific blessing, “Your next baby will be a girl. Not only that, you will have other girls.”

Unwise perhaps in his exuberance, Muli announced the promise to Saints and nonmembers alike. Knowing Muli’s father’s declaration, the people of ‘Uiha were caught up in excited speculation. It was the visionary power of Muli’s father versus the blessing of the Church’s apostle. When Le‘o became pregnant again, the “contest” was common discussion in all village circles. On the night Le‘o delivered, Muli says, “People were everywhere around our house listening and waiting to see if the apostle’s promise was true or false. When the midwife announced, ‘You are blessed with a little girl’ the mockers suddenly disappeared.”

“I Am a Bearer of the Holy Priesthood”

Several years after Muli was baptized he became an elder. The mission presidents in those days were not quick to bestow the Melchizedek Priesthood on the Tongan brethren. But when Muli did become an elder, he determined to honor it. Gifted naturally with a handsome body, a soft cheerful disposition, and fine poetic and musical talent, Muli was very attractive to many people, including bold women. On a trip to Tongatapu with the Methodist choir to sing in their conference, Muli slept in the cabin of their boat. In the middle of the night he suddenly felt himself being embraced. Not only did he resist, but he lectured the intruder.

Amelia, [the poor woman has been identified for posterity] don’t you know me? I am a bearer of the holy priesthood in the Church of Christ. Adultery is an abomination. Therefore I say to you, “Get out of here. Go back to your boat . . . if you don’t go, I will shout for everyone to hear that a woman has come to my bed to seduce me.”

The woman disappeared instantly and Muli records, “I thank the Lord for protecting me and saving me from this temptation.”

Two other times in Muli’s account he records in some embarrassing detail how he was approached and propositioned by women and how he resisted. Each time he says, “I do not want to give the impression that I am a strong person, but to express gratitude for the Lord giving me the strength to resist temptation.”

In 1939 all American missionaries except the mission president were called back home because of the impending war. Muli describes his and Le‘o’s affection for them. “They were like our own children, yet they helped me in spiritual things, and I received strength and energy from them in the work of Christ.” Muli later intimates that one value in the missionaries’ departure was that he was forced to rely upon himself in spiritual things. He was no longer dependent upon the missionaries and did not run to them for blessings and advice. He became a spiritual leader to his family.

The Entire Missionary Force in Vava‘u

When the American elders returned home, President Emile Dunn turned to Tongan elders for service as missionaries. In 1941, Muli and Le‘o and their entire family were called on a mission to Vava‘u to labor in the little island of Kōloa, while Elder Mahu‘inga Folau was to serve in mainland Vava‘u in the village of Tu‘anuku. These two men were to be the entire missionary force in Vava‘u at that time (map 1).

[caption] Map 1[/caption]

The call from President Dunn could not have come at a worse time financially for the Kinikini family, which had now grown to eight people. They had no money, few clothes, no soap or kerosene, and of course they would have to pay their own way. Muli sold all his pigs for eight shillings apiece, made as much copra as he possibly could to sell, processed coconut oil to use in lamps instead of kerosene, and sent his two sons, Tēvita, age ten, and Kime, age nine, out to work. After a long struggle, they were able to secure passage to Vava‘u and arrived at their assigned village with eight shillings in their pocket. Exhausted and hungry from their voyage, they were delighted to find a small pile of manioke (tapioca root) that they could prepare for their first meal. The manioke was tough and strong. They boiled it and poured off the water four different times before they let it simmer in coconut milk. The tapioca was delicious, records Muli, but at 2 a.m. all the children began to vomit. They were very sick. Le‘o began to complain and told Muli to return to ‘Uiha and bring them provisions of food. Muli comforted his wife by insisting that the scriptures promise, “While you are in the service of the Lord, if you eat anything poison you will not die.” Thankfully, the children recovered.

The people of Kōloa were very reserved at first. One Saturday afternoon, Muli and his three small sons went out in the lagoon to fish for their Sunday meal. Returning at 7:30 that evening they found Le‘o waiting for them at the beach. “We have a funeral on our hands,” she said. Vika Fatafehi, 105 years old, had died while Muli was away fishing. Before she passed away she had sent for Muli three times to come and administer to her. Muli rushed to clean up before visiting the family. While he was putting on his clothes and tying his ta‘ovala mat around his waist, an unmistakable impression came over him. As he records, “It was as if a voice whispered to me, ‘Go and restore Vika to life.’” Frightened and nervous, he felt the distance between him and his home in ‘Uiha. He was a foreigner on alien soil. The voice came again. “Go!” He picked up his consecrated oil and left. Le‘o saw the oil and said, “Where are you going?”

“I am going to bless Vika to live.”

Startled and worried, Le‘o cried out “Oh Muli, come back! You’ll be the laughing stock of all Tonga. We’ll all be ridiculed if Vika doesn’t revive. Our shame will spread throughout Tonga.”

But Muli was fixed in his purpose and told Le‘o that the Spirit was guiding him. When he entered the home where Vika lay, he was gently upbraided by the women who reminded him that they had sent for him three times before Vika had passed away. Muli records,

I said nothing, but knelt by Vika’s head, lifted her shroud, picked up the sacred oil and anointed her. I could see the faces of the people, winking at each other and mocking, but I did not hesitate, for I knew this was the Lord’s commandment to me to restore this woman to life and to show His power.

Muli pleaded with the Lord to honor his blessing, lest God’s name be defamed. After the administration, Muli returned to his hut. Soon a messenger appeared to tell him that Vika was conscious and had told the people of the house about her experiences in the spirit world. Thanking the messenger, he promised to visit the family the next morning.

Close relatives responding to news of Vika’s death began to arrive from all over Vava‘u. Several of these people were at a kava assembly with the elders of the village; Muli was also present. To this group Vika’s son, Taufa, pleaded that they simply wait around for a day or two because Vika would no doubt die. They could participate in the funeral services and then be free to leave. Of this moment Muli says in his account, “The voice spoke to me again that I should tell them Vika would not die. So I told them all that not one Latter-day Saint, including Vika, would die as long as I was a missionary here in Kōloa.”

Through the power of the priesthood, Vika Fatafehi was restored to health sufficient to offer the opening prayer at the centennial celebration of the Relief Society held in Neiafu a few months later.

Muli’s faith and courage from that time on never faltered. He presided over the little branch with dignity and compassion and became a friend to the entire village. At the district conference held in Neiafu, October 1942, the little branch of Kōloa won the dance and choir competition, competing with the larger, well-established branches of Ha‘alaufuli and Neiafu. It was a time of great rejoicing and spiritual revival, but the joy was abruptly changed to weeping when President Dunn announced that the Kinikini family was being transferred from Kōloa to the island of ‘Otea. Le‘o cried out her disappointment, but as Muli says in his narrative, “I strained to keep back the tears lest the president should think I did not support his decision.”

It was a sorrowful delegation of Kōloa Saints who went to President Dunn to protest. “Why do you take our missionary away when we are so well organized? We have such a good choir, and there is so much activity in the branch.”

President Dunn’s response was, “There are only two active members of the Church in ‘Otea at the moment. If the branch is not built up soon, we will have to shut it down completely.”

After three days of farewell parties with the Saints and the people of Kōloa, the Kinikini family put their belongings in an outboard, flat-bottom boat and were taken the dozen or so miles to ‘Otea, known for its pineapple, frequent famines, and poison fish. The disappointment of leaving Kōloa was compounded by the discovery that the missionary house in ‘Otea had long been uninhabited, except for pigs and chickens. So the first night Muli and his family slept in the chapel and they spent the next day scrubbing, disinfecting, and burning to make the house livable.

After such warm and loving support in Kōloa, the response of the people of ‘Otea seemed cold and indifferent. Le‘o began to murmur. In an effort to cheer up his wife he announced, “Le‘o, the first man who comes by is going to be baptized into the Church.” Not too long after this dramatic announcement a man of substance in the community did come by (Muli doesn’t mention his name) and was immediately charmed by Muli’s good nature and by the cold drink and flour cakes that Le‘o had prepared. After a long and friendly conversation, the man made an offer to the Kinikini family, which they immediately recognized as a blessing from the Lord. The man said that they could have free access to all the food (taro, bananas, pineapple, and coconut) on his plantation nearby and that he would allow them to gather the coconuts on his plantation outside the village to make copra to sell.

The Kinikini family were well taken care of. But they were the only ones who attended church. Muli longed for a healthy congregation. The village was full of inactive members who had fallen away since the departure of the full-time elders from America. As it turned out, Muli was to win back most of the congregation through a series of remarkable uses of his priesthood authority. A man by the name of Akolea, who later would be a stalwart in the labor missionary program in Tonga and Hawai‘i, lay in his house suffering from a frightful boil. Muli administered to Akolea, who was relieved almost instantly of his affliction. Later his wife, ‘Ofa, also suffering from a terrible boil on her neck, came to Muli and asked for a similar blessing. She was a staunch Methodist and had kept her husband away from the Church. Muli simply said, “Do you believe in Christ and his church?”

“I believe because my husband was healed,” said the woman. The boil on her neck was large, deep, and dangerous. Tongans call it fula. Five days after the blessing, she was cured and asked for baptism. Another couple named Siale and Kale brought their child Peneti who had been ill for years and whose sickness had steadily increased in seriousness until the boy could not eat, speak, or even cry. He was hardly aware of anything around him. Muli fasted and prayed with the father and mother (who were members of another faith), then blessed the child to live and be healed. As the adults were breaking their fast over a nice meal, Peneti began to cry for the first time in months. Muli told the parents to give him bread. He was healed instantly. The parents insisted that they, along with their six children, be baptized into the Church. By now there was a substantial congregation of adults and children, enthusiastic, loving, and united.

However, the new missionary couple had not yet been accepted by the entire village. Indeed, nearly every success had brought expressions of anger from ministers of other churches. The worst of all was the village chief, Vehikite. Vehikite had long been inactive in the Church. According to Muli, he had been lured away by a chiefly title and his position as district officer, given him by the government. At a fono, or town meeting, Vehikite rebuked and humiliated the Mormon missionary for his activities. Wise as a serpent and harmless as a dove, Muli waited for an opportunity to talk with Vehikite. One afternoon he saw the chief go into the bush. Muli followed him with his own machete and hoe. He found Vehikite digging deep holes to plant his yams. Without a word, Muli came forward and began to help Vehikite. The chief seemed irritated but could not, according to custom, reject the offer of help. In Muli’s inimitable friendly way, he was able to engage Vehikite in pleasant conversation and win his confidence. The chief told him about a dream that had been bothering him for a long time. He said to Brother Kinikini: “I saw myself sitting in a large assembly of people. Tungī Mailefihi [Queen Sālote’s consort] was speaking. But as I listened to him, suddenly I could see that his entire body was full of gaping holes.”

When Vehikite had finished the account of his dream, Muli deftly offered an interpretation to Vehikite, saying it was the Lord’s way of telling him that the ways of the chiefs were corrupt and that these would not sustain either the body or the spirit but would leave gaping holes and starving souls. Muli later clinched his point with a direct rebuke to Vehikite. “You left the Church because of this worldly position of yours, so you could get money. Come back.”

Vehikite was so moved by this interpretation and rebuke that he was in church the very next Sunday with his chiefly ta‘ovala and a tie. His return was a consternation to the other churches. Muli again expressed his gratitude to the Lord “for doing things to bring about His will and save His people.”

The Piu Tausinga family was the next to come back into the Church when Muli administered to their little boy who had been sick for some time with what apparently was gastritis. Another child in the family had died of it. The little boy was healed and the whole family became active again.

By now the branch flourished and Elder Kinikini was received throughout the village, except in the home of the chief minister of the Queen’s church. The faifekau (minister) threw Muli out of his house rather than listen to his testimony. The minister shrieked his disapproval of the Mormon missionary over the pulpit, in his residential compound, and even in the streets. His fury was not calmed by Muli’s apologetic nature. To him, Muli was a sheep stealer, an unlearned upstart, who was foisting his American religion upon the sacred traditions of the state church. In a terrible scene at the little village wharf, as the old man was departing for Neiafu for a short visit to his daughter, he shouted that he would kill Muli when he returned. (Muli points out that the poor minister was a tiny wisp of a man that one could knock over with a slight push.) The minister never returned to ‘Otea. He died while he was in Neiafu and was buried in the village of Makave.

A Grand Lakalaka Dance

One of the more exciting adventures of Muli’s ministry in ‘Otea was a big celebration in which all of Vava‘u entertained the crown prince (the present king) who came as part of a search for soldiers to represent Tonga in the war. Vehikite announced in a town meeting that he wanted Muli to teach the village a grand lakalaka2 dance that would compete with performances from the other villages in the celebration. Muli protested. Vehikite insisted. “After all,” he said, “you come from ‘Uiha, the beginning and the end of Tongan faiva, of music and dance performances.” How could Muli resist such a compliment to his island and to himself?

The whole village launched into lakalaka practices. Every household donated large amounts of food to feed the multitude of dancers and singers. Every day of practice included a feast for the entire community. As Muli puts it, “Cattle and pigs died for us while we learned the dances.” It was high excitement. Such a public affair to be presided over by the crown prince meant that every village would put its pride and reputation at stake. Hundreds of people would come with the crown prince from Tonga and Ha‘apai. Thousands of Vava‘u people would descend on the capital village of Neiafu to see and be seen in some of the most spectacular performances to be staged anywhere in Tonga. The villagers of the winning performances would be duly honored by the crown prince. Some of the best punake, or composers, would be represented, including Fakatava who, along with Malukava from Lapaha in Tongatapu, was the most famous composer in the kingdom.

In many lakalaka lyrics there is one verse that boasts of the prowess of the composer who makes jibes and sarcastic comments about his rival poets performing in the celebration. The ‘Otea lakalaka, composed and produced by Muli, was magnificent, and his fetau against the other composers focused on the famous Fakatava. Lustily, the singers sang out Muli’s challenge:

I’m here to speak out with force,And broadcast in a manner you will understand.Composers and performers alike come closeAnd cower in my shadow by my side,For I make a clean sweep like a broom (pulumu tafi),I am the tiger that guards this harbor.

According to Muli, the crowd was ecstatic by this challenge to the famous Fakatava, who responded to the ‘Otea lakalaka with his own fetau:

Poets and performers, hear me,Especially the upstart rookie poets (meaning Muli).In one hundred years only eight real poets have been designated.My island of KalauWas given me by the King,A gift for his true poet laureate.

This was heady business for Muli. With little experience but immense confidence, pride, and native talent, he successfully challenged the laureate of the kingdom. The prince was delighted with the rivalry, and the people saw two wonderful lakalaka. However, no winner was chosen, and the crown prince invited everybody back the next morning to see the final confrontation of the two poets.

The ‘Otea villagers were frantic with excitement and pride, but it was Muli who was feeling the grandest, as if the faiva spirit of his home island had possessed him. But then came the shocker. Vehikite said to Muli, “How about our learning a brand new lakalaka for tomorrow?” Muli simply asked the question, “Could our people stay up all night?” Everyone agreed, and Muli immediately went to work on a ta‘anga (a set of lyrics) that would be one grand fetau against Fakatava. All night they practiced and polished, right up to the 8 a.m. performance the next day. Muli’s description of the dance follows: “The choreography was astounding, producing awe and fear in the spectators. The men leaped and twisted. Huge bodies threw themselves flat on the ground, springing up again into the air. All movements were performed in perfect unity.”

All Vava‘u was stirred by the nature of this performance. Jealousy and anger rushed through the ranks of Fakatava’s lakalaka. A brawl was imminent. Wisely, the crown prince declared Fakatava’s lakalaka first, and ‘Otea’s lakalaka valedictorian, which was the same thing as saying they were both number one. Thus was Muli’s description of his public triumph as a composer.

Muli and Le‘o at Home

Shortly after this triumph, Muli and Le‘o completed their tenure in ‘Otea and were released to go back to ‘Uiha. No doubt Muli felt the let-down, for in Vava‘u he was a well-known and respected minister of Christ and the Church. Back in his home village he was simply Muli Kinikini. His homecoming was later marred by an ugly quarrel with one of his first cousins, who had appropriated some of Muli’s plantation property. The dispute became a serious family confrontation that had to be settled by the governor of Ha‘apai. The governor ruled in Muli’s favor. His cousin became enraged, threatening to shoot Muli and Le‘o both. These were no idle threats, for shortly thereafter the cousin found Muli and Le‘o together in a relatively remote spot by the sea. The man appeared out of the bush and fired a shot from his gun that barely missed. The man loaded his gun and strode forward. Le‘o cried out, “Jesus save us.”

Muli stood before the man and said, “Stop this nonsense.” The man then announced his intentions of shooting both of them. Muli held out his hand and said, “The gun will not fire again. In the name of Christ and by the authority of the priesthood that I hold, the gun will not fire at all.” Three times the man pulled the trigger, but the gun did not fire, at which point the man dropped the gun and cried, “Oh, Muli, please forgive me.” Said Muli, “You may have this land. My blood is more important to me than soil.” Although Muli forgave the man, the villagers did not and he was arrested. Muli later testified in court in the man’s behalf to save him from prison.

In 1947, Muli became a counselor in the Ha‘apai District Presidency. In 1948 an all-mission conference of the LDS Church was held in Vava‘u. The traditional lakalaka competition was to be held as part of the conference. The only instruction from mission headquarters was that the lakalaka had to have something to do with some aspect of Church history or the history of Joseph Smith. Muli declares in his history that he knew only two things (besides the fact that he was a prophet) at that time about Joseph Smith: (a) that he had a vision in the grove, and (b) that he was killed by assassins. (At that time there was very little Church material translated into the Tongan language.)

Muli took this assignment very seriously. He fasted and prayed for inspiration. His creation was destined not only to win the competition in Vava‘u but also to become the signature performance for the school dance of Liahona High School. It was later performed in its entirety as part of the evening show of the Polynesian Cultural Center in Hawai‘i. Muli claims that the Joseph Smith lakalaka was performed in many places in Vava‘u before and after the conference of 1949. It moved many people to tears and softened hearts. It was the first time many people understood any of the history of Joseph Smith. In 1953, Muli’s Joseph Smith lakalaka was performed at the dedication of the Liahona High School and it was performed every time visitors came to Liahona.

In 1956, Muli was set apart as the president of the ‘Uiha branch. Part of his responsibility was to help the building missionaries construct the brick chapel. Typical of his narrative, Muli does not spend much time talking about the events leading to the dedication of the chapel. He concentrates principally on highlights of the big day. But the plans for the biggest celebration ever on ‘Uiha island were marred by disputes and quarrels among the members. The arguments apparently were over Muli’s insistence that the dedication celebrations be the biggest and the best in the mission for chapel dedications. Since his son Takapautolo was the band master of Liahona High School, Muli was able to secure the band to entertain leaders of the mission, the school, and the building program.

Apparently several members resented Muli’s ploy for a grand show, and instead of promising two large pola (banquet litters) of food apiece for the katoanga (celebration), they promised only two plates per family. Muli could barely contain his fury, but fortunately he was able to channel it in a constructive way. He just went to his own brothers, adding to their assignment the food allotment of the “rebellious” members. Muli himself determined to entertain all the top visitors at his pola. Some of his members accused him of fiematamu‘a (wanting too much to be in front), to be seen as a leader. Muli prepared seventeen pola for that feast. Besides the huge pola of food, the villagers also made the traditional, formal gift presentation called hā‘unga, which included dozens of baskets of food, kava plants, ten large pigs, and a huge live sea turtle.

“Ours Was a Little Island”

As to the education of his and Le‘o’s children, Muli had an all-consuming ambition that every one of his children finish high school. He himself had gone only a few years to primary school. During the 1950s, his time and energy were expended gathering, cutting, drying, scraping, and processing coconuts to make copra; he also fished and sold his catches to help meet the school expenses of his large family. In his tribute to his father, the oldest son, Tēvita Fanamaka Kinikini, exclaims how Muli was able to eke out school expenses for his children, including travel to Tongatapu, clothes, and school materials, from a little plantation that had only eighty coconut trees. The fact was that Muli processed coconuts from Malupō’s plantation as well. He also raised cattle, pigs, and ducks to sell in the Pangai market. Muli often preached to his children that they should focus their lives on the images of three fundamental institutions: the Church, the home, and the school.

Muli’s third son, Taniela, tells a touching story about his father’s preoccupation with the education of his children. Taniela had studied in Liahona and had taken the government exams, hoping to be granted one of the few opportunities to enter ‘Atele College to take his higher forms. In those days, these opportunities were very rare for Liahona students. After the exams, Taniela went back home to ‘Uiha. No word came about the results of the exam until the Saturday morning before the Monday that school was supposed to start. Suddenly there appeared a policeman at the Kinikinis’s home. The officer had heard the message that Taniela had been accepted to ‘Atele and that he must be in ‘Atele on the following Monday. This meant they had to pack everything and take a boat to Pangai about eight miles away in order to catch the Hifofua, the government ferry to Tongatapu. The policeman said the Hifofua would leave at four o’clock that afternoon.

In a frenzy, the family made preparation for Muli to accompany his son to the prestigious government school. To Muli’s horror, however, there was not a single sailboat on the island. Desperately he scoured the village to find an outboard but to no avail. Muli had one fear, that his son would be late to the school and his spot would be given to someone else. Finally, as a last resort, he begged his neighbor to borrow his outrigger canoe to paddle his son and luggage to Pangai.

As Taniela says in his account, “Ours was a little island, a little village, and sometimes the hearts of the villagers were just as little and petty.” Other families likely felt some jealousy over Muli’s son having scored so high and going to an elite school. At any rate, Muli’s neighbor refused to lend him his outrigger. It is not certain whether the man was satisfying his jealousy (since he had a son who did not make it to ‘Atele) or whether he felt that it was futile for Muli to try to take his son by outrigger across the deep, often treacherous channel between ‘Uiha and Pangai. The name of the channel is ‘Auhangamea, literally translated, “the place of destruction of things.”

Without arguing or abusing his neighbor, Muli rushed down to the beach. Perhaps his thoughts were on stealing a boat. Finally, he found a discarded and very leaky canoe hull that had lost its outrigger. Hustling up some pieces to make the outrigger, Muli lashed them to the canoe’s hull, packed all his boy’s things—bags, suitcase, and bedding—gave his son a bucket with which to bail water, and launched into the channel. They left the shores of ‘Uiha at 10:30 a.m. With Muli’s mighty strokes and Taniela’s frantic bailing, they landed on the little island of ‘Uoleva, picked up the baggage, waded across the reef to the island of Lifuka, and ran the final distance to the wharf in Pangai. They arrived just as the Hifofua was moving away from the pier. Muli shouted to the captain, pleading with him to put them aboard so he could take his son to college in Tonga. The kind captain allowed the exhausted father and son to get on.

In remembering this experience, Taniela said,

Many times at school I thought of Dad and wondered where he was at that moment, trying to scrape money up from his fishing or his copra making, so we could go to school. I would ask myself, “What island or what part of the ocean is he now struggling [in] for means to help us?”

Muli’s Second Mission

Shortly after the dedication of the chapel in 1958, Muli announced to President Stone that he would like to be released as branch president so he could move his family to Tongatapu to be closer to his children in school. Muli’s intent was to find employment or get some farm land by which he could keep his family. But President Stone had something else in mind. He called the fifty-five-year-old to a full-time proselyting mission to be companions with Vili Fakataha, another senior elder. Without a second thought for the welfare of his family, he accepted the mission call, moved his entire family to Tongatapu (map 2), and served faithfully for four more years as a teacher of the gospel. By this time he had eleven children and several grandchildren.

[caption] Map 2[/caption]

The labors of Muli Kinikini and Vili Fakataha became well-known throughout Tongatapu. They were an odd couple. Vili had considerable ceremonial stature among the people and was well connected to the Tongan aristocracy; Muli was the nephew of the honorable Malupō in ‘Uiha. Both were strong-willed, powerful men. Muli’s disposition was naturally soft and solicitous. Vili’s was occasionally rough and overbearing. Muli was refined and courteous in his speech. Vili could be harsh and combative. But they enjoyed considerable success, and they were permitted to travel throughout Tonga as circuit preachers, through Vava‘u, Ha‘apai, and the smaller islands of the Tongan Kingdom. They even visited the Queen who, according to Muli, expressed her respect for the Church but asked them not to insist that she be baptized, saying she was too old to change. Perhaps they should go to her two sons, Prince Tungī and Prince Tu‘ipelehake, which they did. But the two princes deftly slipped out of their clutches, and the two missionaries had to be satisfied with simply making contact.

The zealous Vili and Muli fed on each other. Each was constantly trying to outdo the other in vigor and powerful utterances. Many times their street meetings generated more heat than light. Muli wanted to visit everyone, high and low, including the Catholic fathers in Ma‘ufanga. Although he was not above challenging Catholic doctrine in his street sermons, Vili did not want to make a personal visit. When Muli went by himself and was chased from the priests’ apartment, Vili rubbed it in, saying that Muli’s undignified retreat from the Catholic priests had brought shame to both of them.

If the Catholic brethren had stopped short of physical violence, speaking only threats and mockery against Muli, Vili’s exasperation on account of Muli’s zeal for preaching and his quick wit sometimes led to violence. Vili could be argumentative and very threatening when angry. Later, as a newly arrived missionary, I was to encounter his anger when on the orders of President D’Monte Coombs I went to his home to tell him he could no longer conduct night street meetings. He had stirred up the anger of many people who came to the meetings only to bait Elder Fakataha and to hear his frightful oaths couched in his own style of prophetic language.

At any rate, one morning Vili and Muli were making their missionary rounds. As they were walking past the great Methodist church building called Saione, Vili suddenly exploded at Muli. He seized him by the arm and began to drag him along the road, shouting that he was taking him to the beach where they were going to fight it out. Muli asked the reason for Vili’s anger. Said Vili, “Because you are fiepoto [wanting to appear intelligent by showing off, a humiliating accusation to a Tongan], you think yourself so smart, but you are only arrogant. And because you always pretend you are such a great doer.”

Muli begged his pardon, but Vili was intent on violence. Muli records, “He pulled me along and all the people of Kolomotu‘a followed behind, fascinated by the yelling and the threatening and the begging pardon of these two Mormon elders, both grandfathers, both serving their second missions.”

When they reached the seashore, Muli rushed into a thicket of trees, turned on Vili who followed, and said, “Kneel down. Let’s pray.” Muli began to pray, after which Vili began to cry and beg Muli not to tell the mission president. The vicissitudes of this strange companionship did not hinder the work. Scores of people were baptized.

A Great Teacher

In 1961, I was transferred from Vava‘u to Tongatapu and became Muli’s companion (fig. 2). It was a different sort of arrangement. President Coombs insisted that I live in the mission home without a twenty-four-hour-a-day companion and simply pick up Muli every day, labor throughout Tongatapu, take him home at night, and return to the mission home. For several months this was the arrangement that in many ways offered some of the happiest and most productive moments of my mission. Together we supervised the missionary work in Tongatapu and ‘Eua. He pushed me to my limits as a missionary and as a Tongan linguist. Like Tonga Malohifo‘ou, my first truly effective teacher, Muli was an affectionate but pitiless mentor to me in the Tongan language. He was one of my greatest teachers either before or after my mission. His prevailing educational theory, at least in learning Tongan, was to tackle the seemingly impossible and to never rest from speaking or reading the scriptures aloud at all times before all audiences.

[caption] Figure 2. This detail of a group picture shows Elders Tēvita Muli Kinikini and Eric B. Shumway, c. 1961. Courtesy Eric B. Shumway.[/caption]

He volunteered me for everything—to speak at funerals, pray at birthday parties, give Sunday School lessons, and present firesides. He introduced me to the nobility. One day he gave me the best advice I ever received in language learning. He explained to me:

True fluency is not measured in how fast you can spit out a Tongan sentence, but how well you say it and with what feeling. Clear and accurate pronunciation and breadth of vocabulary, not speed or an exact Tongan accent and certainly not the popular slang, are the critical elements of mastering the kind of Tongan which Tongans want to hear from you.

One day on a government ferry from Tongatapu to ‘Eua Island, crossing one of the roughest, deepest channels in the world, I was feeling seasick. The stifling smell of diesel fumes mixed with the aroma of pigs and goats and other fauna on this boat was too much for me. Imagine the kind of nausea that inspires such self-concentration that all other feeling is obliterated. In this extreme discomfort, I heard Muli Kinikini’s voice above the din.

“My dear fellow citizens,” he announced, “how fortunate we are to be traveling today with a young American who is just dying to speak to you.” That’s the exact metaphor he used in Tongan. Muli continued, “He is learning our language and has asked for this opportunity to address you. So please forgive him this unusual request and kindly give him your attention.”

It was not Muli’s audacity that bothered me (I was used to it) but his strong right arm pulling me away from the railing that I resented. I was sure the moment I opened my mouth I would lose everything in my stomach. But I made the attempt and was rewarded in ways both personal and sacred. I spoke for nearly two hours. What strikes me as I remember this event, however, was my mentor’s singleness of purpose as a teacher, his confidence in me, his resistance to the path of least resistance, his tenacity to utilize every teaching moment, his utter refusal to make any allowances for fear, his perfect modeling of the language, and his unfailing words of compliment to me and about me to others. Perhaps the most compelling quality of this teacher was his unequivocal and unconditional love for me, his pupil. The blessings in my life as a scholar, author, teacher, and Church steward have multiplied again and again as a result of this remarkable teacher.

A Man of Impeccable Courtesy

It was during this time also that I saw Muli’s magnificent faith and his single-minded concern for keeping the commandments and bringing souls into the Church. The man was not intimidated by the rank, education, wealth or power of anyone else. He was absolutely confident in himself and in the Lord whom he served. Although I never felt inclined against Muli, I could understand why a man like Vili Fakataha could be exasperated by his zeal.

Muli was a man of impeccable courtesy, whether it was to the prostitute whose home we inadvertently tracted out or the high chief whose family we wished to visit. But it was also Muli’s faith in the Lord and the power of the priesthood that set him apart from others. I will forever be grateful for the opportunities of assisting Muli in giving priesthood blessings. It was Muli who blessed me when I became terribly ill with hepatitis. (Other elders from America had been deathly ill with jaundice for many months.) After Muli’s blessing, he and I were out preaching and baptizing within a week.

We had taught the gospel to a lady named Mahola in Ma‘ufanga and baptized her. She had a serious smoking problem and even after baptism continued to smoke. One day we were called to the hospital and found her deathly ill. Lying unconscious on the bed, she was surrounded by her brothers and relatives who were already wearing their black mourning costumes and heavy waist mats. Muli bent over her and whispered her name. Her eyes fluttered momentarily as she tried to open them and whispered, “Ko e putu kuo pau” (a funeral is certain). Muli said simply, “There will be no funeral.” He promised that if she had faith to be healed and determination never to break the commandments again, we would bless her and she would be healed. When we returned to the hospital the next day, she was no longer there. She had returned home completely well. To this day, Mahola is a committed, active Latter-day Saint.

As missionary companions, we had numerous baptisms, for which we were deeply grateful. But I was occasionally irritated at Muli in our missionary training meetings when he would announce to the other missionaries how many baptisms he and I were going to have in a given month. What I called boasting he insisted was simply motivation to the other elders to work harder.

Despite Muli’s poverty he never asked favors of me, as did so many island companions from American elders. In fact, he always asked that I come and eat in his home. He insisted I eat the best food and all of it. One day Le‘o put before me a delicious boiled duckling with piles of breadfruit and taro around it. Four pairs of hungry little eyes stared at the duckling and then looked at their own meatless plates of taro and breadfruit. When I protested to Muli that we all share the duckling, he said, “You eat it by yourself. My children are used to going without for the sake of the elders. I want them to be able to tell their children someday that they had the privilege of going without in order for a servant of the Lord to eat and be satisfied.”

The love that Muli and Le‘o showered on the missionaries became a Kinikini family legacy. In their tributes to their father at his death, many of the children, without resentment, mentioned that growing up they felt Muli’s love for the missionaries exceeded his love for them.

I was pleased to come across Muli’s summary in his history of our missionary work together. He said, “The nature of my work with Elder Shumway was that we did not want one person to escape whether it was on a bus, in the road, or on a boat; we did not wish to remain silent. We wanted all people to know the will of the Lord that would save them.”

When my mission in Tonga came to a close, I had one final meal at the Kinikini home, jellyfish on delicious yam. Le‘o presented me with a beautifully woven mat that I still cherish. When I waved to them from the Tofua as it moved away slowly from Vuna wharf, I had no idea that the next time I would meet the Kinikinis would be in Hawai‘i. Already Muli was making plans to remove his entire family to America. In just one year’s time, Muli came with Le‘o to Hawai‘i in 1963. He received his patriarchal blessing and became a high priest in Lā‘ie in 1964. It was at that time that he refined the Joseph Smith lakalaka for performance at the Polynesian Cultural Center.

In 1966, Muli was invited to assist in the preparation of the Tongan section of a large dance troupe from the Polynesian Cultural Center that toured the U.S. mainland. Muli’s description in his history of his preparation is concise and focused particularly on himself. He mentions their performance in Hollywood, the CBS Television Center, Disneyland, and in many other cities, including Salt Lake City. He was most proud of being able to meet President McKay, and because of the uniqueness of his lakalaka, President McKay requested a special taping of the piece. Muli’s comment about this honor is interesting: “I wore my shirt made of tapa cloth and my tapa cloth lavalava. I was photographed together with the performers and my picture was taken and put in the archives of the Church with the film to await the Second Coming of Christ.”

Back in Tonga in 1969, Muli was called to be a Church genealogist to gather names and genealogies from every island in the kingdom. Muli had a special manifestation that prepared him for this call in 1968. Also he became the second counselor in Nuku’alofa Second Ward when the Nuku’alofa Stake was organized. Later, he served on the high council until he moved his whole family for good to Salt Lake City (about 1974).

At this point in dictating his history, Muli seems to be exhausted from several hours of speaking. There are many years that he does not represent with any commentary. But there are two interesting happenings worth mentioning. First was a dream he had the night of June 6, 1978. He records,

I dreamed that I, the bishop, a man called Toukeni, and a Dutchman, all high priests in our ward, picked up bodily a large black man and carried him to the ocean and immersed him to the bottom of the ocean in an attitude of baptism. As I looked upon this immersion of the black man, I noticed that his overalls were torn. I came ashore, fearing the man would drown. My fear woke me up.

Two days later, Muli witnessed the announcement of President Kimball’s revelation that the priesthood to be given to all worthy males. Muli was overjoyed and states in his history, “Thus the meaning of the dream. Blacks will be baptized and their ‘clothes,’ namely their curse, will be torn off like old overalls, and they will then put on and wear the holy priesthood.”

The Patriarch of the Family

The last days of Muli’s life were spent in Salt Lake City with his children (fig. 3), each of them gainfully employed and prosperous. Twice a month he would gather them together for an extended family home evening where he would teach his children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren. Many of the younger ones did not understand these talks because they knew only English. No doubt Brother Kinikini felt some alienation, but his children honored him, in fact depended upon him for spiritual direction. He was looked to for every event: birth, death, marriage, sickness, or major decision regarding a job or Church responsibility. The children always consulted the patriarch of their family. Kime confided in me that although his father’s death was very sorrowful for him, in a way it forced him to take more responsibility for the spiritual direction of his own family.

[caption] Figure 3. Kinikini family. Back (left to right): Tofilamoa, Pita, Vika, Senituli, Susana, Takapautolo, Taniela. Front (left to right): Keisini, Le‘o, Muli, Tēvita, Kime. Courtesy Kinikini Family.[/caption]

Muli was an inveterate preacher, full of wisdom and instruction. His primary theme to his family was to love Christ and his Church, sustain the leaders, and keep peace and harmony in the home. He also taught that little children must honor and respect the older children, and that the older children must show compassion for and take care of the little ones.

The relatively easy adjustment of the Kinikini family in the Salt Lake area can be largely attributed to their activity in the Church and the fact that they all had the best education possible in Tonga, which among other things gave them skills in English. They learned from their father the skills of hard work and a cardinal Tongan principle, ko e tauhi vaha‘a (keeping up good relations). Since Kime worked for American Airlines, Muli and Le‘o frequently traveled free of charge in their old age. They visited nine temples and even served as ordinance workers in the Salt Lake Temple.

The last part of Muli’s oral history is highlighted by his account of the blessing of his daughter-in-law Linda Mataele Kinikini. She had been in labor for nearly thirty-six hours. The baby’s heartbeat was falling and the doctor said they must rush her to surgery to remove the baby by cesarean section. Linda insisted that her father-in-law come and give her a blessing first. The doctor, a Catholic who was familiar with this Mormon ordinance, said somewhat reluctantly, “If he is not here in fifteen minutes it will be too late.”

When Brother Kinikini, eighty years old, shuffled into the room twenty minutes after the call, Linda was already being removed to surgery. She had received her shots and medication that had deadened her entire body from the neck down. As Brother Kinikini appeared, the nurse whispered to Linda, “It’s too late.” Linda simply said, “It’s my life, it’s my baby, I want Dad to give me a blessing.” Muli anointed his daughter-in-law and pronounced a short blessing, “Linda, by the power of the holy priesthood which I bear, and in the sacred name of Jesus Christ the Son of God who came into the world to be our Savior, I say unto you that there will be no operation, that the baby will come this very instant and without delay, Amen.”

Muli walked out of the room and the nurse proceeded to wheel Linda into the hallway. Muli’s son, Keisini, said to the nurse, “Why don’t you check my wife one more time?” The nurse lifted the sheet to discover the head of the little baby presenting itself. She screamed for the doctor, who arrived too late to see the birth of a healthy beautiful little girl. His only words to Linda were, “Indeed this is a miracle.”3

Muli’s final words in his history seem to capture the essence of his spiritual life: “I have spoken these things not to suggest that I am a good man or a strong man. Not at all. I speak these things because of my faith, for if one speaks for anything to happen without the slightest wavering of his faith, it will happen as he speaks it. There is no way that it won’t happen.”

Kinikini’s Children Reminisce

Several of the Kinikini children have responded in memory of their father. There are many accounts of their relationship with Tēvita Muli that give us a fuller picture of this unusual family and Church leader. Vika, number eight, remembers her father leading in prayer. Her first recollection of family life in Tonga was that Muli would leave every day wearing clean clothes, a white shirt, and a crisp beautiful ta‘ovala, to do his missionary work. Muli’s immaculate appearance was a tribute to his beloved wife, Le‘o, who made sure he looked clean and neat. Vika said many times she would come upon him on his knees in private prayer.

Indeed, every child has recorded the same remembrances of Muli’s remarkable spiritual dimensions. Tofilamoa (number eleven) remembers being sick, lonely, and very far away serving a mission on an Indian reservation. As she lay suffering and depressed, she prayed and said, “Heavenly Father, because of the good works of my father in the Church, because of his faith, please heal me.” She testifies that even though her dad was far away, “as I finished my prayer I felt calm and comfortable.” Senituli (number seven) records a similar experience. He fell overboard in the stretch of water between Ha‘apai and Tongatapu. Terrified of sharks, he shouted a prayer to Heavenly Father, “If my father has been faithful in your service, please save me from the ferocious fish of the sea and give me a chance to live.”

Sione Takapautolo (number five) remembers the prayers that his father offered in the family. Sometimes they were long, but they were always very fervent and personal prayers. Takapautolo also remembers Muli’s humorous habit of addressing the ancestral spirits in the cemetery on the way from the village to the beach as he took his boys night fishing. He would shout into the cemetery and say, “All of you go out and chase the fish to us so that we’ll have fast fishing.”

Takapautolo can also thank his father for his life. When Takapautolo was a teacher and bandmaster at Liahona High School he could hardly care for his family on his small salary. He applied for and obtained the position of financial officer on a new government fishing boat called the Teiko. So proud of himself for obtaining such a prestigious position, Tolo wrote his father in ‘Uiha to announce his good fortune. On the next boat to Tongatapu, Muli came to stop him. He said, “Tolo, you work for the Church whether you get paid or not. You stay on.” He resisted his father momentarily, but the habit of obeying Muli was too strong. He turned down the position and stayed at Liahona. A few months later, on her first voyage, the Teiko disappeared without a trace. Tolo was very grateful for having learned obedience to his father.

All of Muli’s children praise his courtesy and love for them. Kime (number two) describes his father as easy to approach. He had a very friendly disposition. Muli joked, laughed, and played with his children, as opposed to the many stiff, overbearing Polynesian fathers who seldom speak to their children except to rebuke or punish them. Kime continues, “We did not fail to recognize, however, that he put his Church callings before wife and children. We didn’t mind. It was our blessing.”

The oldest son, Tēvita Fanamaka Kinikini, emphasizes Muli’s compassion. Tēvita Fanamaka was a rebellious child but says, “The first principle of my life is the knowledge of how much Dad loved me and the other children. He worked hard without self-pity. He wanted us to love him. He adored us and he played with us. He was a poor man, but he was rich in love.” Tēvita ran away from school three times before Muli finally gave up forcing him to get an education. But Muli never gave up his efforts to get Tēvita to conform to the principles of the Church. Tēvita remembers taking five of his friends to their home just at mealtime. Le‘o’s anger showed in her face because it was obvious there was not enough food for the friends let alone the large Kinikini family. Besides, it was not easy to cook a big meal on an open fire. Muli recognized the tense situation and Tēvita’s potential embarrassment to his friends, so he spoke quickly with a smile on his countenance, “Tēvita, invite your friends to come eat this food. You can eat together.” The dirty looks immediately disappeared from the Kinikini children and from the face of their mother. Unlike many Polynesian fathers who would demand to be fed first, Muli chose to eat nothing to spare his son the humiliation of having his friends sent away without anything to eat.

Tēvita Fanamaka summarizes his feelings about his father, “I ask Heavenly Father not to be angry when I say this about my own father, but our dependency upon Muli in spiritual things was such that he seemed to us like a god, especially when he put his hands out to bless someone.” He continues, “I know without doubt my father used the priesthood properly, and he tried to live worthy of that priesthood.”

Pita Kinikini, Muli’s and Le‘o’s ninth child, and probably the best known of the children in Church leadership circles, praised his father for the emphasis he placed on the scriptures, particularly the scripture Muli desired should become their family theme: “Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not” (D&C 6:36); Muli had asked his children to study this scripture, ponder it, live it.

On March 28, 1993, Pita Kinikini was set apart as president of the Tongan Stake in Salt Lake Valley. He served faithfully until his untimely death on May 2, 2000. Pita’s tenure as stake president was characterized by a profound spirituality and personal stewardship over thousands of Tongans who had emigrated from their island home, much like the Kinikini family, and were making their way in a new environment and among a different people. As stake president, Pita Kinikini drew from the rich spiritual heritage of his father and mother. He emphasized the oneness of the Church. “This is not a pālangi church or a Tongan church. It is the Church of Jesus Christ,” he often repeated. President Kinikini strove to mitigate and resolve many of the problems facing the Tongan Saints in Utah who felt alienated from their “old” Tongan culture and occasionally marginalized by the “new” American one. He encouraged them to embrace the gospel culture, which transcends all worldly cultures. That encouragement nearly always concluded with his father’s favorite scripture: “Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not” (D&C 6:36).

“A Man of God”

Tēvita Muli Kinikini’s personal legacy is at the heart of the grand legacy of faith among the Tongan Saints of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. As a teacher and missionary, he was one of the builders of God’s kingdom in his island nation.

The opposite qualities of pride and humility stirred Tēvita Muli Kinikini’s soul with passionate enthusiasm for any work that would benefit the Church or his family. His appetite for applause as a performer and composer was also part of his courage to face audiences large and small, bear his testimony, and invite all people to embrace Christ and His church. In this regard, Brother Kinikini was the personification of the traditional Tongan virtue called mamahi‘i me‘a, or zealousness in support of a worthy cause. Perhaps he did play to the crowd—he had a taste for grand spectacles and even controversy. His ego occasionally ran from his common sense, as when he composed and produced an entire lakalaka to challenge and irritate the mighty Vava‘u composer, Fakatava, in a competition before the crown prince and all of Vava‘u. But after all, Muli’s ego and taste for controversy are precisely what the people of his tiny island group are famous for. Affectionately called “Ko e Fo‘i ‘One‘one” (“that grain of sand”), Ha‘apai is also referred to as Ha‘apai Veu, suggesting that its people are always a bit forward, innovative, rebellious, and able, as it were, to “tweak the noses” or “pull the beards” of the people of the so-called Tongan establishment. Certainly, Muli was representative of that tradition.

Yet when his ego was purged by prayer and empowered by a mighty faith in God and a worthy confidence in the holy priesthood, Muli was a force for good that added stature and strength to the Church in Tonga during the mid-twentieth century. Despite his occasional foibles, he was to the end of his days faithful and true to his commitment to the gospel of Jesus Christ and to his family. As a poet and writer of songs, he was part of the grand artistic heritage of the Tongan Kingdom. All who knew him well can say with his daughter Vika, “He was a man of secret prayer, a man of healing, a man of revelation, a man of compassion, a man of God.”

1f:T4c1,

For nearly thirty-five years, Eric B. Shumway has been affiliated with BYU–Hawai‘i. Currently serving as its president, he has also been academic vice-president, Chair of the Division of Language, Literature, and Communication, and professor of English literature. For an even longer period of time, though, Shumway has been associated with Tonga. He filled a mission there in the late 1950s, returned in the 1960s as a Tongan linguist and language coordinator for the United States Peace Corps, and served there in the 1980s as mission president. Few pālangi (non-islanders) know the Tongan people and their language as well as Shumway. His love of the people and intimate familiarity with their culture shows through in this compassionate yet candid portrayal of one of the great Tongan Latter-day Saints of the twentieth century. Shumway’s piece, first presented at the 1985 MPHS annual conference, not only offers readers an engaging portrayal of Tēvita Muli Kinikini the man, but it provides an informative and fascinating glimpse of life into Kinikini’s generation.

20:T6ff,

1. The information for this article is taken largely from Tēvita Muli Kinikini’s oral history, dictated in 1982, and from his children’s tributes recorded subsequent to his death in 1984. The unpublished transcripts of these documents are preserved in the Archives and Special Collections, Joseph F. Smith Library, Brigham Young University–Hawai‘i, Lā‘ie, Hawai‘i. Other bits of information come from my own experiences with Brother Kinikini when we were missionaries together for eight months in 1961. Also, several of Muli’s children contributed interesting insights that added significantly to this portrait of Tēvita Muli Kinikini.

2. The lakalaka is a communal dance of large proportions, sometimes exceeding two hundred performers. Besides its artistic complexity, combining the elements of poetry, melody, and dance, the lakalaka captures the essence of the Tongan people, their love of king and country, and the pride of their own identity as Tongans.

3. Some of these details were provided by Linda herself.

21:T11b7a,

On Monday, October 8, 1984, at the Memorial Estates Chapel in Salt Lake City, the eighty-one-year-old body of Brother Tēvita Muli Kinikini rested serenely in a polished bronze casket surrounded by a forest of flowers. His wife, Le‘o, sat on the floor in front of the casket, moaning her sorrow in pitiful expressions of grief and love. Muli’s ten living children lined the wall close to the casket to greet the large numbers of mourners and friends that did not stop until 11 p.m. Sixty-two grandchildren and seventeen great-grandchildren sat around the room, mainly in the large mat-covered section of the chapel. Wearing their fluffy Sunday best and whispering in perfect Utah English, they stared at the grandeur of gifts and the stream of visitors. Grandson Va‘inga, dressed in an immaculate white suit, stood at the head of the casket to greet visitors and to quiet the wailing that rose periodically from the mourners who pressed to see and embrace the remains of one of the remarkable elders of the Church in the Tongan Islands.1

The life story of Tēvita Muli Kinikini, dictated by him in Tongan just two years before his death, is one of a truly converted man who reared a large family with small means, taught the gospel at great sacrifice, built the Church, and overcame the vicissitudes of his own upbringing and the politics of his day. It is also the fascinating saga of a man born and reared without formal education on the tiny island of ‘Uiha (in the Ha‘apai group of the Tongan Islands), but who in the 1940s, ’50s, and ’60s became one of the powerful forces in the growth of the Church and in missionary work throughout Tonga (fig. 1).

Figure 1. Tēvita Muli Kinikini and Le‘o Tukui Kinikini, c. 1970s. Courtesy Kinikini Family.

Before discussing Brother Kinikini’s life, I want to make a brief comment about the historical document itself as he dictated it. First, Muli, who dictated his history in Tongan, spoke his history as if preaching to a large audience; as if, like King Benjamin, he had mounted a tower surrounded by his posterity to speak to them from his heart. The tone and modulation of his voice carry the distinctive characteristics of high Tongan oratory. Barely an hour into his narrative, his voice begins to fail. But he perseveres, concluding his account in a husky, barely audible whisper.

Furthermore, Muli’s narrative does not disguise his shortcomings as a human being. His fierce pride, for example, and his love for spectator applause are seen in both the weal and the woe of his long life. But one thing is certain, his testimony of Christ and the Church was real and was born of the Spirit.

Finally, although a writer of poetry and a teller of tales, Muli speaks his history in concise, almost stark language. There are no rhetorical flourishes typical of Tongan orators. He concentrates on his missionary work and his public service as a composer of music and dance. He does not try to elaborate or expound upon the meaning of his life. He simply tells it. His most often repeated expression is “thanks be to God.” The overriding testimony of his life is that Heavenly Father honors the man who honors his priesthood, and there is no limit to what a worthy man can accomplish or endure.

Muli’s Youth

Muli begins his account with a description of his father and mother. His father, Taniela Kinikini, was a member of the Free Church of Tonga, a preacher and a man of renowned psychic powers who had dreams and saw visions. His mother, Selita Valu Malupō, was the daughter of the paramount chief of the island. Three of her brothers held the title Malupō while Muli lived in ‘Uiha. As the son of the sister of Malupō, Muli had claim on the wealth and the property of his fa‘ē tangata or maternal uncle.

Muli illustrates the visionary powers of his father with a story I heard him tell many times in Tonga. His father had given the oldest son, Pekipaki, the equivalent of $80 in a small leather sack to take with him to Pangai to buy supplies for the family—flour, soap, kerosene, and so forth. Pekipaki arrived in the little boat at Pangai only to discover that the small leather pouch of money had disappeared. He came back in shame and fled to the bush and stayed there until his father sent other sons to bring him home. The father had dreamed a dream and had seen the pouch of money at the bottom of forty feet of water between the reef and a large coral head on the route from ‘Uiha to Pangai. The description was so clear that divers recovered the money instantly.

Muli says very little about his youth except that he was somewhat of a rascal, begat an illegitimate child, but was fortunate enough to marry Le‘o Tukui, whose father was a member of the LDS Church. After Le‘o and Muli’s second child was born, Le‘o’s father came to Muli and asked if they could hold a pō malanga, or religious meeting, in their home. It was a double embarrassment for Muli. He could not refuse his father-in-law, but he also could not embarrass his uncle, the high chief Malupō, who disliked the Church. The only way out was to let the Mormon missionaries use his home but not to attend the meeting himself. As he puts it, “I stood in the roadway because I hated the Mormon Church.”

The Meeting That Changed His Life

This particular meeting was to change Muli’s life and attitude about the Church. One single principle riveted Muli’s attention and stirred his interest. A young Caucasian elder, Elder Miller, stood and testified, “People of ‘Uiha, I testify to you this night that I do not receive one black cent [a Tongan expression] from the Church as payment or wage for my missionary work. I come from America, I work without pay because that is the commandment of Jesus Christ.”

Ministerial salaries in his own church, with all the attendant difficulties of a paid clergy, were problematic for Muli. He records his reaction: “I strode swiftly and stood just outside of the house by the doorway. Another man preached and testified that he too labored without pay. I moved forward even closer. After the service . . . I asked for scriptural references.” Muli took the references and asked his wife to read them from her Bible. After hearing the testimony of the scriptures he said, “I will wait no longer. I will be baptized.”

Word got out quickly into the village that Muli was to be baptized. His parents threatened a double suicide if he did, so he postponed his baptism a week. The honorable Malupō was furious at the news and threatened to take away Muli’s plantation land as well as his village lot, but the surge of faith was too great in Muli. He simply said to the noble, “Do as you please with my land. Take it away. I will go to Tongatapu, Vava‘u, Fiji, or Samoa and get an inheritance of land, but the inheritance in Heaven will not be gotten in any other church but The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.” When Muli was baptized, persecution was intense but short-lived. He was soon reconciled both to his parents and to the noble. The village still gossiped, however, and made fun of him.

An Apostle’s Promise

Muli and Le‘o continued to have more children, all boys. They hoped for a little girl, but Muli’s father, the village psychic, had seen in a dream that Muli and Le‘o would never have any girls. In 1937, Elder George Albert Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles visited Tonga. The ‘Uiha branch received instructions to prepare dances and other performances and come to the conference to be held in Pangai. Each family was asked to donate food to take care of the visitors from Tongatapu. In the prime of his life and very energetic, Muli accepted a full assignment for his family. He composed the dances, dried and salted fish, harvested his yams, boxed up his pigs and took them all to conference in Pangai. He had one thing in his mind. He was going to ask the visiting apostle to bless his wife to have a baby girl. The request was granted by Elder Smith in very specific blessing, “Your next baby will be a girl. Not only that, you will have other girls.”

Unwise perhaps in his exuberance, Muli announced the promise to Saints and nonmembers alike. Knowing Muli’s father’s declaration, the people of ‘Uiha were caught up in excited speculation. It was the visionary power of Muli’s father versus the blessing of the Church’s apostle. When Le‘o became pregnant again, the “contest” was common discussion in all village circles. On the night Le‘o delivered, Muli says, “People were everywhere around our house listening and waiting to see if the apostle’s promise was true or false. When the midwife announced, ‘You are blessed with a little girl’ the mockers suddenly disappeared.”

“I Am a Bearer of the Holy Priesthood”

Several years after Muli was baptized he became an elder. The mission presidents in those days were not quick to bestow the Melchizedek Priesthood on the Tongan brethren. But when Muli did become an elder, he determined to honor it. Gifted naturally with a handsome body, a soft cheerful disposition, and fine poetic and musical talent, Muli was very attractive to many people, including bold women. On a trip to Tongatapu with the Methodist choir to sing in their conference, Muli slept in the cabin of their boat. In the middle of the night he suddenly felt himself being embraced. Not only did he resist, but he lectured the intruder.

Amelia, [the poor woman has been identified for posterity] don’t you know me? I am a bearer of the holy priesthood in the Church of Christ. Adultery is an abomination. Therefore I say to you, “Get out of here. Go back to your boat . . . if you don’t go, I will shout for everyone to hear that a woman has come to my bed to seduce me.”

The woman disappeared instantly and Muli records, “I thank the Lord for protecting me and saving me from this temptation.”

Two other times in Muli’s account he records in some embarrassing detail how he was approached and propositioned by women and how he resisted. Each time he says, “I do not want to give the impression that I am a strong person, but to express gratitude for the Lord giving me the strength to resist temptation.”

In 1939 all American missionaries except the mission president were called back home because of the impending war. Muli describes his and Le‘o’s affection for them. “They were like our own children, yet they helped me in spiritual things, and I received strength and energy from them in the work of Christ.” Muli later intimates that one value in the missionaries’ departure was that he was forced to rely upon himself in spiritual things. He was no longer dependent upon the missionaries and did not run to them for blessings and advice. He became a spiritual leader to his family.

The Entire Missionary Force in Vava‘u

When the American elders returned home, President Emile Dunn turned to Tongan elders for service as missionaries. In 1941, Muli and Le‘o and their entire family were called on a mission to Vava‘u to labor in the little island of Kōloa, while Elder Mahu‘inga Folau was to serve in mainland Vava‘u in the village of Tu‘anuku. These two men were to be the entire missionary force in Vava‘u at that time (map 1).

Map 1

The call from President Dunn could not have come at a worse time financially for the Kinikini family, which had now grown to eight people. They had no money, few clothes, no soap or kerosene, and of course they would have to pay their own way. Muli sold all his pigs for eight shillings apiece, made as much copra as he possibly could to sell, processed coconut oil to use in lamps instead of kerosene, and sent his two sons, Tēvita, age ten, and Kime, age nine, out to work. After a long struggle, they were able to secure passage to Vava‘u and arrived at their assigned village with eight shillings in their pocket. Exhausted and hungry from their voyage, they were delighted to find a small pile of manioke (tapioca root) that they could prepare for their first meal. The manioke was tough and strong. They boiled it and poured off the water four different times before they let it simmer in coconut milk. The tapioca was delicious, records Muli, but at 2 a.m. all the children began to vomit. They were very sick. Le‘o began to complain and told Muli to return to ‘Uiha and bring them provisions of food. Muli comforted his wife by insisting that the scriptures promise, “While you are in the service of the Lord, if you eat anything poison you will not die.” Thankfully, the children recovered.

The people of Kōloa were very reserved at first. One Saturday afternoon, Muli and his three small sons went out in the lagoon to fish for their Sunday meal. Returning at 7:30 that evening they found Le‘o waiting for them at the beach. “We have a funeral on our hands,” she said. Vika Fatafehi, 105 years old, had died while Muli was away fishing. Before she passed away she had sent for Muli three times to come and administer to her. Muli rushed to clean up before visiting the family. While he was putting on his clothes and tying his ta‘ovala mat around his waist, an unmistakable impression came over him. As he records, “It was as if a voice whispered to me, ‘Go and restore Vika to life.’” Frightened and nervous, he felt the distance between him and his home in ‘Uiha. He was a foreigner on alien soil. The voice came again. “Go!” He picked up his consecrated oil and left. Le‘o saw the oil and said, “Where are you going?”

“I am going to bless Vika to live.”

Startled and worried, Le‘o cried out “Oh Muli, come back! You’ll be the laughing stock of all Tonga. We’ll all be ridiculed if Vika doesn’t revive. Our shame will spread throughout Tonga.”

But Muli was fixed in his purpose and told Le‘o that the Spirit was guiding him. When he entered the home where Vika lay, he was gently upbraided by the women who reminded him that they had sent for him three times before Vika had passed away. Muli records,

I said nothing, but knelt by Vika’s head, lifted her shroud, picked up the sacred oil and anointed her. I could see the faces of the people, winking at each other and mocking, but I did not hesitate, for I knew this was the Lord’s commandment to me to restore this woman to life and to show His power.

Muli pleaded with the Lord to honor his blessing, lest God’s name be defamed. After the administration, Muli returned to his hut. Soon a messenger appeared to tell him that Vika was conscious and had told the people of the house about her experiences in the spirit world. Thanking the messenger, he promised to visit the family the next morning.

Close relatives responding to news of Vika’s death began to arrive from all over Vava‘u. Several of these people were at a kava assembly with the elders of the village; Muli was also present. To this group Vika’s son, Taufa, pleaded that they simply wait around for a day or two because Vika would no doubt die. They could participate in the funeral services and then be free to leave. Of this moment Muli says in his account, “The voice spoke to me again that I should tell them Vika would not die. So I told them all that not one Latter-day Saint, including Vika, would die as long as I was a missionary here in Kōloa.”

Through the power of the priesthood, Vika Fatafehi was restored to health sufficient to offer the opening prayer at the centennial celebration of the Relief Society held in Neiafu a few months later.

Muli’s faith and courage from that time on never faltered. He presided over the little branch with dignity and compassion and became a friend to the entire village. At the district conference held in Neiafu, October 1942, the little branch of Kōloa won the dance and choir competition, competing with the larger, well-established branches of Ha‘alaufuli and Neiafu. It was a time of great rejoicing and spiritual revival, but the joy was abruptly changed to weeping when President Dunn announced that the Kinikini family was being transferred from Kōloa to the island of ‘Otea. Le‘o cried out her disappointment, but as Muli says in his narrative, “I strained to keep back the tears lest the president should think I did not support his decision.”

It was a sorrowful delegation of Kōloa Saints who went to President Dunn to protest. “Why do you take our missionary away when we are so well organized? We have such a good choir, and there is so much activity in the branch.”

President Dunn’s response was, “There are only two active members of the Church in ‘Otea at the moment. If the branch is not built up soon, we will have to shut it down completely.”

After three days of farewell parties with the Saints and the people of Kōloa, the Kinikini family put their belongings in an outboard, flat-bottom boat and were taken the dozen or so miles to ‘Otea, known for its pineapple, frequent famines, and poison fish. The disappointment of leaving Kōloa was compounded by the discovery that the missionary house in ‘Otea had long been uninhabited, except for pigs and chickens. So the first night Muli and his family slept in the chapel and they spent the next day scrubbing, disinfecting, and burning to make the house livable.

After such warm and loving support in Kōloa, the response of the people of ‘Otea seemed cold and indifferent. Le‘o began to murmur. In an effort to cheer up his wife he announced, “Le‘o, the first man who comes by is going to be baptized into the Church.” Not too long after this dramatic announcement a man of substance in the community did come by (Muli doesn’t mention his name) and was immediately charmed by Muli’s good nature and by the cold drink and flour cakes that Le‘o had prepared. After a long and friendly conversation, the man made an offer to the Kinikini family, which they immediately recognized as a blessing from the Lord. The man said that they could have free access to all the food (taro, bananas, pineapple, and coconut) on his plantation nearby and that he would allow them to gather the coconuts on his plantation outside the village to make copra to sell.

The Kinikini family were well taken care of. But they were the only ones who attended church. Muli longed for a healthy congregation. The village was full of inactive members who had fallen away since the departure of the full-time elders from America. As it turned out, Muli was to win back most of the congregation through a series of remarkable uses of his priesthood authority. A man by the name of Akolea, who later would be a stalwart in the labor missionary program in Tonga and Hawai‘i, lay in his house suffering from a frightful boil. Muli administered to Akolea, who was relieved almost instantly of his affliction. Later his wife, ‘Ofa, also suffering from a terrible boil on her neck, came to Muli and asked for a similar blessing. She was a staunch Methodist and had kept her husband away from the Church. Muli simply said, “Do you believe in Christ and his church?”

“I believe because my husband was healed,” said the woman. The boil on her neck was large, deep, and dangerous. Tongans call it fula. Five days after the blessing, she was cured and asked for baptism. Another couple named Siale and Kale brought their child Peneti who had been ill for years and whose sickness had steadily increased in seriousness until the boy could not eat, speak, or even cry. He was hardly aware of anything around him. Muli fasted and prayed with the father and mother (who were members of another faith), then blessed the child to live and be healed. As the adults were breaking their fast over a nice meal, Peneti began to cry for the first time in months. Muli told the parents to give him bread. He was healed instantly. The parents insisted that they, along with their six children, be baptized into the Church. By now there was a substantial congregation of adults and children, enthusiastic, loving, and united.

However, the new missionary couple had not yet been accepted by the entire village. Indeed, nearly every success had brought expressions of anger from ministers of other churches. The worst of all was the village chief, Vehikite. Vehikite had long been inactive in the Church. According to Muli, he had been lured away by a chiefly title and his position as district officer, given him by the government. At a fono, or town meeting, Vehikite rebuked and humiliated the Mormon missionary for his activities. Wise as a serpent and harmless as a dove, Muli waited for an opportunity to talk with Vehikite. One afternoon he saw the chief go into the bush. Muli followed him with his own machete and hoe. He found Vehikite digging deep holes to plant his yams. Without a word, Muli came forward and began to help Vehikite. The chief seemed irritated but could not, according to custom, reject the offer of help. In Muli’s inimitable friendly way, he was able to engage Vehikite in pleasant conversation and win his confidence. The chief told him about a dream that had been bothering him for a long time. He said to Brother Kinikini: “I saw myself sitting in a large assembly of people. Tungī Mailefihi [Queen Sālote’s consort] was speaking. But as I listened to him, suddenly I could see that his entire body was full of gaping holes.”

When Vehikite had finished the account of his dream, Muli deftly offered an interpretation to Vehikite, saying it was the Lord’s way of telling him that the ways of the chiefs were corrupt and that these would not sustain either the body or the spirit but would leave gaping holes and starving souls. Muli later clinched his point with a direct rebuke to Vehikite. “You left the Church because of this worldly position of yours, so you could get money. Come back.”

Vehikite was so moved by this interpretation and rebuke that he was in church the very next Sunday with his chiefly ta‘ovala and a tie. His return was a consternation to the other churches. Muli again expressed his gratitude to the Lord “for doing things to bring about His will and save His people.”

The Piu Tausinga family was the next to come back into the Church when Muli administered to their little boy who had been sick for some time with what apparently was gastritis. Another child in the family had died of it. The little boy was healed and the whole family became active again.

By now the branch flourished and Elder Kinikini was received throughout the village, except in the home of the chief minister of the Queen’s church. The faifekau (minister) threw Muli out of his house rather than listen to his testimony. The minister shrieked his disapproval of the Mormon missionary over the pulpit, in his residential compound, and even in the streets. His fury was not calmed by Muli’s apologetic nature. To him, Muli was a sheep stealer, an unlearned upstart, who was foisting his American religion upon the sacred traditions of the state church. In a terrible scene at the little village wharf, as the old man was departing for Neiafu for a short visit to his daughter, he shouted that he would kill Muli when he returned. (Muli points out that the poor minister was a tiny wisp of a man that one could knock over with a slight push.) The minister never returned to ‘Otea. He died while he was in Neiafu and was buried in the village of Makave.

A Grand Lakalaka Dance

One of the more exciting adventures of Muli’s ministry in ‘Otea was a big celebration in which all of Vava‘u entertained the crown prince (the present king) who came as part of a search for soldiers to represent Tonga in the war. Vehikite announced in a town meeting that he wanted Muli to teach the village a grand lakalaka2 dance that would compete with performances from the other villages in the celebration. Muli protested. Vehikite insisted. “After all,” he said, “you come from ‘Uiha, the beginning and the end of Tongan faiva, of music and dance performances.” How could Muli resist such a compliment to his island and to himself?

The whole village launched into lakalaka practices. Every household donated large amounts of food to feed the multitude of dancers and singers. Every day of practice included a feast for the entire community. As Muli puts it, “Cattle and pigs died for us while we learned the dances.” It was high excitement. Such a public affair to be presided over by the crown prince meant that every village would put its pride and reputation at stake. Hundreds of people would come with the crown prince from Tonga and Ha‘apai. Thousands of Vava‘u people would descend on the capital village of Neiafu to see and be seen in some of the most spectacular performances to be staged anywhere in Tonga. The villagers of the winning performances would be duly honored by the crown prince. Some of the best punake, or composers, would be represented, including Fakatava who, along with Malukava from Lapaha in Tongatapu, was the most famous composer in the kingdom.

In many lakalaka lyrics there is one verse that boasts of the prowess of the composer who makes jibes and sarcastic comments about his rival poets performing in the celebration. The ‘Otea lakalaka, composed and produced by Muli, was magnificent, and his fetau against the other composers focused on the famous Fakatava. Lustily, the singers sang out Muli’s challenge:

I’m here to speak out with force,And broadcast in a manner you will understand.Composers and performers alike come closeAnd cower in my shadow by my side,For I make a clean sweep like a broom (pulumu tafi),I am the tiger that guards this harbor.

According to Muli, the crowd was ecstatic by this challenge to the famous Fakatava, who responded to the ‘Otea lakalaka with his own fetau:

Poets and performers, hear me,Especially the upstart rookie poets (meaning Muli).In one hundred years only eight real poets have been designated.My island of KalauWas given me by the King,A gift for his true poet laureate.

This was heady business for Muli. With little experience but immense confidence, pride, and native talent, he successfully challenged the laureate of the kingdom. The prince was delighted with the rivalry, and the people saw two wonderful lakalaka. However, no winner was chosen, and the crown prince invited everybody back the next morning to see the final confrontation of the two poets.

The ‘Otea villagers were frantic with excitement and pride, but it was Muli who was feeling the grandest, as if the faiva spirit of his home island had possessed him. But then came the shocker. Vehikite said to Muli, “How about our learning a brand new lakalaka for tomorrow?” Muli simply asked the question, “Could our people stay up all night?” Everyone agreed, and Muli immediately went to work on a ta‘anga (a set of lyrics) that would be one grand fetau against Fakatava. All night they practiced and polished, right up to the 8 a.m. performance the next day. Muli’s description of the dance follows: “The choreography was astounding, producing awe and fear in the spectators. The men leaped and twisted. Huge bodies threw themselves flat on the ground, springing up again into the air. All movements were performed in perfect unity.”

All Vava‘u was stirred by the nature of this performance. Jealousy and anger rushed through the ranks of Fakatava’s lakalaka. A brawl was imminent. Wisely, the crown prince declared Fakatava’s lakalaka first, and ‘Otea’s lakalaka valedictorian, which was the same thing as saying they were both number one. Thus was Muli’s description of his public triumph as a composer.

Muli and Le‘o at Home

Shortly after this triumph, Muli and Le‘o completed their tenure in ‘Otea and were released to go back to ‘Uiha. No doubt Muli felt the let-down, for in Vava‘u he was a well-known and respected minister of Christ and the Church. Back in his home village he was simply Muli Kinikini. His homecoming was later marred by an ugly quarrel with one of his first cousins, who had appropriated some of Muli’s plantation property. The dispute became a serious family confrontation that had to be settled by the governor of Ha‘apai. The governor ruled in Muli’s favor. His cousin became enraged, threatening to shoot Muli and Le‘o both. These were no idle threats, for shortly thereafter the cousin found Muli and Le‘o together in a relatively remote spot by the sea. The man appeared out of the bush and fired a shot from his gun that barely missed. The man loaded his gun and strode forward. Le‘o cried out, “Jesus save us.”

Muli stood before the man and said, “Stop this nonsense.” The man then announced his intentions of shooting both of them. Muli held out his hand and said, “The gun will not fire again. In the name of Christ and by the authority of the priesthood that I hold, the gun will not fire at all.” Three times the man pulled the trigger, but the gun did not fire, at which point the man dropped the gun and cried, “Oh, Muli, please forgive me.” Said Muli, “You may have this land. My blood is more important to me than soil.” Although Muli forgave the man, the villagers did not and he was arrested. Muli later testified in court in the man’s behalf to save him from prison.

In 1947, Muli became a counselor in the Ha‘apai District Presidency. In 1948 an all-mission conference of the LDS Church was held in Vava‘u. The traditional lakalaka competition was to be held as part of the conference. The only instruction from mission headquarters was that the lakalaka had to have something to do with some aspect of Church history or the history of Joseph Smith. Muli declares in his history that he knew only two things (besides the fact that he was a prophet) at that time about Joseph Smith: (a) that he had a vision in the grove, and (b) that he was killed by assassins. (At that time there was very little Church material translated into the Tongan language.)

Muli took this assignment very seriously. He fasted and prayed for inspiration. His creation was destined not only to win the competition in Vava‘u but also to become the signature performance for the school dance of Liahona High School. It was later performed in its entirety as part of the evening show of the Polynesian Cultural Center in Hawai‘i. Muli claims that the Joseph Smith lakalaka was performed in many places in Vava‘u before and after the conference of 1949. It moved many people to tears and softened hearts. It was the first time many people understood any of the history of Joseph Smith. In 1953, Muli’s Joseph Smith lakalaka was performed at the dedication of the Liahona High School and it was performed every time visitors came to Liahona.

In 1956, Muli was set apart as the president of the ‘Uiha branch. Part of his responsibility was to help the building missionaries construct the brick chapel. Typical of his narrative, Muli does not spend much time talking about the events leading to the dedication of the chapel. He concentrates principally on highlights of the big day. But the plans for the biggest celebration ever on ‘Uiha island were marred by disputes and quarrels among the members. The arguments apparently were over Muli’s insistence that the dedication celebrations be the biggest and the best in the mission for chapel dedications. Since his son Takapautolo was the band master of Liahona High School, Muli was able to secure the band to entertain leaders of the mission, the school, and the building program.

Apparently several members resented Muli’s ploy for a grand show, and instead of promising two large pola (banquet litters) of food apiece for the katoanga (celebration), they promised only two plates per family. Muli could barely contain his fury, but fortunately he was able to channel it in a constructive way. He just went to his own brothers, adding to their assignment the food allotment of the “rebellious” members. Muli himself determined to entertain all the top visitors at his pola. Some of his members accused him of fiematamu‘a (wanting too much to be in front), to be seen as a leader. Muli prepared seventeen pola for that feast. Besides the huge pola of food, the villagers also made the traditional, formal gift presentation called hā‘unga, which included dozens of baskets of food, kava plants, ten large pigs, and a huge live sea turtle.

“Ours Was a Little Island”

As to the education of his and Le‘o’s children, Muli had an all-consuming ambition that every one of his children finish high school. He himself had gone only a few years to primary school. During the 1950s, his time and energy were expended gathering, cutting, drying, scraping, and processing coconuts to make copra; he also fished and sold his catches to help meet the school expenses of his large family. In his tribute to his father, the oldest son, Tēvita Fanamaka Kinikini, exclaims how Muli was able to eke out school expenses for his children, including travel to Tongatapu, clothes, and school materials, from a little plantation that had only eighty coconut trees. The fact was that Muli processed coconuts from Malupō’s plantation as well. He also raised cattle, pigs, and ducks to sell in the Pangai market. Muli often preached to his children that they should focus their lives on the images of three fundamental institutions: the Church, the home, and the school.

Muli’s third son, Taniela, tells a touching story about his father’s preoccupation with the education of his children. Taniela had studied in Liahona and had taken the government exams, hoping to be granted one of the few opportunities to enter ‘Atele College to take his higher forms. In those days, these opportunities were very rare for Liahona students. After the exams, Taniela went back home to ‘Uiha. No word came about the results of the exam until the Saturday morning before the Monday that school was supposed to start. Suddenly there appeared a policeman at the Kinikinis’s home. The officer had heard the message that Taniela had been accepted to ‘Atele and that he must be in ‘Atele on the following Monday. This meant they had to pack everything and take a boat to Pangai about eight miles away in order to catch the Hifofua, the government ferry to Tongatapu. The policeman said the Hifofua would leave at four o’clock that afternoon.

In a frenzy, the family made preparation for Muli to accompany his son to the prestigious government school. To Muli’s horror, however, there was not a single sailboat on the island. Desperately he scoured the village to find an outboard but to no avail. Muli had one fear, that his son would be late to the school and his spot would be given to someone else. Finally, as a last resort, he begged his neighbor to borrow his outrigger canoe to paddle his son and luggage to Pangai.

As Taniela says in his account, “Ours was a little island, a little village, and sometimes the hearts of the villagers were just as little and petty.” Other families likely felt some jealousy over Muli’s son having scored so high and going to an elite school. At any rate, Muli’s neighbor refused to lend him his outrigger. It is not certain whether the man was satisfying his jealousy (since he had a son who did not make it to ‘Atele) or whether he felt that it was futile for Muli to try to take his son by outrigger across the deep, often treacherous channel between ‘Uiha and Pangai. The name of the channel is ‘Auhangamea, literally translated, “the place of destruction of things.”

Without arguing or abusing his neighbor, Muli rushed down to the beach. Perhaps his thoughts were on stealing a boat. Finally, he found a discarded and very leaky canoe hull that had lost its outrigger. Hustling up some pieces to make the outrigger, Muli lashed them to the canoe’s hull, packed all his boy’s things—bags, suitcase, and bedding—gave his son a bucket with which to bail water, and launched into the channel. They left the shores of ‘Uiha at 10:30 a.m. With Muli’s mighty strokes and Taniela’s frantic bailing, they landed on the little island of ‘Uoleva, picked up the baggage, waded across the reef to the island of Lifuka, and ran the final distance to the wharf in Pangai. They arrived just as the Hifofua was moving away from the pier. Muli shouted to the captain, pleading with him to put them aboard so he could take his son to college in Tonga. The kind captain allowed the exhausted father and son to get on.

In remembering this experience, Taniela said,

Many times at school I thought of Dad and wondered where he was at that moment, trying to scrape money up from his fishing or his copra making, so we could go to school. I would ask myself, “What island or what part of the ocean is he now struggling [in] for means to help us?”

Muli’s Second Mission

Shortly after the dedication of the chapel in 1958, Muli announced to President Stone that he would like to be released as branch president so he could move his family to Tongatapu to be closer to his children in school. Muli’s intent was to find employment or get some farm land by which he could keep his family. But President Stone had something else in mind. He called the fifty-five-year-old to a full-time proselyting mission to be companions with Vili Fakataha, another senior elder. Without a second thought for the welfare of his family, he accepted the mission call, moved his entire family to Tongatapu (map 2), and served faithfully for four more years as a teacher of the gospel. By this time he had eleven children and several grandchildren.

Map 2

The labors of Muli Kinikini and Vili Fakataha became well-known throughout Tongatapu. They were an odd couple. Vili had considerable ceremonial stature among the people and was well connected to the Tongan aristocracy; Muli was the nephew of the honorable Malupō in ‘Uiha. Both were strong-willed, powerful men. Muli’s disposition was naturally soft and solicitous. Vili’s was occasionally rough and overbearing. Muli was refined and courteous in his speech. Vili could be harsh and combative. But they enjoyed considerable success, and they were permitted to travel throughout Tonga as circuit preachers, through Vava‘u, Ha‘apai, and the smaller islands of the Tongan Kingdom. They even visited the Queen who, according to Muli, expressed her respect for the Church but asked them not to insist that she be baptized, saying she was too old to change. Perhaps they should go to her two sons, Prince Tungī and Prince Tu‘ipelehake, which they did. But the two princes deftly slipped out of their clutches, and the two missionaries had to be satisfied with simply making contact.

The zealous Vili and Muli fed on each other. Each was constantly trying to outdo the other in vigor and powerful utterances. Many times their street meetings generated more heat than light. Muli wanted to visit everyone, high and low, including the Catholic fathers in Ma‘ufanga. Although he was not above challenging Catholic doctrine in his street sermons, Vili did not want to make a personal visit. When Muli went by himself and was chased from the priests’ apartment, Vili rubbed it in, saying that Muli’s undignified retreat from the Catholic priests had brought shame to both of them.

If the Catholic brethren had stopped short of physical violence, speaking only threats and mockery against Muli, Vili’s exasperation on account of Muli’s zeal for preaching and his quick wit sometimes led to violence. Vili could be argumentative and very threatening when angry. Later, as a newly arrived missionary, I was to encounter his anger when on the orders of President D’Monte Coombs I went to his home to tell him he could no longer conduct night street meetings. He had stirred up the anger of many people who came to the meetings only to bait Elder Fakataha and to hear his frightful oaths couched in his own style of prophetic language.

At any rate, one morning Vili and Muli were making their missionary rounds. As they were walking past the great Methodist church building called Saione, Vili suddenly exploded at Muli. He seized him by the arm and began to drag him along the road, shouting that he was taking him to the beach where they were going to fight it out. Muli asked the reason for Vili’s anger. Said Vili, “Because you are fiepoto [wanting to appear intelligent by showing off, a humiliating accusation to a Tongan], you think yourself so smart, but you are only arrogant. And because you always pretend you are such a great doer.”

Muli begged his pardon, but Vili was intent on violence. Muli records, “He pulled me along and all the people of Kolomotu‘a followed behind, fascinated by the yelling and the threatening and the begging pardon of these two Mormon elders, both grandfathers, both serving their second missions.”

When they reached the seashore, Muli rushed into a thicket of trees, turned on Vili who followed, and said, “Kneel down. Let’s pray.” Muli began to pray, after which Vili began to cry and beg Muli not to tell the mission president. The vicissitudes of this strange companionship did not hinder the work. Scores of people were baptized.

A Great Teacher

In 1961, I was transferred from Vava‘u to Tongatapu and became Muli’s companion (fig. 2). It was a different sort of arrangement. President Coombs insisted that I live in the mission home without a twenty-four-hour-a-day companion and simply pick up Muli every day, labor throughout Tongatapu, take him home at night, and return to the mission home. For several months this was the arrangement that in many ways offered some of the happiest and most productive moments of my mission. Together we supervised the missionary work in Tongatapu and ‘Eua. He pushed me to my limits as a missionary and as a Tongan linguist. Like Tonga Malohifo‘ou, my first truly effective teacher, Muli was an affectionate but pitiless mentor to me in the Tongan language. He was one of my greatest teachers either before or after my mission. His prevailing educational theory, at least in learning Tongan, was to tackle the seemingly impossible and to never rest from speaking or reading the scriptures aloud at all times before all audiences.

Figure 2. This detail of a group picture shows Elders Tēvita Muli Kinikini and Eric B. Shumway, c. 1961. Courtesy Eric B. Shumway.

He volunteered me for everything—to speak at funerals, pray at birthday parties, give Sunday School lessons, and present firesides. He introduced me to the nobility. One day he gave me the best advice I ever received in language learning. He explained to me:

True fluency is not measured in how fast you can spit out a Tongan sentence, but how well you say it and with what feeling. Clear and accurate pronunciation and breadth of vocabulary, not speed or an exact Tongan accent and certainly not the popular slang, are the critical elements of mastering the kind of Tongan which Tongans want to hear from you.

One day on a government ferry from Tongatapu to ‘Eua Island, crossing one of the roughest, deepest channels in the world, I was feeling seasick. The stifling smell of diesel fumes mixed with the aroma of pigs and goats and other fauna on this boat was too much for me. Imagine the kind of nausea that inspires such self-concentration that all other feeling is obliterated. In this extreme discomfort, I heard Muli Kinikini’s voice above the din.

“My dear fellow citizens,” he announced, “how fortunate we are to be traveling today with a young American who is just dying to speak to you.” That’s the exact metaphor he used in Tongan. Muli continued, “He is learning our language and has asked for this opportunity to address you. So please forgive him this unusual request and kindly give him your attention.”

It was not Muli’s audacity that bothered me (I was used to it) but his strong right arm pulling me away from the railing that I resented. I was sure the moment I opened my mouth I would lose everything in my stomach. But I made the attempt and was rewarded in ways both personal and sacred. I spoke for nearly two hours. What strikes me as I remember this event, however, was my mentor’s singleness of purpose as a teacher, his confidence in me, his resistance to the path of least resistance, his tenacity to utilize every teaching moment, his utter refusal to make any allowances for fear, his perfect modeling of the language, and his unfailing words of compliment to me and about me to others. Perhaps the most compelling quality of this teacher was his unequivocal and unconditional love for me, his pupil. The blessings in my life as a scholar, author, teacher, and Church steward have multiplied again and again as a result of this remarkable teacher.

A Man of Impeccable Courtesy

It was during this time also that I saw Muli’s magnificent faith and his single-minded concern for keeping the commandments and bringing souls into the Church. The man was not intimidated by the rank, education, wealth or power of anyone else. He was absolutely confident in himself and in the Lord whom he served. Although I never felt inclined against Muli, I could understand why a man like Vili Fakataha could be exasperated by his zeal.

Muli was a man of impeccable courtesy, whether it was to the prostitute whose home we inadvertently tracted out or the high chief whose family we wished to visit. But it was also Muli’s faith in the Lord and the power of the priesthood that set him apart from others. I will forever be grateful for the opportunities of assisting Muli in giving priesthood blessings. It was Muli who blessed me when I became terribly ill with hepatitis. (Other elders from America had been deathly ill with jaundice for many months.) After Muli’s blessing, he and I were out preaching and baptizing within a week.

We had taught the gospel to a lady named Mahola in Ma‘ufanga and baptized her. She had a serious smoking problem and even after baptism continued to smoke. One day we were called to the hospital and found her deathly ill. Lying unconscious on the bed, she was surrounded by her brothers and relatives who were already wearing their black mourning costumes and heavy waist mats. Muli bent over her and whispered her name. Her eyes fluttered momentarily as she tried to open them and whispered, “Ko e putu kuo pau” (a funeral is certain). Muli said simply, “There will be no funeral.” He promised that if she had faith to be healed and determination never to break the commandments again, we would bless her and she would be healed. When we returned to the hospital the next day, she was no longer there. She had returned home completely well. To this day, Mahola is a committed, active Latter-day Saint.

As missionary companions, we had numerous baptisms, for which we were deeply grateful. But I was occasionally irritated at Muli in our missionary training meetings when he would announce to the other missionaries how many baptisms he and I were going to have in a given month. What I called boasting he insisted was simply motivation to the other elders to work harder.

Despite Muli’s poverty he never asked favors of me, as did so many island companions from American elders. In fact, he always asked that I come and eat in his home. He insisted I eat the best food and all of it. One day Le‘o put before me a delicious boiled duckling with piles of breadfruit and taro around it. Four pairs of hungry little eyes stared at the duckling and then looked at their own meatless plates of taro and breadfruit. When I protested to Muli that we all share the duckling, he said, “You eat it by yourself. My children are used to going without for the sake of the elders. I want them to be able to tell their children someday that they had the privilege of going without in order for a servant of the Lord to eat and be satisfied.”

The love that Muli and Le‘o showered on the missionaries became a Kinikini family legacy. In their tributes to their father at his death, many of the children, without resentment, mentioned that growing up they felt Muli’s love for the missionaries exceeded his love for them.

I was pleased to come across Muli’s summary in his history of our missionary work together. He said, “The nature of my work with Elder Shumway was that we did not want one person to escape whether it was on a bus, in the road, or on a boat; we did not wish to remain silent. We wanted all people to know the will of the Lord that would save them.”

When my mission in Tonga came to a close, I had one final meal at the Kinikini home, jellyfish on delicious yam. Le‘o presented me with a beautifully woven mat that I still cherish. When I waved to them from the Tofua as it moved away slowly from Vuna wharf, I had no idea that the next time I would meet the Kinikinis would be in Hawai‘i. Already Muli was making plans to remove his entire family to America. In just one year’s time, Muli came with Le‘o to Hawai‘i in 1963. He received his patriarchal blessing and became a high priest in Lā‘ie in 1964. It was at that time that he refined the Joseph Smith lakalaka for performance at the Polynesian Cultural Center.

In 1966, Muli was invited to assist in the preparation of the Tongan section of a large dance troupe from the Polynesian Cultural Center that toured the U.S. mainland. Muli’s description in his history of his preparation is concise and focused particularly on himself. He mentions their performance in Hollywood, the CBS Television Center, Disneyland, and in many other cities, including Salt Lake City. He was most proud of being able to meet President McKay, and because of the uniqueness of his lakalaka, President McKay requested a special taping of the piece. Muli’s comment about this honor is interesting: “I wore my shirt made of tapa cloth and my tapa cloth lavalava. I was photographed together with the performers and my picture was taken and put in the archives of the Church with the film to await the Second Coming of Christ.”

Back in Tonga in 1969, Muli was called to be a Church genealogist to gather names and genealogies from every island in the kingdom. Muli had a special manifestation that prepared him for this call in 1968. Also he became the second counselor in Nuku’alofa Second Ward when the Nuku’alofa Stake was organized. Later, he served on the high council until he moved his whole family for good to Salt Lake City (about 1974).

At this point in dictating his history, Muli seems to be exhausted from several hours of speaking. There are many years that he does not represent with any commentary. But there are two interesting happenings worth mentioning. First was a dream he had the night of June 6, 1978. He records,

I dreamed that I, the bishop, a man called Toukeni, and a Dutchman, all high priests in our ward, picked up bodily a large black man and carried him to the ocean and immersed him to the bottom of the ocean in an attitude of baptism. As I looked upon this immersion of the black man, I noticed that his overalls were torn. I came ashore, fearing the man would drown. My fear woke me up.

Two days later, Muli witnessed the announcement of President Kimball’s revelation that the priesthood to be given to all worthy males. Muli was overjoyed and states in his history, “Thus the meaning of the dream. Blacks will be baptized and their ‘clothes,’ namely their curse, will be torn off like old overalls, and they will then put on and wear the holy priesthood.”

The Patriarch of the Family

The last days of Muli’s life were spent in Salt Lake City with his children (fig. 3), each of them gainfully employed and prosperous. Twice a month he would gather them together for an extended family home evening where he would teach his children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren. Many of the younger ones did not understand these talks because they knew only English. No doubt Brother Kinikini felt some alienation, but his children honored him, in fact depended upon him for spiritual direction. He was looked to for every event: birth, death, marriage, sickness, or major decision regarding a job or Church responsibility. The children always consulted the patriarch of their family. Kime confided in me that although his father’s death was very sorrowful for him, in a way it forced him to take more responsibility for the spiritual direction of his own family.

Figure 3. Kinikini family. Back (left to right): Tofilamoa, Pita, Vika, Senituli, Susana, Takapautolo, Taniela. Front (left to right): Keisini, Le‘o, Muli, Tēvita, Kime. Courtesy Kinikini Family.

Muli was an inveterate preacher, full of wisdom and instruction. His primary theme to his family was to love Christ and his Church, sustain the leaders, and keep peace and harmony in the home. He also taught that little children must honor and respect the older children, and that the older children must show compassion for and take care of the little ones.

The relatively easy adjustment of the Kinikini family in the Salt Lake area can be largely attributed to their activity in the Church and the fact that they all had the best education possible in Tonga, which among other things gave them skills in English. They learned from their father the skills of hard work and a cardinal Tongan principle, ko e tauhi vaha‘a (keeping up good relations). Since Kime worked for American Airlines, Muli and Le‘o frequently traveled free of charge in their old age. They visited nine temples and even served as ordinance workers in the Salt Lake Temple.

The last part of Muli’s oral history is highlighted by his account of the blessing of his daughter-in-law Linda Mataele Kinikini. She had been in labor for nearly thirty-six hours. The baby’s heartbeat was falling and the doctor said they must rush her to surgery to remove the baby by cesarean section. Linda insisted that her father-in-law come and give her a blessing first. The doctor, a Catholic who was familiar with this Mormon ordinance, said somewhat reluctantly, “If he is not here in fifteen minutes it will be too late.”

When Brother Kinikini, eighty years old, shuffled into the room twenty minutes after the call, Linda was already being removed to surgery. She had received her shots and medication that had deadened her entire body from the neck down. As Brother Kinikini appeared, the nurse whispered to Linda, “It’s too late.” Linda simply said, “It’s my life, it’s my baby, I want Dad to give me a blessing.” Muli anointed his daughter-in-law and pronounced a short blessing, “Linda, by the power of the holy priesthood which I bear, and in the sacred name of Jesus Christ the Son of God who came into the world to be our Savior, I say unto you that there will be no operation, that the baby will come this very instant and without delay, Amen.”

Muli walked out of the room and the nurse proceeded to wheel Linda into the hallway. Muli’s son, Keisini, said to the nurse, “Why don’t you check my wife one more time?” The nurse lifted the sheet to discover the head of the little baby presenting itself. She screamed for the doctor, who arrived too late to see the birth of a healthy beautiful little girl. His only words to Linda were, “Indeed this is a miracle.”3

Muli’s final words in his history seem to capture the essence of his spiritual life: “I have spoken these things not to suggest that I am a good man or a strong man. Not at all. I speak these things because of my faith, for if one speaks for anything to happen without the slightest wavering of his faith, it will happen as he speaks it. There is no way that it won’t happen.”

Kinikini’s Children Reminisce

Several of the Kinikini children have responded in memory of their father. There are many accounts of their relationship with Tēvita Muli that give us a fuller picture of this unusual family and Church leader. Vika, number eight, remembers her father leading in prayer. Her first recollection of family life in Tonga was that Muli would leave every day wearing clean clothes, a white shirt, and a crisp beautiful ta‘ovala, to do his missionary work. Muli’s immaculate appearance was a tribute to his beloved wife, Le‘o, who made sure he looked clean and neat. Vika said many times she would come upon him on his knees in private prayer.

Indeed, every child has recorded the same remembrances of Muli’s remarkable spiritual dimensions. Tofilamoa (number eleven) remembers being sick, lonely, and very far away serving a mission on an Indian reservation. As she lay suffering and depressed, she prayed and said, “Heavenly Father, because of the good works of my father in the Church, because of his faith, please heal me.” She testifies that even though her dad was far away, “as I finished my prayer I felt calm and comfortable.” Senituli (number seven) records a similar experience. He fell overboard in the stretch of water between Ha‘apai and Tongatapu. Terrified of sharks, he shouted a prayer to Heavenly Father, “If my father has been faithful in your service, please save me from the ferocious fish of the sea and give me a chance to live.”

Sione Takapautolo (number five) remembers the prayers that his father offered in the family. Sometimes they were long, but they were always very fervent and personal prayers. Takapautolo also remembers Muli’s humorous habit of addressing the ancestral spirits in the cemetery on the way from the village to the beach as he took his boys night fishing. He would shout into the cemetery and say, “All of you go out and chase the fish to us so that we’ll have fast fishing.”

Takapautolo can also thank his father for his life. When Takapautolo was a teacher and bandmaster at Liahona High School he could hardly care for his family on his small salary. He applied for and obtained the position of financial officer on a new government fishing boat called the Teiko. So proud of himself for obtaining such a prestigious position, Tolo wrote his father in ‘Uiha to announce his good fortune. On the next boat to Tongatapu, Muli came to stop him. He said, “Tolo, you work for the Church whether you get paid or not. You stay on.” He resisted his father momentarily, but the habit of obeying Muli was too strong. He turned down the position and stayed at Liahona. A few months later, on her first voyage, the Teiko disappeared without a trace. Tolo was very grateful for having learned obedience to his father.

All of Muli’s children praise his courtesy and love for them. Kime (number two) describes his father as easy to approach. He had a very friendly disposition. Muli joked, laughed, and played with his children, as opposed to the many stiff, overbearing Polynesian fathers who seldom speak to their children except to rebuke or punish them. Kime continues, “We did not fail to recognize, however, that he put his Church callings before wife and children. We didn’t mind. It was our blessing.”

The oldest son, Tēvita Fanamaka Kinikini, emphasizes Muli’s compassion. Tēvita Fanamaka was a rebellious child but says, “The first principle of my life is the knowledge of how much Dad loved me and the other children. He worked hard without self-pity. He wanted us to love him. He adored us and he played with us. He was a poor man, but he was rich in love.” Tēvita ran away from school three times before Muli finally gave up forcing him to get an education. But Muli never gave up his efforts to get Tēvita to conform to the principles of the Church. Tēvita remembers taking five of his friends to their home just at mealtime. Le‘o’s anger showed in her face because it was obvious there was not enough food for the friends let alone the large Kinikini family. Besides, it was not easy to cook a big meal on an open fire. Muli recognized the tense situation and Tēvita’s potential embarrassment to his friends, so he spoke quickly with a smile on his countenance, “Tēvita, invite your friends to come eat this food. You can eat together.” The dirty looks immediately disappeared from the Kinikini children and from the face of their mother. Unlike many Polynesian fathers who would demand to be fed first, Muli chose to eat nothing to spare his son the humiliation of having his friends sent away without anything to eat.

Tēvita Fanamaka summarizes his feelings about his father, “I ask Heavenly Father not to be angry when I say this about my own father, but our dependency upon Muli in spiritual things was such that he seemed to us like a god, especially when he put his hands out to bless someone.” He continues, “I know without doubt my father used the priesthood properly, and he tried to live worthy of that priesthood.”

Pita Kinikini, Muli’s and Le‘o’s ninth child, and probably the best known of the children in Church leadership circles, praised his father for the emphasis he placed on the scriptures, particularly the scripture Muli desired should become their family theme: “Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not” (D&C 6:36); Muli had asked his children to study this scripture, ponder it, live it.

On March 28, 1993, Pita Kinikini was set apart as president of the Tongan Stake in Salt Lake Valley. He served faithfully until his untimely death on May 2, 2000. Pita’s tenure as stake president was characterized by a profound spirituality and personal stewardship over thousands of Tongans who had emigrated from their island home, much like the Kinikini family, and were making their way in a new environment and among a different people. As stake president, Pita Kinikini drew from the rich spiritual heritage of his father and mother. He emphasized the oneness of the Church. “This is not a pālangi church or a Tongan church. It is the Church of Jesus Christ,” he often repeated. President Kinikini strove to mitigate and resolve many of the problems facing the Tongan Saints in Utah who felt alienated from their “old” Tongan culture and occasionally marginalized by the “new” American one. He encouraged them to embrace the gospel culture, which transcends all worldly cultures. That encouragement nearly always concluded with his father’s favorite scripture: “Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not” (D&C 6:36).

“A Man of God”

Tēvita Muli Kinikini’s personal legacy is at the heart of the grand legacy of faith among the Tongan Saints of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. As a teacher and missionary, he was one of the builders of God’s kingdom in his island nation.

The opposite qualities of pride and humility stirred Tēvita Muli Kinikini’s soul with passionate enthusiasm for any work that would benefit the Church or his family. His appetite for applause as a performer and composer was also part of his courage to face audiences large and small, bear his testimony, and invite all people to embrace Christ and His church. In this regard, Brother Kinikini was the personification of the traditional Tongan virtue called mamahi‘i me‘a, or zealousness in support of a worthy cause. Perhaps he did play to the crowd—he had a taste for grand spectacles and even controversy. His ego occasionally ran from his common sense, as when he composed and produced an entire lakalaka to challenge and irritate the mighty Vava‘u composer, Fakatava, in a competition before the crown prince and all of Vava‘u. But after all, Muli’s ego and taste for controversy are precisely what the people of his tiny island group are famous for. Affectionately called “Ko e Fo‘i ‘One‘one” (“that grain of sand”), Ha‘apai is also referred to as Ha‘apai Veu, suggesting that its people are always a bit forward, innovative, rebellious, and able, as it were, to “tweak the noses” or “pull the beards” of the people of the so-called Tongan establishment. Certainly, Muli was representative of that tradition.

Yet when his ego was purged by prayer and empowered by a mighty faith in God and a worthy confidence in the holy priesthood, Muli was a force for good that added stature and strength to the Church in Tonga during the mid-twentieth century. Despite his occasional foibles, he was to the end of his days faithful and true to his commitment to the gospel of Jesus Christ and to his family. As a poet and writer of songs, he was part of the grand artistic heritage of the Tongan Kingdom. All who knew him well can say with his daughter Vika, “He was a man of secret prayer, a man of healing, a man of revelation, a man of compassion, a man of God.”

12:["$","$L1d",null,{"book":{"id":30,"title":"Voyages of Faith: Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","subtitle":"Explorations in Mormon Pacific History","image_id":"website-files-bucket/books/book_cover_images/book-voyages.jpg","excerpt":"","book_series_id":null,"series_ordering":0,"ebook_link_kindle":null,"ebook_link_deseret":null,"ebook_link_nook":null,"free_book":0,"pdf_id":null,"footnotes":null,"public":1,"slug":"voyages-of-faith","wp_id":77384,"product_link":"product/voyages-of-faith-explorations-in-mormon-pacific-history","author_id":null},"chapter":{"id":550,"title":"Tēvita Muli Kinikini: Portrait of a Tongan Pioneer","subtitle":null,"online_book_id":30,"excerpt":null,"content":"$1e","intro_text":"$1f","page_number":311,"previous_chapter":"opapo-the-power-of-his-faith","next_chapter":"my-missionary-assignment-to-kona-in-1921","pdf_id":null,"footnotes":"$20","slug":"tevita-muli-kinikini-portrait-of-a-tongan-pioneer","public":1,"wp_id":null,"test":"549","podcast_file_id":null,"section_heading":null,"chapter_author":null},"topics":[],"scriptures":[],"authors":[],"processedContent":{"html":"$21","headings":[{"id":"heading-0","textContent":"Muli’s Youth","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-1","textContent":"The Meeting That Changed His Life","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-2","textContent":"An Apostle’s Promise","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-3","textContent":"“I Am a Bearer of the Holy Priesthood”","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-4","textContent":"The Entire Missionary Force in Vava‘u","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-5","textContent":"A Grand Lakalaka Dance","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-6","textContent":"Muli and Le‘o at Home","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-7","textContent":"“Ours Was a Little Island”","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-8","textContent":"Muli’s Second Mission","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-9","textContent":"A Great Teacher","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-10","textContent":"A Man of Impeccable Courtesy","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-11","textContent":"The Patriarch of the Family","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-12","textContent":"Kinikini’s Children Reminisce","tagName":"H2"},{"id":"heading-13","textContent":"“A Man of God”","tagName":"H2"}]}}]