No specific author, Ten Commandments Today (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955)

Chapter I

Introduction to a Study of the Ten Commandments

By HAROLD GLEN CLARK

Of Brigham Young University

A home evening conversation of a father and his college freshman daughter ran something like this as they discussed the merits of studying the Ten Commandments.

"The Ten Commandments are OK," the daughter said to her father, "but wouldn't a study of our modern gospel help me more with my present-day personal problems?"

"Well, let's see what your present-day personal problems are and then just how these ancient commandments fit in," the father replied.

In the course of another half-hour's discussion, the daughter revealed that her first and foremost problem was to find her niche in life. She wanted great and consuming goals. She wanted more than anything else to gain more self-confidence and poise and obtain a stronger testimony of God and what he would have her do.

The second category of her needs had to do with making and keeping good friends, including a boy friend and eventually a companion to love and cherish for all eternity. She wanted to be a good sport and get along with people in the give-and-take of life and appreciate her parents, brothers and sisters, and all people.

The father showed her that the first four commandments taught us to have one true living God and to study and learn his ways. We are not to take his name in vain, and we must meditate and study and worship him on his most holy day. He then stressed how the last six commandments were guideposts to help her make and keep friends. All the follies of human relationships into which man could fall were treated in these commandments. They were the rules of the game of life for the good sport to follow. No one had ever so completely codified these rules. They called for no immorality, no lying, stealing, bearing false witness, or coveting if the individual would understand, appreciate, and get along with his fellow men.

At the end of their conversation, the daughter concluded with this statement, "I guess I didn't realize how completely these ancient laws tie in with my personal, present-day problems. I would like to know more about them."

It is not difficult to understand this young woman's impression that the Ten Commandments had been outmoded by modern commandments. It is true that many of the Mosaic laws have served their purpose, for example: At present, we do not require the sacrifice of the firstlings of the flock. Because many of these laws are no longer required of us, it is not uncommon for students to look with disdain upon the teachings of Moses.

May we urge upon every Latter-day Saint a more careful and understanding viewpoint? The Mosaic law was given by the Lord to his people for good reasons. It is not archaic nor a relic of a barbaric age. If the circumstances and conditions which brought about the adoption of any of the Mosaic laws should ever exist again among the Lord's people, then it is not unlikely that these laws would be required of his people again.

For example, the Lord has required of us that we live the Mosaic law of the tithe. This law was also given to Adam and his family. The Lord would rather have the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints live a higher law of consecration of their material goods than the law of the tithe. Apparently we were not prepared to do so, hence he gave us the lesser law of the tithe. It would ill behoove the Latter-day Saints one hundred years from now, who may be living a higher law of consecration, to belittle the law of tithing and all the benefits that it has brought from the days of Adam and is bringing to those Latter-day Saints today who keep this commandment.

What have the prophets said about that part of the Mosaic law referred to as the Ten Commandments? Are these laws binding upon the Lord's people down through the ages?

The Lord inspired the Prophet Lehi to send his sons back to Jerusalem at the peril of their lives to obtain the plates of Laban. When Lehi read these plates, he found that they contained the five books of Moses, which, of course, included the Ten Commandments and other teachings. These commandments "should go forth unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people . . . and should never perish . . . neither should they be dimmed . . . by time." (1 Nephi 5:11-22.)

The Prophet Abinadi, 148 years before the coming of Christ, chided the wicked Nephite priests of his day by saying, ". . . if ye keep the commandments . . . which the Lord delivered unto Moses in the Mount of Sinai saying:

"I am the Lord thy God, who hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

"Thou shalt have no other God before me." (Mosiah 12:33-35.) Abinadi continued, repeating to them the other nine commandments. It is interesting to note that among the many laws of the Mosaic code which the prophet might have repeated, Abinadi chose to emphasize the Ten Commandments. (Ibid., 13:1-24.)

The Lord Jesus Christ, in the Meridian of Time, taught the Ten Commandments, giving them added meaning by saying, "Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; . . .

"But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment." (Matt. 5:21-22.) Adultery and bearing false witness were also amplified. (Ibid., 5:27-28; 12:36.)

Some, listening to his teachings, thought that the Ten Commandments and other important Mosaic laws were destroyed. To these people he said, "Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil." (Ibid., 5:17.) He who would break even the least of his commandments would pay the penalty. Those who kept and taught these commandments were to be called great in his kingdom.

The Lord, speaking through the Prophet Joseph Smith in modern times, said: "And now, behold, I speak unto the church. Thou shalt not kill; and he that kills shall not have forgiveness in this world, nor in the world to come." (D. & C. 42:18.) The Lord concludes his quotation of five of the Ten Commandments with this statement: "Thou knowest my laws concerning these things are given in my scriptures; he that sinneth and repenteth not shall be cast out.

"If thou lovest me thou shalt serve me and keep all my commandments." (Ibid., 28-29.)

Thus, in our own day as well as in ages past, we have been commanded of the Lord to live the Ten Commandments.

When Moses led the children of Israel out of Egypt and the bondage of the Egyptian rulers, he faced difficulties in governing his people. They murmured constantly about the food they had to eat and the water they had to drink. In their relationships with God and their fellow men they were stiffnecked and slow to respond to truth and righteousness.

From his father-in-law, Jethro, Moses received the Holy Priesthood and good advice in the art of government and organization. (Ibid., 84:6.) Moses was not to do all of the judging, instead, rulers of thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens were to be provided. The purpose of this organization is revealed in these words of Jethro: "And thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do." (Ex. 18:20.)

Following this organization the Lord took Moses on the Mount of Sinai, and amidst thunders and lightnings and a thick cloud upon the mount, talked face to face with Moses, giving to him, first, the Ten Commandments and later other ordinances and laws governing the fine points of the basic law as set forth in the decalogue. (Ibid., 19:20-21.)

The Ten Commandments were written by the finger of God on tables of stone (Ibid., 34:1), and given to the children of Israel and to all people, for all time, for their guidance. The children of Israel, to whom the Ten Commandments were given, were a choice people, stiffnecked to be sure, and often childlike in their actions, but a special people, a holy nation of priests with a great mission and promise. The commandments were direct, specific, and understandable. They were not "evolved" over eons of time. They are not a collection of "don'ts" given to hedge about the freedom of a superstitious people.

How is it that these laws have never been brought into question? How is it that through the centuries, the teachings of the decalogue stand before us today fresh and beautiful? The very words seem to carry their own credentials. No one will ever outgrow them, for they are the revelations of God. They bear witness that God does not leave his children alone to grope, falter, and guess about the saving principles of conduct in this life. They are not man's concept of what is right but the mind, will, and heart of a gracious Father who loves his children and yearns for their welfare. They must be taught to and learned by the children of men if they would live happy and fruitful lives.

The Lord gives this reason for placing us here:

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them;

And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever. (Abraham 3:25-26.)

In order to do all things which the Lord has asked us to do, we must first learn what his commandments are. Next, we must learn to keep these commandments under the shifting circumstances of mortal life.

Herein lies a great truth. We should recognize it as we begin our study of the Ten Commandments.

No one proves to the Lord that he has kept his estates by learning to apply these laws to one phase of his life only. We may and should acquire a working knowledge of broad principles and laws, such as honesty. But we must learn how to be honest in new and varied situations.

A Brigham Young University professor, in a study of behavior patterns of college men and women, points out the importance of learning how to be honest in every situation. (Wilford E. Smith, in an unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.) His study compares non-Latter-day Saint college student behavior patterns with those of Latter-day Saint college men and women. Latter-day Saint youth in this survey were shown to be vastly superior in their concepts and their practices with respect to the law of chastity and the Word of Wisdom, but when it came to the question of cheating in college examinations, the concepts and practices of the two groups were more nearly even. There are many variables to account for in a study of this kind. We must be careful in drawing conclusions. But one finds it difficult to escape the conclusion that we must teach and learn better than we have up to the present time the concept and practice of honesty as applied to college examinations. At the present time, students are attempting to administer an honor code at Brigham Young University to give opportunity for students to learn how to be honest in college activities. Other colleges have improved their standards of honor by this means.

The great truth is that every one of the Ten Commandments must be taught and learned in life's varied situations. The businessman, the lawyer, the teacher, farmer, mother, father or student—each must learn what coveting or stealing or lying means in his world and his circumstances. How humbling this truth is! Habits are specific. They must be acquired and tested and learned anew in each station in life. It is for this very purpose that we were placed on the earth and life's experiences spread before us in all their variety and complexity. Each adult member of the Church has the responsibility of being alert as to how the laws of God apply to the ever-changing circumstances of his life. He can never afford to be smug about his learning. He must "endure to the end." This means he must be an ever-willing learner, otherwise he may fall into error and break the commandments of God.

The Jewish Sabbath, rightly practised, was a beautiful thing. Holiness settled around the home on this day. Families were together. The pace and tone of life changed, leaving behind the routine and the stress and strain of the week day. It was a day of peace and joy—a day of sacred songs, prayer, and a study of God's commandments. The Jews welcomed the day and were loath to see it go. And when it departed, it left them strengthened and fortified for the coming week.

Our world is quite unlike the pastoral civilization of the children of Moses. The fast atomic age into which we are moving tests our faith and belief in the commandment to rest from our labors and to worship God and pay our devotions to him on the Sabbath day. We must learn how to keep the Sabbath in our day, in our town, on our street, and in our home.

How shall we know how to keep the Sabbath day holy in our day?

These treatises on the Ten Commandments were prepared by living servants of our Heavenly Father. They understand the world in which we now live. They know many of its problems. They can help us make application of the Ten Commandments in the generation in which we live.

There is much to recommend learning the commandments by heart. The full text of the decalogue is found in the twentieth chapter of Exodus. There are many fine codes of ethics in the professions and in other organizations, but they do not save people in the kingdom of God. Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are entitled to the companionship of the Holy Ghost to help understand and keep the Ten Commandments.

The Prophet Abinadi stressed this point with the children of Moses on the American continent shortly before the birth of Christ.

He said, ". . . If ye teach the law of Moses why do ye not keep it? Why do you set your hearts upon riches? Why do ye commit whoredoms and spend your strength with harlots?" (Mosiah 12:29.) Abinadi then gives due credit for the salvation that the Ten Commandments can bring but emphasizes the point that salvation does not come by law alone. Teach the Ten Commandments, he told the priests, but also teach that they are a shadow of things to come. Complete redemption comes only through the atonement which Jesus Christ, the Jehovah of the Jews, would make for the sins and iniquities of this people. All of the children of Israel would have otherwise perished, notwithstanding the Ten Commandments.

A study of these sacred commandments under the influence of God's Holy Spirit will bring specific benefits:

1955 Deseret Book Co.
