No specific author, Ten Commandments Today (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955)

Chapter II

The First Commandment

By ELDER LEGRAND RICHARDS of the Council of the Twelve

Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

And God spake all these words, saying,

‘I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

Thou shalt have no other gods before me.’ (Ex. 20:1-3.)

The Ten Commandments are timeless and ageless. They constitute the most ancient of all creeds to which men of good will everywhere will give assent. They strike a universal cord and sound the music of that eternity which God hath set in the heart of man. (Winston, The Ten Commandments.)

Just as the Lord has placed the germ of life in every seed, so he has planted in every human heart a love for God, which, under proper environment and with proper cultivation, will grow and develop until it becomes the most powerful motivating influence in the life of man.

Of this influence and power, we read in the Gospel of John:

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

The same was in the beginning with God.

All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.

In him was life; and the life was the light of men.

That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world.

And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father), full of grace and truth. (John 1:1-4, 9, 14.)

Since the light "which lighteth every man" is endless, so must man be endless, deathless, as an unknown author wrote:

So far as we know there has never been found a tribe so ignorant, so low, so uncultured, that it did not hold in some form the belief that there was that in man which death could not destroy. Is this delusion, or is it a whisper of the Eternal Spirit telling of the deathlessness of man?

There are two unseen powers operating in the world, the power of God and the power of Satan. When Satan does not feel that the children of God can be won to his cause by outright opposition, he resorts to deceitful imitation of the things of God.

Our Heavenly Father knew that Satan would thus seek to deceive his children, even to the end that he would persuade them to worship false gods. The commandment "Thou shalt have no other gods before me" was timely then and remains so to this day.

Moses clearly understood that Satan would seek to lead the hearts of the children of Israel away from the worship of the God of Israel. When the Lord led them to the promised land, he told them that they should be, in coming generations, scattered among the heathen nations: "And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat nor smell." (Deut. 4:28.) Then Moses promised them that "in the latter days," when they were in tribulation, if they would seek after the Lord their God they should find him if they would seek him with all their hearts and with all their souls. (Ibid., 4:29-30.)

The Prophet Isaiah spoke of Satan's decree to "ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the Most High":

How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!

For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north:

I will ascend above the heights of the clouds: I will be like the Most High.

Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit.

They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms;

That made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners? (Isaiah 14:12-17.)

Satan's power has therefore become so great in the earth that he has been able to deceive the nations, and the multitudes have turned to the worship of false gods, as Moses declared: ". . . which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell." (Deut. 4:28.)

Such was the condition of the Christian world at the time Joseph Smith, in obedience to the advice given by the Apostle James, went into the woods to pray:

If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. (James 1:5.)

He truly sought wisdom, and as promised by Moses—

But if from thence thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul. (Deut. 4:29.)

When, in answer to his fervent prayer, God the Father and Jesus Christ, his Son, appeared to Joseph Smith, he learned that all the churches had departed from the worship of the true and living God. Joseph knew that they were worshiping a God that could "neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell," for how could a God without body, parts, or passions, as worshiped by the Christian world, see, or hear, or eat, or smell?

Compare this sure knowledge Joseph Smith obtained of the true personality of God and his Son, Jesus Christ, through their personal appearance to him, with the uncertain knowledge of the Christian churches.

Note this further testimony of Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon following a vision they received at Hiram, Ohio, Feb. 16, 1832:

And while we meditated upon these things, the Lord touched the eyes of our understandings and they were opened, and the glory of the Lord shone round about.

And we beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness;

And saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever.

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God. (D. & C. 76:19-24.)

Compare this certain knowledge with the views of the Council of Nicea which was convened by Emperor Constantine in the year 325 A. D. Three hundred and eighteen bishops of the church spent four weeks in debate on the true divinity and personality of the Son of God, and the equality of Christ with God, before they could become sufficiently united to make a public declaration on the matter. Their declaration has formed the basis of the belief of the Catholic Church and those branches which have broken away from the mother church; for example, note the following description of God:

There is but one living and true God, who is infinite in being and perfection, a most pure spirit, invisible, without body, parts or passions, immutable, immense, eternal, incomprehensible, almighty, most wise, most holy, most free, most absolute, working all things according to the counsel of his immutable and righteous will, for his own glory: most loving, gracious, merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin; the rewarder of them that diligently seek him; and with all most just and terrible in his judgments; hating all sin, and who will by no means clear the guilty. (LeGrand Richards, A Marvelous Work and a Wonder, pp. 10-11.)

How could a God "without body, parts, or passions" be expected either to "see, hear, eat, or smell"? How could any child of God be expected to understand, much less to love and be loved by such an "incomprehensible" God?

The knowledge that came to Joseph Smith accords with the words of Holy Writ:

And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. (Gen. 1:26-27.)

Attempts have been made to explain that this creation was only in the spiritual image and likeness of God, but after reading Joseph Smith's simple story, one wonders how an historian could have made a more clear-cut, understandable statement of what actually happened in the creation of man, especially when one reads:

And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness, after his image; and called his name Seth. (Ibid., 5:3.)

Joseph Smith found that he was literally in the image and likeness of God and Jesus Christ, as Seth was in the likeness and image of his father Adam.

This also makes the experience of Moses and his associates and seventy of the elders of Israel seem so reasonable and easy to understand:

Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel:

And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness. (Exodus 24:9-10.)

And it came to pass, as Moses entered into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and the Lord talked with Moses.

And all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle door: and all the people rose up and worshipped, every man in his tent door.

And the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. (Ibid., 33:9-11.)

Could any historian be expected to describe this event any more clearly than to say that the Lord and Moses talked with each other "face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend"? Does anyone need to be told how a man speaks to his friend? The Father and the Son spoke with Joseph Smith "face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend." There is only one thing that made this possible, and that is the fact that God did create man in his own image and likeness. Could any other image or likeness have been half so wonderful?

Paul, the Apostle, tried to make clear what kind of Personage God is by telling us that his Son, Jesus Christ, is "the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person," and that he "sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high." (Heb. 1:3.) This, of course, could only have been possible when his Father had a body where Jesus could take his place "on the right hand" of God.

Paul's description of God gives real meaning to the experience of Stephen, when he was being stoned to death by his enemies:

But he, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up stedfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,

And said, Behold, I saw the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God. (Acts 7:55-56.)

Stephen saw two separate and distinct personages—the Son, standing on the right of the Father.

That the Ten Commandments should begin with "Thou shalt have no other gods before me" can well be understood when it is realized that, when Joseph Smith beheld the Father and the Son, there was not a church in all the world teaching faith in the true and the living God, a God who can "see and hear and eat and smell."

We are heirs of the great gospel plan. Where, in the thousands of books which have been written, can we find such a faultless guide to follow than the injunction given by the Lord: "Thou shalt have no other gods before me"?

The First Commandment

By ELDER LEGRAND RICHARDS of the Council of the Twelve

Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

PART TWO

There can be no greater objective in life than to learn to know and understand our relationship to our Father in heaven and his Son Jesus Christ. Jesus said:

And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent. (John 17:3.)

The ability to properly evaluate things in life, putting first things first, is probably the greatest success one can achieve. The wise man Solomon philosophized on the things men seek in life and concluded that it was all "vanity and vexation of spirit." Said he:

. . . the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.

And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning all things that are done under heaven. . . .

I have seen all the works that are done under the sun; and, behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great estate, and have gotten more wisdom than all they that have been before me in Jerusalem.. . .

I perceived that this also is vexation of spirit.

I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure: and, behold, this also is vanity.

I made me great works; I builded me houses; I planted me vineyards:

I made me gardens and orchards, and I planted trees in them of all kind of fruits:

I made me pools of water, to water therewith the wood that bringeth forth trees:

I got me servants and maidens, and had servants born in my house; also I had great possessions of great and small cattle above all that were in Jerusalem before me:

I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of kings and of the provinces: I gat me men singers and women singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that of all sorts.

So I was great and increased more than all that were before me in Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me.

And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not from them, I withheld not my heart from any joy; for my heart rejoiced in all my labour: and this was my portion of all my labour.

Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labour that I had laboured to do: and, behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun. (Eccl. 1:8, 13-14, 16-17; 2:1, 4-11.)

Then Solomon concludes his philosophizing with these words:

Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them;

Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.

For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. (Ibid., 12:1, 13-14.)

There are so many of our Father's children who seem to worship the very things the wise man Solomon condemned as "vanity and vexation of spirit."

Against such as these, it would seem that the words of the Lord coming from Mount Sinai should apply:

"Thou Shalt Have No Other Gods Before Me."

To appreciate our relationship to God, we must learn to know him: "And this is life eternal that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." This knowledge does not come without effort on our part any more than does a knowledge of any branch of science. Jesus indicated the relationship between effort and reward in these words:

Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you:

For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. (Matt. 7:7-8.)

Paul indicated we must do our part:

But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. (Heb. 11:6.)

The following experience will further illustrate this thought:

In the National Art Museum in Amsterdam, one of our missionaries, standing by a rather insignificant oil painting as compared with many in the museum, was asked what he would give for it. He replied: "If I had to take it home and hang it up, I don't think I would give over $10." The National Art Museum had paid 350,000 guilders, or the equivalent of $120,000.00. The missionary's knowledge of art did not enable him to appreciate this lovely painting.

A member of the Church in Amsterdam, an artist, went in a secondhand store and saw two small paintings lying on the floor. He asked the storekeeper what he would take for them, to which he replied: "You may have them both for 25 cents (ten cents American money)." He purchased, cleaned, and sold them for 359 guilders $120.00 American money). The artist knew art—the storekeeper did not. Many of the choicest things in life are trampled underfoot because we lack the ability to appreciate them.

For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.

But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. (1 Cor. 2:11, 14.)

If we understood God's place in the universe and in our lives and in the lives of men and nations, we would realize that no other knowledge could possibly be as valuable to us.

Roger W. Babson tells of a visit he had with the President of the Argentine Republic, at which time the President said: "Mr. Babson, I have been wondering why it is that South America, with all its great natural advantages, is so far behind North America notwithstanding that South America was settled before North America." Then he went on to tell of the superior resources of South America, and then he repeated his inquiry: "Why is it, with all these natural resources, South America is so far behind North America?" Being his guest, Mr. Babson asked the President what he thought was the reason, to which he replied: "I have come to this conclusion. South America was settled by the Spanish who came to South America in search of gold, but North America was settled by the Pilgrim Fathers, who went there in search of God." (Fundamentals of Prosperity.)

We probably will never fully realize how great are the blessings of the Lord upon this land because our Pilgrim Fathers came here in search of God.

At the International Scout Jamboree recently held in California, Vice President of the United States Nixon made the statement that: "The United States has produced half of the supplies or wealth of the world." And this notwithstanding the statement of the President of the Argentine as to the superior resources of South America. Even as the Lord blesses nations that put their trust in him, so does he bless his children who put their trust in him and serve him.

It is no doubt because our Pilgrim Fathers came to this land in search of God that we find written in our Declaration of Independence such statements as "nature's God," "endowed by their Creator," and "the supreme Judge of the world."

In the Constitutional Convention in 1787, the delegates argued and wrangled for about five weeks without making very much headway. Then it was that Benjamin Franklin arose and addressed himself to President Washington in these words:

The small progress we have made is melancholy proof of the imperfections of human understanding. In this situation of this assembly, groping as it were in the dark to find political truth, and scarce able to distinguish it when it is presented to us, how has it happened, sir, that we have not hitherto once thought of humbly applying to the Father of Light to illuminate our understanding. I have lived, Sir, a long time; and the longer I live the more convincing are the proofs I see of this truth, that God governs in the affairs of men. . . We have been assured, Sir, in the sacred writings, that "except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it." I firmly believe this . . . I therefore beg leave to move that hereafter prayers, imploring assistance of heaven and its blessings on our deliberations, be held in this assembly every morning before we proceed to business.

In his inaugural address, George Washington said: "It would be peculiarly improper to omit in this first official act my fervent supplications to that Almighty Being who rules over the universe." In his famous farewell address, he expressed the same thought: "Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity, religion and morality are indispensable supports."

As Lincoln left his home in Springfield for Washington to assume his duties as President of the United States, from the platform of the car he spoke these parting words:

My friends, no one not in my situation can appreciate my feeling of sadness at this parting. To this place and the kindness of this people, I owe everything. Here have I lived a quarter of a century and have passed from a young man to an old man. Here my children have been born and one is buried. I now leave, not knowing when or whether ever I may return, with a task before me greater than that which rested upon Washington. Without the assistance of that Divine Being who ever attended him, I cannot succeed. With that assistance, I cannot fail. Trusting in Him who can go with me and remain with you and be everywhere for good, let us confidently hope that all will yet be well. To His care commending you, as I hope in your prayers you will commend me, I bid you an affectionate farewell.

Before Dwight D. Eisenhower was inaugurated as President of the United States, he met with his prospective cabinet members. At Mr. Eisenhower's request, the meeting was opened with prayer by our own Ezra Taft Benson. Immediately preceding the inauguration ceremony, Mr. Eisenhower requested the privilege of offering a personal prayer soliciting divine assistance in his responsibilities as President of the United States. When he took his oath of office, he placed one hand on the Bible used by Washington at Psalm 127:1: "Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it: except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain." And the other hand he placed on the Bible he had used as a cadet at West Point, which was opened at 2 Chronicles 7:14:

If my people, which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.

J. C. Penney, one of our nationally successful merchants, when a boy told his father he did not believe there was a God. His father replied: "Prisons are full of men who do not believe there is a God." J. C. Penney later developed great faith in God, which inspired him to do many worth-while things to bless humanity and make this a better world in which to live.

The downfall of Rome and many nations of the past, including the great nations that have inhabited this land of America, can be attributed to their having departed from faith in God and the keeping of his commandments.

Think of the men and women who have had a deep faith in God—there is a refinement and culture, and sweetness and nobility of character in them which cannot be found among those without such faith. They will be found among those who are contributing most to the blessing and uplift of humanity and to the making of a better world in which to live. They are also the real homemakers of our land.

It was faith in God that enabled our pioneer parents and grandparents to make the sacrifices they made, to remain true and faithful to their convictions when persecuted and driven so many times from their homes. Except for this faith they could have returned to the homes and loved ones from which they were originally gathered, where they could have found refuge and peace and freedom from persecution.

Religious faith has ever been the most powerful influence in the lives of men. The early Christians suffered their bodies to be fed to the wild beasts and to be burned as torches by the Romans, rather than to deny their faith in God and his Son, Jesus Christ.

God created the heavens and the earth and all things therein, including our mortal bodies and the feelings of the human breast. He planted in each human heart a spiritual germ, which, when cultivated, becomes the most powerful, motivating influence in our lives, i.e., a hunger for God our Eternal Father, the Father of our spirits. This hunger for God is beautifully described by Joseph R. Sizoo in his recent book:

There is a timeless urge which has again taken possession of the human heart. Since that first dawn when the morning stars sang together one desire has surged through the world. From the cradle to the grave it has taken hold of man. When life comes out of nowhere into somewhere this haunting longing comes with it. All men experience it. It leaps across the borders of races and nations; it cuts across the frontiers of time, forever challenging man. It is the yearning for God. We think we need many things, but in the last analysis the human heart today seeks but one thing. I have seen deer tracks in clearings on the edge of the forests. At first it was a tiny trail, then another would run into it and the two would meet a third and so on until the trail became well trodden, wide and hard, at last leading to some hidden spring or some water hole. It has been so with mankind. Throughout all time, all the wants and desires of man have run into this one hope. The story of Sir Galahad is the story of the search for honor; the story of Job is the story of the search for justice; the story of Pilgrim's Progress is the story of the search for heaven. But behind all these is one eternal, ageless, common quest. It is the quest for God. (Joseph R. Sizoo, Make Life Worth Living, p. 33.)

He also tells of Rudyard Kipling's yearning for God:

Some years ago the inimitable Rudyard Kipling was very ill with typhoid fever. For days he tossed back and forth restlessly with a burning fever. It seemed that the end had come for him. As he lay there he kept mumbling to himself. The family tried to find what he wanted, but with no success. After days of tossing and mumbling one morning the nurse bent over his frail form and said, "Mr. Kipling, what do you want?" For a moment the restlessness left him, he opened his eyes slowly and said feebly, "I want God." No one can deny that this almost inarticulate cry of a restless, bewildered age for God is upon many. That hunger is gnawing at the spirits of our current generation, haunting them, and following them like a shadow. Unwilling perhaps to admit it, the one sentence that is knowingly or unwittingly on the hearts of most people is that one of a long-ago seeker, "Oh, that I knew where I might find him." (Ibid., p. 37.)

From a few of our great men we quote:

The end of all learning is to know God and out of that knowledge to love and imitate him. (Milton.)

The older I grow—and I now stand upon the brink of eternity—the more comes back to me that sentence in the Catechism which I learned when a child, and the fuller and deeper its meaning becomes, "What is the chief end of man? To glorify God and enjoy him forever." (Thomas Carlyle.)

I have never doubted the existence of God, for, even if my reason were incompetent to grasp him, still my inner feelings would convince me of his reality. My temperament has always been in harmony with his feeling. (Napoleon.)

Governor Frank G. Clement, of Tennessee, in concluding his speech at the Kiwanis International Convention in New York in the early part of 1953, said: "My friends, the only idea big enough to unite a world is the idea of God. The only institution universal enough to engage all men in religious worship. The only emotion that can join all creatures in one communion is the love of God."

One writer, unknown to the author, expressed these forceful thoughts emphasizing the subject of this lesson:

After every deluge of war and violence, the sacred heights of Sinai again re-echo to the world the importance of God as Creator of heaven and earth. A deep sense of the importance of the first commandment would change all men fortunate enough to share it. It would make us humble and brave. It is the first stone in the foundation of successful life building.

If we fully understood the importance of the part God plays in the affairs of men and nations, and the purpose for which he created this earth and placed us upon it, and what we owe him for all we have and are, we would feel that there should have been no necessity for the command coming from Mount Sinai:

"THOU SHALT HAVE NO OTHER GODS BEFORE ME."

1955 Deseret Book Co.
