No specific author, Ten Commandments Today (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955)

Chapter III

The Second Commandment

By PRESIDENT JOSEPH FIELDING SMITH,

President of the Council of the Twelve

Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth:

Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me:

And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments. (Exodus 20:4-6.)

This is the second commandment of the Decalogue given by the Lord to Moses and enjoined upon Israel as the twelve tribes sojourned in the wilderness, after their deliverance from the bondage of the Egyptians. Egypt was a land infested with idolatry, and so was the land of Canaan and the surrounding country where the Israelites were to make their home. The Lord gave this land to Abraham and his descendants as an everlasting possession with the commandment that they should serve him. This commandment was made very emphatic so that the children of Israel should not forget it; but they did forget, because they failed to hearken to the Lord and his prophets.

The Lord has placed in the soul of every man the attribute of worship. President George A. Smith once said:

There is a feeling in the human breast to reverence something. We find it among the untutored savages; we find it among what are denominated the heathen nations—among those who are considered pagans, bowing down to worship images, the workmanship of their own hands. (Journal of Discourses, 5:359.)

Dr. Alexander Winchell, a man of world-wide experiences, said that travelers report that all savages with whom they come in contact "have some religious practices," some of them abhorrent to civilized man, containing rites and observances which to the civilized eye are "vicious, cruel, or absurd." He adds:

I think that all people had, somehow acknowledged the necessity of some being to worship. Worship, prayer, praise, religious rites, religious symbolism—these are part of the history of every people under the sun. This statement is not made lightly. I have examined all the cases of savages alleged destitute of a religious nature, and I have been led to these conclusions: In respect to many tribes, the changes are clearly unfounded; in respect to some, we have not sufficient information to base any opinion upon them; in regard to others, it is only true that their religious notions are debased and shocking while still they are religious in their meaning, and argue the existence of a real religious nature. (Reconciliation of Science and Religion, pp. 183, 353.)

There is a widespread teaching today that worship began many thousands of years ago when men were savages of a very low order. This doctrine is based solely in the imaginations of modern men. Advocates of this theory declare that in the far-distant past man saw "a spirit in the storm, a god, very like his powerful enemy, too, in the thunder, a nymph in the stream, a Pan in the woods, and every mysterious happening in nature he attributed to the caprice of these spirits, or, if he happened to be a monotheist, to the caprice of the one Great Spirit"; (Evolution in Science and Religion, Robert A. Millikan, pp. 67-68) also that "there are 'primitive' men today similar to the native of the Congo who pounds his tomtom to scare away the god that he fears, or with incantations, the totem poles, and in the medicine-man practices of our American Indians." (Ibid., p. 66.)

From the revelations the Lord has given us in the standard works of the Church we learn that these ideas are not true. This is not the manner in which religion and worship came; but instead it was by a personal contact with God our Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, who gave Adam and the antediluvian prophets commandments in the very beginning. Dr. W. Schmidt, of the University of Vienna, who has made a most thorough study of religious faiths, and who is considered a leading authority on this subject, has stated in his book, Origin and Growth of Religion, that the oldest, as far back as man has been able to discover and religious practices can be traced, were monotheistic, or the worship of one God, not a multitude of gods. The worship of many gods and the making of images of them was of a later date. This is in perfect harmony with the history in the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the Pearl of Great Price.

This second commandment was first given to Adam after he was driven out of the Garden of Eden, when the angel came to him and said: "Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord?" Adam answered: "I know not, save the Lord commanded me." Then the angel instructed him, saying:

This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth.

Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore. (See Moses 5:6-8.)

The Lord commanded Adam and Eve to teach these things to their children, which they did, fulfilling the commandment of the Lord to the best of their power. We read:

And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters.

And Satan came among them, saying: I am also a son of God; and he commanded them, saying: Believe it not, and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish. (Ibid., 12-13.)

From that day Satan introduced various religions. We have no reference in the Bible or in the Pearl of Great Price saying that the antediluvians practised image worship. However, they became so wicked and corrupt in their lives and practices that they brought down the anger of the Lord upon them, and this resulted in the flood and the cleansing of the earth. We may presume, however, that these people before the flood practised all kinds of idolatry. Noah only, and those few members of his family who were willing to heed his counsel, were saved from the flood. Be it remembered that Adam lived 930 years, and in that time he and Eve, who likewise must have lived to an exceeding age, became the parents of many sons and daughters, and at the time of the flood their descendants had spread far and wide and were organized into tribes and kingdoms and were a great multitude. Noah lived 350 years after flood and six hundred years before the flood, so he may be presumed to have had many sons and daughters, and he, too, saw his sons and daughters spread forth upon the land and become rebellious, notwithstanding the taught them correct commandments and to worship God just as Adam had done before him.

After the flood we find history repeating itself. From the story in the Bible we are informed that Noah died about two years before Abraham was born. Abraham was 150 years old when Shem died, so there were many righteous men during those years, and the people had become a multitude of nations. It has been shown that money at compound interest increases rapidly and that people multiply likewise. We get some idea from figures recently released showing the growth of the people in the United States. In 1900 the population was 76 millions, in 1950 it was 151.7 millions, and it is estimated that by 1975 the growth will be 221 millions. We may therefore conclude that in the 350 years that Noah lived after the flood the inhabitants had multiplied rapidly and were quite numerous and scattered.

Notwithstanding the fact that Noah and Shem had lived among them for hundreds of years, the greater part of the people had turned away from the worship of God to the worship of many gods and the making of idols before which they bowed down in worship, rejecting the commandments the Lord had given them through Noah and his sons. In turning away from the truth the minds of the people became darkened, and as time went on, many false traditions and doctrines developed as Satan continued to teach them idolatry to destroy their faith. Of this condition, President George A. Smith, in a discourse delivered in 1857, said:

You should ask the priest of a heathen temple if the real intent is to worship the stone or the image of gold, silver, brass, or iron, and he would tell you that it was representative of something—that you could not see the real god, and the image was introduced as a substitute. Among the early inhabitants of the world who rejected the true religion, many began to pay their adoration to the sun, the moon, stars, etc. These soon adopted personages that they considered would represent the objects of the adoration. Hence we find Jupiter is represented as the king of gods, or as the god of thunder, more particularly—the thunder representing his weapon, being the most powerful agent they had any idea of; and his image or statue was worshiped by the early inhabitants of the earth as the representative of that power. There was generally attached to these deities an idea of terror. (Journal of Discourses, 5:560.)

The worship of false gods and the representation of them by idols spread to all parts of the earth, and the worship of our Eternal Father was almost entirely forgotten. Idol worship was found among the natives of the islands of the sea, in all of the continents and among every kindred, tongue, and people. The Israelites came in contact with it in their connections with Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia, Persia, the nations that were apparently the most civilized in ancient times. The people turned away from serving the Lord back in the days of Noah and Shem. The Greeks and Romans, considered to be the most noted painters, sculptors, and poets, were guilty of this abominable practice. They had numerous gods whose statues, carved in the most beautiful forms, were placed in their sanctuaries and in many public places on hills and in gardens where the people assembled to do them honor. It was in Athens where Paul was shocked because the city was "wholly given to idolatry."

Among the many monuments and altars, Paul found one erected in Athens with the inscription on it: "To the Unknown God." He went to Mars' hill, named after their god of war, where the people assembled and preached all kinds of false philosophy and religion. Paul gained their attention and said:

Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious.

For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with the inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.

God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands:

Neither is worshiped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things:

And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the time before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation;

That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us:

For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring. (Acts 17:22-28.)

He continued his discourse at some length and many believed him, others scoffed, and others said, "We will hear thee again on this matter."

It appears from the researches made that nearly all peoples who worship idols have a belief in one high God, of whom they were ignorant just like these Greeks. Evidently this was the true God of whom they were taught in the beginning, and their traditions still contained some knowledge, vague though it was, of him. The names of some of their gods, with slight imagination, can be connected with the God of Israel. For instance, Zeus of the Greeks, who was the Jupiter of the Romans, may very easily be a corruption of Jesus and Jehovah. These names of Jesus were revealed and known from the days of Adam, which we learn from the book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price. These were also known to Noah and his son after the flood. Zeus or Jupiter was the supreme deity of both the Greeks and the Romans. He was the husband of Hero, or Juno, and the father of Ares. He was the god of thunder, rain, and snow, and Ares represented his messenger in the rainbow. These nations had a multiplicity of gods and even elevated some of their heroes to the semi-gods, but they recognized some unknown God which Paul declared unto them.

As Paul and Barnabas journeyed on their mission, they cried out against the idolatry of the people and performed many miracles, healing the sick, silencing familiar spirits, and doing many other wonderful things. When Paul and Barnabas were at Lystra, in Lycaonia, by faith a man who was lame was healed. The people who witnessed it "lifted up their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men. And they called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius, because he was the chief speaker." The result of this brought the priest of Jupiter to the scene, and he brought oxen and garlands to the gates to offer sacrifice. When Paul and Barnabas saw this, they ". . . rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out,

"And saying, Sirs, why do ye these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and preach unto you that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God, which made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein." (Ibid., 14:14-15.) This gave Paul and Barnabas another opportunity to preach to them. The outcome of it was that certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium turned the people against these apostles and while, just shortly before the people were ready to offer sacrifice to them and worship them, their unstable natures, through the persuasion of these malicious Jews, turned against Paul and Barnabus whom they stoned, and Paul was dragged out of the city, the people thinking he was dead. Again, at Ephesus, the preaching of these missionaries against idolatry caused many to believe, which caused the silver-smiths, who gained their wealth by making images of Diana, to plot against them, saying that if these apostles were permitted to continue preaching, the craft of the silversmiths would be in danger. There was a great temple in Ephesus built in honor to Diana, and the silversmiths caused a tumult, and Paul and Barnabas would have met with violence had not the town clerk come to their rescue and, having authority, dispersed the people, saying that if these men had committed any offense it would be handled according to law.

The history of the nations of the earth reveals that in the entire world the people, though in many instances far apart and not in communication, had turned to the bowing down to idols. Moreover, they respected the belief of their neighbors in their worship of different idols from their own. It is recorded in the scriptures that when Israel was at war with Syria, and Syria was defeated, the servants of the king of Syria came to him and said:

Their gods are gods of the hills; therefore they were stronger than we; but let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they.

The prophet came to the king of Israel and said unto him:

Thus saith the Lord, because the Syrians have said, the Lord is God of the hills, but he is not God of the valleys, therefore will I deliver all this great multitude into thine hand, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. (I Kings 20:23, 28.)

It is very plain to see that Satan has great influence among the children of men. Everywhere he has turned the people against true worship and the paying of devotion to God our Eternal Father, and his Son, Jesus Christ. Satan does not care what kind of worship people have as long as it is the worship of false gods. They may worship the sun, the moon, the stars and plants, animals, or the forces of nature, or even their own wealth and possessions, all of this is the same to him as long as they do not bow the knee and worship the God of Adam, Abraham, and Moses.

The Second Commandment

By PRESIDENT JOSEPH FIELDING SMITH,

President of the Council of the Twelve

Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth:

Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me:

And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments. (Exodus 20:4-6.)

PART TWO

Abraham was born in the city of Ur, or Hur, of the Chaldees, which had become an idolatrous city long before the death of Noah. Abraham's father, Terah, had followed his neighbors into the abomination of idol worship, but Abraham had remained true to the teachings of Noah and Shem. Because of the wicked practices in that city the Lord called Abraham to make a new home in another land which the Lord gave to him and his posterity. This land is known as Palestine, but in the days of Abraham it was called Canaan. Much that we learn about Abraham and his call to Canaan we get from the book of Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price. Abraham tells us that the people of Ur, because he taught the people the evil of idolatry and opposed their evil worship, were about to offer him as a sacrifice. Abraham says that his father, having turned from the holy commandments to the worshipping of gods of the heathen, utterly refused to harken to his voice. The people of Ur set their hearts on the worship of Elkenah, Libna. Mamackrah, and Korash, the gods of the Pharaoh, king of Egypt. Not only did they worship idols, but they also offered sacrifices of innocent children, men and women, on their altars before the images of their gods. Abraham writes:

Even the thank-offering of a child did the priest of Pharaoh offer upon the altar which stood by the hill called Potiphar's Hill, at the head of the plain of Olishen.

Now, this priest had offered upon this altar three virgins at one time, who were the daughters of Onitah, one of the royal descendants, directly from the loins of Ham. These virgins were offered up because of their virtue; they would not bow down to worship gods of wood or stone, therefore they were killed upon this altar, and it was done after the manner of the Egyptians. (Abr. 1:10-12.)

In the time when Abraham lived in Ur, that city was under the control of the Egyptians. Because Abraham would not bow down to their gods and before their images, they laid violent hands upon him to slay him as they did the three virgins. As they lifted up their hands to offer him, he lifted up his voice to the Lord, and the Lord harkened and heard, and he beheld in vision the Almighty, and the angel of his presence stood by him and loosened his bands. It is a terrible state of wickedness that people can reach when they depart from the truth and partake of the spirit of darkness. Satan evidently delights in the shedding of blood, especially of the innocent who will not bow down and worship him in some paganistic form.

There is a very interesting story in the book of Jasher that conveys an important lesson; whether it is authentic or not does not matter. Abraham's father made for his own worship a number of graven and carved images, before which he bowed. Abraham was grieved at his father's folly. One day he prepared "savory meat" and placed it in vessels before each of his father's gods and invited them to eat. The next day the food remained, of course, untouched, Thereupon Abraham went into the chamber with a hatchet, where these images were, and broke them all to pieces except the biggest one. Then he placed the hatchet in the hand of the biggest one and departed. When his father discovered what had been done, he was very angry with Abraham and said to him: "What is this work thou hast done to my gods?" Abraham answered:

Not so my lord, for I brought savory meat that they might eat, they all at once stretched forth their hands to eat before the great one had put forth his hand to eat. And the large one saw their works that they did before him, and his anger was violently kindled against them, and he took the hatchet that was in the house and came to them and broke them all, and behold the hatchet is yet in his hands as thou seest.

Terah's anger was kindled against Abraham, and he said:

What is this tale thou hast told! Thou speakest lies unto me! Is there in these gods spirit, soul, or power to do all that thou has told me? Are they not wood and stone, and have I not myself made them, and canst thou speak such lies, saying that the large god that was with them smote them all?

Abraham's anger was then kindled against his father and he answered: "How canst thou then serve these idols in whom there is no power to do anything?" Abraham further said:

Woe unto my father and this wicked generation, whose hearts are all inclined to vanity, who serve these idols of wood and stone, which neither eat, smell, hear, nor speak, who have mouths without speech, eyes without sight, ears without hearing, hands without feeling, and legs which cannot move like them are these that made them and that trust in them.

So the Lord commanded Abraham to leave that country and its wickedness. Let us hope that his father repented of this evil, for he accompanied Abraham from Ur to Haran on the journey to Canaan, and in Haran Terah died, being two hundred and five years of age.

Abraham taught his children, as did Isaac his son, to worship our Eternal Father. When Jacob was returning to Canaan with his wives and children, herds and flocks, from the land of the east, the home of Laban, Rachel stole her father's images. They must have been quite small, for she hid them in the camel furniture. When her father pursued Jacob, the Lord warned him in a dream not to say anything to Jacob, "either good or bad." He went with the determination of doing some harm, but notwithstanding he had images which no doubt, Laban worshiped, he respected the warning and command the Lord had given him. It may have been the case with Laban that he believed in God but also in other minor gods of the people among whom he resided. In keeping with the follies of the times, such a thing would have been possible. Why Rachel took them is not clear, for Jacob was not an idolator but was true to the God of Abraham. Could it have been that she wished to deprive her father of his images to see if he would stop his foolish practice?

After the tribes of Israel were liberated from the bondage of Egypt, the Lord kept them in the wilderness for forty years, until all who came out of Egypt who were over twenty years of age had died, with the exception of Caleb and Joshua, who had not rebelled against the Lord but were loyal to his commandments. The reason for keeping the Israelites in this wilderness for forty years was to remove from their ranks all of those who were tainted with Egyptian idolatry. Even afterwards, the Lord was under the necessity of calling his people a stiffnecked and rebellious people, and repeatedly he had Moses remind them in the wilderness that they were not to worship the idols or even mingle with the nations among whom they were to dwell. This commandment was given to them immediately after they left Egypt and before Moses received the tables of stone; but when Moses was called to go up to the top of Sinai, where he spent forty days in the presence of the Lord, he received many other commandments by which Israel was to be governed. Because of his long absence, the Israelites became restless and concluded that Moses was dead. Therefore they said to Aaron, the brother of Moses:

Up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.

Aaron, not knowing what else to do, foolishly complied with their demand and said to them:

Break off the golden earrings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and your daughters, and bring them unto me.

And all the people brake off the golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought them unto Aaron.

And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, These be the gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and said, Tomorrow is a feast to the Lord.

And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.

And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down; for the people, which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves:

They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. (Ex. 32:1-8.)

When Moses came down from the mountain and saw what the people were doing, his anger was kindled against them, and he threw down the tables of stone the Lord had given him and shattered them. For this and other rebellions, the Lord took away from the children of Israel the privileges he had intended to give them, even the fulness of the power of the priesthood; and after the death of Moses, Israel was left with the Aaronic Priesthood and the laws of carnal commandments, which we call the law of Moses. These laws were very drastic in many of their provisions, but Israel had shown an unworthiness to receive the fulness at that time. This is explained in the Doctrine and Covenants, 84.

Some may wonder why Aaron made an image of a calf for the people to worship, rather than an image of a man. The answer is that the Egyptians worshiped and held sacred many animals, among them the bull and the cow. Their imaginary god Apis was represented by the image of a bull, and bulls without blemish were tenderly and sacredly protected, as was also the cow. Their god Hathor was worshiped in the image of a cow, and carvings of these animals were found in their shrines and many other places.

Dr. A. S. Yahuda, the Egyptologist, in his book The Accuracy of the Bible, says that Pharaoh's dream of the seven fat and the seven lean kine (cows) could only apply to Egypt, where the goddess Hathor was worshiped in the from of a cow, and as there were seven districts in Egypt, each having a Hathor cow, the dream was likewise of seven cows. He further says, "In the tomb of Hefretiry, the beautiful wife of Rameses II, the seven cows are to be seen accompanied by the bull-god, as if they were marching in solemn procession." Similar pictures are found in the mural reliefs of the temple of Hatshepsut and in other places. So, in hunting for an image to worship, it was natural for the Israelites to turn to something with which they were familiar and make themselves a god in the shape of a calf.

The Lord kept Israel in the wilderness of Arabia for forty years, and even Moses had to remain on the east side of Jordan, but the Lord permitted him to ascend Mount Pisgah and view the land, after which he was taken from Israel, and Joshua, the son of Nun, was put in command. Caleb, son of Jephunneh, and Joshua were permitted to enter the land, the only Israelites over twenty when they left Egypt that had this privilege.

Things went well with Israel during the administration of Joshua. Shortly before his death, he called on Israel to choose whom they would serve, ". . . whether the gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord." The people pledged themselves saying, "God forbid that we should forsake the Lord, to serve other gods."

And Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that overlived Joshua, and which had known all the works of the Lord, that he had done for Israel. (Joshua 24:15, 31.)

It was not long thereafter that they forgot their pledge and began to mingle with the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, and other peoples and took from among these people wives contrary to the promise they had made to the Lord. They also began to adopt their idols and worship at their altars. The Prophet Samuel did much to correct this evil, as did David, the second king of Israel. Solomon, his son, was blessed with great wisdom, and many of his wise sayings have come down to us in the Proverbs. In later years he lost his wisdom, and he committed the very follies and sins which he previously had so intelligently written against and condemned. He took wives of the daughters of the Kings of the surrounding nations and broke his covenants. His heathen wives brought images of their gods which Solomon permitted them to worship. Not only that, he built for them altars and "burnt incense and sacrificed to their gods." For this wickedness the Lord, who had appeared to him twice, took away ten of the tribes and left but two with his son, Rehoboam, the ten being given to Jeroboam. And from that time on they were divided into two kingdoms. It is written in the book of I Kings, Chapter 11:

For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was the heart of David his father.

For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.

And Solomon did evil in the sight of the Lord, and went not fully after the Lord, as did David his father.

Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh, the abomination of Moab, in the hill that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech, the abomination of the children of Ammon.

And likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt incense and sacrificed unto their gods. (I Kings 11:4-8.)

From that time on, while the kingdoms of Israel and Judah remained, the prophets had to plead with the people. All the kings of Israel from Jeroboam down to the captivity of that kingdom by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, were wicked and corrupted the people. The kings of Judah with few exceptions did likewise, and for their sins were carried captive into Babylon, where they remained for seventy years, after which they were permitted to return and rebuild the temple. Perhaps the worship of idols and false gods reached its climax in Israel during the reign of Ahab, who married Jezebel, daughter of Ethbaal, king of Zidon. This wicked woman sought the prophets of God to put them to death and place in their stead the false prophets of Baal, god of the Syro-Phoenician nations, who worshiped him as the sun god and god of fire. This condition existed in the days of Elijah, whose life this wicked woman and her equally wicked husband sought. We are all familiar with the challenge Elijah gave the false prophets of Baal, as recorded in I Kings, Chapter 18. Elijah called on these false prophets to build an altar and offer sacrifice to their god Baal, and he would build an altar and call upon the Lord. The agreement was that the priests of Baal were to commence this contest and pray to their god to send down fire to consume their sacrifice, then should they fail, Elijah would prepare his altar and sacrifice and call upon the Lord to do the same.

The prophets of Baal began calling on their god early in the morning and continued until late in the afternoon, but without success—no fire came down. All the time they were shouting and cutting themselves with knives, and Elijah mocked them, saying: "Cry aloud; for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awakened." So they cried louder, but no answer came.

Then Elijah invited all the people to come closer to him, and he took twelve stones and made an altar and placed his sacrifice upon it. Then he built a trench around it and had four barrels of water poured on his sacrifice. Then he said, "Do it the second time," and this was done, and the third time, and the water ran around the altar and filled the trench. It was then the time of the evening sacrifice, and Elijah, when all the preparations were made, prayed, and said:

Lord, God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all these things at thy word.

Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou are the Lord God, and that thou hast turned their hearts back again.

Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench.

And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces: and they said, The Lord, he is God: the Lord, he is the God. (I Kings 18:36-39.)

Then Elijah commanded that the prophets of Baal, who had made Israel sin should be taken and slain that this wickedness should cease in Israel.

When the Jaredites came to the Western Hemisphere, they were humble and had the gospel. There was no idolatry among them, but in the course of time this evil practice was introduced. The only way this could have happened is that Satan taught them in order to turn them away from the true worship of their fathers. The same evil was adopted by the Lamanites after the two sons of Lehi and their followers rejected the Lord. The Nephites also, when they departed from the faith of their fathers, became idolatrous and worshiped images and built altars in certain parts of the Nephite country. These abominable practices they did not learn from Lehi or Nephi, and once again we must conclude that Satan taught it to them, just as he led the children of Adam astray as recorded in the book of Moses. It is possible that we fail to realize that Satan has power and can put into the hearts of men and their minds all kinds of evil thought leading to wicked practices and form of worship. When the Europeans first came to the Western Hemisphere, they found idol worship practised among the Lamanites here, and in Mexico, Central America, and South America, the offering of human sacrifice. After the great apostasy of these people they turned to this kind of worship. In the days of Mormon and Moroni human sacrifice was practised by both Nephites and Lamanites, for the people had become extremely wicked. Mormon writes of them as follows:

And it is impossible for the tongue to describe, or for man to write a perfect description of the horrible scene of the blood and carnage which was among the people, both the Nephites and of the Lamanites; and every heart was hardened, so that they delighted in the shedding of blood continually.

And there never had been so great wickedness among all the children of Lehi, nor among all the house of Israel, according to the words of the Lord, as was among this people. . . .

And they [Lamanites] did also march forward against the city Teancum, and did drive the inhabitants forth out of her, and did take many prisoners, both women and children, and did offer them up as sacrifices unto their idol gods. (Mormon 4:11-12, 14.)

The making of idols and the worship of false gods did not cease in ancient times. This has continued until now, and there are hundreds of millions of people on the earth today who worship idols and images and relics. This heathen idol worship is not confined to the ignorant, but is practised by millions of people whom we look upon as being intelligent and that live in all civilized countires, including the United States. Relic worship is one phase of idolatry. The saving of hair, fingernails, bones, hearts, etc., and placing them in shrines before which worshipers may kneel in reverence is an abomination to the Lord and is condemned in this second commandment.

Camille Flammarion in his book, The Unknown, relates some interesting stories of image worship. From his book we give these two examples.

Baron Hausser, in his travels in Italy, heard the following conversation in a street in Naples:

"How is your child?"

"Not any better. His fever is still bad."

"You must have a taper burned to St. Gertrude."

"I have. It was no use."

"What chapel did you go to?"

"The one in the Via di Toledo."

"Sh! my poor woman, that St. Gertrude is the very worst in all Naples. You can get nothing out of her. Go to the church in the Piazzo dei Capucini. You will see that that St. Gertrude is much kinder to poor people." (Pp. 29-30.)

Says Dr. Flammarion:

A few years since, when visiting the crypt of the Virge Noir, at Charres, I entered for a moment into conversation with a peasant woman who was coming out of the church. "Oh, Monsieur," she said, "this virgin is not so great a lady as Notre Dame des Victories, in Paris, but she listens much more favorably to us." This opinion reminded me of Louis XI taking form the band of his hat the little leaden image of Notre Dame d'Embrun, replacing it by that of Notre Dame de Cleri, and addressing to the latter at once his royal prayers, with full confidence that she would hear him. (P. 30.)

All of these practices are evil in the sight of the Lord. We are commanded not to worship or adore images or likenesses "of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth." We are not to bow down to them, pray to them, or serve them, but to give our entire devotion to God, our Eternal Father, and to bow down only to him and his Son, Jesus Christ, in whose name we are to worship and pray to God, who is our Father.

1955 Deseret Book Co.
