No specific author, Ten Commandments Today (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955)

Chapter IV

The Third Commandment

By ELDER LEGRAND RICHARDS of the Council of the Twelve

Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

Thus spake the Lord to Moses upon Mount Sinai: This command has never been rescinded. In fact, Jesus put his stamp of approval upon it when the rich young ruler came to him with the query: "Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?" To which Jesus replied: ". . . if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments." And in further answer to his questions as to which Jesus enumerated the commandments largely given in the Ten Commandments. (See Matthew 19.)

This command applies to both the name of God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, since we are given to understand that Jesus was the instrument in the hands of his Father in creating this earth and the heavens thereof, and other worlds which man cannot number. (See John 1:1-3, 10, 14, and Moses 1:31-33; 3 Nephi 9:15.)

When Jesus visited the Nephites in this land of America following his resurrection, he told them that it was he who gave the law unto Moses. Therefore, it was he who gave the Ten Commandments. (3 Nephi 15:5.)

How could any man with a true understanding of what God has done for him, take the holy name of God in vain?

David, the Psalmist, declared:

What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?

For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour.

Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet. (Ps. 8:4-6.)

In contemplating all these great gifts of God to man, no wonder the Psalmist declared:

O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! (Ibid., 8:9.)

It is easy to understand why the Lord, after recounting all he had done for his children, would declare unto them:

And in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments. (D. & C. Sec. 59:21.)

Even more important than acknowledging his hand in all things, comes the command from Mount Sinai:

Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

If one should speak disparagingly of another's earthly father, his son would immediately come to the defense of his father.

The Apostle Paul declared:

Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live? (Heb. 12:9.)

Why should we, therefore, not hasten to the defense of the Father of our spirits, when his holy name in taken in vain? And how could we possibly forget ourselves enough to profane the name of the Father of our spirits, knowing that we are indebted to him for all we have, even life itself, and for the earth, and the fulness thereof?

Of our relationship to God, we refer to Paul's famous sermon to the men of Athens on Mars' hill, whom he found worshiping "The Unknown God."

For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.

For in him we live, and move, and have our being: as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring.

Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device. (Acts 17:23, 28, 29.)

There was no question in Paul's mind but that all men are the "offspring of God," being his sons and daughters.

If a relative or friend were to give us a valuable gift, we would never speak his name in vain, but we would always hold his name in reverence, and speak it only with words of commendation and appreciation. The gifts of God, our Father, are worth more than all the wealth of the whole world, and yet many of us speak his holy name with curses and profanity, not because God has injured or harmed us, but we speak his name when our feelings are wrought up in anger.

Thinking of all that our Heavenly Father has done for us, as we count our many blessings, we come to realize that we are truly indebted to him for all we have and are, even unto life itself. We do not always stop to count our blessings and express to God our gratitude therefor.

The mystery and miracle of the human body has always fascinated me. We may feel that we are indebted only to our parents for our bodies, but we have to go back further than our parents for the intelligence that has brought them into being. The thought that they could bring themselves into existence is inconceivable; any more than a watch or auto could create itself. Such wonderful evidence of intelligent creation must date back to him who created the heavens and the earth—worlds innumerable unto man.

No man, except as God has given him the power, could create the human body with all its organisms for digesting food to rebuild the body; provide a period for sleep to restore the body's strength; provide millions of red corpuscles in the blood to rush to any part of the body to restore when the body is cut or bruised; and then, the most wonderful thing of all, to provide the body with the power of reproduction. One could not possibly believe that such perfect organization could spring forth without intelligent direction. It would be more difficult to believe that this all came into existence of itself than to believe that it is the work of a Master mind, which we are happy to call "God." In contemplating his great achievements and mighty intelligence, his own words come to our minds:

Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, and rejoice ye inhabitants thereof, for the Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior.

Great is his wisdom, marvelous are his ways, and the extent of his doings none can find out.

His purposes fail not, neither are there any who can stay his hand.

From eternity to eternity he is the same, and his years never fail. (D. & C. Sec. 76:1-4.)

God also created the feelings of the human soul. This has always seemed to the writer to be the very climax of all his creations. Without this, man would be no more than the animals, for God even created them with instincts. Have you ever had the experience of watching a hen hatch a brood of ducklings, seeing her lead them into the barnyard where there is a pond, and seeing them rush into the water, greatly to the consternation of the hen? They did not learn this from the hen. She did not set them the example; she did not go into the water; this instinct was born in them. Another miracle!

And so with man. God planted in his soul the germ of faith, his love for God which, when cultivated and developed, can become the most powerful force in his life. Jesus understood this, as evidenced by his answer to the lawyer: Master, which is the great commandment in the law? Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

This is the first and great commandment. (Matt. 22:36-38.)

The apostles exemplified this great love, as one by one they gave their lives for him and his great cause established in the earth for the salvation of his children.

Job's example will ever stand as an inspiration of loyalty to God. The Lord permitted Satan to test his love of God by taking from him his lands and sheep and cattle; destroying his buildings and taking the lives of his seven sons and daughters, and his servants. And when the report of all this disaster reached Job, we are told that he "arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshiped, and said:

"Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord." (Job 1:20-21.) Then he added: "My friends scorn me: but mine eye poureth out tears unto God." (Ibid., 16:20.) When his friends abhorred him, when they whom he loved turned against him, there came from his lips one of the greatest testimonies ever written:

Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a book!

That they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever!

For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth:

And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God:

Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me. (Job 19:23-27.)

Though Job lost all his earthly possessions, and his body was afflicted with sores, yet his heart was full of love and praise for his God and his Redeemer. He knew that all he had ever enjoyed had come from them, and that should he prove faithful, he would be permitted to be with his Redeemer when he should come in power and great glory in the latter days, as he had been promised by the prophets. What an example! No feeling of cursing God or profaning his name even entered the heart or mind of this man, whose love of God had been perfected.

The Savior, speaking of the matter of swearing, said:

Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths:

But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven: for it is God's throne:

Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King.

Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black.

But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil. (Matt. 5:33-37.)

Many have thoughtlessly acquired the habit of saying: "For heaven's sake," but Jesus forbade this, since heaven is God's throne. What God has hallowed, man must not desecrate.

At a stake conference the writer attended, a priest spoke on "The Evils of Profanity," from which we quote the following excerpts:

Next to idolatry there is perhaps no habit in common practice so opposed to refinement and spirituality as profanity. It is Satan's way of expression. He dislikes God, therefore, he delights to desecrate his name.

Multitudes followed Jesus to hear him talk. No evil or unclean word ever passed his lips. Only pure language—so simple that all who listened could understand. As in everything else, he set us a pattern for speech.

Speech is an index of character. We are judged by the way we express ourselves. Mr. Baird said, "If one would find profanity developed to a fine art he must go down to the slums of a big city or to the prison. The lower he goes into the dens of vice the more he will hear. When he travels in the opposite direction he will hear less. In the best homes, in churches, in respectable schools and all places of genuine refinement profane swearing is not heard at all. To swear in public is to pin a sign on yourself to the effect that you belong to the lower strata of social culture."

It breaks down one's character. It leads one to the extremes of evil. It goes without saying—no gentleman ever swears—others should not. Civic organizations are aware of these evils of profanity, and steps have been taken to curb this practice.

California passed a law in which persons could be fined as much as $200 or 90 days in jail, or both, for using profane or indecent language in public places in the presence of women and children. San Francisco has a city ordinance fining $500 or six months imprisonment for using profane language in public.

So we see this evil is recognized and must be stamped out. The greatest damage of profane swearing is done to the spirit—nothing is more destructive. It has been compared to a gas which exists in deep coal mines known as "black damp." Its danger lies in its seeming innocence—it cannot be felt, seen, or smelled—but it is detected by the miner's lamp slowly fading out, and if he does not quickly get away, his life will also flicker out. In a similar way when God's name is taken in vain, spiritual life and light begin flickering out.

During the war many communications were received from men in the armed forces containing alarming statements, such as:

I have been amazed, astonished, and disgusted at some of the things I have seen and heard in the six weeks that I have been with Uncle Sam. I never expected to hear the swearing and vile talk that I have heard, not in a so-called Christian country. Where have the parents been to let a generation grow up so morally wrong? And to this question might be added: "Where have the teachers of our youth been?"

General George Washington made clear that profanity in military service was neither called nor justified:

Many and pointed orders have been issued against the unmeaning and abominable custom of swearing; notwithstanding which, with much regret, the general observes that it prevails, if possible more than ever. His feelings are continually wounded by the oaths and imprecations of the soldiers, whenever he is hearing of them. The name of that Being from whose bounteous goodness we are permitted to exist and enjoy the comforts of life is incessantly impeached and profaned in a manner as wanton as it is shocking. For the sake, therefore, of religion, decency, and order, the general hopes and trusts that officers of every rank will use their influence and authority to check a vice which is as unprofitable as wicked and shameful. If officers would make it an inviolable rule to reprimand, and, if that won't do, to punish soldiers for offenses of this kind, it would not fail of having the desired effect.

During the dark days of the Civil War, Lincoln issued an order to the Army and Navy: "The discipline and character of the National Forces should not suffer, nor the cause they defend be imperiled by the profanation of the Sabbath day or the name of the Most High." We are told that he went "so far as to admonish a certain general, who was addicted to the habit of profanity, to abandon the habit himself and to use his authority to discourage it among the soldier."

To his people in these latter days, the Lord has renewed his command in this important matter, through his latter-day Prophet, Joseph Smith:

Wherefore, let all men beware how they take may name in their lips—

For behold, verily I say, that many there be who are under this condemnation, who use the name of the Lord, and use it in vain, having not authority. (D. & C. Sec. 63-61 -62.)

It is difficult to understand how a person may truly and sincerely approach God in prayer, seeking a blessing at his hand, and at the same time be so disrespectful as to take his name in vain.

Profanity is incompatible with reverence. Surely at this critical time in our nation's history, when we need the sustaining help of God, we should see that we do not offend him by reason of our language. We appeal to our young people everywhere to hold in reverence the sacred name of Deity, that they may walk acceptably before the Lord, so that, should there come a time in their lives when they need his sustaining help, they may go to him with good conscience and call upon him with faith that he will hear their plea.

This commandment does not come to us by way of counsel only, but reinforced by the declaration that the "Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain."

1955 Deseret Book Co.
