No specific author, Ten Commandments Today (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955)

Chapter V

The Fourth Commandment

By ELDER SPENCER W. KIMBALL of the Council of the Twelve

Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work;

But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates:

For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

Moses came down from the quaking, smoking Mount Sinai and brought to the wandering children of Israel the Ten Commandments. This was not the origin of these specific laws, for Adam and his posterity knew the gospel and had been commanded to live them. This spectacular experience was neither the beginning nor the end. The laws of God were pre-mortal. They were part of the test for mortals spoken of in the council in heaven.

The law of the Sabbath, as with other laws, antedated earth life and has been reiterated through the dispensations to that of the Fulness of Times. It distinguished the early Israelites from pagans.

The first of the Ten Commandments requires the worship of the Lord by men, and the fourth provides a Sabbath day for such worship, and it must be remembered that every commandment that God has given to his servants is for the benefit of them who receive and obey it. It is man who profits by the careful and strict observance of the commands of God; it is man who suffers by the breaking of the laws of God.

To many, Sabbath breaking is a matter of little moment, but to our Heavenly Father it is one of the principal commandments. It is a test to "see if we will do all things" commanded and it seems that as centuries roll we continue to ignore these solemn commands.

Salvian, a writer of Roman days, wrote:

We rush from the churches to the theatres, even in the midst of our perils. In Carthage the theatres were thronged while the enemy were before the walls, and the cries of those perishing outside under the sword mingled with the shouts of the spectators in the circus. . . . Nor are we better here in Gaul. Treves has been taken four times and has only increased in wickedness under her misfortunes. . . . It seems to be the destiny of the Roman Empire to perish rather than reform: They must cease to be, in order to cease to be vicious. . . . Think not, then, that they conquer and we yield by the simple force of nature. Rather let us admit that we succumb through the dissoluteness of our morals, of which our calamities are the just punishment. (Providence of God, Bk. VI:6-7.)

And for the keeping of these key laws, the Lord has promised:

Then will I give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit.

And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time: and ye shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely.

And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid . . . neither shall the sword go through your land. (Lev. 26:4-6.)

And I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou mayest eat and be full. (Deut. 11:15.)

The fourth commandment is a dual law, both positive and negative. On the negative side: ". . .in it (the Sabbath) thou shalt not do any work." On the positive side: "Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy.

"Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work." (Ex. 20:8-10.)

The Lord has indicated that the living of his commandments will bring joy and progress unspeakable and blessings innumerable, including the fulness of the earth and all good things therein.

The breaking of the Sabbath was assigned by the Prophet Nehemiah as the cause for affliction of his nation.

In those days saw I in Judah some treading wine presses on the sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and lading asses; as also wine, grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the sabbath day: and I testified against them in the day wherein they sold victuals.

There dwelt men of Tyre also therein, which brought fish, and all manner of ware, and sold on the sabbath unto the children of Judah, and in Jerusalem.

And it came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the sabbath, I commanded that the gates should be shut, and charged that they should not be opened till after the sabbath: and some of my servants set I at the gates, that there should no burden be brought in on the sabbath day.

So the merchants and sellers of all kind of ware lodged without Jerusalem once or twice.

Then I testified against them, and said unto them, Why lodge ye about the wall? if ye do so again, I will lay hands on you. From that time forth came they no more on the sabbath. (Neh. 13:15, 16, 19-21.)

President George Albert Smith expressed the same feeling:

The Sabbath has become the play-day of this great nation, the day set apart by thousands to violate the commandment that God gave long, long ago, and I am persuaded that much of the sorrow and distress that is afflicting and will continue to inflict mankind is traceable to the fact that they have ignored his admonition to keep the Sabbath day holy. (Conf. Rep., Oct. 1935, p. 120, and D. & C. 59.)

But man has made a work day, a holiday, a day for extra work, a day for money-making, a day for relaxation and amusement.

In the early days of Israel specific injunctions were given, and the death penalty was imposed for violation.

Perhaps this was the only way that these former slaves could be taught the law of obedience and be brought to an understanding of the commandments of the Lord. Rabbis and priests made mockery of the commands by carrying them to unwarranted extremes in which a knot could not be tied nor loosed; a fire could not be kindled nor extinguished; a broken bone could not be set; a dead body could not be moved from wreckage; a bed could not be moved; sticks could not be gathered. And it was against these excesses that the Savior lashed rather than the Sabbath day itself, for he who instituted the Sabbath had greatest respect for it.

In older days, Isaiah wrote: "I have brought my children, and they have rebelled against me." And this rebellion seems to have been a constant thing throughout the centuries. The breaking of the Sabbath is rebellion when men have been taught the law. The Prophet Samuel said: "For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry."

Every week we find people defiantly carrying on their work and play activities on the Lord's day. Shops and stores carry large signs: "Open Sunday." Factories and businesses run with "full steam ahead." Houses are displayed and sold. Beaches, parks, and other places of amusement enjoy their best business. Long waiting lines of people stand before ticket offices of theatres. The ball games and rodeos attract their thousands and families have their reunions in parks and canyons. Students study their secular lessons. Stockmen round up their cattle. People travel when unnecessary. Farmers plow and harvest and cultivate their crops. Some businessmen close their offices but spend their Sabbaths in streams, fishing, and in mountains, hunting, and in canyons, loafing. Women do their cleaning and other housework. Others explore and hike. The people, as a whole, seem to be on wheels — the highways are crowded. Half-clad men are clipping hedges, cutting lawns. Lunch stands and drive-ins work almost in a frenzy. Women in housecoats and unshaved men spend hours lazing about their homes. The socially elite hold receptions and teas, and week after week the Sabbath is desecrated and the law of God defied.

It is conceded that many good folk are compelled to labor on Sunday. Their alternatives are to work or lose their employment. But frequently those whose shift work occupies part of the day excuse themselves from Sabbath activities using their work as an alibi. Shift workers seldom work more hours a day than other folk, and if they are determined such people can usually find ample time to render service and to hallow the Sabbath in the hours that remain.

When employment is at a low ebb and difficult to obtain, some people find they must labor on the holy day as an "ox in the mire." But when employment is abundant, men can often find work which requires no Sabbath service. This change of employment might entail some financial sacrifice, but the Lord has promised he will bless those who live his laws.

Sometimes Sabbath desecration is justified by the holding of a single sacred meeting. One organization took its youth into the mountains over Saturady night and through Sunday, the girls in slacks and sweaters and the boys in overalls and hiking clothes, and the Lord's day became a holiday, except the time during which a testimony meeting was held. The balance of the day was a play day, but in their minds the meeting seemed to justify the holiday. A Scout group took its young boys into Scout camp on Saturday evening and returned them the second Sunday evening. Two Sabbaths were desecrated. The second group left Monday morning and returned Saturday night in time for their Sabbath meetings next day.

Many who would not themselves work on the Sabbath, employ other people to do so. But the Lord says in Deuteronomy 5:14, that on the Sabbath day:

. . . thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that thy manservant and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou.

Can the employer rest easy in his pew at church while his employees make profits for his bank account on the Sabbath? Can the parents fully enjoy their meetings having hired baby-sitters to watch their children, who also should attend Sabbath meetings?

Quoting from Brigham Young:

It is very pleasing and gratifying to the spirit that I possess, for the parents to see that their children attend Sunday School and receive the proper instruction with regard to their faith. After the Sunday School is over, let the parents take pains to bring their children to meeting. (Journal of Discourses, Vol. 6, p. 277.)

Some say that man is the victim of circumstance and that he cannot control the influences that surround him, and that the forces are like an unmanageable flood which engulfs him. But, as Nephi declared, the Lord gives us no commandment unless he prepares the way by which it can be fulfilled.

Every Sabbath breaker seems able to find an excuse to satisfy him temporarily for the ignoring of this solemn command. Some merchants claim they must meet competition; a provider of amusements says that Sunday is his most profitable day; some real estate brokers convince themselves that they must run show houses when people are free; some eating houses, confectioneries, service stations, and stores claim they are performing a public service, but the question arises, is the profit motive or the public service uppermost in their minds? Fruit growers sometimes excuse their harvesting and selling on the grounds of a short season and perishable crop. Pleasure-seekers on the Sabbath excuse themselves on the ground that their other days are occupied. But expediency is not necessarily right.

A good example of the control which a business or industry can bring to bear is that of the morticians and undertakers in the general area of Salt Lake City. Whereas funerals had been held on Sunday for years, it was found that concerted action brought about weekday funerals, and many people were released from Sabbath toil, and funeralgoers were released to regular Sabbath activities. Such a cooperative program could be worked out by many other lines of business. "Where there's a will there's a way."

Is the buyer of commodities on the Lord's day less guilty than the seller of wares? Is he who buys food, gasoline, and entertainment in such a different position from him who sells it? If there were no buyers, would shops open, theatres show, or rodeos be staged? In the days of the Prophet Nehemiah, the people were called to repentance for their Sabbath buying and brought to their knees in humility, and a great number of them joined in an agreement which they wrote and upon which they placed their seals. A long list of the names was given to those people with their families who signed the "sure covenant":

They clave unto their brethren . . . and entered . . . into an oath, to walk in God's law . . . and to observe and do all the commandments of the Lord our Lord, and his judgments and his statutes;

And if the people of the land bring ware or any victuals on the sabbath day to sell, that we would not buy it of them on the sabbath, or on the holy day. (Neh. 10:29, 31.)

Long ago, Isaiah lashed forth against those who found their pleasures on the Sabbath:

If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words:

Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord; and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. (Isa. 58:13, 14.)

President Heber J. Grant spoke plainly upon the matter:

I am opposed to Sunday baseball. . . . When a young man, I was passionately fond of the game. Today I am happy in contemplating the fact that, much as I loved to play it, I never played a game on Sunday. . . . I am decidedly and emphatically in favor of a Sunday law which will not only prevent playing of baseball but will also provide for the closing of theatres and other places of amusement. In my opinion, our legislators, from the date of Utah's admission into the union, have neglected a very important duty to the public. . . . I never think of the quiet in the great city of London, on Sundays, and compare it with our own city, that I am not humiliated. (Imp. Era, Vol. 16, pp. 262-263.)

President Brigham Young speaks of work and pleasure-seeking on the Lord's day:

. . . those who go skating, buggy riding, or on excursions on the Sabbath day . . . are weak in the faith. (Jour. Disc., Vol. 15, p. 83.)

Expediency is often the motive for the breaking of the Sabbath. President Brigham Young is again emphatic:

. . . When we see a farmer in such a hurry, that he has to attend to his harvest, and to haying, fence-making, or to gathering his cattle on the Sabbath, as far as I am concerned, I count him weak in the faith. . . . Six days are enough for use to work, and if we wish to play, play within the six days; if we wish to go on excursions, take one of those six days, but on the seventh day, come to the place of worship, attend to the Sacrament, confess your faults one to another and to our God, and pay attention to the ordinances of the house of God. (Ibid., p. 81.)

I said yesterday to a bishop who was mending a breach in the canal, and expressed a wish to continue his labor on the following Sabbath, as his wheat was burning up, let it burn; when the time comes that is set apart for worship, go up and worship the Lord. (Ibid., Vol. 3, p. 331.)

In dry countries, irrigation is used as an excuse to cover violation of the Sabbath. The repair of equipment, the hauling of hay when clouds are darkening are alleged emergencies which are justified in the hearts of many on the grounds of "the ox in the pit." It is noted that frequently people who find oxen in pits are not too discriminating. The exception becomes a rule, and the resistance to Sabbath work decreases.

President Woodruff said that Brigham Young told the brethren that they must not work on Sunday; that they would lose five times as much as they would gain by it, and none were to hunt or fish on that day.

And President Joseph F. Smith urges that we do not overwork or overindulge on Saturday to the extent that our worship of the Sabbath be marred. He said:

Men are not resting from their labors when they plow, and plant and haul and dig. They are not resting when they linger around the home all day on Sunday, doing odd jobs that they have been too busy to do on other days.

Men are not showing zeal and ardor in their religious faith and duty when they hustle off early Sunday morning in the cars, in teams, in automobiles, to the canyons, the resorts, and to visit friends or places of amusement, with their wives and children. They are not paying their devotions to the Most High. . . .

Boys and young men are not fasting with singleness of heart, that their joy may be full, when they spend the Sabbath day loafing around the village ice cream stand or restaurant, playing games, or in buggy riding, fishing, shooting, or engaged in physical sports, excursions and outings. Such is not the course that will keep them unspotted from the world. (Smith, Joseph Fielding, Gospel Doctrine, p. 310.)

President Heber J. Grant warned:

A sacred Sabbath is not automobile riding to the canyons on Sunday. A sacred Sabbath is not out on excursions on Sunday. I feel that it is a reproach to the Latter-day Saints that we should have amusements in our towns and cities on the day of the Lord.

The Fourth Commandment

By ELDER SPENCER W. KIMBALL of the Council of the Twelve

Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work;

But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates:

For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

PART TWO

The law of the Sabbath is also positive. The Decalogue says, "Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work." (Ex. 20:9.) To loaf, to be idle, to be indolent is not in keeping with the word of the Lord.

The inhabitants of Zion are commanded to observe the Sabbath; but also to work on other days. Joseph Smith never tolerated in the least indolence, idleness, slothfulness, drunkenness, or anything of the kind wherein exists sin. (Jour. Dis., p. 364.)

And in our own dispensation comes the positive command from the Lord, who says:

. . . thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day;

. . . thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord. (D. & C. 59:9-12.)

And to him who "doeth the works of righteousness," the Lord promises rich reward, peace in the world, eternal life in the world to come, and he says to the prophet: "Trouble me no more concerning this matter." In other words: You have the law. It is clearly given you. Go now and live it without alibis, excuses, and rationalizations. Do not give it your own interpretation, wresting the scriptures to fit your own needs and to excuse your own weaknesses. He closes his revelation: "I, the Lord, have spoken it, and the Spirit beareth record. Amen." (Ibid., 24.)

And the Nephites waxed strong for two hundred years as they kept the Sabbath day holy, profaned and blasphemed not, and kept strictly the commands of God. (Jarom 5.)

It would appear that the reason the Sabbath day is so hard to live for so many people is that it is still written on tablets of stone rather than being written in their hearts.

Brigham Young said:

The Lord has planted within us a divinity; and that divine immortal spirit requires to be fed. Will earthly food answer for that purpose? No. It will only keep this body alive as long as the spirit stays with it. . . . That divinity within us needs food from the Fountain from which it emanated.

. . . just as surely as failing to eat will cause our physical frames to shrink and die, just so sure neglect to supply our spiritual natures will bring death to them. (Jour. Dis., Vol. 7, p. 138.)

Boy Scout leaders have recognized the religious element in the training of the boy:

Nowhere in the constitution or the bylaws does it say that a Scout leader must pledge to see that a boy learns how to tie knots, or to go camping, or to learn to swim. Nowhere does it say that he must see that a Scout becomes First Class or reaches the Eagle rank. . . . But it does say that only where leaders are willing to see that definite attention to the religious life of a boy is given can leaders be registered in the program. In the L.D.S. Church this means teaching the principles of Mormonism in the Scout Troop, the Explorer Post, and the Cub Pack. This was the job of the Mutual, accepted when it was given permission to use the Scouting program. (YMMIA Superintendency.)

In the days of weak Israel it seemed necessary for the Lord to specify the many things which people must not do on the Sabbath, but in our own day it would seem that he recognized the intelligence of his people, and assumed that they would catch the total spirit of worship and of the Sabbath observance when he said to them:

Thou shalt offer a sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in righteousness, even that of a broken heart and a contrite spirit. (D. & C. 59:8.)

And then he gave us the first and great commandment:

Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. (Matt. 22:37.)

It is unthinkable that one who loves the Lord with all his heart and with all his soul and who with a broken heart and contrite spirit recognizes the limitless gifts which the Lord had given him would fail to spend one day in seven in gratitude and thankfulness, and carrying forward the good works of the Lord. The observance of the Sabbath is an indication of the measure of our love for our Heavenly Father.

The second Sunday of May is set apart to honor our mothers; the 4th of July to memorialize our independence; and family members have their annual birthdays. How thoughtless and inconsiderate would one be thought who would ignore loved ones' birthdays or who would pay no attention to Mother's Day. How disloyal for one to forget the birthday of the nation or to ignore election day. And yet, one day in seven has been set apart to remember the Lord, as the Sabbath day—a day for rest, for doing good, for service, for spiritual regeneration, for worship of God. Greedy business fills its store windows with Mother's and Father's Day cards, with Halloween wares and valentines, with birthday remembrances, and with Christmas gifts, but how often does it lend its windows to the encouragement of Sabbath honoring?

And again, the Lord says: "Thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day."

"The sacrament" is the ordinance of partaking of the bread and the water. But sacrament, in its wider sense, "stands for any sacred rite or ceremony whereby we affirm our allegiance to our divine Lord." It could be in the form of songs, prayers, praise, testimonies, partaking of the sacrament, study, contemplation of the word of the Lord.

Again

But remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High. (D. & C. 59:12.)

In the New and Everlasting Covenant the Lord graciously accepts tithes and offerings, donations and gifts; and the Lord's day is a very proper day upon which to remember such oblations, as well as to confess sins, publicly among the brethren, if necessary; privately before the Lord, which is always necessary. (Jour. Dis., Vol. 6, pp. 277-278.)

The Lord enforced the law of the Sabbath when he fed the children of Israel for forty years in the wilderness. A single day's supply of manna came each of the five days of the week. And then on the day before the Sabbath came the supply for two days. The heaven-sent food spoiled which was gathered on the five days in excess of the single day's needs, but that which was gathered in double portion to care for the Sabbath was always fresh and palatable.

Brigham Young sets clear the policy of the Church in yesterday's century:

On the Sabbath we are required to come together—repent of our sins—confess our sins—partake of the bread and water, . . . If it is necessary to cook food, do so, but even if that could be dispensed with, it would be better. (Ibid., Vol. 16, p. 168; Vol. 6, p. 277.)

In Hebrew the term Sabbath means "rest." It contemplates quiet tranquility, peace of mind and spirit. It is a day to get rid of selfish interests and absorbing activities.

The Sabbath day is given throughout the generations of man for a perpetual covenant. It is a sign between the Lord and his children forever. It is a day in which to worship and to express our gratitude and appreciation to the Lord. It is a day on which to surrender every worldly interest and to praise the Lord humbly, for humility is the beginning of exaltation. It is a day not for affliction and burden but for rest and righteous enjoyment. It is a day not for lavish banqueting, but a day of simple meals and spiritual feasting; not a day of abstinence from food, except fast day, but a day when maid and mistress might be relieved from the preparation. It is a day graciously given us by our Heavenly Father. It is a day when animals may be turned out to graze and rest; when the plow may be stored in the barn and other machinery cooled down; a day when employer and employee, master and servant may be free from plowing, digging, toiling. It is a day when the office may be locked and business postponed, and troubles forgotten; a day when man may be temporarily released from that first injunction, "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, until thou return unto the ground. . . ." It is a day when bodies may rest, minds relax, and spirits grow. It is a day when songs may be sung, prayers offered, sermons preached, and testimonies borne, and when man may climb high, almost annihilating time, space, and distance between himself and his Creator.

The Sabbath is a day on which to take inventory—to analyze our weaknesses, to confess our sins to our associates and our Lord. It is a day on which to fast in "sackcloth and ashes." It is a day on which to read good books, a day to contemplate and ponder, a day to study lessons for priesthood and auxiliary organizations, a day to study the scriptures and to prepare sermons, a day to nap and rest and relax, a day to visit the sick, a day to preach the gospel, a day to proselyte, a day to visit quietly with the family and get acquainted with our children, a day for proper courting, a day to do good, a day to drink at the fountain of knowledge and of instruction, a day to seek forgiveness of our sins, a day for the enrichment of our spirit and our soul, a day to restore us to our spiritual stature, a day to partake of the emblems of his sacrifice and atonement, a day to contemplate the glories of the gospel and of the eternal realms, a day to climb high on the upward path toward our Heavenly Father.

The question may be asked: Can one observe the Sabbath without attending his meetings and doing full service in his spiritual responsibilities? The sick and the afflicted might have excuse, but the well and firm people should fill the day with constructive spiritual service. It is not enough to do nothing. One is not justified in substituting home reading for sacrament meetings. President Brigham Young spoke boldly on this topic:

Whether we are rich or poor, if we neglect our prayers and our Sacrament meetings, we neglect the Spirit of the Lord and a spirit of darkness comes over us. . . . After the Sunday School is over, let the parents take pains to bring their children to meeting. (Ibid., Vol. 10, p. 300; Vol. 19, p. 92.)

The Savior said that the Sabbath was for man and not man for the Sabbath. The Sabbath is for man to obey and in which to find profit but not to break and desecrate. The Savior repeatedly insists upon the hallowing of the Sabbath day. He recognized the fact that livestock must be loosed from the stall and taken to water and fed and that other chores must be done. He recognized also that the ox might get into the mire or the ass fall into the pit; but neither in the letter nor in the spirit did he ever approve the use of the Sabbath for ordinary and regular work or for amusements and play. He healed the sick on the Sabbath, preached in the synagogues on this day, but he gave the Sabbath not for amusement and labor but for rest to the mind and body, change and relaxation from heavy service, and leisure for works of mercy. The observance of the Sabbath is a part of the new covenant.

Nehemiah states that the children of Israel confessed their sins and made covenant with the Lord and, separating themselves from all strangers they fasted—"with sackcloth and earth upon them." They read the scriptures for a quarter of the day, and for another quarter of the day they worshiped, rehearsing the kindness of the Lord to Israel from Abraham's day. And then they entered into the covenant that they would observe the Sabbath day.

Isaiah speaks of the blessings of those who love the Lord's day:

Blessed is the man that . . . keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and keepeth his hands from doing any evil. (Isa. 56:2.)

President Brigham Young emphasized this covenant:

. . . to keep us in remembrance of our God and our holy religion. Is this custom necessary? Yes, because we are so liable to forget—so prone to wander, that we need to have the gospel sounded in our ears as much as once, or twice, or thrice a week, or, behold, we will turn again to our idols. (Jour. Disc., Vol. 6, p. 195.)

And President Joseph F. Smith says:

. . . Go to the house of prayer. Listen to the instructions. Bear your testimony to the truth. Drink at the fountain of knowledge and of instruction. . . . When we go home, get the family together. Let us sing a few songs. Let us read a chapter or two in the Bible, or in the Book of Mormon or in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. Let us discuss the principles of the Gospel which pertain to advancement in the school of divine knowledge, and in this way occupy one day in seven. (Young Woman's Journal, Vol. 27, pp. 455—460.)

And President Heber J. Grant:

. . . I have never known a person who attended his meetings and partook of the spirit and inspiration that are present in the meetings of true faithful Latter-day Saints, who has ever apostatized. (Church Section, April 10, 1937.)

There are many who justify their absence from their meetings in the statement that they are poorly conducted or that their sermons are dry and the speakers boring. This again is a weak excuse, for the meeting never was intended as an entertainment but as a worshipful assembly. Since worship is an individual matter, each person may get untold value from a sacrament meeting regardless of who speaks or what is said. An intelligent person can concentrate on the object of his reverence, the blessings of the Lord and his great gospel. Again, the Prophet Brigham Young speaks:

. . . Though the speaker be unable to say more than half a dozen sentences, and those awkwardly constructed, if his heart is pure before God, those few broken sentences are of more value than the greatest eloquence without the Spirit of the Lord and of more real worth in the sight of God, angels, and all good men. In praying, though a person's words be few and awkwardly expressed, if the heart is pure before God, that prayer will avail more than the eloquence of a Cicero. (Jour. Disc., Vol. 8, pp. 283—284.)

As we study carefully the 59th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, it seems the Lord's idea of a full and abundant Sabbath is the worship and the learning of him and partaking of his sacrament. He would have us fill the day with useful and spiritual activities. He would have us do these things with thanksgiving and cheerful hearts and countenances, and not with much laughter. He would have our men and boys attend their priesthood meeting having prepared their lessons and with a glad heart. He would have his people attend the Sunday School and there learn his plan of salvation. He would have his people attend the sacrament meeting to sing with the Saints and to pray in spirit with him who is mouth, and to partake of the sacramental emblems, repledging total allegiance, unconditional surrender, undeviating works, a constant remembrance of him, his program, his sacrifice. He would have us proselyte, visit the homebound, read the scriptures. When one shall have taken care of his religious duties in spirit as well as by the letter and shall have filled in the interims with these constructive activities, there will be little temptation to falter.

People frequently wonder where to draw the line: what is worthy and what is unworthy to do upon the Sabbath. But if one loves the Lord with all his heart, might, mind, and strength; if one can put away selfishness and curb desire; if one can measure each Sabbath activity by the yardstick of worshipfulness; if one is honest with his Lord and with himself; if one offers a "broken heart and a contrite spirit," it is quite unlikely that there will be Sabbath breaking in that person's life.

It is a happy satisfaction to find many people who are willing to adjust their affairs so that they may worship the Lord on the Sabbath. In a certain cattle-feeding area many men excused themselves from their Sunday responsibilities, saying the cattle must be fed, but one resourceful man among thm fed his cattle on Saturday in one pasture for Saturday and in another pasture for Sunday. The next morning he unlocked the gate and drove the cattle onto the Sunday feed ground and went with his family to his Sabbath devotions.

A prominent and successful real estate firm shows its for-sale houses on week days and firm members and employees are free to keep their Sabbaths sacred.

In the short days of fruit harvest, there are many who harvest and merchandise their perishable product on the six days allotted to man for work, and they worship their Lord, the giver of their bounty, on his holy day.

There are cattle communities where cowboys start driving the animals on Monday morning and have finished or interrupted their roundup by Saturday night in order to exchange overalls for Sunday attire and to pay their oblations unto the Most High.

There are eating houses, successful ones, who close their doors on the Sabbath and whose owners and associates spend their Sunday in directing activities of wards and quorums and auxiliaries and in worshiping the God of heaven on his day.

There are grocery stores which close on Sunday when competetive establishments are threateningly open, service stations that make their profit on the six days prescribed, wayside stands which forego the Sabbath profits, cinemas which offer no shows on Sunday, department stores which not only close their doors but also draw the blinds on the Lord's day. There are drug stores which offer no food or cosmetics or sundries on the Sabbath and prescriptions only in emergencies; doctors who operate, visit, prescribe, and treat only in emergencies; students who study their lessons for high school or college on the week days. There are factories which close, and farmers who do only those absolutely necessary chores. There are hunters who always get their deer, pheasant, and ducks on the week days and fishermen who find a time in the six days to catch their limit. There are families which have their week day reunions and social groups who have their canyon parties on week days and nights.

This means sacrifice and requires much faith, but in almost every business and profession and endeavor there are faithful ones who love the Lord with all their hearts and with all their souls and who make such sacrifice as they find necessary to comply fully with the commands of the Lord. To them will come the plaudits of their maker: "Well done, thou good and faithful servant . . . enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." (Matt. 25:21.)

1955 Deseret Book Co.
