No specific author, Ten Commandments Today (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955)

Chapter VI

The Fifth Commandment

By ELDER ELBERT R. CURTIS, General Superintendent, Y M M I A

Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

During the three hundred years that the descendants of the twelve sons of Jacob were reduced to slavery in Egypt they were treated much like domestic animals. They had no opportunity to honor or serve each other. Both parents and children served the state or their masters. Family ties and obligations were disregarded and all but forgotten.

When the God of Israel, through Moses, had delivered his people after a series of plagues and miracles they found themselves in a wilderness. Their confidence and ability to fend for themselves was practically nil. At the first obstacles they were full of complaint and, like children, longed for the "fleshpots" of Egypt and for masters to think and provide for them.

As our Heavenly Father set about re-establishing the "royal nation of Israel" he gave, on Mount Sinai, ten basic commandments, the first four of which you have already learned, had to do with the one God of Israel, than whom they should have no other. He emphasized the danger of graven images, the sin of taking the name of the Lord in vain, and the respect to be shown for the Lord's day.

Next, then, he gave as a commandment the basic law of children honoring parents, to cement the family unit and restore the dignity of the home, without which prime factor no nation can long endure.

And God spake all these words, saying:

Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. (Exodus 20:1, 12.)

It is perhaps human to take blessings for granted. A Latter-day Saint youth, reared in a home which has become a temple of love, with a fireside which has become an altar, might overlook this sacred commandment or brush it aside with the weak excuse, "it's old-fashioned," failing to appreciate its deeper meanings so applicable in these modern times.

Many will remember the nursery rhyme "I love you, mother," said little John; Then, forgetting his work, his cap went on, And he was off to the garden swing. And left her wood and water to bring. "I love you, mother," said rosy Nell; "I love you better than tongue can tell." Then she teased and pouted full half the day Till her mother rejoiced when she went to play. "I love you, mother," said little Fan; "Today I'll help you all I can; How glad I am that school doesn't keep." So she rocked the baby till it fell asleep. Then, stepping softly, she fetched the broom, And swept the floor and tidied the room; Busy and happy all day was she, Helpful and happy as child could be. "I love you, mother," again they said, Three little children going to bed. How do you think that mother guessed Which of them really loved her best?

Honor of father and mother means much more than childhood obedience in the matter of daily tasks.

Recently a man, prosperous so far as the acquisition of worldly goods goes, gave his mother a baby grand piano for Mother's Day—truly a wonderful present.

This mother was wealthy in spiritual matters (in which field her prosperous son was poverty-stricken indeed). She cared little for the piano or for other worldly goods. She would have been honored far more if the son had called for her and taken her to sacrament meeting, if he had given more thought to the keeping of the Sabbath day and honoring his priesthood.

The Latter-day Saints, perhaps more than any other people in the world, understand that parenthood is partnership with God. Worthy parents, who are faithful in their trust in this partnership, undertake to teach their children to honor and love their Heavenly Father, and to keep his commandments. He has said, "If ye love me, keep my commandments." (John 14:15.) If we love father and mother, we heed their wise counsel to keep the commandments of the Lord, and in so doing we honor both earthly parents and our Heavenly Father. Moreover, we place ourselves in a position to enjoy the blessings he has in store for those who love him and obey him. Perhaps this is why the Almighty gave the prominence he did to this commandment, stressing its importance by placing it next in numerical order to the commandments dealing with the love and honor to be given to him.

Consider, also, that the Lord has not only commanded children to honor and obey, he has emphasized the obligation of parents to instruct their children properly.

And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents. (D. & C. 68:25.)

The Lord chastised the early leaders of this Church, including even the Prophet Joseph Smith, for not having done their full duty in instructing their own children. (See Doc. & Cov. Sec. 93:47-50.) He expects parents to honor their children and be an honor to them. In turn he commands children to honor parents and to be an honor and credit to them.

In ancient Israel disobedience and rebellion on the part of children was abhorred, in fact, disobedience to parents was one of the three offenses punishable by death, the other two being murder and adultery.

If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, when they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them:

Then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place;

And they shall say unto the elders of his city, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton and a drunkard.

And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all Israel shall hear, and fear. (Deut. 21:18-21.)

Consider the ways in which we may honor our parents. The following are just a few which suggest themselves:

In the Mission Ward of the San Francisco Stake there lives a remarkable family by the name of Te'o. This family is almost patriarchal in its government and in the love, regard, and honor shown by the children towards their father, and indeed towards each other.

Some years ago Brother Te'o, who had two sons of his own and fourteen adopted children, decided to come to the United States, that his children might have the advantages of education in our schools, and in the hope that he might be able to do much temple work for his own people.

Brother Te'o is a very spiritual man, and in preparing to come he said: "I will take with me those who will serve the Lord. If you will keep the commandments of the Lord, you are my sons. If you will not serve the Lord, you are not my sons." Brother Te'o explains his philosophy thus: "I accept them into my family, I teach them the gospel, help them to get an education, asking only that they live in accordance with the gospel of Jesus Christ. As long as they are willing to keep the commandments of the Lord and magnify their priesthood they are my children, but if they reject the teaching of the gospel and disregard the commandments, then I no longer claim them as my own." By the way, Brother Te'o deplores the use of the word adopted, because he feels that these boys are as much his sons as are his own children. Until the day of departure from Samoa they did not know for sure which ones would be asked to come with him.

Well, Brother Te'o brought them all, and they have kept the commandments. They are a fine strength to the Mission Ward and indeed to the Church. They have presented nearly 500 Samoan programs in different wards and have rendered great service in raising stake and ward building funds.

Recently one of the sons was tendered a farewell, prior to his return to Samoa on a mission. At the farewell it was brought out that, true to his "father's" teachings, this young man was faithful in the matter of his prayers while in the service. One night in Korea it was made known to him that he should ask for a transfer from the company in which he was serving. He made the request to his officers, who ignored it. The next night the same urgent prompting came to him, and at his insistence he was transferred. Within three days, not a member of the company from which he was transferred remained alive.

In his new company, he and his "brother" always insisted on having prayer together before going into combat—much to the annoyance of the officers. However, through honoring the teachings of their "father," these two young men always came back.

The young man who went on a mission had received the Silver Star from a grateful country. Another "son" still in the service, received the Congressional Medal of Honor while in Korea. Both expressed as the reason for their valor, the teaching of Brother Te'o that they were actually fighting the adversary of free agency, who was trying to thwart God's purposes in the earth.

Brother Te'o receives great joy and satisfaction as his "sons" follow his example, as indeed do all parents whose children thus honor them.

Parents do not wish us to mimic or imitate them exactly. They do not want us to surrender our individuality. Generally parents want children to excel and exceed their own accomplishments.

Just as there are many ways in which we may honor parents, there are numerous ways of dishonoring them, such as speaking slanderously of them, joking in an unseemly manner about them, or apologizing for them. Good-natured teasing may promote fellowship, but often it may lead to disrespect. There is a great tendency in the world for cynicism and sarcasm in dealing with our loved ones. Lack of honor is often displayed by the very manner we address them, as "old man" or "ma," and the like.

One source of dishonor to parents is the too common trend of the young to take loving care and blessings for granted, to be guilty of the sin of ingratitude. Although every day is filled with opportunities to show our gratitude and love through little thoughtful, kindly acts, many fail entirely to show honor to loved ones, and further, often fail to voice the simple words of appreciation, "Thank you."

Dishonor is sometimes shown in sacred matters. No son who treats his priesthood lightly, trampling it into the dust, is showing proper respect for his parents.

Often a young person dishonors his parents in the selection of companions, in courting matters, etc. In no way may we honor our forebears to a greater extent than in the selection of our life's companion, and in the progeny which we bear them.

Recently a young girl ran off and married a young man, not approved by her parents, failing to inform them of her intentions until afterwards. Her mother aged years, and the father was brokenhearted. Nothing could have dishonored them more. The lovely comradeship and closeness between mother and daughter suffered a serious shock.

A Latter-day Saint young man, failing to honor the counsel of parents with reference to ways of living and clean associations, had been drinking in a saloon. A brawl followed in which a man was killed. Because of his drunken condition, he did not know what happened and he was "framed." He served seven years in a penal institution before the real culprit confessed his act, and the young man—no longer young, but aged prematurely—was released. His mother, a beautiful, educated woman was robbed of nearly all that was near and dear to her, and his father sacrificed all his earthly possessions to clear the boy's name. The mother and father he loved (but had dishonored) suffered rebuke and criticism by their so-called friends. He lost his wife and child—and his whole life's course was changed. All might have been different had he but honored his father and mother and heeded their counsel.

It is not possible to dishonor parents one day and pluck back the honor the next, no matter how repentant one may feel. Honor comes from consistent action, day following day.

An excellent example of honor, respect, and true love is found in the following:

A young man, whose schooling had been interfered with by his military service, was released from the Navy, re-entered school, and fell in love with a beautiful young lady. The bishop called the young man on a mission. Here was a real test. He had been away from home; he loved his sweetheart; he wanted to get married. He loved the Church of Jesus Christ and was grateful for his priesthood and testimony. What should he do? He testified that the deciding factor was his habit of honoring his parents and his desire to please them. Through doing so, he honored his priesthood and his Heavenly Father. He said "yes" and filled a wonderful mission. The sweetheart took pride in him and waited for his return.

The whole world will honor the person who is an honor to his father and mother, while no one will respect the individual who is a dishonor or a disgrace to them.

The Fifth Commandment

By ELDER ELBERT R. CURTIS, General Superintendent, YMMIA

Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

PART TWO

The fifth commandment, it is thought, was intended primarily for the young, because youth probably honor parents less than do those of more mature years. Youth is a period of more mistakes than is characteristic of the years of riper judgment. Mark Twain has been quoted (or misquoted) as saying:

When I was about fourteen, I thought my father was the dumbest creature on earth. When I became twenty-one years of age, I was shocked to see how much he had learned in seven years.

It is unfortunate that so many of the teachable years slip past before the young are willing to listen and to heed. Perhaps that is why most criminals get their start in youth. If the young would honor parents more and follow their counsel, youth would make fewer mistakes. The opening sentence in the Book of Mormon reflects honor for parents:

I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents, therefore I was taught somewhat in all the learning of my father; and having seen many afflictions in the course of my days, nevertheless, having been highly favored of the Lord in all my days; yea, having had a great knowledge of the goodness and the mysteries of God, therefore I make a record of my proceedings in my days. (1 Nephi 1:1.)

The very first chapters of the Book of Mormon show the character traits of Father Lehi's sons. The older boys refused to honor and obey the counsel of their father. They criticized their mother. Nephi, and the younger brothers, early indicated their desire and willingness to honor, and follow the commandments of their father and of their Heavenly Father. The history of a great branch of the house of Israel has been shaped by that very honor and dishonor.

If the young could but see! A wise man has written:

The dullard must wait for events to overtake him. He lacks the sensitive imagination and disciplined powers of analysis to enable him to anticipate and to discount events. He never knows that a policy is bad until it has worked havoc in his life or in the life of his time. He never knows that a policy is good until it has dropped the ripe fruits of its goodness in his lap. Thus he must go through life victimized by the tragic results of bad policies that wiser men would have forestalled, and robbed of the benefits of good policies that more farseeing men would have brought into being. With all this, he may be technically a learned man, but lacking insight and understanding, his learning becomes so much waste lumber.

Down the ages the capacity to anticipate and to discount bad ideas and the capacity to sense in advance and to appropriate good ideas, without waiting for events to indicate their badness or their goodness, has been considered the supreme achievement of man as a thinking animal. (Author unknown.)

Lack of honor for parents is often a matter of being thoughtless, as illustrated in the following:

A young family was packing to go to the mountains. The boys were worrying about their own interests. In their thoughtlessness they asked, "Ma, did you pack that? . . ." "Ma, where is this? . . ." "Ma, will you get this? . . ." They little realized that they sounded as though they were ordering about a servant. Suddenly "Ma" dropped dead, and the trip did not materialize. In after years, one of the boys said in recalling the event, "I would give anything to blot out of my memory that day. We loved our mother. We were just thoughtless."

A happier story was recently told by a man whose form is now bent and whose hair is white with years. When he was a boy of twelve, he was returning one evening from the haying on his father's farm. He had been at work since daybreak, when his father met him with a request that he go to town to do an errand. Anyone who has lived on a farm and who knows what a day's work "from sunup to sundown" means in haying time will understand how the boy felt. The old man said:

I was tired, dirty, and hungry. It was two miles to town. I wanted to get my supper, and to dress for the singing class. My first impulse was to refuse, and to do it harshly, for I was angry that my father should ask me to go after my long day's work. But I knew that if I did refuse, he would go himself. "Of course, father, I'll go," I said heartily, giving my scythe to one of the men. "Thank you, Jim," my father replied. "I was going myself, but somehow I don't feel very strong today." He walked with me to the road that turned off to the town, and as he left me he put his hand on my arm and said again, "Thank you, my son; you've always been a good boy to me, Jim." I hurried into town and back again. When I came near the house, I saw that something unusual had happened. All the farmhands were gathered about the door instead of doing the chores. I went nearer, when one of the men turned to me with tears rolling down his face. "Your father," he said "is dead. He fell just as he reached the house. His last words he spoke to you." I am an old man now, but I thanked God over and over again in all the years that have passed since that hour for those last words of my father—"You've always been a good boy to me."

There is a little proverb that says: "Home is where we are treated the best and we act the worst."

Undoubtedly much lack of honor toward parents comes through lack of understanding on both sides. Impatient youth, who have not yet had previous experience, do not understand parents sometimes. Conservative parents have forgotten the experiences of youth. Parents and their young people often do not stand on common ground, and hence they are frequently unsympathetic to each other's motives and demands. Dictionaries record many definitions of the word honor. Most of them have to do with consideration, respectful regard, esteem, admiration, veneration, worship, etc. Surely the Lord meant more than to obey when he said, "Honour thy father and thy mother. . . ."

Honor, to be consistent with the gospel of Jesus Christ, is given as a free-will offering, in love, cheerfully, never grudgingly. It is never exacted.

This honoring of parents is not limited to childhood nor indeed to this life. The gospel is eternal, and the commandments of the Lord are not limited to time, as distinct from eternity.

Many have had one parent or both pass on. We may honor or dishonor these loved ones, even so. One Sunday morning a young people's meeting was held. A beautiful testimony was borne by a young girl, who said during the course of her remarks that she had changed her mode of living since her mother's death. She mentioned how happy the new life was making her, and said: "Oh, how I wish my mother could see me now." After the service the conducting officer suggested to the young lady that he felt her mother could see and was proud of the girl's action. This made the girl cry. Later in the day the young woman's sister said, "What did you say to my sister to make her cry?" She was told the same thing, and then she cried also. Both shed tears of joy, and it is entirely possible that a fond mother, no longer with them in earth life, cried tears of joy right along with them over the goodness of our Father in heaven, in answering a mothers' prayers in behalf of her choice daughters.

Fortunately, many do honor, respect, and love their parents. They have faith and confidence in the counsel of parents. They accept their counsel and are blessed through following it. One young man said, "I would like to give my children the same kind of parents I had."

The late Elder John A. Widtsoe of the Council of the Twelve, friend of youth, president of two universities—Utah State Agricultural College and the University of Utah—truly made "Honour thy father and thy mother . . ." a vital part of life.

He was left fatherless at the age of six; when he was nine, his mother accepted the gospel message in their native Norway, and two years later emigrated to Utah. Sister Widtsoe was always desirous that her sons obtain the best education, and worked long hours toward that end. John received his bachelor's degree, summa cum laude, with highest honors from Harvard University in 1894 and, declining employment as a chemist in the East, returned to Utah where he could be with his people and work for their advancement. In 1898 he was appointed to the Parker Fellowship as a traveling fellow of the graduate school of Harvard University. He married Leah Eudora Dunford, and they went to Europe on a combination honeymoon, study course, and mission for the Church. With high honors he received his master of arts and doctor of philosophy degrees, magna cum laude, from Goettingen University in Germany, in November, 1899.

Returning to Utah with the responsibilities of a family, in debt (his education in Europe was achieved partly with borrowed money), one of his first thoughts was to his widowed mother. Sister Leah Widtsoe fondly recalls how he used to write two checks the first of each month. The first one was for tithing; the second one was for his mother; his own family managed to live on what was left. He built a modest home on Capitol Hill in Salt Lake City for his mother, even before his own family had a home of their own.

Many have wondered in what way the promise "that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee" may be realized. It has been suggested that in primitive lands, when old men and women have finished their lives of usefulness and are no longer able to carry the burdens of life, they are done away with. As these unenlightened people learn to honor father and mother, they in turn are honored when advanced years come in their own lives. They are asked to fill important posts in community life and are shown the honor and deference of age. Thus by honoring their parents they in turn are shown honor and their days are long upon the land.

This may be a partial answer. However, blessings always follow the keeping of the commandments of our Father in heaven. Often in giving a commandment, he states the promise of blessings. He has said:

I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise. (D. & C. 82:10.)

For example, the Lord has promised those who honor him in observing the law of tithing, that he will open the windows of heaven and pour out blessings such as they will not be able to contain. (See Malachi 3:10.)

With reference to the Word of Wisdom he has promised:

And all saints who remember to keep and do these sayings, walking in obedience to the commandments, shall receive health in their navel and marrow to their bones;

And shall find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures;

And shall run and not be weary, and shall walk and not faint.

And I, the Lord, give unto them a promise, that the destroying angel shall pass by them, as the children of Israel, and not slay them. (D. & C. 89:18-21.)

With reference to observance of the Sabbath day, he has promised:

Verily I say, that inasmuch as ye do this, the fulness of the earth is yours. . . . (Ibid., 59:16.)

To the pure in heart, the promise is given that they shall be blessed and see God. (See Matt. 5:8.)

The fifth commandment contains, for those observing it, a promise of long life upon the land which the Lord our God has given us. Many have felt that this meant just a rich and full life. Experience teaches that those who do honor father and mother are happy.

However, by honoring the counsel of worthy parents with reference to the Word of Wisdom, observance of the Sabbath day, and purity of life, life is actually lengthened. A wise parent will say, "Don't go there"—"Be cautious in this regard"—"Drive carefully"—Don't drink" and the like, and by obeying this counsel our days are lengthened on the earth. Parents are prompted by the Holy Ghost when they ask us to refrain from going to certain places and doing certain things. Obedience to parents brings blessings. The scriptures say, "The wages of sin is death," and in many cases earlier death is indeed the result of sin.

Yes, happiness and innumerable blessings come through following the instructions of wise parents and through obeying the commandments of a loving Heavenly Father. The experiences of the ages prove conclusively the wisdom of the divine edict, "Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee."

1955 Deseret Book Co.
