No specific author, Ten Commandments Today (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955)

Chapter VII

The Sixth Commandment

By ELDER HAROLD B. LEE of the Council of the Twelve

Thou shalt not kill.

Why is it considered such a serious sin to destroy life? How much is a human soul worth? Well might we pause to ask those questions in a day when life is exploited so wantonly in the cruel processes of war and destruction and when the threat from more terrible engines of war which, if fully employed, could in a moment of ruthless fury turn great cities into a carnage of bloody devastation.

To answer these questions we turn briefly to the teachings of the scripture:

Man in the spirit world was the offspring of Deity. The earth was created and organized as the dwelling place of heaven-born spirits in mortal bodies "to prove them now herewith to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." God's purpose in so doing was "to bring to pass immortality and eternal life" or, in other words, as a result of a successful mortal life, to bring each soul back into the presence of "that God who gave him life" and with a resurrected body not subject to death and thus perfected, to live eternally in the presence of the Lord our Master and the Father of us all.

To accomplish that purpose, a plan was laid in the heavens which involved the atoning sacrifice of the greatest and First Born of God the Eternal Father in the spirit world, who was "as a lamb slain from before the foundation of the world." Therefore, the worth of souls is great in the sight of God—

For behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him. (D. & C. 18:11.)

The penalty for opposition to that plan was the banishment and the loss of the privileges of mortal life by one-third of the spirits in heaven, marshaled and led in their opposition by Lucifer, an illustrious son in the morning of God's creations. Satan's hosts, now cast out for rebellion, are ever ready to attack mortal beings and to destroy them in mortality by enticing them to commit sins which would unfit them for their eternal glory.

One of the most serious of all sins and crimes against the Lord's plan of salvation is the sin of murder or the destruction of human life. It seems clear that to be guilty of destroying life is the act of "rebellion" against the plan of the Almighty by denying an individual thus destroyed in mortality, the privilege of a full experience in this earth-school of opportunity. It is in the same category as the rebellion of Satan and his hosts and therefore it would not be surprising if the penalties to be imposed upon a murderer were to be of similar character as the penalties meted out to those spirits which were cast out of heaven with Satan. Perhaps a few incidents from the scriptural record will serve to indicate the nature of the penalties imposed.

Cain, the son of Adam and Eve, of lustful and covetous heart, was warned that "if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door." (Gen. 4:7.) Prompted by Satan, he committed the first murder upon the earth when he killed his brother Abel, and was given an awful penalty of being "cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand. . . .

". . . a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth." (Ibid., 4:11-12.) Throughout the long recorded history of God's hand-dealings with his children there have been recorded many incidents involving those who have wilfully taken life. Repeatedly those who have been guilty have been condemned by the Lord.

With reference to two notorious murders and the fate of those who perpretrated them, namely, the conspiracy of David in plotting the death of Uriah so that he could take Uriah's beautiful wife, Bathsheba, and the crucifixion of the Savior by the Jews, the Prophet Joseph Smith has said this:

A murderer, for instance one that sheds innocent blood, cannot have forgiveness. David sought repentance at the hand of God carefully with tears, for the murder of Uriah, but he could only get it through hell; he got a promise that his soul should not be left in hell.

Although David was a king, he never did obtain the spirit and power of Elijah and the fulness of the priesthood; and the priesthood that he received and the throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage.

Peter referred to the same subject on the day of Pentecost, but the multitude did not get the endowment that Peter had; but several days after, the people asked, "What shall we do?" Peter says, "I would (or I wish) ye had done it ignorantly," speaking of crucifying the Lord. He did not say, "Repent and be baptized for the remission of your sins," but he said, "Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord." (Acts 3:19.) This is the case with murderers. They could not be baptized for the remission of sins for they had shed innocent blood.

The Lord once told me what I asked for I should have. I have been afraid to ask God to kill my enemies, lest some of them should, peradventure, repent. I asked a short time since for the Lord to deliver me out of the hands of the Governor of Missouri, and if it needs must be to accomplish it, to take him away; and the next news that came down from there was, that Governor Reynolds had shot himself. And I would now say, Beware, O earth, how you fight against the Saints of God and shed innocent blood; for in the days of Elijah, his enemies came upon him and fire was called down from heaven and destroyed them. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 339-340.)

To warn men and to make them afraid to sin, God from the beginning has given his children in the gospel plan divine injunctions so plainly stated that a "wayfaring man though a fool need not err therein."

On Mount Sinai God delivered to Moses the Decalogue or the Ten Commandments, included in which were catalogued cardinal crimes against our fellow men which he had condemned from the beginning. Heading these divine injunctions was the declaration: Thou shalt not kill!

In this dispensation, the Lord repeatedly reiterated that command:

And now, behold, I speak unto the church. Thou shalt not kill; and he that kills shall not have forgiveness in this world, nor in the world to come.

And again, I say, thou shalt not kill; but he that killeth shall die. (D. & C. 42:18-19.)

He further commanded that murderers should be "delivered up and dealt with according to the laws of the land; for remember that he hath no forgiveness." He warned his Saints when he directed them to obtain land in Zion that they should obtain these lands by purchase and not by blood:

And if by blood, as you are forbidden to shed innocent blood, lo, your enemies are upon you, and ye shall be scourged from city to city, and from synagogue to synagogue, and but few shall stand to receive an inheritance. (Ibid., 63:31.)

Likewise the Lord warns against war as a righteous means of settling disputes: "Therefore," he commanded, "renounce war and proclaim peace. . . ." (Ibid., 98:16.) He even went so far as to say:

. . . if men will smite you, . . .

but if ye bear it not patiently, it shall be accounted unto you as being meted out as a just measure unto you.

And again, if your enemy shall smite you . . . and [you] bear it patiently, your reward shall be an hundredfold. (Ibid., 98:23-25.)

In the great Sermon on the Mount the Master went one step further in his teachings to fortify us against taking the steps which would lead to this terrible crime. Said he:

Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment:

But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca [or vain fellow], shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. (Matt. 5:21-22.)

This was putting in plainer words what the old prophets had said: "As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he." The Master knew that evil thoughts were father to evil acts. No one ever committed murder who didn't first become angry, and no one became angry with his brother "without a cause" who didn't begin to think of him as Raca or "a vain fellow" or a fool. If we would act properly, we must think right. The great laws which set high standards of conduct before God and towards our fellow men is set forth in the Lord's answer to those who questioned him as to which was the greatest commandment of the law.

Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. (Ibid., 22:37-39.)

With human life thus declared so precious and the destruction thereof so terrible in the sight of God and visited by such awful penalties, it will be easily understood then how serious it is to even tamper with the vital processes of human conception and child-bearing. The prostitution of the human power of creation in unlicensed and unholy sexual practices has been condemned from the beginning and is declared by a prophet father to his son as being second only to the sin of murder and the shedding of innocent blood. (See Alma 39:5.)

But this subject of sexual impurity is to be dealt with more fully in another chapter.

There is, however, another heinous practice, the sin of abortion, or the destruction of unborn children by illegal operations, which lies somewhere a close kin to the crime of destroying human life and certainly to be condemned under the subject heading of this chapter, "Thou shalt not kill!"

Against this deplorable practice the leaders of the Church have declared from the beginning. This serious sin against the Lord's plan is committed by two groups of individuals: first, those who, having committed their first great error in yielding to sexual sin, seek to cover their sins after gratifying their lusts, by committing an even more heinous crime before the law of the land and against the law of God; and, second, by those having entered into the sacred relationships of the married state but who, rather than accept the responsibilities of parenthood, yield to this awful practice by which they forfeit their rights to wonderful blessings which otherwise could have been theirs.

May the youth of the Church and young men and women everywhere be forewarned against the deadly sin of human destruction and be prepared to lay claim to the blessings promised through obedience to God's divine command.

The Sixth Commandment

By ELDER HAROLD B. LEE of the Council of the Twelve

Thou shalt not kill.

PART TWO

A discussion of the teachings of the last chapter must have aroused a number of questions in the minds of our readers. In this militaristic age in which we live, many, if not all able-bodied young men, may be marshaled and drilled in the processes of war. If, in compliance with the call of a sovereign nation to military service, one is required to take life or to destroy, do his acts of war bring him under condemnation and subject to the penalties set forth in the law of the Lord previously discussed?

In a pertinent statement set forth in a message of the First Presidency to the Church during World War II and delivered at the general conference on April 6, 1942, this subject was fully discussed. This was delivered at a time when nearly one hundred thousand Latter-day Saint youths were engaged in or were undergoing training for combat in the most destructive war in all history. I quote here from that message (pages 32-36):

But all these commands, from Sinai down, run in very terms against individuals as members of society, as well as members of the Church, for one man must not kill another as Cain killed Abel; they also run against the Church as in the case of securing land in Zion, because Christ's Church should not make war, for the Lord is a Lord of peace. He has said to us in this dispensation: "Therefore, renounce war and proclaim peace. . . ." (D. & C. 98:16.) Thus the Church is and must be against war. The Church itself cannot wage war, unless and until the Lord shall issue new commands. It cannot regard war as a righteous means of settling international disputes; these should and could be settled—the nations agreeing—by peaceful negotiation and adjustment.

But the Church membership are citizens or subjects of sovereignties over which the Church has no control. The Lord himself has told us to "befriend that law which is the constitutional law of the land":

"And now, verily I say unto you concerning the laws of the land, it is my will that my people should observe to do all things whatsoever I command them.

"And that law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind, and is justifiable before me.

"Therefore, I the Lord, justify you, and your brethren of my church, in befriending that law which is the constitutional law of the land;

"And as pertaining to law of man, whatsoever is more or less than this, cometh of evil." (Ibid., 98:4-7.)

While by its terms this revealed word related more especially to this land of America, nevertheless the principles announced are world-wide in their application, and they are specifically addressed to "you" (Joseph Smith), "and your brethren of my church." When, therefore, constitutional law, obedient to these principles, calls the manhood of the Church into the armed service of any country to which they owe allegiance, their highest civic duty requires that they meet that call. If, harkening to that call and obeying those in command over them, they shall take the lives of those who fight against them, that will not make of them murderers, nor subject them to the penalty that God has prescribed for those who kill, beyond the principle to be mentioned shortly. For it would be a cruel God that would punish his children as moral sinners for acts done by them as the innocent instrumentalities of a sovereign whom he had told them to obey and whose will they were powerless to resist.

The whole world is in the midst of a war that seems the worst of all time. This Church is a world-wide Church. Its devoted members are in both camps. They are the innocent war instrumentalities of their warring sovereignties. On each side they believe they are fighting for home, and country and freedom. On each side, our brethren pray to the same God, in the same name, for victory. Both sides cannot be wholly right; perhaps neither is without wrong. God will work out in his own sovereign way the justice and right of the conflict, but he will not hold the innocent instrumentalities of the war, our brethren in arms, responsible for the conflict. This is a major crisis in the world-life of man. God is at the helm.

There is, then, a vast difference in destroying life while acting under the mandate of a sovereign nation whom we are in duty bound to obey and wantonly killing on our own responsibility. It would be well for every young man called to military service to study carefully the above quoted statement of the First Presidency.

The law to the "ancients" before they should go to battle is set forth in the following quotation:

And again, this is the law that I gave unto mine ancients, that they should not go out unto battle against any nation, kindred, tongue, or people, save I, the Lord, commanded them.

And if any nation, tongue or people should proclaim war against them, they should first lift a standard of peace unto that people, nation, or tongue;

And if that people did not accept the offering of peace, neither the second nor the third time, they should bring these testimonies before the Lord;

Then I, the Lord, would give unto them a commandment, and justify them in going out to battle against that nation, tongue, or people.

And I, the Lord, would fight their battles, and their children's battles, and their children's children's, until they had avenged themselves on all their enemies, to the third and fourth generation.

Behold, this is an ensample unto all people, saith the Lord your God, for justification before me. (D. & C. 98:33-38.)

Now there is the question as to whether or not one would be justified in destroying a person in self-protection against that person who would kill you if he could. Here is also stated the Lord's law to his "ancients" on that subject:

And then, if he shall come upon you or your children, or your children's children unto the third and fourth generation, I have delivered thine enemy into thine hands;

And then if thou wilt spare him, thou shalt be rewarded for thy righteousness; and also thy children and thy children's children unto the third and fourth generation.

Nevertheless, thine enemy is in thine hands; and if thou rewardest him according to his works thou art justified; if he has sought thy life, and thy life is endangered by him, thine enemy is in thine hands and thou art justified.

Behold, this is the law I gave unto my servant Nephi, and thy fathers, Joseph, and Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham, and all mine ancient prophets and apostles. (Ibid., 98:29-32.)

Now, another problem: Throughout the scriptures there are recorded instances where life has been taken by the Lord's command, even the destruction of whole cities which of necessity would involve the destruction of the lives of those within those cities as well as the destruction of homes and property. There are some of our modernists who would pervert the record of these incidents and deny that there would ever be justification for God and countenance such destruction. In the wisdom of the Almighty these things have been commanded, and for a righteous purpose. May I give you two incidents related in the scriptures—one from the Book of Mormon and one from the Bible:

After Lehi had departed from Jerusalem, with his family, he was commanded to send back to one Laban and from him obtain possession of plates of brass on which were contained vital teachings of the scriptures with a record of the Jews and their genealogies. When approached, Laban became angry and sought to slay Lehi's son, Laman, who fled from him. Nephi's great faith led him to go the second time for the plates, even in the face of great personal danger. His testimony was that he was "led by the spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which I should do." (1 Nephi 4:6.) He found Laban near his house fallen in a drunken stupor. When Nephi was contrained by the spirit to kill Laban, he shrank from so doing, saying in his heart, "Never at any time have I shed the blood of man. And I shrunk and would that I might not slay him." (Ibid., 4:10.) Then the spirit commanded: "Slay him, for the Lord hath delivered him into thy hands." (Ibid., 4:12.) Then followed the reason justifying the committing of an act which had been condemned under other circumstances from the beginning:

Behold the Lord slayeth the wicked to bring forth his righteous purposes. It is better that one man should perish than that a nation should dwindle and perish in unbelief.

And now, when I, Nephi, had heard these words, I remembered the words of the Lord which he spake unto me in the wilderness, saying that: Inasmuch as thy seed shall keep my commandments, they shall prosper in the land of promise.

Yea, and I also thought that they could not keep the commandments of the Lord according to the law of Moses, save they should have the law.

And I also knew that the law was engraven upon the plates of brass.

And again, I knew that the Lord had delivered Laban into my hands for this cause—that I might obtain the records according to his commandments.

Therefore I did obey the voice of the Spirit, and took Laban by the hair of the head, and I smote off his head with his own sword. (Ibid., 4:13—18.)

In Abraham's day, as recorded in the Bible, Sodom and Gomorrah, near where Abraham lived, were wicked cities. The Lord decreed their destruction. Abraham pleaded that if fifty righteous could be found in Sodom that the Lord would spare the city from destruction. Finally the Lord declared: "I will not destroy it for ten's sake." (Gen. 18:32.) The nature of the degradation into which its inhabitants had fallen is growing among us today and may well be noted in the following references. (Lev. 18:22; 20:13; Deut. 23:17; Rom. 1:27; I Cor. 6:9.) Messengers of the Lord called at the home of Lot and his family in Sodom, who were undoubtedly not guilty of the sins before noted, and warned them to flee before the threatened destruction. When this was accomplished, the Bible records:

Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven:

And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.

And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the Lord:

And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace. (Gen. 19:24-25, 27-28.)

Similar destruction has been prophesied in the last days just preceding the second coming of the Lord.

How then can we justify such destruction in view of the strictness of the law of the gospel as declared by the Lord himself as we have pointed out in the last chapter? President John Taylor has set forth in clear reasoning why in God's wisdom such destruction under certain circumstances is essential to the carrying out of his plans for the redemption of his children:

Here, then, it is stated, that if brother, son, wife, or any one, wish to lead thee from God, thou shalt destroy them; and why? Because in forsaking God, they lose sight of their eternal existence, corrupt themselves, and entail misery on their posterity. Hence it was better to destroy a few individuals, than to entail misery on many. And hence the inhabitants of the old world and of the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed, because it was better for them to die, and thus be deprived of their agency, which they abused, than to entail so much misery on their posterity, and bring ruin upon millions of unborn persons. And having thus deprived them of their agency to act upon the earth, and punished them for their transgressions, Jesus went "and preached unto the spirits in prison; which were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing." (I Peter 3:19, 20.)

It is upon this principle that the world will be punished in the last days for their transgressions, because they have abused their agency, and broken the covenant that God made with them. They have yielded to the influence of Satan, perverted the designs of Jehovah, and brought upon themselves and posterity a curse, misery, and ruin. If anything further is desired upon this subject, Isaiah has described it plainly, and has shown the awful effect of an abuse of this moral agency and departure from God, and the breaking of this covenant. To him I refer the reader as a conclusion on this subject. "Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof. And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him. The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled: for the Lord hath spoken this word. The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and fadeth away, the haughty people of the earth do languish. The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therin are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned and few men left." (Gov't. of God, pp. 53—54.)

By similar reasoning, the law is justified in destroying the life of a murderer or others guilty of capital crimes by capital punishment:

And if he was prostituting the use of those faculties given him by God, to the service of Satan, and abusing the liberty which his Creator had so liberally given, although the Lord could not control the free action of his will, he could destroy his body, and thus prevent him from cursing posterity. Hence, if a man transgress the laws of the land, he is considered a bad member of society, and is punished accordingly; sometimes imprisoned; sometimes banished; and sometimes put to death. Legislators assign as a reason for these things, that such persons are injurious to society; and if crime was not punished, the virtuous and good would be abused; the wicked would triumph; character, life, and property would be insecure; and anarchy, confusion, and desolation would inevitably ensue. (Ibid., p. 55.)

1955 Deseret Book Co.
