No specific author, Ten Commandments Today (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955)

Chapter VIII

The Seventh Commandment

By ELDER MARK E. PETERSEN of the Council of the Twelve

Thou shalt not commit adultery.

You are a potential creator. As God is, you may become. Even here in this life you can cooperate with him in his work of creation. He planned it that way.

As is true with all lower forms of life, man goes through a series of steps in his development. First, he is a spirit, next a mortal person. Then he loses his mortal body and becomes a spirit again. At last he again takes up his body, now no longer mortal, but resurrected and eternal, no more subject to death.

When we were spirits, we lived with God. He was our Father, and as members of his family, we dwelt with him in his home and partook of its influence. God lives on a glorious planet. As spirits we lived there with him.

He was the Creator of many galaxies of stars, of many heavenly universes. He was a Personage of flesh and bone. He reached his great position by successfully passing through the various stages of life—even such stages as we must pass through.

In our heavenly home we were told that some time, if faithful, we could become like him. We could have a glorious body of flesh and bones, we could become highly intelligent, we could assist with creation. It was only natural that children should become like their father.

As his spirit children, he called us into a great council and there explained to us our destiny. We could become like him if we successfully passed through stages of progression as he had done. In order to do that, we must begin with a mortal existence. It meant leaving our heavenly home, and coming to another planet which he would create as a home for us, and passing through the trials and troubles as well as the joys of such a life. Our next step in progress after that would be to go to a place of waiting, and finally, if we were faithful, we could come back into his presence. Through these stages of experience, we could achieve the type of development which the Lord had planned for us.

In our heavenly home with our Father we were spirit personages. We looked much as we do now; we could be recognized; we could sing and laugh and work and play. We were taught to worship. We made friends. We had our free agency, which meant that we could choose our own likes and dislikes even as we do here.

When we came to earth we were told we would be given bodies of flesh and bone as houses or tabernacles in which our spirits would live. When we finished our mortal life we would also be finished with our mortal bodies and would move out of them. On leaving them, they would die. But we were told that those bodies are essential to our eternal progress, and at a later time we would have them again. Our bodies could not go to heaven while still mortal. They would have to be "conditioned" for such a glorious place. That conditioning, we are told, would come about through the resurrection when the corruptible would become incorruptible.

But man was not to be alone on this new earth which the Lord was to make for us. We would have much company in the form of both vegetable and animal life. These other forms of life also had lived in a spirit form before the earth was made. Mortal bodies must be provided for them also, to fit them for this new existence through which we all were to pass.

After the earth was formed, the Lord placed upon it vegetation of all kinds, as he had created it in the spirit. He planted seeds in the earth, seeds which would produce the kinds of vegetable life he wished to grow here. Then he sent rains upon the earth, and the seeds grew and produced the beautiful vegetation we now see all over the earth.

The Lord knew, however, that in order to keep the earth beautiful and green, this vegetation must be permitted to reproduce itself. But it must be orderly and according to his plan. He, therefore, provided that each plant should produce seed which, when planted, would reproduce the same kind of life which in the first place had produced the seed. Each tree was to bring forth trees, flowers would bring forth flowers, grass would bring forth grass. And even within each classification lines were drawn. Roses would bring forth only roses, sunflowers only sunflowers, asters only asters. Pine trees would bring forth pines, and poplar trees would bring forth only poplars. There was order in all things. Definite lines were provided, for there was order in heaven, and in all of God's creations.

Next the Lord placed upon the earth the various kinds of animal life. From the very beginning, each brought forth after its own kind. Scientists have tried to introduce theories to the contrary, but later scholars are now discovering those former theories were not right. The creation by God—the Lord's way—is the only way.

As animals were placed on the earth, they were given the same powers as had been given to the vegetation. They could reproduce themselves. How else would life be maintained on the earth?

But here again the Lord drew definite lines to protect and preserve this great power of procreation. It was a great power. It was a divine power. Who could bring forth life without God? The greatest of the scientists have stood in awe before the creation of life. That is God's power and his secret. But he gave to each form of life a share in this divine prerogative, protecting it, however, with his laws.

As was the case with the flowers and trees, each animal must bring forth after its own kind. Lions must bring forth lions; horses must bring forth horses; elephants would produce elephants; and ants would bring forth ants.

To quote one great scientist:

For hundreds of years in each of countless acorns is preserved the exact arrangement of atoms that produced the first oak. No oak tree ever bore chestnuts. No whale ever gave birth to a fish. The waving fields of wheat are, in every grain, wheat. And corn is corn. Law governs the atomic arrangement in the genes which absolutely determine every genus of life from beginning to extinction.

This scientist, Cressy Morrison, past president of the New York Academy of Sciences, says that the evolutionist did not know about genes. The genes keep the strains of life as they were first made. They cannot change.

The Lord placed an instinct in animals. Not one of them has a tendency to attempt to reproduce itself through association with any animal except those of its own kind. Cats and dogs have no tendency to join their species. Neither do horses and cows. Neither do squirrels and rats. "Each after its own kind" is absolute. It is God's way of avoiding confusion, it is his way of keeping the strain pure. Since he was giving to life on this earth a share in his great prerogative—that of producing more life—he provided that it should be as orderly as in heaven. Reproduction was part of God's program. Therefore, it was sacred. Not even the animals nor the vegetation should be allowed to distort it nor to divert this power into other channels.

Then God placed man upon the earth, the first man, the one chosen to be the progenitor of our race. His coming was the most important of all. Had not the earth been created especially for man to help him in his progress toward Godhood?

Here at the zenith of his work, the Lord again must provide for continuation of life—human life—on the earth. This human life was close to his heart, because those who were to inhabit these earthly bodies were his own children, his own family, his own race.

He provided conditions ideal to their progress, conditions which would help them most to move toward that great goal of becoming like him. They were to be tested and tried, but they also were to be given powers which, if honored and cherished, would make man, even in mortality, a partner with him.

Man must reproduce himself. Man was not of the vegetable kingdom to follow the rules of that form of life. Neither was he an animal to be led by mere instincts. As a child of God, man was given powers not granted to any other form of life. He was of the divine race, and therefore could have many of the privileges and powers related to divinity.

The power of reproduction must be given to man as it had been given to lower forms of life to perpetuate his species. But whereas the Lord had set up safeguards for this power among the lower forms, barriers which the animals had no tendency to break down because of the manner in which they were made, man was in a different situation. With his right of choice, with his impulses, some for good and some for evil (even Satan had rebelled in the pre-existence), he could now use these divinely-given powers for either good or bad purposes. It was not a matter of instinct with him. It was a matter of choice. He possessed the right of choice before he came into the world. It was not taken from him when he became mortal. The animals would not corrupt their reproductive powers. Instinct took care of that. But what would mortal man do? This question came to the very heart of the purpose for which man was sent here—to try him, and prove whether he was worthy to come back into God's presence. With his right of choice, he would be at liberty to select his own course. He could do that which would be ennobling, or he could do that which would debase.

Laws were the answer. How else could God deal with an intelligent person who had the right of choice and who was to be tested to see which he would choose?

So God called before him the first man and the first woman. As male and female, they were to reproduce their species. But they were to do so under divinely prescribed conditions.

Because man was the child of God, because he had a great goal to achieve, because he had the right of choice, because he had the power to elevate or to debase, the Lord provided for him a system which was essential to the "race of Gods."

He knew that "man is not without the woman, neither is the woman without the man in the Lord." He knew that eternal exaltation—our ultimate destiny—was a family matter. Man and woman are exalted together, not singly, not apart. No man will receive exaltation in "single bliss." No single or unmarried woman will ever receive exaltation. Man and woman receive exaltation together.

At the very outset of this earth life, therefore, God put into operation the process leading to ultimate exaltation. He married the man and the woman, Adam and Eve. That marriage was given before death came into the world. It was not contemplated that death would affect it in any way. Married life was to be projected into mortality, and through it beyond death and into the eternal worlds.

Family life was placed on an eternal, everlasting basis, right from the beginning. It was part of the government and plan of heaven. Because it was part of the heavenly order, it must be kept sacred, as near to a heavenly system on earth as mortal things may be.

The covenant of marriage, this sacred thing which was to go on eternally, was the heavenly institution which God provided under which his mortal children on earth were to reproduce themselves. There should be no human sex relationship outside of marriage. Children born to man and woman under divinely appointed marriage were to remain as their children forever. Families would continue as a unit even into eternity. The ties of home established in earth life would last forever. It was part of the system of heaven transferred to earth. It must be kept sacred.

Having married Adam and Eve, God now commanded them to have children. In this way they became partners with him in his creative work, providing bodies for his spirit children. But it was more than merely providing those bodies. It was more than perpetuating human life on the earth. It was the beginning of steps which could lead to their exaltation—together—as families, parents and children.

Reproduction among humans, therefore, was not to be classed in any way with that of lower forms of life. It was a divine act. To do so under the order and rules of God was sacred. It was helping him to complete his creative work on this earth. It was laying the foundation for immortality and eternal life in the world to come. It was as important to exaltation as the resurrection or as baptism, and just as holy.

The Seventh Commandment

By ELDER MARK E. PETERSEN of the Council of the Twelve

Thou shalt not commit adultery.

PART TWO

Marriage for eternity is an essential part of exaltation in the celestial kingdom. It belongs to the heavenly order. It is one of the key steps in the plan of salvation.

Since it is so much a part of God's program for us, and since we must prepare ourselves for the hereafter while we are yet in mortality, every safeguard must be provided to keep marriage holy.

We must approach it as a sacred institution. We must be pure going into it, and once there, we must adhere to those divine laws which make of it an hallowed relationship.

Marriage involves sex. The Lord provided that it should. Sex itself was a divine creation to permit the species to perpetuate itself. Its purpose was as sacred as the creation itself.

Since sex is so sacred, the violation of its fundamental purpose becomes a crime in the eyes of God. To disobey any of his sacred precepts is an offense to him. But to violate the very basis by which he brings forth life is an affront of a most serious kind.

The race must be propagated. If it were not, the plan of God would be frustrated. How could be provide mortal tabernacles for his spirit children without it? If they had no mortal tabernacle, they could never have resurrected tabernacles, and without a resurrection they could never become like him. Yet his whole purpose is that we do become like him. "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1: 39), he said at one time.

But necessary as propagation is, he does not wish to bring his children into mortality with a stain upon them. Each one has a right to be well born. Each one has a right to honorable parentage. Honorable parentage stems from honorable marriage. Honorable marriage is the plan of God, both for mortal life and for exaltation in the world to come, for marriage is designed to survive death and go on into eternity as an essential part of it. The families reared here during mortality are intended to be kept intact forever, not only until death parts them. The family is a part of the heavenly order. As we rear our families in this life we rear them for eternity.

We must begin in our earliest youth to guarantee the sanctity of our family ties. The Lord ordained that boys and girls, at the beginning of their 'teens, should begin to form an interest in each other, leading in later years to this eternal relationship of marriage and the home.

As the first boy-meets-girl interest begins to show itself, there is need to control that interest. Each boy and each girl must understand the appropriateness of things. Each must know that such interest must be kept on the high plane of honor, respect, and protection.

Mothers have taught their sons to give their lives to protect the virtue of the girls with whom they keep company. Sons and daughters have been told that it is better to die clean than to live an unclean life. Virtue is more important than life. Life may be clean or unclean, but virtue is never anything but pure.

Dates are natural in the lives of young people. Those dates are opportunities for getting acquainted, but also they must be regarded as times when proprieties are to be observed. Joyful companionship may be had to the full. Innocent fun is good for people. But it must be kept innocent. No boy has a right to take liberties with his girl friend; no girl has a right to invite a boy to debase them both.

One of the first questions asked about these dates is, "What about kissing good-night?"

It is a good question. What about it?

What is a kiss anyway? Is it something to be played with as you would play with a toy? Is it just a normal part of a date, like soda pop and ice cream, or heavier refreshments after a dance?

The kiss is a sacred thing. It should not be made common or cheap. Think about it for a moment. Is mother's kiss worth anything to you? Or dad's? When you have watched dad kiss mother good-bye as he leaves for work each morning, haven't you thought of it as a gentle "I love you, dear" given by husband to wife? Haven't you considered it a sign of a sacred covenant?

Can a kiss be anything less than that, and still have meaning? The kiss is sacred. It is a sign of affection, a pledge of love and loyalty. When you put a kiss on that basis, are you willing to bestow it upon any Tom, Dick, or Harry who wishes to take liberties with you, or upon any Jane, Helen, or Mary who is willing to take the first step toward making herself common?

In the light of such a definition of the kiss, let us ask where does "necking" stand? Does it have a place in the proper scheme of things? Is there anything "lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy" in it? Isn't "necking" cheapening both to boy and girl? Doesn't it make young folk "common"? Doesn't it destroy a certain amount of respect each should have for the other?

The real "manly" man, who stands for genuine manhood, is never a cheap sort of person. The girl who honors her womanhood never makes herself common.

One of the worst things about "necking" is that it leads to "petting." Taking one liberty leads to another. One step toward breaking down our barriers leads to the next. Each step "conditions" the mind for a little more. If we have gone this far, why not farther? That is so often the question. "First we pity, then endure, then embrace," it has been said of sin.

"Petting" is the first great break in the wall protecting virtue. To allow ourselves to be touched improperly is to open the gates of our fortress to the enemy. It is an invitation to disaster.

"Petting" cannot be disassociated from a certain degree of lust. No matter how you look at it, petting is a step down, it is placing yourself in the hands of the tempter.

You cannot "pet" and come out unscathed. You not only place your virtue in jeopardy, but you actually lose a part of it if you engage in that practice. It is possible to lose your virtue a little at a time. You can and you do when engaged in the practice of "petting."

The Savior had a good idea of what goes on in the minds of some men and women at times, and he pointed to its seriousness. He said: "Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart." It is equally applicable to women as to men. There are not two standards of morals in the gospel. Man and woman must be clean, equally so.

"Petting" is lust. Those who lust commit adultery in their hearts. It is that plain. It is that simple.

"Necking" leads to "petting." "Petting" is a partial loss of virtue, and it may lead to a complete loss of that most priceless possession.

From Mount Sinai and from the Doctrine and Covenants we are commanded of God: "Thou shalt not commit adultery."

The adulterous relationship is described by scripture as being next to murder in its seriousness. Alma taught his son Corianton that there are three worst sins: sin against the Holy Ghost, murder, and sex sin. He was not talking alone about sin between two married persons. His own son, to whom the remarks were addressed, appears to have been an unmarried man.

One of the things which leads to sex sin is immodesty in dress, which has but one purpose. It is designed to "play up" sex. Some brazenly have called it sex appeal. The expression actually became popular. Immodesty makes common and cheap and evil that which was designed as a sacred attribute. The low-cut gown, the skimpy sun suit, or the extreme bathing suit is but a "come on" to those whose minds are on sex. It is an invitation.

Actually sex sin begins with loss of modesty. When we drop our standards, we drop our defense. Modesty is the first line of defense for virtue. If that were preserved, there would be no further losses, no surrender to the enemy.

No woman ever looks quite as lovely as she does when well-groomed in modesty. She can be as stylish as any, and still be modest. Many stylish women not of our Church dress more modestly than some of our own people. They never think it is an outmoded custom properly to clothe one-self.

The Lord intended that we should be clothed. That is why, in the Garden of Eden, he himself made clothing for Adam and Eve. If it were his idea that men and women should be immodestly dressed (or undressed) he never would have provided clothing for them.

Young people, cherish your virtue. Protect it by your modest dress. Protect it by your modest actions. Avoid making your body either a plaything or an "exhibition piece." Never cheapen yourself or make yourself common. Uphold your self-respect or you can never have the respect of others. Neither boys nor girls actually respect those of whom they make a toy.

When you think of the divine importance of your marriage, and its relationship to God and eternity, when you think what your actions may do to children who may be born to you, can you fail to be pure?

If purity had not been so important to God, would he have said so much about it? If marriage were not so vital to our life here and now, as well as in the eternities, would the Lord have said so much about it?

Marriage actually is a heavenly order. It is a part of the divine plan. We must go into it with pure hands and clean hearts and with intentions which are above reproach. Once married, we must hold to our covenants, live the gospel, and make that marriage a success.

Is there a place for divorce in the divine plan? Marriage is for eternity. Husband and wife are commanded to love each other with all their hearts, to be loyal and true to each other, and have no interest in any other man or woman.

How well the Lord knows the human heart. With his great insight into human nature, he gave us this commandment:

"Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else." What a wealth of wisdom, what a tower of protection in that little sentence. If applied, there need be no unhappiness in any home, no divorce, no broken hearts, no children becoming delinquent.

". . . love thy wife with all thy heart." It is the same complete love which he demands of us in the first and great commandment.

". . . cleave unto her and none else." It reminds us of one of the Ten Commandments: "Thou shalt not covet . . . thy neighbour's wife." It demands loyalty, allegiance, dependability, wholehearted devotion.

That was for married folk. But he said more, for both single and married people:

". . . he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith, and shall not have the spirit; and if he repents not shall be cast out." This again could apply to "petting." Not only is "petting" a means of demoralizing ourselves and others, but it is a step toward apostasy, toward losing the Spirit of the Lord, and even toward excommunication.

"Thou shalt not commit adultery; and he that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out."

But he that has committed adultery and repents with all his heart, and forsaketh it, and doeth it no more, thou shalt forgive: . . . (D. & C. 42:24-25.)

There are some who have fallen. The Lord here offers an opportunity for a comeback. Those who have sinned may be forgiven if they repent. If they continue on in sin and do not repent, they are to be "cast out" or excommunicated from the Church.

The adulterous woman came to the Christ. She seems to have been repentant. He sent her away with a "Go thy way and sin no more."

Sinning no more, and reforming one's life is the way to forgiveness. And if we are sincere, the Lord will be merciful.

But how much better that we never have need of such a comback. How much better to live the divine law without variation. How much better to have no regrets. How much better to have the assurance that we have kept ourselves clean. How much better to have obeyed the Lord in the first place, and not be required to come back in sackcloth and ashes seeking mercy.

1955 Deseret Book Co.
