No specific author, Ten Commandments Today (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955)

Chapter IX

The Eighth Commandment

By CLEON SKOUSEN of Brigham Young University

(Elder Skousen formerly served for sixteen years with the Federal Bureau of Investigation in positions of influence and trust.)

Thou shalt not steal.

What is stealing? It is simply the illegal act of taking or converting someone else's property.

Studies show that nearly everyone (usually as a child) has done a little of it and nearly everyone, as an adult, has been the victim of it.

Do you recall having something stolen from you? It gives a person a peculiar feeling. You suddenly realize that someone has deliberately snatched away one of your prized possessions. It doesn't matter whether the thief took your pet dog, your new car, your lawn mower, or your pocket-book, the loss always spreads a cloud of insecurity in your mind and suspicion in your heart. What will disappear next? Who could have done it?

In order to appreciate the scope of this problem, it is necessary to remind ourselves that there are more than two billion people in the earth and not one of them was born honest. Nor were they born dishonest. They were born innocent, without a knowledge of good or evil. Therefore, each person has to learn honesty.

Learning to tell the truth and learning to respect other people's property is an important part of growing up. Some people learn it early, others learn it late. And there are a few who never do develop a respectable or mature "honesty quotient."

Each person can check his own H.Q. by noticing how he reacts to certain situations; for example, supposing a boy finds an expensive tennis racquet lying on the high school lawn. He says: "What a beauty! Whoever lost this will feel terrible. I'll turn it in right away." Another boy finds a tennis racquet and says: "Wow, what a beauty! I wonder if anybody will notice it under my jacket?"

A similar honesty test occurs every time a person gets too much change at the store. The cashier is under pressure and occasionally she will fill the hands of a customer with more money than he deserves. The first reaction is usually a pleasant surprise. He gave her one dollar, now she's giving him change for a five. What will he do?

A person who hasn't developed a grown-up sense of values will probably say to himself: "What a break! I wonder if she'll catch the mistake before I get lost in the crowd?"

A person with a high H.Q. will also be pleasantly surprised when these greenbacks are thrust into his hand. But because of past training he will stop and return the money. In fact, there is much satisfaction seeing the reaction of the cashier. As the money is returned, her eyes light up like two neon signs. Usually her enthusiastic remark will be, "Say, thanks a lot! Most people wouldn't have said anything!"

She will also be making a quick mental note that if you had not called this mistake to her attention she would have had to make it up from her own wages. After an experience like this a cashier feels like her faith in humanity has been restored.

Of course some people would not call it stealing even if they did rush off with money which the cashier overpaid them by mistake. They would call it "luck" or say it serves the store right for hiring such an incompetent cashier. But no matter how the pie is sliced, it is still pie, and no matter how a person rationalizes this kind of dishonesty it is still stealing. Knowingly accepting the property of another and then converting it to one's own use is certainly thievery within the meaning of the eighth commandment.

In the next chapter we will discuss all the different kinds of stealing, but for the moment let us first consider the causative factors which lay a foundation for a professional career of criminal thievery.

Seldom does a person deliberately plan a career of crime for himself. He just starts out "taking a few little things." The sly and furtive habits of the average criminal reflect the sneaking stealth of his earlier days as a petty thief. However, we should also mention that many people who later become respectable citizens also get enmeshed in a little stealing during their childhood days, but they are smart enough to call a halt. The difference with the professional criminal is that he does not halt this felony pattern—he tries to perfect it.

Now let us examine the package of pressures and temptations which leads people to steal.

First of all, we should observe that every normal person is born with the instinct of "acquisition"—the instinct to want "things." Like other instincts and appetites, the inborn desire to want things is basically a wholesome drive. Think how dull this world would be for a person who did not want anything. However, the human hunger for the acquisition of things must be controlled just as we control the instinct to eat. Developing this control is a gradual process. For one thing, it requires that a person learn to appreciate the sanctity of other people's property rights.

But of course, when a child is only three years old we will not expect to find much appreciation for property rights. In fact, to him "his" property is just about whatever happens to be handy. He wears the older children's clothes, plays with their toys, and feels a certain sense of proprietory right concerning anything which happens to be in his hands. Eventually his parents may be shocked to find him dragging home the neighbor's toys, and they will probably give him a long lecture on why little boys should not steal.

But to a three-year-old this generally doesn't make sense. He did not steal anything. In fact, what is stealing? He just saw something he wanted and brought it home.

Some parents make the mistake of repeatedly telling Junior that he is becoming a little thief. If they persist in this, he may begin to take pride in this new title. As one little boy told a neighbor lady: "You can't trust me. I'm a thief. My mother said so." This might sound like a confession to some people, but a child psychologist knows that this little fellow is feeding his ego with this new source of notoriety.

The wise parent will begin stressing property rights rather than stealing. Junior will be taught that just as he feels bad when someone takes his toys, so also the neighbor boy feels brokenhearted when Junior purloins his things. At first, however, the idea is difficult to get over.

Recently a three-year-old came home with an expensive toy dump-truck built exactly to scale. The father said: "Where did you get the truck?" The three-year-old said: "Up to Bobbie's." "Well," the father inquired, "if the truck is Bobbie's why did you take it?"

"Because I wanted it," came the quick reply.

The father tried again.

"Don't you think Bobby will feel very bad when he finds you have his nice new truck?"

"Oh," said the little fellow, "I won't tell him!"

At this point many parents decide they have a potential gangster on their hands. Sometimes they use the "sledgehammer approach" to impress upon Junior's little personality that he must not steal. However, the experienced parent will usually take Junior by the hand and help him redeliver the truck to its rightful owner. It may be two or three more years before Junior finally gets the whole idea, but if parents persist, they will usually find Junior fairly well adjusted to other people's property by the time he is six or seven.

At nine or ten he may get another stealing streak. But this time the situation may be quite different. By this time he knows about property rights, but he may steal because he thinks it's smart. Stealing to show off is charactertstic of late childhood and early adolescence. In many cities there are criminally-minded adults who will capitalize on this tendency of certain young boys to steal. The boys are told how to steal tires, hub-caps, spotlights, bicycles, etc., and then the criminal-adult pays the boys a small fraction of the true worth of these articles and resells them in legitimate markets.

Of course a person does not have to be clever to steal such things because our culture has been built upon the assumption that most of our people are decent and honest citizens. People feel safe in leaving their cars on the streets at night. Storekeepers spread their merchandise out on tables and trust people to pay for the things they want to buy. Grocery stores, department stores, cafeterias, and self-help gas stations all depend to a considerable extent on the honor system, because they know that most people can be trusted. This is a great achievement for any society.

In contrast to this there are some countries where people live behind high walls and barred windows. A car parked in the street must be guarded or it will be stolen. People gathered together in a crowd are relieved of their pocketbooks by light-fingered pickpockets. Nothing is safe unless it is watched. In such countries there is a constant fear. It reminds one of a period in Book of Mormon history when it says:

Behold, we lay a tool here and on the morrow it is gone; and behold, our swords are taken from us in the day we have sought them for battle.

Yea, we have hid up our treasures and they have slipped away from us.

. . . Behold the land is cursed, and all things are become slippery, and we cannot hold them. (Helaman 13:34-36.)

Today, in spite of the basic honesty of most people, there is a gradual increase in the crime rate which shows that more and more people are participating in what one authority calls "Kid-Stuff"—manifestations of uncontrolled appetites for wanting things, like a three-year-old. Such people seriously endanger the "free and easy feeling" which our culture has created on the assumption that most of our people are honest.

When a boy or girl in late childhood or early adolescence breaks out on a stealing spree, it is time for that boy's or girl's parents to "lay it on the line." Frequently a heart-to-heart chat with the boy or girl will reveal the reason for stealing. Sometimes it is merely to show off. Sometimes it is loneliness. Sometimes it is to gain recognition. Stealing things attracts the attention and admiration of certain associates and gives the young thief a shabby but somewhat gilded sense of accomplishment. Sometimes it is to satisfy a twisted sense of adventure. Regardless of the motives, however, a boy or girl is headed for serious trouble if he or she has not learned the sanctity of other people's property rights before graduating from high school.

Unless this is done a person with a low H.Q. is going to have a mental battle every time he sees an open locker, an unlocked bicycle, a car with keys in the ignition, or a stray book lying unattended on the study hall table. Crime studies show that unless a person can rid himself of "sneaky-snitching" by the time he leaves high school, he is likely to be plagued by this weakness the rest of his life.

Strange as it may seem, some boys are encouraged to follow this pattern of weakness after they leave high school. They may join an athletic team that prides itself in pocketing souvenirs wherever it goes—silverware, salt and pepper shakers, linen and hotel towels, or they may go to certain colleges where new students are initiated into fraternities during a period called "Hell-Week." During this time the new students are often given assignments as part of their initiation to steal articles from lobbies of hotels, railroad stations, or other public places. This is supposed to be very brave, showing courage and character. But such activities destroy the reputation of the fraternity and make local citizens distrust the administration of the university.

At the Church-sponsored Brigham Young University the students have set up social units instead of fraternities, and the new students are initiated during "Help-Week." During this period the initiates are assigned tasks such as cleaning up the campus, performing services for local merchants, helping a family where there is illness, or otherwise contributing something constructive to the community. The "Kid-Stuff" of "Hell-Week" has been replaced by the solid satisfaction which comes from handling adult jobs in a grown-up manner.

Anyone who thinks the Ten Commandments are old-fashioned and outmoded may be surprised to find out how urgently the recognition of these principles is needed in our generation. As we have already mentioned, our society is built upon the presumption that most people are forthright and honest. The trend, however, is toward an increase in crime. Any person who finds himself violating the eighth commandment is contributing to the pattern of crime which is fastening its tentacles in the flesh of our society.

In 1954 [^1] stealing by threat or violence (robbery) increased 6.8% over 1953. Breaking into buildings for the purpose of stealing or committing some other type of crime increased 8.4% over 1954. Sneak-thievery increased 5.8%.

Altogether there were more than 2,000,000 major crimes in the United States during 1954, which is the highest crime rate the nation has ever had. Violations of the Eighth Commandment constituted a higher percentage of crimes than all other offenses put together!

Records show that young people are inclined to become involved in certain types of stealing more than others. Take car thefts as an example. The average automobile represents about $2,000 worth of personal property. Recently two young men, each 23 years of age, saw a car with the keys in the ignition. Because of their lack of respect for other people's property, they looked upon this parked automobile as an "opportunity." They drove it away. Forty-eight hours later they had driven the automobile halfway across the continent. They had been taking back roads, but having gone so far from their home town, they felt safe in using the main highway.

Almost immediately they were spotted by a highway patrol officer, and the chase began. The boys became excited, and during the chase they wrecked the car when it rolled over after failing to make a curve. Both young men were seriously injured. They could have been killed. What started out to be a lark turned out to be a nightmare. The penalty for this type of crime is five years imprisonment and a $500.00 fine. (U. S. Code, Title 18, Sections 2311:2313.)

Then there is shoplifting. Sometimes this starts out as a dare, or a person does it to see if he can get away with it. Success leads to further attempts. Pretty soon a boy or girl begins building up a wardrobe with clothes which are stolen from the open counters of store owners who have been willing to trust the public. But it is not very long before the inevitable happens.

Nearly all stores of any size have some type of detective or investigative agency to protect them against shoplifters. Sometimes these officers watch the customers through so-called X-ray mirrors. Sometimes special cameras are used. Usually young people who have established a pattern of shoplifting habits fail to realize how embarrassing it is to have an officer walk up and say, "Young man, you are under arrest!"

Car stripping is another type of crime which flourishes in certain crowds of young people. It is considered clever to steal a set of tires, a heater, radio, or spotlight. Many nationally known criminals originally launched their careers of crime by participating in this type of thievery. Whether young people indulge in car stripping to get ornaments for their own cars or items of value to sell, the thing which they all come to realize when they get caught is the fact that it will take a long time to regain the respect and confidence of friends and neighbors when it is revealed who has been responsible for the car-stripping thefts in the area.

We should also mention one other kind of stealing which can leave a scar for years to come. This is stealing from an employer.

An employer always finds it necessary to trust his employees because they usually have access to both money and merchandise. Sometimes an employee will observe that the firm for which he works has large quantities of office supplies. He starts taking a supply home for himself. This is stealing. He may rationalize it by saying that the company will not miss it, or he may think they should be paying him more wages and he therefore excuses himself by taking a few little things now and then. Nevertheless, he is in trouble when the loss shows up on the inventory or he is observed by a superior. When such an employee is fired, he cannot get a letter of recommendation as he goes out to look for another job. And you can imagine the reaction of a prospective employer if he called this firm to inquire about such a boy and heard the manager say: "Oh, I fired that boy for stealing office supplies!" It takes a long time to live down a reputation of dishonesty.

A person may also steal from his employer by accepting pay for time which was not put into productive labor. When a person obtains a job, he is actually selling his time and his talent. When he punches a time-card and pretends to be on the job, but actually indulges in "gold bricking" or loafing, he is stealing within the broad meaning of the eighth commandment.

During World War II the government found it necessary to hire millions of employees to do the job which was necessary to win the war. A few of these people were not honest citizens, and they would steal from the stockpiles which were being accumulated for the war effort. These people were not only dishonest; they were also disloyal. The members of the United States Congress became so indignant with these activities that they passed a law providing that people who stole government property could be sentenced to as much as ten years in a federal penitentiary and fined up to $10,000. This helped to impress upon these weak citizens the seriousness of their offenses.

When the Lord put the eighth commandment in the Judaic code, he was simply trying to promote happiness and peace in each community. It is a most important commandment, and no matter how strong the temptation may be to take another person's property, each of us should remember that the First Presidency of heaven, which will some day sit in judgment over each of us, has said, "Thou shalt not steal!"

The Eighth Commandment

By W. CLEON SKOUSEN of Brigham Young University

Thou shalt not steal.

PART TWO

At the beginning of this lesson let us take a moment to discuss the experiences of a man whom we shall call Henry B—. In 1948, Henry had a good job, a fairly substantial home, and a nice family. He was what you might call a good average citizen in the community.

One Saturday afternoon at the country club he happened to notice an open locker. No one was around and the next thing Henry knew he had opened the locker door. The clothes inside were expensive and a pair of trousers hanging on the hook had a fat wallet bulging from a back pocket. Henry took out the wallet, extracted a number of large bills, and then replaced it. He picked up his clubs and started out. But he never reached the door.

A plainclothesman stepped out from behind the adjoining row of lockers and said, "Mr. B—, you're under arrest!" Henry was petrified. He must have been seen! The officer led him over to a side room and closed the door.

Henry decided to put on a bold front. "What's the trouble? What's the idea of putting me under arrest? I'm a member of the club. . . ."

"I know you are," interrupted the officer. "Hand over the money you took from that locker."

Henry was flushed and excited. He tried to act indignant. "I didn't take any money from anybody's locker. All I have is my own wallet and these bills I got from the bank this morning." He threw his wallet and the bills on the table.

The officer didn't say anything, but fumbled in a black satchel. Finally he took out a chromium device with a long cord which he connected to a wall plug. Then he closed the Venetian blinds and turned to Henry.

"Hold out your hands."

As Henry extended his hands he noticed a purple light coming from the end of the bright chromium tube. When the light focused on his hands, Henry saw it reveal dark blotches on his fingers and palms. Then the officer focused the light on the bills. They had the same dark blotches.

"Invisible dye," explained the officer. "Only shows up under an ultra-violet light. I dusted those bills with the dye before I put them in the billfold of that open locker. There's been a lot of stealing going on here for quit awhile. We thought we ought to find out who was doing it."

Henry slumped into a chair. There really wasn't much to say. On the table were three one-hundred dollar bills covered with the telltale dye. This was a felony. It meant at least a year and maybe more in the state penitentiary. He hadn't really intended to take so much. The first few times it had never been more than ten or fifteen dollars. He felt about the way he had when the principal caught him stealing from the cafeteria back in his high school days. But now it was worse in so many ways. His wife would be terribly shocked. What would his two boys say? Henry hoped the officer would take him out of the club house before any of his friends returned.

Early that morning, Henry B— had come to the country club with everything in his favor. He had friends, respect, a well-paying job. Until just a few minutes before no one knew who had been raiding the lockers every time one was left open. Now everyone would know. It would be in the papers. Who would take care of his family while he served his sentence? What would he do for a job when he got back? All of a sudden Henry B—'s world tumbled into shambles. He felt as if he had sold his soul for three hundred dollars.

As we mentioned in the last chapter, there are more crimes of thievery each year than all other major crimes combined. Behind many of these offenses are men like Henry B—. For many years he got away with his stealing. During that time he was considered a respectable citizen in the community. But there is no such thing as a respectable thief. When people found out about him, his reputation and standing in the community went out like a light.

In the days of Moses the Lord required a thief to return twice as much as he stole! (Exodus 22:4, 7.) This shows that the Lord has always attached great importance to a proper respect for the property rights of others.

In modern times the Lord commanded that those who are known to be stealing should be reported to the police. (D. & C. 42:85.)

Some people will say that it is a harsh thing to report a neighbor or citizen in the community to the police even though he is known to be a thief. In fact, they will sometimes take it upon themselves to warn the thief that his secret operations are known and that he had better reform. This merely puts the thief on notice that he had better be more careful. In all probability he will move his stealing operations to another part of town and will try to be more careful so that he will not be detected again.

If a person like this is reported to the police and is promptly called to an accounting, he is much more likely to realize the seriousness of his errors. The Lord knew whereof he spoke when he said, "If he or she shall steal, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of the land."

It is the duty of every member of the Church to cooperate with the police when violations of the law come to their attention. Recently a man read about a burglary in his community and told the police that he suspected a certain neighbor because he seemed to have suddenly come into possession of a large quantity of money which he was spending freely. The police investigated and not only cleared up this burglary, but thirty-two others besides. Do you think the same result would have been achieved if this man had gone over and "warned" his neighbor? The Lord gave sound counsel when he said that such matters should be handled by the duly constituted authorities who are enforcing "the law of the land."

How many kinds of stealing can you think of? What is the penalty for different kinds of stealing?

Many people are astonished when they discover how severe the punishment can be for thievery. The reason the penalty is so severe is because stealing strikes at the very foundation of a community. It is lawless indifference to the property rights of others. There can be no security when homes and stores are frequently raided by thieves. And there can be no safety on a highway where hijackers and road-robbers operate.

Because the criminal code in each state lays great stress on the seriousness of stealing, it is thought that it may be of interest to list some of the different kinds of thievery mentioned by the state statutes.

The penalty for stealing by means of a confidence game may go as high as ten years in the state penitentiary. (Utah Penal Code, 76-20-17.)

Although thievery is a problem to the nation, it cannot be solved except on an individual basis. It is a personal problem.

I once saw a seventeen-year-old boy interviewed by a well-known criminal psychologist. The boy had been stealing since he was five. The psychologist said something like this:

"Did you know that in some ways people are like plants? Did you know that if a plant is neglected and begins to wither you can still make it productive if you catch it during the growing stage?"

He then pointed out that the gardener learns that while a plant may be stunted somewhat by neglect, nevertheless, it will produce good fruit if you make up for the neglect by giving it water, cultivation and food. Once that growing period is completed, however, it is too late. No amount of water and cultivation can make a plant productive after the development period is finished. Then he continued:

"I have found that if we can help a boy get straightened out while he is still developing, he can become a good citizen without too much difficulty. But the longer he postpones correcting his bad habits the harder it is to break them. If he waits until he has finished developing, the possibility of rehabilitating him is so slow that it is almost a lost cause."

The boy said, "How long have I got left to break my bad habits?" The man replied, "You are already becoming set in your ways. If you postpone it another three or four years, I will expect you to become an habitual criminal."

Then the boy said: "I always feel terrible when I get caught, but it isn't long before I go right ahead and do it again. What can I do to break the habit?"

"Well," the psychologist replied, "I can suggest several things. But remember, it's your problem. I'm like a physician. I can tell you what medicine to take, but I won't always be there to see if you take it. That's your job."

The boy said he would appreciate the suggestions and try to follow them.

"First," the man said, "I want you to pick out someone whom you admire very much. It may be a leader at your church, a scoutmaster, or a neighbor. I want you to tell him all about this problem of yours, and then I want you to go to him every Saturday afternoon and report whether or not you have slipped, and then he can look you up and give you this sealed envelope."

"What's inside the envelope?" the boy asked.

"It is the dose of medicine you have to take if you ever steal again. I warn you, it's nasty medicine and you won't like it. Nevertheless, it will help you break the habit of stealing if you really want to. And, of course, if you don't want to, then that's your business, and I'll be seeing you up at the state penitentiary."

The boy said he really wanted to break his stealing habit and promised to have one of the men from church call and pick up the sealed envelope. I later learned that the envelope never had to be opened. This boy made good. But if by some chance the boy had slipped and the envelope had been opened he would have received this dose of medicine: "Take it back!" Any person who has ever stolen anything knows that there is no more bitter pill than "taking the stuff back."

And the psychologist knew that in the majority of cases when a boy forces himself to take stolen loot back to the owner and apologizes for his mistake it is not likely that a similar mistake will occur again.

But this was not the only advice the psychologist had for the boy. He knew this boy had never had much money, and part of his temptation was the fact that he wanted things "like the other guys." So the psychologist made arrangements to help him get a job. It wasn't fancy job, but it kept the boy busy and gave him some spending money. Later the boy obtained a better job on his own initiative. The psychologist told the boy to start doing "lots of things." He said: "It's hard for a boy to get too busy."

This last remark may cause some parents to wonder. Sometimes young people seem to be on such a merry-go-round that parents fear there will be an atomic explosion. However, studies show that young people who are very busy usually (there are exceptions, of course)—

It is important to govern activity so that it does not interfere with normal health and does not seriously interfere with studies. But both of these things being equal, a good, vigorous program of multiple activities is good for youth.

This is particularly applicable where a person has "to think up things to do" in order to occupy his time and often finds his imagination suggesting activities which spell trouble. One boy I know is a student body president, plays M-Men basketball, is an amateur radio operator, builds model airplanes, teaches a class in Sunday School, is a varsity debater, has a lead part in the school opera and maintains a scholarship average up around the top of his class. I haven't heard of him getting into any trouble. He's too busy.

That is why it is good advice for a person who is trying to break some bad habits to "get busy." A constructive life precludes a person from living a destructive life. As one man said: "Get so busy doing good things that you break down your bad habits by sheer neglect."

Those who have overcome their habit of "sneaky-snitching" say that it became easier when they found new interests and took on a heavy schedule of activities.

In conclusion let us remind ourselves that honesty builds happiness. It is a wonderful feeling to know that you are right with the world, that you haven't cheated anybody or taken property that didn't belong to you. It is not possible to be happy any other way. The Lord knew this. That is why he included among his commandments this important declaration: "Thou shalt not steal!"

Footnotes

1955 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] God Himself First and worst of all false witness is the lie. Here a person stoops to deliberate falsification for the purpose of doing injury. Here motive or intent is clear. Here clearly we seem to yield to Satan's promptings. For Self-Protection—Having been caught under unfortunate circumstances, they manufacture ways of escape. The difficulty with lying is that all too often it but complicates the attempt to escape.
