No specific author, Ten Commandments Today (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955)

Chapter X

The Ninth Commandment

By ELDER ADAM S. BENNION, of the Council of the Twelve

Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

In the study of this great moral code, the Ten Commandments, it has always helped me in my attempt to remember them in their order to list them under two basic divisions and then consider them as being set down in the order of their primacy.

The first four center in God:

The last five have to do with our relationships with our fellow men, again in the order of their seriousness:

with the fifth as the great bridge—parenthood—as between God and man.

Murder, adultery, and stealing, dealing respectively with life, virtue, and property, are generally considered more serious offenses before the law than the bearing of false witness. And yet, what the latter may lack in severity, it more than makes up for in prevalence. As a matter of fact, most of the readers of these lessons will likely shun—as they would a plague—the first three of these major social offenses; but consciously or unconsciously, we may all at times be tempted into the carelessness of rumor and other forms of bearing false witness. Many of us have seen a member of a social group—out of envy, or jealousy, or pique—resort to unfortunate practices toward a popular or successful presumed rival.

Early in the history of the law, courts recognized the damage that could be done by false witnesses and took steps to bar them from good court procedure. That is why today so much of would-be testimony is thrown out as mere hearsay. It is unfortunate that it cannot be thrown out of conversation.

At the outset, let us remind ourselves that all mankind are our neighbors. For evidence of that fact, consider the answer given by the Savior of the world when he was asked: "Who is my neighbour?"

But he, willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my neighbour?

And Jesus answering said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead.

And by chance there came down a certain priest that way: and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.

And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side.

But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he had compassion on him.

And went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.

And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee.

Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves?

And he said, He that shewed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise. (Luke 10:29-37.)

It is true that there is a wide range of coverage in the matter of bearing false witness. It may reach all the way from idle gossip of the street corner or club variety to the vicious deeply-laid plots of villainy such as that featured by Iago in Shakespeare's Othello.

To bear false witness is to testify to or to pass along reports, insinuations, speculations, or rumors as if they were true, to the hurt of a fellow human being. Sometimes the practice stems from a lack of correct information—sometimes from lack of understanding—sometimes from misunderstandings—sometimes from a vicious disposition to distort and misrepresent.

Whereas murder involves the taking of human life, bearing false witness centers in the destruction of character or its defamation. It reaches to the ruin of reputation. The seriousness of this offense is reflected in Shakespeare's famous lines—lines which ought to be universally memorized: Good name in man and woman, dear my lord, Is the immediate jewel of their souls. Who steals my purse steals trash; 'tis something, nothing; 'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands; But he that filches from me my good name Robs me of that which not enriches him, And makes me poor indeed.

(Shakespeare, Othello)

Bearing false witness once led to Calvary. How many similar hills have had to be climbed!

One wonders why people would want to stoop to such a low form of intellectual pastime.

The Ninth Commandment

By ELDER ADAM S. BENNION of the Council of the Twelve

Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

PART TWO

In the last chapter we discussed the types of false witness. In this one we shall discuss the reasons for bearing false witness.

As far as I have been able to analyze, people bear false witness for the following reasons:

The plain truth is that there is really no escape from reality. To deal in facts is always our safest course. And if we are not sure of the facts, then we ought to refrain from mere speculative inference or hearsay. Life imposes upon us the responsibility of knowing or finding out or keeping still. Certainly, there are times when Silence is Golden.

How can there ever be any real soul satisfaction in idly peddling loose talk and speculative rumor? How that practice is rebuked in our hymn, "Nay, Speak No Ill": Nay, speak no ill; a kindly word Can never leave a sting behind; And, oh, to breathe each tale we've heard Is far beneath a noble mind. Full oft a better seed is sown By choosing thus the kinder plan. For, if but little good is known, Still let us speak the best we can. Give me the heart that fain would hide, Would fain another's faults efface. How can it please the human pride To prove humanity but base? No, let us reach a higher mood, A nobler estimate of man; Be earnest in the search for good And speak of all the best we can. Then speak no ill, but lenient be To other's failings as your own. If you're the first a fault to see, Be not the first to make it known, For life is but a passing day; No lip may tell how brief its span; Then, O the little time we stay, Let's speak of all the best we can.

One of the most regrettable and revolting illustrations of bearing false witness has occurred in Salt Lake City during the past decade. You no doubt read of the tragedy involving a maid working in one of Salt Lake's finest homes. The case was a baffling one—weeks on end—no clue whatsoever. Then speculation became rife, and the wheels of rumor began to turn. Even the good people for whom the maid worked—and who had done so much for her because of their love and affection for her—came under the attack of the rumor mongers. Hundreds of letters and phone calls reached the police insisting upon rumor-inspired conclusions.

I have been close enough to this family to observe the heartache—the bruised spirit—the emotional upset of perfectly innocent and perfectly wonderful people. Fortunately, for them, a suspect was discovered, and his admission has convicted him in the courts of the state.

It is sad to relate that none of the glib talebearers has called the police to retract the damaging suspicion. Rumor scatters the feathers of scandal from the housetop, but never can gather them up—seems never to care to try. How many idle conversations should now cause a cringe of regret to those who never took the trouble to check the facts.

Surely we should constantly remind ourselves of that eternal truth:

"Thou shalt not bear false witness."

Scriptural References

For reinforcement, it is interesting to turn to these scriptures:

"Lying lips are abomination to the Lord: but they that deal truly are his delight." (Proverbs 12:22.)

"A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaketh lies shall not escape." (Proverbs 19:5.)

"A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaketh lies shall perish." (Proverbs 19:9.)

"Thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful man." (Psalm 5:6.)

"He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house: he that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight." (Psalm 101:7.)

"Thou shalt not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness." (Exodus 23:1.)

"If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against him that which is wrong;

"Then both the men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand before the Lord, before the priests and the judges, which shall be in those days;

"And the judges shall make diligent inquisition: and, behold, if the witness be a false witness, and hath testified falsely against his brother;

"Then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother: so shalt thou put the evil away from among you." (Deut. 19:16-19.)

"Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it." (John 8:44.)

"But Peter said, Ananias, why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?" (Acts 5:3.)

"Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbour: for we are members one of another." (Eph. 4:25.)

"Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his deeds." (Colossians 3:9.)

"Yea, he stirreth up their hearts to anger against this work.

"Yea, he saith unto them: Deceive and lie in wait to catch, that ye may destroy; behold, this is no harm. And thus he flattereth them, and telleth them that it is no sin to lie that they may catch a man in a lie, that they may destroy him." (D. & C. 10:24-25.)

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, wo be unto him that lieth to deceive because he supposeth that another lieth to deceive, for such are not exempt from the justice of God." (D. & C. 10:28.)

"And again, I say, thou shalt not kill; but he that killeth shall die.

"Thou shalt not steal; and he that stealeth and will not repent shall be cast out." (D. & C. 42:19-21.)

"And it shall come to pass, that if any persons among you shall kill they shall be delivered up and dealt with according to the laws of the land; for remember that he hath no forgiveness; and it shall be proved according to the laws of the land." (D. & C. 42:79.)

"And if he or she shall lie, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of the land." (D. & C. 42:86.)

"For there are many yet on the earth among all sects, parties, and denominations, who are blinded by the subtle craftiness of men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, and who are only kept from the truth because they know not where to find it." (D. & C. 123:12.)

By way of contrast, turn to the words of the Master:

". . . To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth." Should You Feel Inclined to Censure Should you feel inclined to censure Faults you may in others view, Ask your own heart, ere you venture, If that has not failings too. Let not friendly vows be broken; Rather strive a friend to gain; Many a word in anger spoken Finds its passage home again. Do not, then, in idle pleasure, Trifle with a brother's fame; Guard it as a valued treasure, Sacred as your own good name. Do not form opinions blindly. Hastiness to trouble tends; Those of whom we thought unkindly, Oft become our warmest friends.

1955 Deseret Book Co.
