No specific author, Ten Commandments Today (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1955)

Chapter XI

The Tenth Commandment

By ELDER RICHARD L. EVANS of the Council of the Twelve

Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's. (Exodus 20:17.)

This is the last of the Ten Commandments, and if it were not so involved with all the others, some might suppose it to be one of the least. But all the commandments are so intertwined that none can be broken without weakening all the others. To illustrate (and to remind ourselves of the other nine):

He who covets the mere material "things" of life may have "other" gods before him," and may "bow down before them," in thought and in spirit, if not in physical fact.

He who covets may become coarse and careless in other things also, such as taking "the name of the Lord God in vain."

He who covets may desecrate the Sabbath day to get gain.

He who covets may fail to sustain his father and his mother in their need.

Some who have coveted have killed to get gain.

Many who have coveted a "neighbour's wife" have committed the grievous sin of adultery.

He who covets is more likely to steal (or to swindle or embezzle or engage in sharp practices).

He who covets may bear false witness to get gain.

And so again: The tenth commandment is inseparably integrated with all the others, and coveting could lead to infraction of all the others—for there is a wholeness in life in which each part complements the other. And there is a wholeness and harmony in the word of God, and it all comes from the same source. And whenever we ignore any divine counsel or commandment, we can be sure that we weaken ourselves and increase our susceptibility to other sins.

The dictionary defines covetousness as "cupidity . . ."

"To long inordinately for something that is another's . . ."

"To desire sensuously . . ."

"To have or indulge in inordinate desire . . ."

Our Savior confirmed the Old Testament commandment against coveting with these words:

"And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth." (Luke 12:15.)

* * * *

"And the Pharisees also, who were covetous, heard all these things: and they derided him." (Ibid., 16:14.)

Covetousness is akin to greed and to selfishness. It has in it also the elements of envy and jealousy, and the miserliness of always wanting more and more. Coveting leads to acquisition by unethical practices, by stealth, by embezzlement, by the loopholes of law, and by violence—such as Micah suggests:

"And they covet fields, and take them by violence; and houses, and take them away: so they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage." (Micah 2:2.)

And from an Arab proverb comes this quote on the evils of coveting:

"Covetousness has for its mother unlawful desire, for its daughter injustice, and for its friend violence."

The commandment against covetousness does not mean that we should not have a wholesome discontent or a wholesome desire to improve ourselves or our situation. It does not mean that we should not have an honest ambition to have more of the better things of life. It does not mean that we may not admire what our neighbor has, and seek by our own industry to earn things of like worth. The earth holds plenty for all—and the urge to acquire for ourselves such good things as other men have is a productive quality of character—provided that we acquire them by honest effort, by lawful means, and by keeping life well-balanced. The danger comes when mere "things" begin to matter too much.

"Covetousness has such a blinding power," wrote Thomas Wilson in the eighteenth century, "that all the arguments of the world would not convince a man that he is covetous." And so he may slip into a false sense of values.

The question of covetousness and a false sense of values was thus commented on in a Tabernacle Choir broadcast some time ago:

"Perhaps all of us pursue some things which, after we acquire them, seem somewhat shallow or shoddy or at least unessential. And then we wonder why we wished for them so much and worked for them so hard, and passed by more worth-while things we might have had. There is a parable by John Ruskin that has much to suggest concerning this subject. He said it was a dream, but we rather surmise it was a dream he deliberately dreamed for the purpose of putting over a point: 'I dreamed,' he said, 'that I was at a child's . . . party, in which every means of entertainment had been provided . . . by a wise and kind host. . . . The children had been set free in the rooms and gardens, with no care whatever but how to pass their afternoon rejoicingly. . . . There was music . . . all manner of amusing books . . . a workshop . . . a table loaded with everything nice to eat . . . and whatever a child could fancy . . . but in the midst of all this it struck two or three of the more 'practical' children that they would like some of the brass-headed nails that studded the chairs, and so they set to work to pull them out. In a little while all the children, nearly, were spraining their fingers in pulling out brass-headed nails. With all that they could pull out they were not satisfied; and then everybody wanted some of somebody else's. And at last the really 'practical' and 'sensible' ones declared that nothing was of any real consequence that afternoon except to get plenty of brass-headed nails. . . . And at last they began to fight for nail heads, even though they knew they would not be allowed to carry so much as one brass knob away with them. But no! it was, 'Who has the most nails? . . . I must have as many as you before I leave the house or I cannot possibly go home in peace.' At last they made so much noise that I awoke, and thought to myself, 'What a false dream that is of children. . . . Children never do such foolish things. Only men do." And so ended Ruskin's dream of the children and the little brass nails. One of the greatest gifts of God is a sound sense of values. It is a gift of inestimable worth, for those who have a limited time to live—which, so far as the limits of this life are concerned, includes all of us. And yet, even as the foolish children referred to, it would seem that much too much of our time may be taken in struggling for little brass nails, which we cannot take home with us at the end of the day." [^1]

Coveting is a slow, self-produced poison, that does not always outwardly show itself. But as surely as a person permits this poison to take hold of him, it will corrode him—inside himself—and shrivel his soul.

It all adds up to this: None of the commandments stands alone. The breaking of any one of them weakens the will to keep all the others: And the commandments against coveting cannot be lightly looked upon—nor can any other commandment.

The Tenth Commandment

By ELDER RICHARD L. EVANS of the Council of the Twelve

Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's. (Exodus 20:17.)

PART TWO

We read, not in the Old, but in the New Testament, that

. . . the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. (I Timothy 6:10.)

Not in money alone, not in possessions alone, but in the unrighteous love of them lies the danger of losing sight of the things that matter most.

Covetousness can lead to many serious consequences:

"Keeping up with the Joneses" is often a kind of covetousness (with a little jealousy and envy added). It is one reason why we may sometimes feel that we must have things we can't afford, that we don't actually need: the latest car, the latest appliances, the latest fashions. For such unessential things people often place themselves in the bondage of debt. And with debt, men work and worry and wear themselves away. With debt, men sometimes embezzle and gamble and cut corners and so do questionable things—all for acquiring or keeping that which is not needed for life or for health or for happiness, but which is wanted simply because of some false emphasis, some false set of values.

A boy may covet a sleek and colorful car, and the desire to possess it may lead him to steal it and find himself at the beginning of a tragic career of crime.

The quality of covetousness may make a man forget that the Lord God has given him all he has.

Covetousness can keep a person from paying an honest tithing. Often when a man makes a little money, he has the faith to pay his tithing or his tenth. But as he makes more and more, and has more and more, it is a common occurrence that he somehow finds it harder to pay tithing. Some have found it harder to pay a thousand dollars tithing with nine thousand dollars left than to pay one dollar tithing with only nine dollars left.

President Heber J. Grant frequently told a story from his experience on this subject:

I know people of my own personal acquaintance that were honest, conscientious tithepayers when they were making three thousand, four thousand, five thousand, six thousand dollars a year. But when, in the providences of the Lord, they made ten thousand or twenty thousand, they never grew an inch above that $600.00 a year tithing. They were just like grandfather's clock, stopped, never to go again.

What was the matter?

Prosperity distorted their vision. They could see what they were giving the Lord, but not what the Lord had given them.

I know one man who paid $600.00 a year tithing. Being in the banking business and having available financial statements of many people, I knew that he had made a little more than $45,000 that year, instead of the $6,000.00 which his tithing indicated. If he made $45,000.00 and paid $4,500.00 tithing, what would he have left? Over $40,500.00. If he had the right vision his heart should almost have burst with gratitude to God for the difference, rather than dwell upon the amount of tithing to be paid. When he paid the $600.00 originally, what did he have left? $5,400.00. The more he made, the easier it should have been to pay his tithing. But no, he had set his heart on accumulating money. (Gospel Standards, p. 64.)

One great trouble with tithing is that men, because of their natural selfishness, become blinded and they cannot see straight. They cannot calculate properly. If we can only have the proper vision, the more we make the easier it is to pay our tithing, because of the greater amount that is left.

Paying tithing is just one of many things that covetousness makes difficult. Covetousness makes honesty and generosity more difficult in all the dealings of every day.

In speaking to some seminary graduates, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., made, in his own distinctive way, this searching and significant statement:

I do not wish to speak irreverently, but I think of Satan as feeling that perhaps God was a little old-fashioned. . . .

Think of it a moment—and its implications.

Some people have come to think that the Ten Commandments are very old-fashioned. Some people have come to think that many timeless truths and ageless virtues and eternal principles are very old fashioned. But the need for keeping the Ten Commandments is as great or greater now than ever before—including the commandment that says, "Thou shalt not covet."

He who reaches unrighteously for what is not his, blights all he touches—including his own peace and his own soul. "Woe to him that increaseth that which is not his! . . ." (Habakkuk 2:6.)

* * * *

May we conclude this re-consideration of the Ten Commandments with a radio comment presented on a Tabernacle Choir broadcast. It was titled Swiftly, Silently, Certainly:

"Sometimes we think of the past as a thing quite apart from the present. To say that something happened a century ago may seem like dimly long ago. But if we have lived through half a century, or a quarter, or even a sixth of a century, we know how quickly it has come and gone. If we have lived through half a century, we know that two times our lifetime isn't long. Youth moves quickly to maturity. Families that once were young are then grown, and then gone. Children have their children, and parents become grandparents, as the generations move, swiftly, silently, certainly. But people haven't changed much, and principles haven't changed at all even though much has happened, morally and materially. No great truths have changed; no great principles have passed; no eternal plans or purposes have been abandoned. And men and women inside themselves are not so different from what they were. We might use a little different language; we might travel faster and farther; we might speak to more men; we might have much more of many things—and much less of others. But the timeless virtues haven't changed—nor the need for them. Honor and honesty, truth and chastity are still not basically different from what they were—nor the need for them. Still there are commandments to keep and standards that we pay a price for departing from. Sin still leads to the same inner unrest. The ageless virtues, with willing work, are still the only way to prosperity and peace. No, a century isn't so long ago, nor, in some ways is twenty centuries. The great eternal truths that the Savior uttered are ever present, as are those which were given of God on Sinai some fifteen centuries sooner. And all the evils that ever were are still what they were, no matter what we may have come to call them. All the virtue, the truth, the goodness that ever was is still what it is and ever was, no matter what we may have come to call it. The words may change, the styles may change, the manmade manner of life may change, the manner of life may change, but the stars are still in their course, the Creator is still in command and the eternal truths are still eternal in the ever unfolding plans and purposes of him in whose hands we are and in whom our faith is fixed." [^2]

Footnotes

1955 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] "The Spoken Word," heard over Radio Station KSL and the nation-wide Columbia Broadcasting System, from the Tabernacle, Temple Square, Salt Lake City, Sunday, March 8, 1953, 11:00 to 11:30 a.m., Eastern Time. Copyright, 1953.
[^2] "The Spoken Word," heard over Radio Station KSL and the nationwide Columbia Broadcasting System, from the Tabernacle, Temple Square, Salt Lake City, Sunday, January 10, 1954, 11:00 to 11:30 a. m., Eastern Time. Copyright, 1954.
