Oscar W. McConkie, Aaronic Priesthood ( 1977)

CHAPTER ONE

Priesthood and the Power of Righteousness

God has all power. There is no power that he does not possess. The risen Lord bore this testimony of his own omnipotence: "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth." (Matthew 28:18.)

In this dispensation, the word of God has been heard through the voice of the Prophet Joseph Smith, saying, "Behold, and hearken unto the voice of him who has all power. . . ." (D&C 61:1.) In the Book of Mormon the prophet Alma says that "we must come forth . . . and acknowledge . . . that he has all power." (Alma 12:15.) No truth about God is more fully witnessed in the holy scriptures than this. (See, for example, D&C 19:3, 4, 20; 20:24; 61:1; 93:17; 1 Nephi 9:6; Mormon 5:23; Ether 3:4.) John the Revelator seemed to hear the very elements proclaim, "Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth." (Revelation 19:6.) The word omnipotent, defined as having unlimited power and authority, is nearly always used as an adjective qualifying the noun God. (Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith, pp. 9, 43-45, 50-51.)

One of the most gracious and loving doctrines taught by Jesus was the concept that man may share his power and authority. The Lord tells us that he will delegate this power and authority to man on earth to act in all things for the salvation of men. Indeed, Jesus specifically says he will empower those who believe on him to do the works that he did during his earthly ministry:

He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto my Father.

And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.

If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. (John 14:9, 12-14.)

Part of the grace of God is that he will empower us to do his works. We can share his power and authority.

The apostle Paul cautions, "And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God. . . ." (Hebrews 5:4.) That is, God will call and delegate his power to whom he will. Man cannot conjure up the power himself nor can he give it to himself. It is a gift of God. The Lord made this clear to those to whom he gave his power and authority in the meridian of time when he said: "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, . . . that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you." (John 15:16.) The Lord calls; man responds and is the recipient of God's goodness.

Those who attempt to follow Jesus are indebted to the senior apostle of his day, Peter, for giving a name to the power and authority of God as delegated to man. He called the power and authority of God as given to man "priesthood" or "holy priesthood." (1 Peter 2:5, 9.) Jesus said that he ordained Peter and his associates. (John 15:16.) Peter said that such call and ordination made of them a "priesthood, . . . the people of God." (1 Peter 2:9-10.) The Lord ordains and gives his power for the use of man.

In an ancient instruction on priesthood, we read, "And it was delivered unto men by the calling of his own voice, according to his own will, unto as many as believed on his name." (Inspired Version, Genesis 14:28-29.)

The apostle Paul, in his enlightening epistle to the Hebrew saints, discusses priesthood in some detail, referring to those called to the priesthood as "holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling." (Hebrews 3:1.) He says that those called to this holy order are properly called sons of God, and that men called to the priesthood are "ordained . . . in things pertaining to God." (Hebrews 5:1.) But most importantly, Paul teaches us that even Jesus Christ was called to hold the holy priesthood: ". . . consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus. . . ." (Hebrews 3:1.) Jesus was "called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec." (Hebrews 5:10.)

As in all matters pertaining to salvation, Jesus was a perfect example. He is the sole perfect exemplar, the prototype of our salvation. As he was baptized, so must we be baptized. (John 3:5; 2 Nephi 31:12-21.) As he received the holy priesthood to merit the fulness of salvation, so must those who would be joint heirs with him also receive the holy priesthood. (D&C 107:5, 8, 18-19.) In the perfect pattern of life and salvation, "The Lord sware and will not repent, Thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchisedec." (Hebrews 7:21.) Priesthood, the power and authority of God, is intended for man's enjoyment; indeed, it is necessary for man to have it to be saved.

When Jesus promised men that they might do the works that he did, it was with two conditions: (1) they must keep his commandments—"If he do whatsoever I command you" (John 15:14), and (2) they must ask in the Lord's name—"Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do" (John 14:13). In early days the name of God's priesthood was "the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God." (D&C 107:3.) Thus, it is by the proper use of his priesthood that one may act in his name.

As there is only one God and thus only one power of God, it must follow that there is only one priesthood. It is "the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God." (D&C 107:3.) We are taught that "out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood." (D&C 107:4.) Thus, in the epistle to the Hebrews we read repeatedly of the order known as the Melchizedek Priesthood. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "all Priesthood is Melchizedek, but there are different portions or degrees of it." (Joseph Fielding Smith, comp., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976], p. 180.) He further said: "Its institution was prior to 'the foundation of this earth, or the morning stars sang together, or the Sons of God shouted for joy,' and is the highest and holiest Priesthood, and is after the order of the Son of God, and all other Priesthoods are only parts, ramifications, powers and blessings belonging to the same, and are held, controlled, and directed by it." (Ibid., p. 167.)

Priesthood is the eternal power and authority of God by which all things were created and are now controlled. As pertaining to our existence and experience, it is the power and authority of God delegated to man on earth to act in all matters pertaining to the salvation of man on the earth. Everything in the heavens and the earth is subject to the power and authority of the priesthood.

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints there are two great orders of the priesthood: the Melchizedek Priesthood and the Aaronic Priesthood. The Aaronic Priesthood is an appendage to the Melchizedek Priesthood. That is, the Melchizedek Priesthood includes all powers and authorities exercised in the Aaronic order. When it is understood that one is talking of orders within God's priesthood, it is generally accepted usage to say that there are two priesthoods in the Church. Hence, the revealed statement: "There are, in the church, two priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood." (D&C 107:1.) The Prophet Joseph Smith explains that the "Melchizedek Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood. . . ." (Teachings, p. 166.)

In our day we are indebted to the Prophet Joseph Smith for much of our understanding about the priesthood and its reality in our lives. "The Priesthood is an everlasting principle," he said, "and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years." (Ibid., pp. 157-58, 323.) Adam and others had the priesthood conferred upon them "in the Creation, before the world was formed." (Ibid., p. 157.) Alma says that those "ordained unto the high priesthood of the holy order of God" were "called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God" to enjoy the blessings and powers of the priesthood. (Alma 13:7, 3.)

Righteousness and the Priesthood

Righteousness results from obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. The Lord said to those whom he had called to his priesthood," . . . if ye do whatsoever I command you . . . whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you." (John 15:14, 16.)

No person is wholly righteous. However, by walking in the light of the gospel and obeying the celestial law to the extent of one's ability, one may attain a high degree of righteousness. In the beatitudes Jesus said: "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled." (Matthew 5:6.)

God is the very embodiment of righteousness. "Righteousness" is one of his names. Christ is sometimes called Son of Righteousness. (2 Nephi 26:9; 3 Nephi 25:2; Ether 9:22.) The state of righteousness is a state of godliness.

There is an inseparable blessing between righteousness and the powers and blessings of the priesthood.

Two of the great functions of the priesthood are to learn and to teach of God and his ways. With direct reference to priesthood offices the Lord says, "I am your lawgiver. . . . I say unto you, teach one another according to the office wherewith I have appointed you." (D&C 38:22-23.) Priesthood quorums and functions provide the means of instruction and teaching one another. The priesthood further "holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. . . . And without . . . the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh." (D&C 84:19-21.)

". . . let every man esteem his brother as himself." (D&C 38:24.) This is an important part of priesthood function. We are brethren, children of the same Father, members "of the household of God." (Ephesians 2:19.) Priesthood concept and practice should develop brotherly love.

From the same scriptural text we read," . . . practice virtue and holiness before me." (D&C 38:24.) Priesthood is more than precept; it is also example. Teaching, learning, and loving are not enough. All of this must be translated into action. This, too, is priesthood function. Priesthood is given to us to the end that we shall act out God's purposes.

To further these ends, we are organized into units, or quorums, so we can act in concert, be more effective, and accomplish more righteousness.

To further these ends, we are organized into units, or quorums, so we can act in concert, be more effective, and accomplish more righteousness.

The practice of holiness and power is the practice of priesthood. God's initial priesthood fiat still holds forth:

That every one being ordained after this order and calling should have power, by faith, to break mountains, to divide the seas, to dry up waters, to turn them out of their course;

To put at defiance the armies of nations, to divide the earth, to break every hand, to stand in the presence of God; to do all things according to his will, according to his command, subdue principalities and powers; and this by the will of the Son of God which was from before the foundation of the world. (Inspired Version, Genesis 14:30-31.)

This is what Jesus was talking about when he said to those whom he had called to priesthood callings, "The works that I do shall ye do also; and greater works than these shall ye do . . . in my name." (John 14:12-13.)

In 1839 the Prophet Joseph Smith expressed in prayer his soul-felt yearnings: "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place? How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea, thy pure eye, behold from the external heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants. . . . Remember thy suffering saints, O our God. . . ." The answer from the Lord was sure: "My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment." (D&C 121:1, 2, 6, 7.) Then came one of the most sublime revelations on priesthood ever recorded:

How long can rolling waters remain impure? What power shall stay the heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latterday Saints.

Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen?

Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson—

That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness.

That they might be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man.

Behold, ere he is aware, he is left unto himself, to kick against the pricks, to persecute the saints, and to fight against God.

We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion.

Hence many are called, but few are chosen.

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by longsuffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;

By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—

Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;

That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death.

Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever. (D&C 121:33-46.)

No man fully understands priesthood. It is eternal, "having neither beginning of days, nor end of life." (Hebrews 7:3.) Its power is without bounds. (Matthew 28:18.) Finite mind cannot comprehend infinite and eternal priesthood. God, in his goodness, magnifies man. He gives him his priesthood, and, as we shall see, through it he makes available to man "all that my Father hath." (D&C 84:38.)

Examples of Men Doing God's Work

Through priestly power, the works that the Lord performed during his earthly ministry were continued by his chosen and ordained servants. Peter was chief among them. After Jesus' ascension into heaven, Peter continued his good works in Jesus' name.

Now Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour.

And a certain man lame from his mother's womb was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into the temple;

Who seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple asked an alms.

And Peter, fastening his eyes upon him with John, said, Look on us.

And he gave heed unto them, expecting to receive something of them.

Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have give I thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk.

And he took him by the right hand, and lifted him up: and immediately his feet and ancle bones received strength.

And he leaping up stood, and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God. (Acts 3:1-8.)

This was not the fervent prayer of a righteous man. It was a priesthood directive: "Rise up and walk." It was a command in the name of the Lord. Jesus had promised, "The works that I do shall he do also . . . in my name." (John 14:12-13.) The Lord's power and authority remained on the earth.

As the Lord's priesthood continues in our day, so his work continues in our day. A member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in the restored church was given first-person testimony of the continuation of the Lord's work today. Elder Matthew Cowley said the following in an address at Brigham Young University on February 18, 1953:

I've told the story about the little baby nine months old who was born blind. The father came up with him one Sunday and said, "Brother Cowley, our baby hasn't been blessed yet; we'd like you to bless him."

I said, "Why have you waited so long?"

"Oh, we just didn't get around to it."

Now, that's the native way; I like that. Just don't get around to doing things! Why not live and enjoy it? I said, "All right, what's the name?" So he told me the name, and I was just going to start when he said, "By the way, give him his vision when you give him a name. He was born blind." Well, it shocked me, but then I said to myself, why not? Christ told his disciples when he left them they could work miracles. And I had faith in that father's faith. After I gave that child its name, I finally got around to giving it its vision. That boy's about twelve years old now. The last time I was back there I was afraid to inquire about him. I was sure he had gone blind again. That's the way my faith works sometimes. So I asked the branch president about him. And he said, "Brother Cowley, the worst thing you ever did was to bless that child to receive his vision. He's the meanest kid in the neighborhood, always getting into mischief." Boy, I was thrilled about that kid getting into mischief! . . .

I was called to a home in a little village in New Zealand one day. There the Relief Society sisters were preparing the body of one of our Saints. They had placed his body in front of the Big House, as they called it, the house where the people came to wail and weep and mourn over the dead, when in rushed the dead man's brother.

He said, "Administer to him."

And the young natives said, "Why, you shouldn't do that; he's dead."

"You do it!"

This same old man that I had with me when his niece was so ill was there. The younger native got down on his knees, and he anointed the dead man. Then this great old sage got down and blessed him and commanded him to rise. You should have seen the Relief Society sisters scatter. And he sat up, and he said, "Send for the elders; I don't feel very well." . . . we told him he had just been administered to, and he said: "Oh, that was it." He said, "I was dead. I could feel life coming back into me just like a blanket unrolling." Now, he outlived the brother that came in and told us to administer to him. (Matthew Cowley Speaks [Deseret Book Co., 1954], pp. 247-49.)

The apostle Paul catalogued some of the good works performed through faith by ancient priesthood bearers. In his monumental epistle on priesthood to the Hebrew saints, in the eleventh chapter of Hebrews, this most articulate of New Testament writers wrote of his Old Testament brethren who "wrought righteousness" and "blessed . . . concerning things to come" and "obtained promises" by exercising God's own power. He started his recounting with the first man's son, saying that through faith, "Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice." Then he cited instance after instance that appeared in the Old Testament as simple historical narratives and declared that they were performed with the power of the Son of God. He said that Enoch was translated by this power. Noah acted through it. Abraham sought the heavenly city (the translated city of Enoch) through it. Sarah conceived a child "because she judged him faithful who had promised" in priesthood blessing. Isaac blessed Jacob, and Jacob blessed his sons through this agency. Moses, "esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt," acted in His power and authority in keeping the priesthood ordinances, "the passover, and the sprinkling of blood," and by this power "passed through the Red sea as by dry land." It was through faithful use of his power that "the walls of Jericho fell down." Paul says, "Time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets: Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, Quenched the violence of fire." (This is a reference to Melchizedek himself, who, as a child, feared God, stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the violence of fire, according to the Inspired Version, Hebrews 11.)

It was never intended that God share his priestly power with only an elite few. One of the purposes of the scriptures is to encourage us all to be worthy so we may enjoy this sharing. Moses gave voice to the yearnings of all who enjoy this power in his prayer: "Enviest thou for my sake? would God that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!" (Numbers 11:29.)

Through scriptural examples and life experiences, the Latter-day Saints are encompassed about, like Paul, with a cloud of witnesses. Most of us have experienced the beauty of God's sharing his power with us. This is joy! This is rapture! Sometimes there is drama. In terms of man's wisdom and puny abilities it is always miraculous.

May I add my personal witness by way of testimony. I have seen the terminally sick made well by the power of God, exercised by his legal administrators. I recall, almost by random selection, the following illustration of our Lord's goodness in fulfilling his promise that "he that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also. . . . And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do." (John 14:12-13.) Late one evening, the phone rang in the mission home. One of our district leaders was phoning to tell me how sick an elder in his district was. I knew the missionary had a history of muscle spasms that resulted in uncontrollable hiccups. When this had happened before, the doctor had prescribed muscle relaxants, and the spasms had stopped. He also said that if the medication did not stop the spasms, there was nothing medical science could do. That night the medicine had no effect, and the muscle spasms continued for hour after hour, wracking the young elder's stomach and chest with pain. He had not been able to eat, drink, or sleep for nearly twenty-four hours.

I told the district leader to bring the missionary to the home. When they arrived I turned to the district leader and said, "You are a priesthood bearer. Anoint him." He anointed the elder with consecrated oil, and I was voice in sealing the anointing. There was sweet, peaceful assurance. God's power was there, and the still small voice whispered instructions. As the words were spoken, directing the young man to breathe normally, the spasms stopped. The Lord healed him as our hands were on his head. I know that God manifests his power in what is done righteously and properly in his name.

The Church is administered constantly by and through the delegated power and authority of God. I call it operational inspiration. While I was a presiding officer over a small portion of Church affairs, we held a press conference for the president of the Church at the Arizona Temple visitors center. The first question was asked by a sharp-minded young reporter: "Mr. Kimball, you were introduced as the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and also as a prophet. My question is: Does God speak to you? And if so, how?" President Spencer W. Kimball, senior apostle on the earth, responded: "Yes. God speaks to his prophets today, just as he spoke to his prophets yesterday and just as he will speak to them tomorrow. You will remember that Amos wrote, 'Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets.' (Amos 3:7.) Sometimes he speaks with an audible voice. Sometimes he sends his angels, as he did to Joseph, the stepfather of Jesus. Usually it is by the still small voice of God to the spirit within. Yes. Have I answered your question, young man?"

Most of the time the use of God's power and authority is not attended by high drama, important as the work is. The Lord's work is to save people. When a priest in the Aaronic Priesthood performs the ordinance of baptism by immersion in water, he is doing the work of the Lord. It is written: "When therefore the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John . . . though he himself baptized not so many as his disciples." (Inspired Version, John 4:1, 3.) As Jesus baptized, so may we baptize in his name. As we follow his example, we do his works. The world needs righteous models. The sons of God, priesthood bearers, are to be lights upon a hill. "As with the people, so with the priest" (Isaiah 24:2) and "like people, like priest" (Hosea 4:9).

God cannot fail. All of his work will succeed. Righteousness will prevail. It follows that all who are engaged in righteous endeavors will ultimately succeed. In his statement addressed to those "who are the called according to his purpose," which includes priesthood bearers, the apostle Paul said, "And we know that all things work together for the good to them that love God." (Romans 8:28.)
