Oscar W. McConkie, Aaronic Priesthood ( 1977)

CHAPTER TWO

The Aaronic Priesthood

Adam was the first man on the earth. He was the first person to whom God gave his priesthood. (Moses 6:67-68.) This priesthood continued with his worthy descendants until the day of Moses. (D&C 84:5-16; 107:41-53.) Through Moses, the Lord attempted to set up the house of Israel as a kingdom of priests of the holy order, with each man and his family enjoying the full blessings of the patriarchal order and priesthood. (Exodus 19:5-6; Deuteronomy 26:18.) But Israel rebelled and rejected the higher law, and the Lord took Moses and the fulness of the priesthood from them. (Inspired Version, Exodus 34:1-2; D&C 84:17-25.) For the most part, the scriptures are accounts of the Lord's dealings with his servants, the priesthood bearers.

One of the most significant misconceptions in worldly scholarship has to do with the notion of the developing concept of God in the history of mankind. It is widely believed that as civilizations developed, so also man's idea about God developed, and man's understanding about God is now superior to his understanding about God in ancient times. This is interesting sociological theory. It is also false. According to this theory, the earliest religion, which included the worship of many gods, came into being as part of the evolutionary development of man. The concept of one supreme Deity was gradually accepted by the Hebrew peoples according to this theory. This concept simply is not true. It is not only not in accord with all revealed scripture, but it is also directly contrary to the scriptural presentation of the history of God's dealings with mankind.

Many of the writings of inspired men from the old world have been handed down from age to age and preserved for us in the Bible. As these writings were originally given, they were the mind and will of God and his voice to all who would listen. (D&C 68:4.) The major characters therein "saw the God of Israel" (Exodus 24:10), and, as one of the most preeminent authors of the Old Testament said, "And the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend." (Exodus 33:11.) The biblical accounts of God's creation of heaven and earth and his association with and revelations to Adam and the patriarchs are true, so far as they have been correctly translated. (Article of Faith 3.) This has all been reconfirmed by direct revelations by God in this day. For instance, the Book of Moses and the Book of Abraham, both in the Pearl of Great Price, set forth the truth about God's ancient dealings with the people from the days of Adam down; the Book of Mormon establishes the divinity of such ancient prophets as Isaiah; and many direct revelations to Joseph Smith outline God's dealings with his ancient Saints. (D&C 84 and 107.)

When God revealed the fulness of the gospel to Moses, he called Moses to his holy order of priesthood. Not many people in the history of mankind have been more intimately acquainted with God than was Moses. God also revealed knowledge about himself and his power and his saving truths to such prophets as Adam, Enoch (Moses 6 and 7), Noah (Moses 8), and Abraham (Abraham 2:6-11; Galatians 3:6-8, 18.) Moses, like the prophets just cited, was the head of a great dispensation of the gospel. (D&C 84:17-28.)

The Israelites whom Moses was called to lead out of bondage were not prepared for a fulness of the gospel. Because they rebelled and manifested gross unworthiness, God took from them the power whereby they could have become a kingdom of priests and kings. That is, he took the fulness of the gospel from them. He substituted the lesser law and called it the "law of carnal commandments."

And the Lord said unto Moses, "Hew thee two other tables of stone, like unto the first, and I will write upon them also, the words of the law, according as they were written at the first on the tables which thou brakest; but it shall not be according to the first, for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst, lest I destroy them.

"But I will give unto them the law as at the first, but it shall be after the law of a carnal commandment; for I have sworn in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my presence, into my rest, in the days of their pilgrimage. . . ." (Inspired Version, Exodus 34:1-2.)

This is what the apostle Paul was talking about in his epistle to the Galatian saints when he explained that God gave the gospel to Abraham and that thereafter the law "was added because of transgressions." (Galatians 3.) He told the Hebrew saints that their fathers had had the fulness of the gospel, but it "did not profit them" because of unbelief. (Hebrews 4:1-5.)

The law of carnal commandments was given to prepare Israel, after more than four hundred years in Egyptian slavery, for the fulness of the gospel. It was to be a schoolmaster: "Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ. . . ." (Galatians 3:24.) They were the "divers washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the time of reformation." (Hebrews 9:10.) They are recorded in great detail in Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy, some of Moses' writings in the Old Testament. They were also preserved on the brass plates which the Nephites took with them. (1 Nephi 4:15-16.)

The Book of Mormon prophet Abinadi taught that the law of Moses was given to point the attention of the people forward to Christ. All of the performances and ordinances "were types of things to come." Israel was given "a very strict law; for they were a stiffnecked people, quick to do iniquity, and slow to remember the Lord their God; Therefore there was a law given them, yea, a law of performances and of ordinances, a law which they were to observe strictly from day to day, to keep them in remembrance of God and their duty towards him." (Mosiah 13:29-31.) It was called "the law of carnal commandments" (D&C 84:27; Hebrews 7:16) because it was given to teach those belonging to a chosen lineage to bridle their passions, to overcome the lusts of the flesh, to triumph over carnal things, and to advance to a place where the Spirit of the Lord could have place in their hearts.

Nephi said simply that the law of Moses was given to prove to the people "the truth of the coming of Christ; for, for this end hath the law of Moses been given; and all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him." (2 Nephi 11:4.)

The great lawgiver Moses gave more than the law of carnal commandments. It was also his responsibility to lead his people to Christ. He also received and recorded many gospel truths, which are eternal in nature and have been in force in all dispensations. The Ten Commandments are part of "the law of Christ." (D&C 88:21.)

When the Lord gave the law of carnal commandments, he gave a lesser order of priesthood to administer this lesser law. (Hebrews 7:12.) This lesser priesthood was conferred upon Aaron and his sons after him. (Exodus 28, 29, and 30; Leviticus 1:11, 3:2, and 13:2; Numbers 18.) It was given as "an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations." (Exodus 40:15; Numbers 25:10-13.)

Who Was Aaron?

Aaron was the oldest son of Amram and Jochebed of the tribe of Levi. (Exodus 6:16-23.) He was three years older than his brother Moses (Exodus 7:7) and younger than his sister Miriam. He married Elisheba, a woman of the tribe of Judah, by whom he had four sons: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. (Exodus 6:23.)

The Lord appointed Aaron the spokesman of Moses and instructed him to meet Moses in the wilderness. (Exodus 4:27.) In Israel's first recorded battle with the Amalekites, Aaron and Hur supported the hands of Moses. (Exodus 17:10-12.) Aaron held a position of prominence and leadership among the elders. (Exodus 18:12.)

Aaron held the Melchizedek Priesthood. (John Taylor, Items on Priesthood [1881], p. 5.) With two of his sons, Nadab and Abihu, as well as Moses and seventy of the elders of Israel, Aaron "saw the God of Israel." (Exodus 24:9-10.) When Moses "went up into the mount of God," Aaron and Hur were left in a position of presidency over the other elders. (Exodus 24.)

At Sinai, while Moses was on the mount receiving the law, Aaron granted the request of the people that they should have a God whom they could see in their corruption. The idol was in the form of an Egyptian deity, the Apis-bull. (Exodus 32:22-25, 35.)

Aaron's family was selected for the lesser priesthood, which priesthood was made hereditary (Exodus 28), and Aaron became the head of this priestly order. Thus to Aaron went the honor, as a memorial to him in all generations, of having his name used to identify the lesser, Levitical, or Aaronic Priesthood. (D&C 84:18-27; 107:1, 20.) Aaron and his sons were chosen to bear that priesthood by which the lesser law was administered. (Numbers 16:3-10, 40.) Aaron's position then became comparable to that of the presiding bishop of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. (John Taylor, op. cit., pp. 5-6.) After the beginning of the Aaronic order, Aaron and his sons after him were anointed priests unto Israel. (Exodus 28, 29, and 30; Numbers 3 and 4.)

Aaron's sons Nadab and Abihu were destroyed for unholy conduct. (Leviticus 10:1-3.) Aaron and Miriam were not always supportive of Moses; for her criticism of Moses, Miriam was smitten with leprosy. (Numbers 12.)

A staff carried by Aaron was known as Aaron's rod. When it was thrown down in the presence of Pharoah, it became a snake. (Exodus 7:9-12, 15.) During sedition in the wilderness it budded as a sign of divine approval of Moses and Aaron. (Numbers 17:1-10.) It was preserved in the ark. (Hebrews 9:4.)

On Mount Hor, in the sight of all the congregation, Aaron's priestly robes were transferred to his son Eleazar, who succeeded him. Aaron left this world at the age of 123 years. (Numbers 20:23-29; 33:39.) He has ever since been honored as the first head of the Aaronic Priesthood.

Aaron is not a leader without human weaknesses. An objective overview of his mission and life brings him into view as one of the most worthy and venerated leaders in Israel's history. This is attested to by the more than 325 specific references to him in the Old Testament. He was a colorful character. His physical appearance was legendary; King David sang of it: ". . . even Aaron's beard: that went down to the skirts of his garments." (Psalm 133:2.) Perhaps it is his humanness that encourages the rest of us who follow after his order to emulate his successes. His life, like the priesthood that bears his name, helps weak mortals. It shows the spiritual heights to which we can ascend, imperfect, jealous, and stubborn though we are. Aaron shows us that though a man may wrongly fashion a golden calf, he may also repent and be accepted of God, and that God will stand by him and allow him in His presence.

It is recorded that Aaron died on Mount Hor (Numbers 33:39), and may be that is what happened. However, while it was recorded of Moses that he died and was buried by the hand of the Lord (Deuteronomy 34:5-7), Alma said that he "was taken up by the Spirit," or, more specifically, "the scriptures saith the Lord took Moses unto himself." (Alma 45:18-19.) Moses was translated, as were many, like strangers and pilgrims on earth before him. (D&C 45:11-14; Hebrews 11:5, 11-16.) There is some scriptural evidence that Aaron parted this probationary state in the same manner as did Moses. The Lord said to Moses, "Get thee up into this mountain. . . . And die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto thy people; as Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered unto his people." (Deuteronomy 32:48-50.) Another account of this incident preserves the reference that Moses' leaving of this world was to be like Aaron's: ". . . thou also shalt be gathered unto thy people, as Aaron thy brother was gathered." (Numbers 27:13.) I choose to believe that Aaron was translated as Moses was translated.

Israel mourned Aaron's leaving them for thirty days (Numbers 20:29), but they sang of "Aaron the saint of the Lord" (Psalm 106:16) for generations to come.

The Aaronic Priesthood

The Aaronic Priesthood is a priesthood of great majesty and power. It "is called the lesser priesthood . . . because it is an appendage to the greater, or the Melchizedek Priesthood." (D&C 107:13-14.) The term "lesser priesthood" in no sense is derisive. It is lesser only to the fulness of the power of God. As a part of the power and authority of God delegated to men on the earth, the Aaronic Priesthood represents more power than the combined armies and political systems of men.

The Priesthood of Aaron "has power in administering outward ordinances" (D&C 107:13-14) required for salvation. When one is commissioned in this holy order, he becomes a legal administrator empowered to baptize in the name of the "Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." (D&C 20:73.) God delegates to those in this order of his priesthood the agency to act for and in his behalf.

The Priesthood of Aaron "holds the keys . . . of the gospel of repentance." (D&C 13.) It is a preparatory priesthood because it is given to prepare people to accept the gospel. Inasmuch as Elias was the harbinger of Jesus Christ, the Priesthood of Aaron is sometimes referred to as the Priesthood of Elias. Repentance is the key to one's preparation to know God. Therefore, the Aaronic Priesthood holds the keys of the gospel of repentance.

The Priesthood of Aaron "holds the keys of . . . baptism by immersion for the remission of sins." (D&C 13.) Within the Aaronic Priesthood is the authority to baptize, an essential ordinance for salvation. (John 3:5.) Thus, in a literal way, the Aaronic Priesthood helps administer salvation. "The priest's duty is to . . . baptize." (D&C 20:46.)

The Priesthood of Aaron "holds the keys of the ministering of angels." (D&C 13.) This means that those who hold this power of God and are faithful have the key whereby they can open the door to the visitations of God's messengers, the angels.

Teaching and expounding the preparatory gospel as well as exhorting in righteousness are within the purview of the Aaronic Priesthood. "The priest's duty is to preach, teach, expound, exhort." (D&C 20:46.)

The opportunity to "administer the sacrament" is given to the Aaronic Priesthood. (D&C 20:46.) Members of the Aaronic Priesthood are also to "watch over the church always, and be with and strengthen" the members; to "see that there is no iniquity in the church"; and to "take the lead of meetings." (D&C 20:53-54, 56.) "Every . . . priest, teacher, or deacon is to be ordained according to the gifts and callings of God unto him." (D&C 20:60.)

Members of this order are to be involved in the basic teaching programs of the Church; they are to "visit the house of each member, and exhort them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties." (D&C 20:47.)

Aaronic Priesthood bearers are under obligation to participate in the priesthood missionary work of the Church. They are to "invite all to come unto Christ." (D&C 20:59.)

Aaron was the first head of the priesthood that bears his name. He was "called of God" (Hebrews 5:4) to this position of God's power. When the Lord first gave the law of carnal commandments as preparatory gospel, he gave a preparatory power in priesthood to administer the lesser law. (Hebrews 7:12; Inspired Version, Exodus 34:1-2.) This lesser priesthood was conferred upon Aaron and his sons after him. (Exodus 28, 29, and 30; Leviticus 1:11, 3:2, 13:2; Numbers 18.)

Later the Aaronic Priesthood was conferred upon substantially all of the men of the tribes of Levi. Those who were between thirty and fifty years of age were given specific priestly duties in the tabernacle. (Numbers 4:2-4.) Sometimes this order of priesthood is called the Levitical Priesthood. In this dispensation the terms Aaronic Priesthood and Levitical Priesthood are used interchangeably. (D&C 107:1, 6, 10.)

The ancient holders of the Aaronic Priesthood administered numerous ordinances and performances, which are set forth and described in considerable detail in the books of the law (Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy). The apostle Paul referred to these many duties as "diverse washings, and carnal ordinances." (Hebrews 9:10.) He described them as "the law of commandments contained in ordinances." (Ephesians 2:15.)

The purpose of these numerous ordinances was to help school an unruly people to the end that they could accept the Holy One of Israel. An illustration of how these performances and demonstrations were used to center people's attention on the Lord is found in the standard Moses was directed to raise on a pole:

And the Lord said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live.

And Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived. (Numbers 21:8-9.)

As the Israelites wandered in the desert, many were bitten by poisonous serpents. Moses directed them to look up to a standard he raised and live. Many refused, and they died of poison. Those who obeyed were taught to look to a standard and have faith, and they lived. Alma commented on this:

Behold, [the Son of God] was spoken of by Moses; yea, and behold a type was raised up in the wilderness, that whosoever would look upon it might live. And many did look and live.

But few understood the meaning of those things, and this because of the hardness of their hearts. . . . they would not look, therefore they perished. (Alma 33:19-20.)

Helaman makes the meaning even plainer:

Yea, did he not bear record that the Son of God should come? And as he lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness, even so shall he be lifted up who should come.

And as many as should look upon that serpent should live, even so as many as should look upon the Son of God with faith, having a contrite spirit, might live, even unto that life which is eternal. (Helaman 8:14-15.)

John taught the same lesson in the New Testament times, saying, ". . . as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up." (John 3:14.) Thus were types and performances used as teaching aids, as a schoolmaster to bring people to an understanding of the person and message of Jesus Christ. In Abinadi's words, they "were types of things to come." (Mosiah 13:31.)

Since all of this was administered under the direction of the Aaronic Priesthood, those chosen to this order were likely to be prominent people in Israel. God honors certain persons by giving them a portion of his power and authority known as the Aaronic Priesthood.

From Aaron to John the Baptist

Soon after the consecration of Aaron and his sons, the Lord announced a major expansion of those to whom he would give his power and authority. He directed Moses and Aaron to make a census of all the male members of Israel "from twenty years old and upward" (Numbers 1:2-3), except one of the twelve tribes was not to be included in the count: "Only thou shalt not number the tribe of Levi, neither take the sum of them among the children of Israel" (Numbers 1:49). These were to be appointed to look after "the tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels thereof, and over all things that belong to it. . . ." (Numbers 1:50.) They were no longer numbered as a separate tribe of Israel. The Lord said to Moses:

Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him.

And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole congregation before the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle.

And they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the charge of the children of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle.

And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons: they are wholly given unto him out of the children of Israel. (Numbers 3:6-9.)

Aaron's Call a Prototype

Ever since Aaron was called and ordained to the priesthood, the procedure and source of his calling have been cited as being an authoritative and exemplary call. Paul used the example of Aaron in his instruction on how to properly obtain priesthood power and authority: "And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron," he said. (Hebrews 5:4.) Aaron's call was the perfect precedent. He was called by God, through God's legal administrator on earth, and then authoritatively ordained to the office of his calling. All of this was carefully preserved for us in the Bible.

The Lord directed Moses, "And take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons. . . . And thou shalt . . . anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office. . . . it shall be a statute forever unto him and his seed after him." (Exodus 28:1, 41, 43.)

Indeed it has been a statute for men. This is the way it is done today. One who represents God, an ordained and setapart bishop, calls a worthy neophite and confers upon him the Aaronic order of the priesthood of God.

The Lord continued his instructions to Moses: "And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations." (Exodus 40:15.)

It was a perfect call and ordination because it had its inception in God. This was and is God's way. Moses, God's earthly administrator, simply executed divine directives. "Thus did Moses: according to all that the Lord commanded him, so did he." (Exodus 40:16.)

It was never intended that this order of the priesthood would be conferred only upon one man and his sons. Approximately 17,160 of the men of Israel (Numbers 4) were initially "called of God, as was Aaron" (Hebrews 5:4.) Once again the record is clear. "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him." (Numbers 3:5-6. See also Numbers 3 and 4.) The Aaronic Priesthood was conferred upon substantially the whole male membership of the house of Levi.

The Lord preserved the record for us. It sets forth the perfect prototype. Where substantially identical procedure is followed today, there is God's holy order. It was to this end that the record was kept, that in the mouth of more than one witness, truth can be established. (Deuteronomy 19:15; John 8:13-18.)

As Joshua said of the Aaronic Priesthood bearers of his day, "For the priesthood of the Lord is their inheritance" (Joshua 18:7), so also it may be said of those in our day who have been called of God, as was Aaron.

The Lord confirmed this in a personal revelation to Aaron: "I have taken your brethren the Levites . . . : to you they are given as a gift for the Lord. . . ." (Numbers 18:6.) And so from the beginning the bearers of the priesthood were "as a gift for the Lord."

The Levites operated under the direction of the Aaronic Priesthood and they did not have the fulness that Aaron and his sons held. ". . . their Priesthood was only an appendage to the Aaronic Priesthood, and not that Priesthood itself as held by Aaron and his sons." (Taylor, Items on Priesthood, p. 43.) The Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood is one priesthood. (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 3:86.) In those early days there was a difference in function within this priesthood, but in our day the terms are used interchangeably. (D&C 107:1, 6.)

We cannot be certain from the scriptural citations as to the exact age or time when a Levite could enter the priesthood. Certain Aaronic Priesthood functions were assigned "from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service." (Numbers 4:43.) It would appear that there were great numbers of men so to serve. (Numbers 4:36, 40, 44; Genesis 46:11.)

The Levites did not receive a land inheritance as did the other Israelites. "Thou shalt have no inheritance in their land, neither shalt thou have any part among them: I am thy part and thine inheritance among the children of Israel." (Numbers 18:20.) The priesthood was their inheritance. "But the Levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the Lord is their inheritance. . . ." (Joshua 18:7.) However, their physical wants and needs were cared for. (Numbers 18:21-24; 35:2-3.)

The establishment of the Aaronic Priesthood was all done under the direction of the incomparable Moses. So great was Moses that even Christ is described as a prophet like unto this leader of all of Israel's hosts. (Deuteronomy 18:15-19; Acts 3:22-23; 3 Nephi 20:23.) Although Aaron held the keys of leadership for the Aaronic Priesthood for nearly forty years, this was not the power and authority from God by which Israel was governed during this time. It was to Moses that God said, "I have made thee a god . . . and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet." (Exodus 7:1.) Moses, with the fulness of the priesthood, was the presiding officer of his day. ". . . the Melchizedek Priesthood was greater than the Aaronic, and . . . while it ruled, it controlled all matters pertaining to the government and instruction of the people, and . . . it organized and directed the Aaronic Priesthood which was in reality an appendage to the greater." (Taylor, Items on Priesthood, p. 11.) The Aaronic Priesthood cannot preside in the presence of the Melchizedek Priesthood. While Moses lived, all priesthood activity was under his direction. He prepared the sons of Aaron and the Levites to take over when he would leave them.

Aaron and his sons acted in the full power of the Aaronic Priesthood. Many of their functions would be comparable to the duties of the bishops and priests in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today.

The righteous Levites had the right to hold the power and authority of God. Of them Paul writes, "They that are of the sons of Levi, who receive the office of the priesthood, have a commandment to take tithes of the people according to the law, that is, of their brethren, though they come out of the loins of Abraham." (Hebrews 7:5.) They participated in the offering of sacrifices. Many of their functions were comparable to those of teachers and deacons in this dispensation. (Numbers 3 and 4; 2 Chronicles 29; Malachi 3:3.)

Shortly after the death of Aaron, the Lord was ready to take away the fulness of his "holy order, and the ordinances thereof" (Inspired Version, Exodus 34:1), as he said he would. In fulfillment of prophecy, Moses and the higher laws were taken from Israel:

Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also;

And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel;

Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb. (D&C 84:25-27.)

"Until John," referring to John the Baptist, meant that the sacrificial offerings of Israel would be directed by the Aaronic Priesthood from the death of Moses until the time of John the Baptist. At that time Jesus Christ would come and bring the Mosaic dispensation to an end. The sons of Aaron and the Levites were properly called and trained. They were ready to preside as well as function otherwise when Moses was taken from them.

The Prophet Joseph Smith was once asked, "Was the Priesthood of Melchizedek taken away when Moses died?" He answered: "All Priesthood is Melchizedek, but there are different portions or degrees of it. That portion which brought Moses to speak with God face to face was taken away; but that which brought the ministry of angels remained." (Teachings, pp. 180-81.) That portion which remained was the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood.

"And the Lord confirmed a priesthood also upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations. . . ." (D&C 84:18.) This was the priesthood in general usage in ancient Israel. It was hereditary; that is, it was disseminated by virtue of who one's father and mother were. From Aaron to John the Baptist the hereditary nature of the Levitical Priesthood was in active operation. (D&C 84:18, 26-27, 30; Teachings, pp. 318-19.) This order of priesthood was conferred only upon the worthy members of the special lineage chosen to receive it.

The taking of the Melchizedek Priesthood from Israel meant that the bearers of the higher priesthood would not be among them in as great a number. It did not mean that the said power and authority of God would not be among them in any form. Prophets of God, clothed with his authority and the fulness of his priesthood, worked with Israel. (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 3:84-85.)

However, from that time until the time of Christ it was the Aaronic Priesthood that directed the detail and the functions of the law of Moses. When Moses was taken, Eleazar and the Aaronic Priesthood began to bear rule in Israel. (See Lee A. Palmer, Aaronic Priesthood Through the Centuries [Deseret Book, 1964], for a detailed account of the Aaronic Priesthood from Aaron to John.)

John the Baptist was a descendant of Aaron (Teachings, pp. 272-73) and held the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood. Zacharias, his father, was a priest of God and officiated in the temple. "John was a priest after his father, and held the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, and was called of God to preach the Gospel of the kingdom of God." (Ibid.) John received a special ordination: "For he was baptized while he was yet in his childhood, and was ordained by the angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power, to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord, in whose hand is given all power." (D&C 84:28.)

John was the last legal administrator holding the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood in the Mosaic dispensation. (D&C 84:26-28.) He had the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, and although he was a priest, his position, like that of Aaron before him, was comparable to the office of the presiding bishop in his Aaronic Priesthood responsibilities.

This order of the priesthood was given of God to prepare the way of the Lord. It is the Priesthood of Elias, that is, a preparatory priesthood. (D&C 84:107.) "The spirit of Elias is to prepare the way for a greater revelation of God, which is the Priesthood of Elias, or the Priesthood that Aaron was ordained unto. And when God sends a man into the world to prepare for a greater work, holding the keys of the power of Elias, it was called the doctrine of Elias, even from the early ages of the world." (Teachings, pp. 335-36.) This is the office and calling of the priesthood John held. He was great because he magnified his office in the priesthood. Of this priest in the Aaronic Priesthood, the Lord said, "Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist. . . ." (Luke 7:28.)

Righteous Pride

When serving on my first mission, I was assigned to Aquidneck Island, Rhode Island, a small island off the coast of New England in the Atlantic Ocean. We were teaching a small group of nonmembers in a weekly cottage meeting. Each week the missionaries would present a gospel subject, entertain questions, and lead a discussion.

One of the young ladies impressed me as a person of quality and refinement. She wasn't aloof, but she was separate from the others. Her bearing was different, almost regal. One could feel her sense of self-confidence.

At the conclusion of one of the lessons I asked her if she knew what set her apart from the others. "Yes," she said. "Don't you know who my father is?" I had no idea who her father was and told her so. She said, "My father is a descendant of Levi. He has traced his lineage to Levi, of the house of Israel." My silence and, I suppose, blank expression prompted her to continue her explanation. "My father is not a religious man," she said. "He goes to the synagogue only on special holy days. But when he goes, the rabbi always steps aside and asks him if he will participate in the service, read the scriptures, or the like." I still did not understand. "He has the right, don't you see?" My countenance brightened. "My father holds the Levitical Priesthood by right of birth. I am set apart from my associates!"

Think of that! It has been 2,000 years since the Mosaic dispensation, with its priesthood of father and mother, ended with John the Baptist, and yet here was a young woman who felt a distinction, almost as of royalty, because her father was of the lineage that once enjoyed the inheritance of the Aaronic Priesthood.

I thought, Oh, that we who have been honored to bear this order of the priesthood in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times could feel the righteous pride of the call from God, as was Aaron.

A brief incident in the life of a modern apostle and prominent statesman illustrates the awe in which he stood of priesthood calling.

Reed Smoot was the first Latter-day Saint to represent Utah in the United States Senate, serving in that august body for nearly a quarter of a century. During that time he was an ordained apostle in priesthood calling and was a set-apart member of the Counsel of the Twelve Apostles. He became the chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee and was one of the key opinion makers and policy setters in the United States.

He was a respected and powerful leader of the political party to which he owed allegiance. When his party met in Chicago to name its nominee for the office of president, he was a leader of the convention. His party had won the presidency the last several elections, and most observers thought the trend would continue. It was almost conceded that this convention would name the next president of the United States.

Senator Smoot met in a hotel room with the power structure of the party to choose the man they could all support. Reporters representing the news media of the world were waiting in the hall. At one point in the deliberations Senator Smoot opened the door and made a statement in the presence of the newspaper men that has since come into standard political parlance. He said, "I can't stand decisions made in smoke-filled rooms."

During this convention the leaders assembled there said to Senator Smoot, "Senator, you may have the nomination if you want it. There is one stipulation: You will have to softpeddle the fact that you are a Mormon." Senator Smoot is reported to have replied, "I would rather be a deacon in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints than be president of the United States."

This is reminiscent of the psalmist saying, "I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness." (Psalm 84:10.) The spiritual sovereign is superior to the temporal sovereign.
