Oscar W. McConkie, Aaronic Priesthood ( 1977)

CHAPTER THREE

Purchasing a Good Degree

The apostle Paul captures the essence of the purpose of the Aaronic Priesthood in discussing the qualifications for the office of a deacon in the early Church. He wrote these instructions:

Likewise must the deacons be grave, not doubletongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre;

Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience. And let these also first be proved; then let them use the office of a deacon, being found blameless.

For they that have used the office of a deacon well purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus. (1 Timothy 3:8-10, 13. Italics added.)

We are thus authoritatively advised that the Aaronic Priesthood offices are preparatory in nature, a proving grounds, positions of training and apprenticeship. They are to be used to prepare persons for greater boldness in the faith, for service in a more abundant dispensing of God's own power and authority.

Before one can understand the discussion that follows on the responsibilities of those who hold offices within the Aaronic Priesthood, he must understand that this order of the priesthood was established to teach and train. Indeed, the greatness of the Aaronic order is that it prepares one for and helps one associate with the glories of the fulness of the power and authority of God as delegated to man on the earth, which is the Melchizedek Priesthood.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is operated by the Melchizedek Priesthood. Everything it does is by that agency:

All other authorities or offices in the church are appendages to this priesthood.

The Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the church in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things.

The power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church—

To have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the general assembly and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant. (D&C 107:5, 8, 18-19.)

When He reigns whose right it is to reign, everything on earth will be subject to His power and authority. Even under present circumstances everyone ordained after Christ's order and calling should have power, by faith, to do all things according to his will. And the Aaronic Priesthood is an essential part of the helps and governments established to help us reach this enviable position.

The Aaronic Priesthood recipient is an assistant to one holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, while the fundamental responsibility of the Melchizedek Priesthood is to perfect the Saints so they can see the face of God.

An apt scriptural illustration as to how it is intended that officers of the Aaronic Priesthood will assist the officers of the Melchizedek Priesthood is found in the revelation on Church organization and government:

The duty of the elders, priests, teachers, deacons, and members of the church of Christ—An apostle is an elder, and it is his calling to baptize;

And to ordain other elders, priests, teachers, and deacons;

And to administer bread and wine—the emblems of the flesh and blood of Christ—

And to confirm those who are baptized into the church, by the laying on of hands for the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, according to the scriptures;

And to teach, expound, exhort, baptize, and watch over the church;

And to confirm the church by the laying on of the hands, and the giving of the Holy Ghost;

And to take the lead of all meetings.

The elders are to conduct the meetings as they are led by the Holy Ghost, according to the commandments and revelations of God.

The priest's duty is to preach, teach, expound, exhort, and baptize, and administer the sacrament,

And visit the house of each member, and exhort them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties.

And he may also ordain other priests, teachers, and deacons.

And he is to take the lead of meetings when there is no elder present;

But when there is an elder present, he is only to preach, teach, expound, exhort, and baptize,

And visit the house of each member, exhorting them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties.

In all these duties the priest is to assist the elder if occasion requires. (D&C 20:38-52.)

The elders in the Melchizedek Priesthood have the duty to watch over the Church. They are to conduct meetings, baptize, confirm those baptized into the Church, teach and exhort, administer the emblems of the sacrament, confer the priesthood to others and ordain to offices therein, and generally take the lead in church administration. In many of these priestly functions the priests, teachers, and deacons in the Aaronic Priesthood are to assist the elders.

Watching over the Church, with all that that portends, is a function of the Melchizedek Priesthood. The Lord uses members of the Aaronic Priesthood, in the nature of on-the-job training, to assist and thus serve and enjoy learning experiences and growth. In subsequent chapters, the revealed duties of the several offices within the Aaronic Priesthood are discussed. To be properly understood, all of this must be seen in the context of overall Melchizedek Priesthood superintendence and ultimate responsibility.

For instance, it is the elders' responsibility to baptize and administer the sacrament. Priests are accorded the singular honor of participating in performing these ordinances. It is the elders' responsibility to watch over the Church. Teachers are specifically empowered to assist them in this particular calling. (D&C 20:53.) Thus teachers may participate in the home teaching and welfare programs of the Melchizedek Priesthood, though not as equal partners. It is a Melchizedek Priesthood function to warn the world, to teach, and to testify (D&C 42:12; 88:81); however, deacons and teachers and priests are specifically directed to participate in missionary activity (D&C 20:59). And so it is with all of the Aaronic Priesthood offerings unto the Lord in righteousness. In all of the functions pertaining to salvation, the Melchizedek Priesthood leads the way. In many of these functions the Aaronic Priesthood has a part. Those who utilize its functions and prerogatives are on the Lord's errand, too.

Prospective Elders

Because it is the purpose of the Melchizedek Priesthood to help the membership of the Church "enjoy the communion and presence of God," all adult male members of the Church who are not ordained elders are considered prospective elders. "A prospective elder is an adult male member of the Church, nineteen years of age or older, who does not hold the Melchizedek Priesthood." (Melchizedek Priesthood Handbook, 1975, p. 2.) Many of these men now hold the Aaronic Priesthood. "All prospective elders may be ordained priests as soon as their worthiness permits. It is not necessary to first ordain them deacons or teachers." (Ibid., p. 21.)

From the phrase "prospective elder" one may discern that in the Church system of things, the Aaronic Priesthood is thought of as a preparatory order for the Melchizedek Priesthood. This is in complete harmony with the same order of things in both the New Testament and Old Testament.

Part of the helps and governments the Church affords its members today is the prospective elders program. In this program the president of the elders quorum is responsible for "any family headed by an Aaronic Priesthood member" and "unmarried adult male members who do not hold the priesthood and who are not living at home." (Ibid., p. 11.)

All of the advantages incident to quorum brotherhood are given the prospective elder in the elders quorum. "Prospective elders join with elders for quorum meeting instruction and all appropriate social activities and service projects." (Ibid., p. 2.)

Aaronic Priesthood brethren who are considered prospective elders participate with the elders in priesthood responsibilities. "Elders quorums should be given the responsibility for home teaching all prospective elders and their families, and where feasible should use prospective elders who hold the Aaronic Priesthood to assist them. The basic responsibility of the bishop for home teaching remains the same." (First Presidency letter, January 1972). Thus the administration of the Church procedure implements the precept enunciated by Paul.

The prospective elders program is an interim program to bring persons to the fulness of God's power. President Spencer W. Kimball declared: "As the bishops discharge their duties as president of the Aaronic Priesthood in their wards, the prospective elders program should fade out. We hail that day!" (Address at MIA June Conference, June 23, 1974.)

The Aaronic Priesthood offices are to be used to develop the bearer of the Priesthood of Aaron into something better—"purchasing a good degree."
