Oscar W. McConkie, Aaronic Priesthood ( 1977)

CHAPTER FOUR

"Upon You I Confer the Priesthood of Aaron"

In eloquent simplicity the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded in his diary the events of the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood. At the time, the Prophet was translating the plates to be known as the Book of Mormon and dictating to Oliver Cowdery. On the 15th day of May, 1829, the following occurred:

We still continued the work of translation, when in the ensuing month (May, 1829), we on a certain day went into the woods to pray and inquire of the Lord respecting baptism for the remission of sins, that we found mentioned in the translation of the plates. While we were thus employed, praying and calling upon the Lord, a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light, and having laid his hands upon us, he ordained us, saying:

Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the Gospel of repentence, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness. (D&C 13.)

He said this Aaronic Priesthood had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but that this should be conferred on us hereafter; and he commanded us to go and be baptized, and gave us directions that I should baptize Oliver Cowdery, and afterwards that he should baptize me. Accordingly we went and were baptized. I baptized him first, and afterwards he baptized me, after which I laid my hands upon his head and ordained him to the Aaronic Priesthood, and afterwards he laid his hands on me and ordained me to the same Priesthood—for so we were commanded.

The messenger who visited us on this occasion, and conferred this Priesthood upon us, said that his name was John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament. (Joseph Smith, History of the Church 1:39-40.)

As in most of the Prophet's writings, he simply puts on record the plain truth pertaining to the coming forth of the work of God. He does not revel in the grandeur of the occasion. For him it is just a simple restatement of events that occurred.

However, Oliver Cowdery was present on this wondrous occasion. He recorded a description of the scene and the impression it left upon his mind. After speaking of his and the Prophet Joseph's desire to be authoritatively baptized, he says:

This was not long desired before it was realized. The Lord, who is rich in mercy, and ever willing to answer the consistent prayer of the humble, after we had called upon him in a fervent manner, aside from the abodes of men, condescended to manifest to us His will. On a sudden, as from the midst of eternity, the voice of the Redeemer spake peace to us, while the veil was parted and the angel of God came down clothed with glory and delivered the anxiously looked for message, and the keys of the Gospel of repentance. What joy! what wonder! what amazement! While the world was racked and distracted—while millions were groping as the blind for the wall, and while all men were resting upon uncertainty, as a general mass, our eyes beheld—our ears heard. As in the "blaze of day;" yes, more—above the glitter of the May sunbeam, which then shed its brilliancy over the face of nature! Then his voice, though mild, pierced to the center, and his words, "I am thy fellow-servant," dispelled every fear. We listened, we gazed, we admired! 'Twas the voice of an angel from glory—'twas a message from the Most High, and as we heard we rejoiced, while His love enkindled upon our souls, and we were rapt in the vision of the Almighty! Where was room for doubt? Nowhere; uncertainty had fled, doubt had sunk, no more to rise, while fiction and deception had fled forever. But, dear brother, think further, think for a moment what joy filled our hearts and with what surprise we must have bowed, (for who would not have bowed the knee for such a blessing?) when we received under his hands the Holy Priesthood, as he said, 'Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer this Priesthood and this authority, which remain upon earth, that the sons of Levi may yet offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness!'

I shall not attempt to paint to you the feelings of this heart, nor the majestic beauty and glory which surrounded us on this occasion; but you will believe me when I say, that earth, nor men, with the eloquence of time, cannot begin to clothe language in as interesting and sublime a manner as this holy personage. No; nor has this earth power to give the joy, to bestow the peace, or comprehend the wisdom which was contained in each sentence as it was delivered by the power of the Holy Spirit! Man may deceive his fellow man; deception may follow deception, and the children of the wicked one may have power to seduce the foolish and untaught, till naught but fiction feeds the many, and the fruit of falsehood carries in its current the giddy to the grave, but one touch with the finger of his love, yes, one ray of glory from the upper world, or one word from the mouth of the Savior, from the bosom of eternity, strikes it all into insignificance, and blots it forever from the mind! The assurance that we were in the presence of an angel; the certainty that we heard the voice of Jesus, and the truth unsullied as it flowed from a pure personage, dictated by the will of God, is to me, past description, and I shall ever look upon this expression of the Savior's goodness with wonder and thanksgiving while I am permitted to tarry, and in those mansions where perfection dwells and sin never comes, I hope to adore in that day which shall never cease. (Ibid., pp. 42-43, footnote.)

John the Baptist, as a resurrected personage, came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and made the first conferral of the Aaronic Priesthood in this dispensation. In a further revelation Joseph was reminded: "Which John I have sent unto you, my servants, Joseph Smith, Jun., and Oliver Cowdery, to ordain you unto the first priesthood which you have received, that you might be called and ordained even as Aaron." (D&C 27:8.)

Part of the Restoration of All Things

The visitation of the resurrected John the Baptist and the accompanying conferral of the Aaronic Priesthood is a part of the restoration of all things "which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) All of the prophets from the beginning of time have looked forward to the dispensation in which we now live, when the work of restoring all saving truths and ordinances is to be accomplished.

The restoration of all things will be accomplished when the earth is restored to that perfect state which prevailed when all things were created, and when the Creator proclaimed that his work was "very good." (Genesis 1:31.) The most important part of the restoration of all things is the restoration of the gospel, of which priesthood restoration was a necessary prerequisite. All of the priesthood and the keys needed to save and exalt mankind in the highest heaven have now been given to us. (D&C 13; 27:12-13; 110:11-16; 128:20-21.)

When the ancient apostle recorded, "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people" (Revelation 14:6), he was not talking only of the angel Moroni. He saw a composite angel. "Divers angels" (D&C 128:20-21) came in fulfillment of this prophetic vision. John the Baptist was one of them.

As a part of the restoration of all things, certain Levitical ordinances will again be performed in this dispensation, apparently on a one-time basis. In the ordination prayer John the Baptist said that the sons of Levi would make offerings again. (D&C 13.) The offerings that they made in ancient days were sacrifices, and he brought back to earth the commission and the power whereby these ordinances could be performed.

Malachi foretold that such offerings would again be performed in the day of the second coming of Christ. (Malachi 3:1-4.) Joseph Smith wrote:

All the ordinances and duties that ever have been required by the Priesthood, under the directions and commandments of the Almighty in any of the dispensations, shall all be had in the last dispensation, therefore all things had under the authority of the Priesthood at any former period, shall be had again, bringing to pass the restoration spoken of by the mouth of all the Holy Prophets; then shall the sons of Levi offer an acceptable offering to the Lord. . . .

. . . it is generally supposed that sacrifice was entirely done away when the Great Sacrifice (i.e., the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus) was offered up, and that there will be no necessity for the ordinance of sacrifice in [the] future: but those who assert this are certainly not acquainted with the duties, privileges and authority of the priesthood, or with the Prophets.

The offering of sacrifice has ever been connected and forms a part of the duties of the Priesthood. It began with the Priesthood, and will be continued until after the coming of Christ, from generation to generation. We frequently have mention made of the offering of sacrifice by the servants of the Most High in ancient days, prior to the law of Moses; which ordinances will be continued when the Priesthood is restored with all its authority, power and blessings. . . .

These sacrifices, as well as every ordinance belonging to the Priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in all their powers, ramifications, and blessings. This ever did and ever will exist when the powers of the Melchisedic Priesthood are sufficiently manifest; else how can the restitution of all things spoken of by the holy Prophets be brought to pass? It is not to be understood that the law of Moses will be established again with all its rites and variety of ceremonies; this has never been spoken of by the Prophets; but those things which existed prior to Moses' day, namely, sacrifice, will be continued. (History of the Church 4:210-13.)

Notwithstanding the foregoing, which is yet to be accomplished as part of the restoration of all things, it should be understood that the offering of sacrifices, as a generally practiced ordinance of the gospel, ended with the sacrifice of Christ. The emblems of the sacrament became the newly established ordinance that served the same purpose that sacrifices had heretofore served. The Book of Mormon explains this:

For it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice; yea, not a sacrifice of man neither of beast, neither of any manner of fowl; for it shall not be a human sacrifice; but it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice.

Now there is not any man that can sacrifice his own blood which will atone for the sins of another. Now, if a man murdereth, behold will our law, which is just, take the life of his brother? I say unto you, Nay.

But the law requireth the life of him who hath murdered; therefore there can be nothing which is short of an infinite atonement which will suffice for the sins of the world.

Therefore, it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice; and then shall there be, or it is expedient there should be, a stop to the shedding of blood; then shall the law of Moses be fulfilled; yea, it shall be all fulfilled, every jot and tittle, and none shall have passed away.

And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law, every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal. (Alma 34:10-14. See also 2 Nephi 2:7.)

The New Testament teaches these same truths, though not in as plain terms. The risen Lord commanded the Nephites: "And ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood; yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away, for I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt offerings. And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit." (3 Nephi 9:19-20.)

Offices in the Aaronic Priesthood

In the Aaronic Priesthood organization today there are four offices: deacon, teacher, priest, and bishop. Each office is an ordained calling, an assignment to serve. Each office bears a specified area of responsibility.

The priesthood is greater than any of its offices, and no office adds any power or authority to it. All offices derive their rights, prerogatives, power, and authority from the priesthood. No one can hold an office in the priesthood without first holding the priesthood.

Think of the priesthood as a circle:

Then envision the offices of the priesthood as segments that make the circle:

One who serves in one segment must possess the power of the entire circle.

The priesthood is conferred upon selected persons, who are then ordained to offices within the priesthood. Each office in the priesthood is designated as an appendage to the priesthood to which it is attached, and each office is supplemental to the priesthood and grows out of it. (D&C 84:29-30; 107:5; McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, pp. 535-37.) Those receiving priesthood office have the obligation to labor with energy as the needs of that ministry require. (D&C 88:109-110; 107:95-100.) Many of the assigned functions of Aaronic Priesthood offices today are comparable to those performed by the Levites of old. (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 3:111-14.)

In New Testament days Aaronic Priesthood bearers entered their ministries when they were young men. This was similar to Old Testament practices. A preeminent apostle in those days, Paul, records in considerable detail the qualification of deacons and their wives and the behavior of their children. (1 Timothy 3:8-13.) When this dispensation commenced, the same pattern was used; the first persons ordained to offices in the Aaronic Priesthood were adult brethren. It is significant that the dispensation in the meridian of times and the dispensation of the fulness of times were officered in part by the offices within the Aaronic order (Phillippians 1:1-2), as was also the dispensation of Moses.

We were not far into this dispensation when the preparatory priesthood was given to boys. Joseph Smith's youngest brother "was ordained to the Priesthood when only 14 years of age." (History of the Church 4:393.) Since he was subsequently ordained an elder, we know that the priesthood here referred to was of the Aaronic order. (Journal History, July 23, 1833, p. 2.) It is now recommended that "those who are worthy may be ordained to offices in the Aaronic Priesthood at the following minimum ages: Deacon, age 12; Teacher, age 14; Priest, age 16." (General Handbook of Instructions, No. 21 [1976], p. 40.)

In order to be called to the priesthood, one must be worthy. The call originates with God and is issued by his servant, the bishop. If the prospective bearer of the priesthood is a minor, the bishop has prior consultation with his parents or guardians to obtain permission. Using the special spiritual gift of discernment, he is to ascertain the worthiness of the neophite. In the General Handbook of Instructions we read:

The bishop is to interview carefully every candidate in private to determine his worthiness. The bishop should review with him in detail what will be expected of him as a priesthood holder within a certain office. The review should outline the specific duties in Doctrine and Covenants 20:46-60 as they pertain to the office under consideration. The Aaronic Priesthood member should make a commitment to the bishop that he will continue to—

After the interview with the bishop and before being ordained to any office in the Aaronic Priesthood, the name of each candidate is to be presented in sacrament meeting for the sustaining vote of the members. (Ibid.)

After this searching procedure to insure worthiness, the Aaronic Priesthood is conferred upon the person and he is ordained to offices therein under the direction of the bishop. Bishops should encourage worthy fathers to ordain their sons; this is in the patriarchal nature of the ancient order of Aaron.

When a person has been ordained to an office in the Aaronic Priesthood, he is to receive a Certificate of Ordination in the Aaronic Priesthood, which is signed by the bishop and the ward clerk. All ordinations are recorded on the membership records, the ordinance and action records, and the minutes of the Church.

Let us examine the offices within the Aaronic Priesthood in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Deacon

Deacon is one of the ordained offices in the Aaronic Priesthood. (D&C 20:60.) It is the lowest office in the priesthood hierarchy. (D&C 88:127.) However, it represents a very significant office, a high and holy calling in God's kingdom. In order to hold an office in the priesthood, one must have conferred upon him the fulness of that priesthood to which the office is an appendage, and the office of a deacon is an appendage to the Aaronic Priesthood. (D&C 84:30.) Therefore, a deacon holds as much Aaronic Priesthood as does anyone. Others may have more responsibilities and authority to accomplish them but no one holds more of the Aaronic Priesthood than does a deacon.

Deacons are "appointed to watch over the church, to be standing ministers unto the church." (D&C 84:111.) In practice this means that they are at the call of the bishop to minister to the wants of the Church. Included in these responsibilities are such standard assignments as these:

Deacons have the authority and the obligation to assist the ordained teacher "in all his duties in the church, if occasion requires." (D&C 20:57.) They are "to warn, expound, exhort, and teach. . . ." (D&C 20:58-59.) Recall that Noah was given the priesthood when he was ten years old (D&C 107:52), and that "the child Samuel ministered unto the Lord before Eli" and heard the voice of the Lord at a tender age (1 Samuel 3:1-10.) Deacons are to lead exemplary lives and caution associates against all forms of evil. They are to learn the gospel and be able to set forth the precepts thereof.

Deacons are to "invite all to come unto Christ." (D&C 20:59.) They are thus under obligation to be involved in missionary work.

There are some express limitations upon a deacon. They are not to "baptize, administer the sacrament, or lay on hands." (D&C 20:57-60.)

Teacher

Teacher is one of the ordained offices of the Aaronic Priesthood. (D&C 18:32; 20:60.) No biblical passage makes it definite that persons in Old and New Testament times were ordained to the office of a teacher in the priesthood; references to teachers in the Bible may have reference to persons who acted as preachers or instructors. (Acts 13:1; 1 Corinthians 12:28-29; Ephesians 4:11.) However, a teacher was an officer in the New Testament church, as is explained in the sixth Article of Faith: "We believe in the same organization that existed in the Primitive Church, viz., apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, etc." The Prophet Joseph Smith seems to indicate that Christ gave teachers, in an ordained sense, saying, "And how were . . . teachers . . . chosen? By prophecy (revelation) and by laying on of hands . . . through the medium of the Priesthood. . . ." (Teachings, p. 206.) The office of teacher appears to be ancient as well as modern in the priesthood.

When a deacon is ordained to the office of a teacher, he does not receive more priesthood. He does receive the right to exercise more of the authority of the Aaronic Priesthood than he was permitted to exercise as a deacon. If one is ordained to the office of a teacher who was not previously ordained to the office of a deacon, the ordination carries with it all of the authority that ordination to the office of a deacon has, plus added appointments and privileges. A teacher continues to exercise the rights and authorities of a deacon. He also has further responsibilities in priestly service.

The office of a teacher is an appendage to the Aaronic Priesthood. (D&C 84:30; 107:5.) Together with the deacons, teachers are appointed "to watch over the church, to be standing ministers unto the church." (D&C 84:111.) As with the deacons, this means that the teacher is at the call of the bishop to minister to the wants of the Church. All of the responsibilities of the office of a deacon are also in the office of a teacher.

The Lord gave to the Prophet Joseph Smith a revelation on Church organization and governance. In legalistic terms this revelation, section 20 of the Doctrine and Covenants, is the "constitution of the Church." The duties of the teacher are therein set out in considerable detail.

The teacher's duty is to watch over the church always, and be with and strengthen them;

And see that there is no iniquity in the church, neither hardness with each other, neither lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking;

And see that the church meet together often, and also see that all the members do their duty.

And he is to take the lead of meetings in the absence of the elder or priest—

And is to be assisted always, in all his duties in the church, by the deacons, if occasion requires.

But neither teachers nor deacons have authority to baptize, administer the sacrament, or lay on hands;

They are, however, to warn, expound, exhort, and teach, and invite all to come unto Christ. (D&C 20:53-59.)

Inasmuch as the responsibilities of the teacher, in large measure, are directed to "the church" it is appropriate to inquire as to what the scriptural definition of "the church" is. Prior to using this term in section 20, the Lord taught Joseph Smith what the terminology meant. He said, "Behold, this is my doctrine—whosoever repenteth and cometh unto me, the same is my church." (D&C 10:67.) That is to say, the church is the people. Again, in the revelation wherein he uses the term "the church" the Lord defines his terms:

All those who humble themselves before God, and desire to be baptized, and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and witness . . . that they have truly repented of all their sins, and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins, shall be received by baptism into his church." (D&C 20:37.)

The church is an assembly of congregations of such people.

The teacher is to minister to the wants of God's people. He is to "see that there is no iniquity in the church, neither hardness with each other, neither lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking; . . . and also see that all the members do their duty." (D&C 20:53-55.) Home teaching is one of the assignments given to teachers to enable them to discharge these divinely imposed responsibilities.

The teacher "shall teach the principles of my gospel." (D&C 42:12.) It is expressly stated that the source of his teaching of the gospel shall be the holy scriptures. Implied in this directive is a knowledge through scriptural perusal.

The teacher is given specific instructions to "go to with his might, with the labor of his hands, to prepare and accomplish the things which I have commanded." (D&C 38:40.)

There are some scriptural limitations on the office of a teacher. He does not "have authority to baptize administer the sacrament, or lay on hands." (D&C 20:58.) His responsibility to do missionary work—"invite all to come unto Christ" (D&C 20:59)—is discussed in more detail later.

The teacher is a significant position in the priesthood structure. When there is no priest or higher authority present he is directed "to take the lead of meetings." (D&C 20:56.) The office is designated by divine fiat as one of leadership.

Priest

A priest is an ordained office in the Aaronic Priesthood. (D&C 18:32; 20:60.) A priest may do all that a deacon or teacher is authorized to do, with additional authority and responsibilities. The duties incident to his calling are some of the most satisfying and important of all priesthood functions. (For a detailed statement of a priest's duties, see Oscar W. McConkie, The Priest in the Aaronic Priesthood, published by the Presiding Bishop of the Church.)

This office was instituted at Sinai in a most solemn manner. The Levites there remained true to Jehovah and were chosen for this religious service. (Exodus 32:26-29; Numbers 3:9, 11-13, 40, 41; 8:16-18.) There are more than seven hundred references to the priest in the Bible. The functions of the office of a priest continued into New Testament times. (John 4:1-3.) Baptizing is a function of the priest.

There were ordained priests among the first twenty-seven people in the church in this dispensation. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1973], pp. 57-58.)

The Lord outlines the duties of a priest in our day in the basic revelation on church organization and governance:

The priest's duty is to preach, teach, expound, exhort, and baptize, and administer the sacrament,

And visit the house of each member, and exhort them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties.

And he may also ordain other priests, teachers, and deacons.

And he is to take the lead of meetings when there is no elder present;

But when there is an elder present, he is only to preach, teach, expound, exhort, and baptize,

And visit the house of each member, exhorting them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties.

In all these duties the priest is to assist the elder if occasion requires. (D&C 20:46-52.)

It is the duty of the priest "to preach, teach, expound, exhort." One of the most satisfying experiences in God's service is to preach under the influence of the Spirit of the Lord. With reference to this specific responsibility of the priest the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded: ". . . if a Priest understands his duty, his calling, and ministry, and preaches by the Holy Ghost, his enjoyment is as great as if he were one of the Presidency; and his services are necessary in the body, as are also those of Teachers and Deacons." (History of the Church 2:478.)

"The priest's duty is to . . . baptize." No ordinance is better suited to demonstrate priestly authority than the authorization to baptize. Consider the revealed baptismal prayer: "Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen." (D&C 20:73.) This is a divine commission, the essence of priesthood usage: the delegation of the authority of God to act for and in his behalf.

"The priest's duty is to . . . administer the sacrament." This means to officiate at the sacrament table and to break the bread and offer the prayers that have been revealed for use in blessing the emblems of the sacrament. In Old Testament times the priests administered the ordinance of sacrifice. Today the priest administers the ordinance reminiscent of the last great sacrifice. The significance of these performances is found in the words of the revealed prayers:

O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it, that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them; that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. (D&C 20:77.)

O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this wine to the souls of all those who drink of it, that they may do it in remembrance of the blood of thy Son, which was shed for them; that they may witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they do always remember him, that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. (D&C 20:79.)

"The priest's duty is to . . . visit the house of each member." Home teaching is one vehicle to discharge this responsibility. This is a program of the Church where a priesthood bearer goes into the homes of the members and encourages such Christian attributes as prayer.

Priests may "ordain other priests, teachers, and deacons." A priest is authorized to ordain other officers in the Aaronic Priesthood. Once again, this is acting for and in behalf of God.

The priest's duty "is to take the lead of meetings." The priest is herein designated a leader in the household of God.

"In all these duties the priest is to assist the elder if occasion requires." This is a restatement of the truth that the elders in the Melchizedek Priesthood bear the burden of administering all the laws and ordinances of the gospel. Next to the bishop, the priest is the final step in the Aaronic order, the preparatory priesthood. It is he, more than any others, who assists the holders of the higher priesthood.

These three offices of the Aaronic Order—priest, teacher, and deacon—are "to be ordained according to the gifts and callings of God . . . by the power of the Holy Ghost." (D&C 20:60.)

Bishop

Bishop is an ordained office in the Aaronic Priesthood. (D&C 20:67; 107:87-88.) "The office of a Bishop belongs to the lesser Priesthood. He is the highest officer in the Aaronic Priesthood." (Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 9:87.)

The bishop is designated as both the president of the priests quorum and as the president of the Aaronic Priesthood in the area of his jurisdiction. "Also the duty of the president over the Priesthood of Aaron is to preside over forty-eight priests, and sit in council with them, to teach them the duties of their office, as is given in the covenants—This president is to be a bishop; for this is one of the duties of this priesthood." (D&C 107:87-88.)

The office of a bishop is also an appendage "belonging unto the high priesthood." (D&C 84:29.) The bishop is a high priest in the Melchizedek Priesthood as well as an officer in the Aaronic Priesthood. Brigham Young declared: "Can the Bishop baptize the people, according to his Bishopric? He can. When the people he has baptized assemble for confirmation, can he confirm them? He cannot, under the power of his Bishopric; but as he has been ordained to the office of a High Priest, after the order of Melchisedek . . . he has a right as a High Priest to confirm them into the Church by the laying on of hands." (Journal of Discourses 9:280.) "The bishop is the presiding high priest in the ward. . . ." (General Handbook of Instructions, No. 21 [1976], p. 6.)

"In his Aaronic Priesthood capacity a bishop deals primarily with temporal concerns (D&C 107:68); as the presiding high priest in his ward, however, he presides over all ward affairs and members." (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 89.) The bishop presides over all members of his ward, regardless of their office or calling.

As is true for all the offices in the priesthood, a bishop is ordained to this calling, a permanent position that he never loses, assuming good behavior. He is set apart to preside in a ward, which is a temporary assignment of presiding.

A bishop is given special spiritual endowments necessary in performing the office of his calling. One of the functions of his office is to act as a common judge in Israel (D&C 107:74), which is an office of judgment. To perform this function, he has a right to have the gift of discernment, which is the power to discern other spiritual gifts, "lest there shall be any among you professing and yet be not of God." (D&C 46:27.)

One indication of the significance accorded the Aaronic Priesthood in the Church today is found in the General Handbook of Instruction, the operational manual of the Church: "The bishopric is the presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood in the ward. . . . Their major responsibility is to watch over the young men of the Aaronic Priesthood and the young women of the same age. They are to supervise conferral of and ordinations in the Aaronic Priesthood. They are to emphasize and supervise the Aaronic Priesthood. . . ." (P. 6.)

As far as we are able to tell, the New Testament office of bishop is substantially the same as the office of bishop today. The apostle Paul sets forth these qualifications of a bishop:

For a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God; not selfwilled, not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre;

But a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate;

Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers. (Titus 1:7-9.)

These are standard guidelines today in the selection of worthy men for this most special calling.

Presiding Bishop of the Church

It is appropriate to conclude this outline of offices in the Aaronic Priesthood by describing separately the office of a bishop known as the Presiding Bishop of the Church. This is especially appropriate because in this office there may be a continuation of the ancient order of things. This is the office that Aaron held in Old Testament times. Now, as then, the right to this office is hereditary; it descends from worthy father to worthy son: "For the firstborn holds the right of the presidency over this priesthood, and the keys or authority of the same." (D&C 68:17.) In a revelation received by Joseph Smith in 1831 it is recorded: "And if they be literal descendants of Aaron they have a legal right to the bishopric, if they are the firstborn among the sons of Aaron." (D&C 68:16.) To the Priesthood among the Sons of Aaron belongs the legal right to serve as the president of the Aaronic Priesthood and the Presiding Bishop of the Church. This is a living and everlasting monument to Aaron, a "perpetual statute" and "an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations." (Exodus 28:1-3; 40:15.)

The Presiding Bishop is called of God through the mouth of his prophet, the President of the Church. Since he is a General Authority, his is a position of general jurisdiction rather than an office of specific jurisdiction. He holds the keys of presidency over the Aaronic Priesthood of the entire church.

In the absence of a revelation to the President of the Church revealing the lineage of a man to hold this Levitical presidency, the First Presidency is empowered to choose "a high priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood" to hold the office. (D&C 107:17.) All of those chosen thus far in this dispensation have been such high priests.

One who is called by the President of the Church from the loins of Aaron, according to the rule of primogeniture, could serve as Presiding Bishop without counselors. (D&C 107:76.) When the Presiding Bishop is called from among the high priests, he serves with counselors (D&C 107:72), ordained bishops, who are called of God through the Presiding Bishop. These three men, constitute the Presiding Bishopric of the Church. The counselors' authority to act is dependent upon the keys of presidency held by the Presiding Bishop.

The Presiding Bishop may sit as a judge in Israel, to judge transgressors (D&C 107:72), and "none shall be exempted from the justice and the laws of God" (D&C 107:82-84).

He is concerned with and watches over many of the temporal concerns of the church. He is "set apart unto the ministering of temporal things." (D&C 107:71.) The Lord gives him special spiritual insight, "knowledge . . . by the Spirit of truth" (D&C 107:71), to accomplish his calling.

The Presiding Bishop receives consecrations for the care of the Lord's poor. (D&C 42:31-33; 51:5, 12-13.) He is thus intimately associated with the welfare program and its bishop's storehouse. He is also called to travel and preach as an aid to building up the kingdom. (D&C 84:112-116.)

In carrying out the New Testament injunction of bishoprics "to feed the church of God" (Acts 20:28), the Presiding Bishopric sits with the First Presidency of the Church and acts directly under its jurisdiction.

Priesthood Quorums

Those who hold the priesthood are organized into units called quorums. Twelve deacons form a quorum of deacons, twenty-four teachers form a teachers quorum, and forty-eight priests form a quorum of priests. (D&C 107:85-87.)

Each deacons and teachers quorum has a deacon and a teacher, respectively, called to preside over their brethren as president. "Of necessity there are presidents, or presiding officers growing out of, or appointed of or from among those who are ordained to the several offices in these two priesthoods." (D&C 107:21.) The bishop is the president of the priests quorum.

These presidents hold the keys of presidency over the various quorums. It is their obligation to sit in council with their fellow quorum members, "teaching them the duties of their office," "edifying one another, as is given according to the covenants." (D&C 107:85-89.)

The fact that the Lord has chosen quorum organization as the organizational units of his church dramatizes the interdependence of the brethren. Quorums are social, service, and educational units. The quorum furnishes the vehicle for mutual help of its members in every way toward salvation.

Quorums are service units. They are to "give impetus to the service and activities dimension of the Aaronic Priesthood . . . program so that our youth will increase in both their faith and in their capacity to serve their fellowmen. . . . We should not be afraid to ask our youth to render service to their fellowmen or to sacrifice for the kingdom. Our youth have a sense of intrinsic idealism. We need have no fear in appealing to that idealism when we call them to serve. . . . Our youth either know now that 'sacrifice brings forth the blessings of heaven,' or they can come to know that truth, if we will give them greater responsibility and more opportunities for service." (President Spencer W. Kimball, address at MIA June Conference, June 23, 1974.)

The Church gives ever-increasing emphasis to the strengthening of priesthood quorums. President Kimball puts this into proper perspective:

It is our desire to see the quorum presidencies of the Aaronic Priesthood quorums take their tasks seriously, just as we simultaneously are trying to awaken the Melchizedek Priesthood quorums of the Church.

Just as economic and political conditions in the world may give us fresh appreciation for the basics of food, clothing and shelter, and safety, so the Church needs more than ever to focus on fundamentals, like family and quorums.

We must honor the individual, honor the family, honor the quorums, and honor the priesthood. For then we will automatically give more honor and blessings to womanhood.

By focusing on the family and on priesthood quorums—the Aaronic Priesthood and the Melchizedek Priesthood quorums—we can better carry out the unique responsibility of the Church to preach the gospel to every nation in the world; the vitalizing of Aaronic Priesthood quorums and the awakening of the Melchizedek Priesthood quorums will affirmatively affect all other programs in the Church!

We know, of course, that it is change in heart and not change in chart which really makes a lasting difference! I am not discouraged, but I am anxious about my stewardship, just as you should be about yours.

Here we see sparkle the Church teachings wherein the man becomes the child and the child becomes the man through example and training of our superb family life. . . .

If the members of the Church would take giant steps to lift the Church, it must be done or inspired in our families, in our Aaronic Priesthood quorums, in our Melchizedek Priesthood quorums, and in our women programs. (Ibid.)

The great reservoir of power and strength of the sons of God can best be used to its greatest value by having strong, active quorums. As President Harold B. Lee said, "There is no new organization necessary to take care of the needs of this people. All that is necessary is to put the priesthood of God to work. There is nothing you need as a substitute." (General conference address, October 7, 1972.)

The Aaronic Priesthood will remain upon the earth until the day of the second coming of Christ and while he reigns during the Millennium. In ordaining Joseph Smith, John, the heavenly messenger, said of the Priesthood of Aaron, "And this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness." (D&C 13.)

The phrase "the sons of Levi [shall] offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness" was not original with John the Baptist. It is the phrase used by the prophet Malachi in the last book of the Old Testament as he described the second coming of the Lord: "And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness." (Malachi 3:3.)

"The Priesthood of Aaron, or the Levitical Priesthood, will not end when the sons of Levi make their offering in righteousness, but it will remain on the earth as long as mortals dwell here. . . . As long as we have temporal things on the earth this priesthood is necessary. Eventually, when the earth is celestialized, I suppose all priesthood will be of the higher order." (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 3:91-92.)
