Oscar W. McConkie, Aaronic Priesthood ( 1977)

CHAPTER FIVE

The Gospel of Repentance

One of the most optimistic and comforting doctrines of Christ is the doctrine of repentance, which is the process of casting off the burden of guilt, the washing away of iniquity and evil, and becoming free from sin. If a person repents, the Lord will not remember his former sins and imperfections. "Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more." (D&C 58:42.)

Those who love the Lord and seek to do his will want to cleanse and purify themselves. They want to be pure in heart. It is thus that one becomes a saint. (Mosiah 3:19.) The process of working out one's salvation consists in the cleansing and purifying of one's soul. Men must change from their carnal state to a pure state in which they have been forgiven of their sins. That is, they must be purified through the atoning blood of Christ. (Mosiah 4:2.) The pure in heart shall see God. (Matthew 5:8; 3 Nephi 12:8; D&C 97:16.) They shall be one with Christ (3 Nephi 19:28-29) and shall enjoy exaltation (1 John 3:1-3; Moroni 7:48; D&C 35:21).

Thus we see that the very plan of salvation is based upon the belief in and practice of repentance. Every prophet or inspired teacher in every dispensation has restated Isaiah's dictum: "Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil. . . . Learn to do well." (Isaiah 1:16-17.) This is so fundamental and such an integral part of the gospel that the entire plan of salvation is spoken of as the gospel of repentance. (D&C 13.)

Repentance is essential to salvation. "And we know that all men must repent and believe on the name of Jesus Christ, and worship the Father in his name, and endure in faith on his name to the end, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God." (D&C 20:29.) To the end of our own salvation we are commanded to repent, ". . . for, behold, I command all men everywhere to repent." (D&C 18:9-22.)

Now is the time for repentance if we are to have part in the plan of redemption. (Alma 34:31-35.) Peter makes it a directive: "Repent . . . every one of you." (Acts 2:38.)

He who holds the Aaronic Priesthood has two involvements in the process and concept of repentance. He must first concern himself with the process of his own repentance. Then, having commenced to make himself pure in heart, he is under obligation to teach and demonstrate the concept of the gospel of repentance to others.

First Responsibility: Our Own Repentance

"If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us." (1 John 1:8.) The need for repentance is universal. How do we repent? To answer this question, we must examine each element of the process of repentance. These elements, outlined for us in the scriptures, apply to every member of the Church. They are:

We may repent over and over again, for each sin calls for repentance. However, when we repeat a trespass, we evidence that we really did not repent of it. We do not forsake it. Therefore, each time we sin, repentance becomes more difficult. "I, the Lord, will not lay any sin to your charge; go your ways and sin no more; but unto that soul who sinneth shall the former sins return, saith the Lord your God." (D&C 82:7.) The effects of repentance are thus conditioned upon continued righteousness.

Second Responsibility: To Teach and Demonstrate Repentance

Having immersed himself in the process of repentance, the bearer of the Aaronic Priesthood has further responsibility in the gospel of repentance. He must not only be good, but he must also be good for something. He must repent and then teach others to repent.

The holder of this priesthood has a duty "to preach, teach, expound, exhort." Even in the concept of repentance, a priesthood bearer does not worship alone. It is in concert with his fellows that the fulness of the gospel of repentance is realized.

We must be involved in service: service that builds up the kingdom of God from within and service that proselytes others to the cause of truth. We must demonstrate the effects of repentance.

Repentance is such an important aspect of the gospel and its propagation that missionaries are under instruction to "say nothing but repentance unto this generation." (D&C 6:9-11; 11:9.) This means to teach the fundamental principles of the gospel.

Part of the Preparatory Gospel

"And the lesser priesthood . . . holdeth the key of . . . the preparatory gospel; Which gospel is the gospel of repentance. . . ." (D&C 84:26-27.)

The gospel, which is the plan of salvation, embraces all of the laws, principles, doctrines, ordinances, and powers necessary to save and exalt men. The great preparatory principle upon which all of this is based is repentance, and the doctrine of repentance is the preparatory gospel. It is the function of the Aaronic Priesthood to administer the preparatory gospel, to provide the schooling whereby mankind can be led to the gospel of Christ: "The law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ." (Galatians 3:24.) In this important regard the priesthood holder is an officer of the law.
