Oscar W. McConkie, Aaronic Priesthood ( 1977)

CHAPTER SIX

The Ordinance of Baptism

As the angel ministered to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on May 15, 1829, he said in part: "Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys . . . of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins." (D&C 13.)

Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins is a part of preparatory gospel over which the Aaronic Priesthood had jurisdiction. The concepts of faith, repentance, and baptism are spoken of as the preparatory gospel.

When water baptism by immersion is viewed in its historical setting, it is particularly appropriate that it is an Aaronic Priesthood function. God has said that without his ordinances "the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh." (D&C 84:21.) Jesus is the center of all true religion, and religious ordinances center in him. "And behold, all things have their likeness, and all things are created and made to bear record of me, both things which are temporal, and things which are spiritual." (Moses 6:63.) The Aaronic Priesthood was established to take care of some of God's ordinances. (Hebrews 7:12; Exodus 28, 29, 30; Numbers 3, 4; 2 Chronicles 29; Malachi 3:3.) One of the most important of these ancient rites, the ordinance of sacrifice, is specifically described as being performed in "similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten." (Moses 5:7.)

The ordinance of baptism fits the pattern of other ordinances perfectly. It teaches us of Christ; it centers our attention on him. Paul likens baptism to the death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus. (Romans 6:4-5; Colossians 2:12.) We are thus taught in beautiful symbolism that going into the water and coming forth out of the water are even as his going into the grave and coming forth out of the grave. The ordinance imparts knowledge about God to us.

Baptism is part of the everlasting covenant. It began on earth with Adam (Moses 6:64-67) and has continued ever since whenever the Lord has had a people on earth. (D&C 20:23-28; 84:26-28.) It was not a new rite practiced by John the Baptist and adopted by Christ. The Jews were baptizing their converts long before John. Modern discoveries, such as the Dead Sea Scrolls, have added much light to secular scholarship in the matter of pre-Christian baptisms. The part of the Book of Mormon that deals with the pre-Christian era contains much information relative to this eternal law.

The ordinance of baptism has several characteristics. It has a physical or ceremonial part: being immersed in water. There is a spiritual aspect of the ordinance: having the Holy Ghost ratify that which was done. And finally, through this ordinance one may become sanctified, or achieve a state of holiness and purity. The Lord described these three essential characteristics of baptism to Moses: "For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified." (Moses 6:60.) One is sanctified by the Spirit because of the blood of Christ. (2 Nephi 27:19-21.)

Baptism is the initiatory ordinance into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. "No one can be received into the church of Christ unless he has arrived into the years of accountability before God, and is capable of repentance. Baptism is to be administered . . . unto all those who repent." (D&C 20:71-72.)

Baptism is a necessary prerequisite to salvation in the celestial kingdom in the world to come: "And he commandeth all men that they must repent, and be baptized in his name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God." (2 Nephi 9:23.)

Both the temporal and spiritual parts of baptism are essential. Of the angelic ministrant's earthly ministry we read:

John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.

And there went out unto him all the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins.

And [John] preached, saying: There cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose.

I indeed have baptized you with water: but he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost. (Mark 1:4-8. See also Luke 3:16.)

The separable nature of baptism is further illustrated in the ministry of Paul when he met persons who had been baptized "unto John's baptism," that is, water baptism. Paul "laid his hands upon them" and "the Holy Ghost came on them," that is, baptism of the Spirit. (Acts 19:1-6.)

Baptism in water or by immersion is done by the power of the Aaronic Priesthood. (D&C 20:46.) It was thus that John the Baptist was empowered to baptize as he did. (D&C 68:17; 84:26-28.)

Baptism of the Spirit is an administration under the power of the Melchizedek Priesthood. To those holding this priesthood is given authority "to confirm those who are baptized into the church, by the laying on of hands for the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost." (D&C 20:41.) It was thus that the apostle Paul was able to baptize and confirm as he did.

Baptism means immersion. The meaning of the term at the time of Christ was an actual immersion in water. Contemporary accounts of naval battles in those days spoke of ships being baptized if they were sunk, or partially baptized if they were beached and only partially sunk. (James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith, pp. 484-86.) The scriptural accounts of baptism take place in rivers (Mark 1:9) or where there is "much water" (John 3:23).

Modern revelation sets forth in clarity the proper form of baptism:

Baptism is to be administered in the following manner unto all those who repent—

The person who is called of God and has authority from Jesus Christ to baptize, shall go down into the water with the person who has presented himself or herself for baptism, and shall say, calling him or her by name: Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Then shall he immerse him or her in the water, and come forth again out of the water. (D&C 20:72-74.)

Priests are instruments in the hands of God in performing this essential ordinance.

Purposes of Baptism

The scriptures suggest several purposes served by baptism. First, baptism is a divinely prescribed ordinance for the remission of sins. "Thou shalt declare repentance and faith on the Savior, and remission of sins by baptism, and by fire, yea, even the Holy Ghost." (D&C 19:31.)

Second, baptism admits a repentant person to membership in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

All those who humble themselves before God, and desire to be baptized, and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and witness before the church that they have truly repented of all their sins, and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins, shall be received by baptism into his church. (D&C 20:37.)

Third, baptism is the gateway—the only way—to the celestial kingdom of heaven. "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.) All men must "be baptized, . . . or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God." (2 Nephi 9:23.)

Fourth, baptism begins the means of personal sanctification. "Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day." (3 Nephi 27:20.)

The Priest as an Agent of God

Baptism is a sacred contract between God and man, a part of the new and everlasting covenant of the gospel. Each of us who is baptized undertakes certain obligations as our part in this covenant. We agree to serve God and keep his commandments. We are to take upon ourselves the name of Christ. (D&C 18:17-25.) We are to stand as witnesses of God, to bear one another's burdens, and to comfort those that stand in need of comfort and mourn with those that mourn. (Mosiah 8:7-10.)

The Lord, for his part, agrees to "pour out his Spirit" upon those who so contract and assure them of eternal life. The priest who performs this holy ordinance, as the duly commissioned agent of God, performs the function that binds God if the second party to the sacred and solemn contract is faithful and does not breach the agreement.

John the Baptist did not introduce a new rite in his earthly ministry nor when he ministered to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. A portion of this ordinance has been a part of the ministry of the Aaronic Priesthood since that priesthood was given to the world. Peter, the chief apostle in the New Testament church, put it in plain terms: "He commanded them to be baptized." (Acts 10:48.)
