Oscar W. McConkie, Aaronic Priesthood ( 1977)

CHAPTER SEVEN

An Offering Unto the Lord in Righteousness

When the Aaronic Priesthood was restored to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on that momentous day in May 1829, John declared: ". . . and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness." (D&C 13.)

The prophet Malachi, in the last book of the Old Testament, described the second coming of the Lord: "And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness." (Malachi 3:3.) We are thus assured from the mouth of the restoring angel that the Aaronic Priesthood will remain upon the earth until into the millennium.

Incident to the second coming, and as a part of the restoration of all things, certain ancient Levitical ordinances will again be performed in this dispensation. The Prophet Joseph said: "All the ordinances and duties that ever have been required by the Priesthood, under the directions and commandments of the Almighty in any of the dispensations, shall be had in the last dispensation." (History of the Church 4:210-11.)

Ceremonial rites or offerings do not fulfill the angelic requirement of offering unto the Lord in righteousness. This offering means much more than ordinance work. There must be a vital, living, and real offering in the lives of the officers in the Aaronic Priesthood.

Making offerings unto the Lord is, in effect, worshiping God: "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." (Matthew 4:10.) Worship is defined as paying divine honors to deity.

A priesthood bearer may make his offerings in righteousness in putting on himself the Christian disciplines. He thus may worship in paying tithes, in observing the Word of Wisdom and the Sabbath, in fasting, in praying, in his relationship to his family, in his relationship to his community and government, in his total involvement in the Church, in his role in sharing the gospel.

Offerings unto the Lord in righteousness are best made by those who first believe the gospel and join in its outward form and then develop the personal righteousness that makes them the exemplars of the Christian ethic.

Ancient and modern Israel are under commandment to offer their oblations unto the Lord. (Leviticus 7:38; 2 Chronicles 31:14 2 Chronicles 31:14.) In its highest and most meaningful sense, the offering of an oblation consists in giving full devotion unto the Lord. In this dispensation the Lord has directed that our offering unto him be a broken heart and a contrite spirit:

Thou shalt offer a sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in righteousness, even that of a broken heart and a contrite spirit.

For verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High;

Nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times;

But remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord. (D&C 59:8, 10-12.)

The priesthood officer in the kingdom is under particular obligation to offer oblations unto the Lord in righteousness. It is thus that he magnifies his priestly calling; it is one important way in which he helps to perfect the Saints.

General Priesthood Functions

Modern revelations outline the specific duties and responsibilities of those holding the Aaronic Priesthood in the church and kingdom of God today. There are also other priesthood functions imposed by scriptures. When the Lord says, "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39), he is also stating the work of priesthood. The bringing to pass of man's eternal life has been divided into three categories for administrative objectives:

The Aaronic Priesthood bearer has a priesthood involvement in each of these areas of priesthood administration.

To Preach, Teach, Expound, Exhort

The apostle Paul records that "it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe," and that this is a calling of the brethren. (1 Corinthians 1:21, 26.) Preachers are called of God to teach his saving truths. This has been the case from the beginning. Moses names the patriarchs from Adam to Enoch and describes them, saying: "And they were preachers of righteousness, and spake and prophesied, and called upon all men, everywhere, to repent; and faith was taught unto the children of men." (Moses 6:23.)

This being the order of things, it is necessary that some men be called to perform this essential function. The bearers of the Aaronic Priesthood are among those so called. Paul, the great missionary apostle, explains this concept:

For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.

How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?

And how shall they preach, except they be sent? as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things!

But they have not all obeyed the gospel. For Esaias saith, Lord, who hath believed our report?

So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. (Romans 10:13-17.)

Teaching is not only done in formal preachments, but also in informal conversation in many teaching situations. The Lord directs that we should teach in all possible situations:

Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord:

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart:

And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. (Deuteronomy 6:4-7.)

This great commandment has been repeated in every dispensation. In the dispensation of the fulness of times we have added to the commandment of teaching the principles of the gospel this important statement: "which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon, in the which is the fulness of the gospel." (D&C 42:12.) Since this commandment was given in 1831 two other standard works have been canonized: the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price.

The secret of convincing gospel teaching is given by Nephi: "When a man speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the children of men." (2 Nephi 33:1.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith, in a revelation specified as the law of the Church, said this about teachers: "And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith; and if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach." (D&C 42:14.)

Before one can properly teach gospel principles, then, he must have the Spirit of the Lord. The priesthood bearer must so live that the Holy Ghost can enlighten his mind and loosen his tongue. He must also know the doctrines of the gospel. "Neither take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say" is the divine decree, "but treasure up in your minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man." (D&C 84:85. See also Matthew 10:19-20.)

Priesthood bearers who are parents are given special instruction and direction to teach their children:

And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents.

For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized.

And their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on of the hands.

And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord." (D&C 68:25-28.)

The art of expounding is a part of the teaching process. To expound is to lay open the meaning of; to set out or expose. Expounding has to do with interpreting and explaining. That which has been said of teaching can be said of expounding.

Expounding gospel principles carries special responsibilities. The priest does not have the prerogative to put his own interpretation on gospel principles. Peter instructs that "no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation." (2 Peter 1:20.) As scriptures are produced when the Holy Ghost moves persons (D&C 68:3-4), so their interpretation must come from the same source (D&C 8:1-2). Thus, in order to discharge his responsibility in expounding, the priesthood bearer must enjoy the companionship of the Holy Ghost.

To exhort is to incite persons to action. It is to advise or to earnestly warn. Exhortation has a particular function in the gospel plan. Paul wrote: "Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, . . . exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine." (2 Timothy 4:2.) The purpose of preaching, teaching, and expounding is to motivate our brothers and sisters to righteous action.

One great call to action or exhortation is to earnestly warn the world. "For this is a day of warning, and not a day of many words" (D&C 63:58), and "it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor" (D&C 88:81).

In all of these godly purposes the priesthood bearer is an express functionary.

Involvement in Home Teaching

Upon priesthood bearers, including those in the Aaronic Priesthood, rests the obligation to visit the houses of the Saints and to lead the inhabitants thereof to righteousness. This responsibility is detailed in the revelations. Such a teacher's duty is "to watch over the church always, and be with and strengthen them; And see that there is no iniquity in the church, neither hardness with each other, neither lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking." (D&C 20:53-54.)

To aid in the discharge of these responsibilities, the Church sends out priesthood brethren as home teachers to visit the homes of all members at least once a month.

The home teacher represents, first of all, his bishop. This is a solemn responsibility. He should convey the same feeling of love, concern, and interest that the bishop would convey if he were there personally.

Second, he represents his priesthood quorum. The priesthood quorum is the Church unit directly responsible for the welfare of its members, and one of the goals of home teaching is to enrich and develop the feeling of brotherhood within the quorums.

Third, he has the responsibility of coordinating all of the resources of the Church that are necessary to achieve the physical and spiritual needs of his families. The home teacher thus helps to fellowship each family in the wholeness of Church activity. He helps strengthen the home instruction of his family.

Involvement in Church Welfare

The Lord has always been concerned with the temporal welfare of his people. In every dispensation the physical well-being of the people has been a subject of revelation from God. Much of the burden of the prophets and apostles in all ages has been to alleviate social injustices and iniquities.

In this dispensation of the fulness of times the Lord has decreed: "But it is not given that one man should possess that which is above another, wherefore the world lieth in sin." (D&C 49:20.) This is one of the great social pronouncements of all time.

The Lord further spoke to Joseph Smith of the importance of social justice and equality: "You may be equal in the bonds of heavenly things, yea, and earthly things also, for the obtaining of heavenly things. For if ye are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly things." (D&C 78:5-6.) Part of the order of the Church was to advance this cause. (D&C 78:4.) Within the organization of the Church was to be "the preparation . . . and the foundation, and the ensample" to eventually accomplish these noble objectives of equality. (D&C 78:13.)

The Lord clearly states his purpose in caring for the physical needs of his people and the penalty of noncompliance to his will:

I, the Lord, stretched out the heavens, and built the earth, my very handiwork; and all things therein are mine.

And it is my purpose to provide for my saints. . . .

For the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare. . . .

Therefore, if any man shall take of the abundance which I have made, and impart not his portion, according to the law of my gospel, unto the poor and the needy, he shall, with the wicked, lift up his eyes in hell. (D&C 104:14-18.)

The bishop is specifically charged with the responsibility of "searching after the poor to administer to their wants." In part this is done by redistributing wealth, or "humbling the rich and the proud." (D&C 84:112.) All of this is under the auspices of the elders. (D&C 20:42.)

Welfare work is not new. Every dispensation has had its tithes, offerings, cooperative enterprises, united orders, planned economies, or whatever arrangements were necessary under the given circumstances. The Church's attempt to apply these divine principles in the daily lives of its members received renewed emphasis in 1936 in a system known as the Church welfare plan.

"Our primary purpose," said the First Presidency, "was to set up, in so far as it might be possible, a system under which the curse of idleness would be done away with, the evils of a dole abolished, and independence, industry, thrift and self respect be once more established amongst our people. The aim of the Church is to help the people to help themselves. Work is to be re-enthroned as the ruling principle of the lives of our Church membership." (Conference Report, October 1936, p. 3.)

Part of the responsibility of members of priesthood quorums is to help provide for the temporal well-being of one another. This is part of the brotherhood that membership in the quorum implies.

The quorum itself is to participate in the activities of the welfare program, such as planting, caring for, and harvesting crops, processing foods, storing food, clothing, and fuel, and carrying out other projects for the mutual benefit of its members or other persons.

The relationships of the priesthood with its lofty, unselfish brotherhood, require that quorum members, individually and as groups, exert their utmost means and powers to spiritually and temporally rehabilitate their brothers. The quorum looks upon a needy member as a continuing problem until his temporal and spiritual needs are met. Rehabilitation activities are nearly as many and varied as are the problems. They have included: (1) placing quorum members in permanent jobs; (2) helping the families of quorum members in getting permanent jobs; (3) helping quorum members in trade school training, apprenticeships, and so forth; (4) providing means and encouragement for further schooling; (5) building homes; (6) assisting quorum members in establishing themselves in business.

Caring for one another is not an optional part of the gospel. From the beginning it was intended that we would be our brother's keeper. (Genesis 4:9.) There is hardly a way wherein one could better make an offering unto the Lord in righteousness.

Involvement in Genealogy and Temple Work

An epistle from the Prophet Joseph Smith to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints contains the following reference to offerings to the Lord in righteousness:

Behold, the great day of the Lord is at hand; and who can abide the day of his coming, and who can stand when he appeareth? For he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap; and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. Let us, therefore, as a church and a people, and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness; and let us present in his holy temple, when it is finished, a book containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptation. (D&C 128:24.)

The scriptures thus itemize genealogical records for temple work as an offering unto the Lord in righteousness.

One of the great functions of the priesthood is to provide for the dead. "The greatest responsibility in this world that God has laid upon us is to seek after our dead." (Teachings, p. 356.) Modern scripture refers to this area of priesthood function as "this most glorious of all subjects belonging to the everlasting gospel." (D&C 128:17.) As such, it represents one of the basic duties imposed upon the Church membership.

"God is not the God of the dead, but of the living." (Matthew 22:32.) That is to say, there is no death nor dead as far as God is concerned. All are alive unto him. The Lord made this statement with reference to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who had died long before as men count death, but who were alive as the Lord views things in his eternal perspective.

In the eternal perspective man's existence and progress from his pre-earth life to his eventual inheritance in one of the post-earth life degrees of glory is one continuing course. In the Lord's view, then, it is not material whether the opportunity to accept the gospel of salvation comes in this mortal sphere or in the world of spirits hereafter. Sometime after birth into this life and before the resurrection and judgment every living soul will hear the gospel message. All will be judged according to the various reactions thereto. The millions who pass, by way of death, into the spirit world without receiving an opportunity during mortality to hear the truths of salvation will receive their chance to hear and accept the gospel.

It was Jesus who organized the missionary work among the spirits in the spirit world: "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; Which sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water." (1 Peter 3:18-20.)

The Lord explained this concept: "Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." (John 5:28-29.)

The prophets and apostles prophesied of it (Isaiah 42:6-7; 61:1-2) and described its application and procedures in the primitive church (1 Corinthians 15:29).

The principles and procedures whereby the saving truths of the gospel are offered to, accepted by, and made binding upon the departed dead comprise the doctrine of salvation for the dead. That is part of God's plan of salvation. The principles of salvation are taught in the spirit world, leaving the ordinances, which are earthly acts, to be performed in this life on a vicarious or proxy basis. The worthy dead who accept the gospel in the spirit world and for whom the necessary ordinances are performed in this world can become heirs of the fulness of the Father's kingdom. Salvation for the dead is the system under which those who would have accepted the gospel in this life, had they had the opportunity of hearing it, will have the opportunity to accept it in the spirit world and will then be entitled to all the blessings that passed them by in mortality.

One of the evidences that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a true restoration of the primitive church established by Christ is that it practices the New Testament doctrine and procedure of baptism for the dead.

"Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" (1 Corinthians 15:29.)

As in every true application of gospel ordinances, the ordinance of baptism for the dead is an exclusive ordinance of the restored church, administered by authoritative ministers. The rest of the Christian world read of it and wonder.

The administration of the ordinance is a priesthood function, and holders of the priesthood are under a duty to perform the ordinance as a service for our departed dead. We cannot lightly pass over these obligations. (D&C 128:15.)

Young members of the Aaronic Priesthood should participate in the temple ordinance of baptism for the dead where a location of a temple makes it possible. (D&C 128:13-18.) They ought to prepare themselves for service to their dead. The Aaronic Priesthood is a preparatory priesthood, and holders should prepare themselves for temple ordinances reserved for those of the Melchizedek Priesthood.

And, finally, those who bear the Aaronic Priesthood should prepare genealogical data for temple ordinances. They should do research on family lines. They should prepare family group sheets. They should work on their pedigree charts. They should "offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness . . . a book containing the records of our dead." (D&C 128:24.)
