Oscar W. McConkie, Aaronic Priesthood ( 1977)

CHAPTER EIGHT

Keys of the Ministering of Angels

When the angel visited Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery at Harmony, Pennsylvania, on May 15, 1829, and conferred the Aaronic Priesthood upon them, he said in part: "Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels."

Do angels exist? What are they? What are their functions and purposes? What is their ministry? And what did the angel mean when he talked of the "keys of the ministering of angels"? Finally, and more importantly, what has all of this to do with us?

No less a personage than our Lord has called our attention to angels. When Jesus' disciples asked him to "declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field," he responded: "He that soweth the good seed is the Son of Man; the field is the world . . . and the reapers are the angels." (Matthew 13:36-39.) The Son of Man was and is real. He exists. The world was and is real. It has place and substance. As the Lord said, angels are real too. They are beings. They exist.

Jesus taught much about angels. He tells us what brings them joy. "Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth." (Luke 15:10.) In requiring us to become as little children in our faith, he reminds us that "in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father. . . ." (Matthew 18:10.) And in the last days he says they shall have to do with our very salvation. For, he says, he "shall send his angels . . . and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds. . . ." (Matthew 24:31.)

Clearly the Lord believes in and has to do with angels. Just as clearly, judging from his holy writ, he wants us to do the same. (Oscar W. McConkie, Jr., Angels [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975], p. 1.)

The Aaronic Priesthood has a special role to play with reference to ministrations of angels. Historically, angels have had to do with this order. Moses records the function of an angel incident to this ancient ministry: "And the Lord said unto Moses, Depart, and go up hence, thou and the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, unto the land which I sware unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, Unto thy seed will I give it: And I will send an angel before thee." (Exodus 33:1-2.)

Following this same pattern in our day, the Lord said: "The power and authority of the lesser, or Aaronic Priesthood, is to hold the keys of the ministering of angels, and to administer in outward ordinances, the letter of the gospel, the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, agreeable to the covenants and commandments." (D&C 107:20.)

God created the angels. "For by him were all things created, that are in heaven and that are in earth, visible and invisible . . . all things were created by him, and for him." (Colosssians 1:16-17.)

The angels are children of our Father in heaven. "Because angels are of the same race as man and God, it is with perfect logic that in the pure language spoken by Adam, they were designated Anglo-man." (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 37.)

Form of Angels

The spirit form and appearance are similar to the temporal form or appearance. This is true of each particular form of life. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained this principle, saying: ". . . that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created." (D&C 77:2). Thus in pre-earth life God's creations appeared somewhat as they appear in the flesh.

The Brother of Jared was accorded the singular privilege of seeing the Lord two millennia prior to his earthly ministry. In introducing himself the Lord said, "Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. . . ." (Ether 3:14.) Then the Lord told his beholder, ". . . Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all men were created in the beginning after mine own image." (Ether 3:15.) Then the Lord told him what spirits look like before they are in the flesh. Their fleshy temples are after the similitude of the spirit. "Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh." (Ether 3:16.)

Angels are in form like man, as they have appeared throughout the ages. The most universally accepted accounts of such appearances are biblical.

When Abraham entertained three angels on the plains of Mamre, it is recorded, ". . . he lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him." (Genesis 18:2.) Of the two angels who visited Lot's home in Sodom, the local residents inquired, "Where are the men which came in to thee this night?" (Genesis 19:1, 5.)

Daniel described Gabriel as he came to him as being in the form of man: ". . . behold, there stood before me as the appearance of a man." (Daniel 8:15.)

All four Gospel accounts of the women at the sepulchre of the risen Lord describe "the angel of the Lord descended from heaven" (Matthew 28:2) as being in the form of a man. ". . . they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment." (Mark 16:5.) In the Gospel of John the women were pictured as seeing two angels. (John 20:12.) Luke records the same instance: "two men stood by them in shining garments." (Luke 24:4.) Although in form like men, there was a glory that attended this angel: "His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow." (Matthew 28:3.)

The most detailed description of an angel recorded was written by Joseph Smith. It is a description of the appearance of the Angel Moroni. Here is his witness:

While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor.

He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, and his arms also, a little above the wrist; so, also, were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing on but this robe, as it was open, so that I could see into his bosom.

Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately around his person. When I first looked upon him, I was afraid; but the fear soon left me.

He called me by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had a work for me to do; and that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people.

After this communication, I saw the light in the room begin to gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking to me, and it continued to do so until the room was again left dark, except just around him; when, instantly I saw, as it were, a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended till he entirely disappeared, and the room was left as it had been before this heavenly light had made its appearance. (Joseph Smith 2:30-33, 43.)

This vision was repeated three times, and the Prophet Joseph Smith himself wrote the firsthand account of it.

Types and Kinds of Angels

The scriptures describe several types of persons that the Lord has used as angels in varying circumstances, including the following:

From the foregoing quotation we note that many people have been translated in the history of this earth. The Prophet Joseph Smith gives us more insight into this in the Inspired Version, Genesis 14:25-26.

The Prophet said of Enoch: "He is a ministering angel, to minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation, and appeared unto Jude." He further plainly says that these translated beings are "ministering angels unto many planets." (Teachings, p. 120.)

The Three Nephites were spoken of "as the angels of God" (3 Nephi 28:30) after they were translated and continued to minister to mortal men.

John the Revelator was translated and given to "tarry till I come." (John 21:20-25.) He ministered to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in connection with the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood. (D&C 7; 27:12-13.)

Church leaders of spiritual maturity and sensitivity, such as President Wilford Woodruff, record many ministrations of such angels: "Joseph Smith visited me a great deal after his death, and taught me many important principles." (The Discourses of Wilford Woodruff [Bookcraft, 1946], p. 288.)

This type of angel has been instrumental in the restoration of the gospel in this dispensation. It was of such angels that John recorded: "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people." (Revelation 14:6.) He saw in vision the restoration of the gospel in these last days.

John the Baptist was such an angel. (D&C 13.) Peter and James were among this type of ministrants. (D&C 27:12-13; 128:20.)

Moroni, Michael, Gabriel, Raphael (D&C 128:20-21), Moses, Elijah, and Elias (D&C 110:11-16; 133:54-55) all came to earth as resurrected personages and played an indispensable part in the restoration in the fulness of times. They restored the keys and powers and authorities that they had obtained in their separate dispensations, thus bringing all together in one dispensation.

Moses and Elias were translated beings in their lifetimes. They ministered as such on the Mount of Transfiguration. (Matthew 17:1-4.) However, for their participation in the great drama of the dispensation of the fulness of times they "were with Christ in his resurrection." (D&C 133:55.)

It is of these angels and others like them that the revelation records: "Then shall the angels be crowned with the glory of his might, and the saints shall be filled with his glory, and receive their inheritance and be made equal with him." (D&C 88:107.) That is to say, worthy saints and angels will receive exaltation with God.

Not all angels will be exalted. Those who did not abide all of the gospel law shall not go on to godhood, but shall act as "angels of God forever and ever" and shall be "ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory." (D&C 132:16-17.)

The Lord as an Angel

Our Lord is called The Angel in a blessing given by Jacob: "God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this day, The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads." (Genesis 48:15-16.)

The Lord is not an angel in the usual sense. However, Christ is the messenger of salvation and the messenger of the covenant. (Malachi 3:1.) He is one who carries out the will of the Father. (Moses 4:2.) Thus he may perform the function of an angel and is properly called such.

It was the Lord who appeared to Moses in the burning bush: "The presence of the Lord appeared unto him, in a flame of fire in the midst of a bush." (Inspired Version, Exodus 3:2.) The King James translation interpreted the passage as "the angel of the Lord," but had him say "I am the God of thy father." (Exodus 3:2-6.) Some biblical citations thus refer to the Lord as an angel.

Righteous Mortal Men as Angels

The revelations refer to certain mortal men who act as messengers or agents of God as angels. In the Old Testament the terms "angels" and "men" were used interchangeably in talking of the persons sent by God to rescue Lot from the wicked inhabitants of Sodom. Joseph Smith's Inspired Version tells us that these "angels of God" were actually "holy men." (Inspired Version, Genesis 19:15.)

The New Testament also uses this terminology. It records the Lord as giving "unto the angel of the church of Ephesus" (Revelation 2:1) certain instructions. Thus an officer in the church was referred to as an angel.

Ministering of Angels

Angels are ministers of Christ. One of their duties is to minister to the children of men, to prepare the way for men to have faith in Christ. (Moroni 7:29-32.) Moroni says that angels have not ceased to minister:

For behold, they are subject unto him, to minister according to the word of his command, showing themselves unto them of strong faith and a firm mind in every form of godliness.

And the office of their ministry is to call men unto repentance, and to fulfill and to do the work of the covenants of the Father, which he hath made into the children of men, to prepare the way among the children of men, by declaring the word of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they may bear testimony of him. (Moroni 7:30-31.)

As angels minister to men, they "speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore, they speak the words of Christ." (2 Nephi 32:3.)

From Adam until the present day angels have ministered to men whenever men have had sufficient faith. When men are unacquainted with such ministrants it is because of unbelief. "Have angels ceased to appear unto the children of men? . . . Nay; . . . it is by faith that angels appear and minister unto men; wherefore, if these things have ceased wo be unto the children of men, for it is because of unbelief, and all is vain." (Moroni 7:36-37.)

This combination of heavenly and earthly activity is cited as a standard. If angels minister to men, then it is evidenced that they are the Lord's people and kingdom. If angels do not minister among people, it is evidenced that they are not the Lord's people.

The restoration of the gospel was foreseen as the work of ministering angels. "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." (Revelation 14:6-7.)

It was by this means that the Book of Mormon was brought forth. "God ministered unto [Joseph Smith] by an holy angel . . . And gave him power . . . to translate the Book of Mormon." (D&C 20:6-8.)

Angels restored the Aaronic and the Melchizedek priesthoods by conferring their powers upon men.

It was because men heard the voices of angels that they were commissioned to use the keys of the kingdom in this dispensation. "Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel. . . . Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham. . . . Elijah . . . stood before us, . . . testifying that he [Elijah] should . . . turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, . . . Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands." (D&C 110:11-16.) "The voice of Michael on the banks of the Susquehanna" (D&C 128:20) was heard by Joseph Smith. "The voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, . . . all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory" (D&C 128:21) were all parts of the restoration of all things.

It is by angelic ministrants that the world is called to repentance. (D&C 43:25.) It is through the ministering of angels to men in modern history that the Lord is performing his great work of restoring the gospel of Jesus Christ in principle and power.

Angels and Us

Angelic ministrations to others are vital to us. Each of us has the right to have angels minister to us. God is no respector of persons. If we comply with the requisite law, the effect of the law is put into operation. The angel Moroni need not appear to us because the Book of Mormon has already been brought forth; so also the other angels instrumental in restoring the gospel need not appear to us personally because they have already accomplished their various purposes. The Lord does not use special messengers when it is not necessary. However, the promise of angelic ministrations is not given just to persons who had part in the great restoration of things. It is a gift that all members of the priesthood should enjoy.

In speaking of the time shortly after his conversion to the Church, Wilford Woodruff reports that he baptized men but did not have the authority to confirm them. He said: "I had the administration of angels while holding the office of a priest." (The Discourses of Wilford Woodruff [Bookcraft, 1946], p. 298.) The illustration he uses in conjunction with this statement is illuminating. He was threatened by an apostate who intended to kill him, and his life was spared by dramatic divine intervention in his behalf. He referred to this incident as ministration of angels.

There are many specific instances in which angels have performed particular works whereby faithful people have been guarded and preserved. Isaiah writes of the angel whose presence saved Israel. (Isaiah 63:6-9.)

The administration of angels need not be as dramatic as were those of the restoring agents from on high. Angels may minister and the recipient need not know the source of his strength or joy. For example, one person may be helped while speaking from the pulpit, while another may receive guidance at a critical junction in his life. In some instances a third party has been aware of the presence of angels while the party actually concerned was apparently unaware of their presence.

One manifestation of angelic ministrations may be angels attending a person to comfort, encourage, and enlarge his joy. It was thus that Cornelius sought and enjoyed the ministration of an angel. (Acts 10:30-31.)

We have the right today to expect angels to function and perform as they have functioned and performed in times past. Those who are prepared in righteousness may claim such experiences, and if we do not enjoy them, it is because of our unbelief. The divine standard is constant It is we who are on trial, not the angels.

Keys of the Ministering of Angels

The Aaronic Priesthood holds the keys to the ministering of angels, which means that the Aaronic Priesthood opens the door to all that we have discussed relative to the ministering of angels. Inasmuch as this is the express potential of the priesthood bearer, one is not fully enjoying his office and calling in the absence of such a wonderous experience.

What a tremendous advantage it is to hold the Aaronic Priesthood!

The Lord has ordained the lesser priesthood so that we might prepare ourselves for the high priesthood. The keys of the ministration of angels have been given to be used, and when we do not use these offered blessings, we default in our priestly prerogatives and do not enjoy the full intent of the office and callings to which we have been ordained. These proffered blessings are a means of leading us "unto the city of the living God." (Hebrews 12:22.)

David praised the Lord for this principle. "The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them. O fear the Lord, ye his saints: for there is no want to them that fear him." (Psalm 34:7, 9.) He knew what he was talking about. He had experienced the angelic forces of God in his behalf. In inspired song he sang: "He hath delivered my soul in peace from the battle that was against me: for there were many with me." (Psalm 55:18.) This is an apparent reference to the Assyrian invasion of Judah wherein the righteous troops were encouraged: "Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the king of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there be more with us than with him: With him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to fight our battles. . . ." (2 Chronicles 32:7-8.)

One trouble is that we do not know that the Lord is willing to take care of our wants, and so we do not enjoy the joint effort that we otherwise might have.

In the Old Testament we read of Elisha, a man of God who saw the angelic hosts marshaled in favor of the forces of righteousness. By intercessory prayer the prophet was able to open the eyes of the people, and they became aware of the strength of their position. They saw that there were more that were for them than there were that were against them:

Therefore sent he thither horses, and chariots, and a great host: and they came by night, and compassed the city about.

And when the servant of the man of God was risen early, and gone forth, behold, an host compassed the city both with horses and chariots. And his servant said unto him, Alas, my master! how shall we do?

And he answered, Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them.

And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha. (2 Kings 6:14-17.)

Since God is no respector of persons, we can safely assume that he will treat us as he treated Elisha's men. It is as important in our lives, as it was in theirs, to know that "they that be with us are more than they that be with them."

The apostle Paul talks about the Mosaic dispensation as being received "by the disposition of angels." (Acts 7:53.) This is yet another reference to the connection between the Aaronic order and angelic administrations. Apparently when God was with Moses on Sinai thousands of angels were there too. (Deuteronomy 33:2.)

As the eyes of our understanding are opened, it is hoped that we too may see. This is the reason why this order of the preparatory priesthood holds the keys to the ministering of angels.
