Oscar W. McConkie, Aaronic Priesthood ( 1977)

CHAPTER NINE

Invite All to Come Unto Christ

Apart of the specific requirements of those holding the Aaronic Priesthood is this divine fiat: "Invite all to come unto Christ." (D&C 20:59.) The Lord required all who have heard the gospel to share it: "It becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor." (D&C 88:81.) But to those of the Aaronic Priesthood is given the special charge to invite all into the glories of the fulness of the gospel, for priesthood carries with it the responsibility to do missionary work.

President Spencer W. Kimball has instructed: "The question is frequently asked: Should every young man fill a mission? And the answer has been given by the Lord. It is 'yes.' Every young man should fill a mission. . . . The answer is yes. Every man should also pay his tithing. Every man should observe the Sabbath. Every man should attend his meetings. Every man should consummate his marriage in the temple. . . . yes, we would say, every able worthy man should shoulder the cross. . . ." (Regional Representatives Seminar, April 4, 1974; personal correspondence.)

Fulfilling a tour of duty as a full-time missionary is as incumbent upon a priesthood bearer as are paying tithing, keeping the Sabbath holy, and keeping the rest of the commandments. God requires it of his people.

A young missionary in the mission field came to me one day and said, "President, I want to go home."

"Why?" I asked.

He responded, "I just don't like missionary work. It is not what I expected when I accepted my call."

"I don't consider that answer responsive to my question. Why do you want to go home?"

"I told you," he replied. "I don't like missionary work; that's why I want to go home."

"Whether you like it or not doesn't have anything to do with performing your missionary obligations," I said. "Do you hold the priesthood?"

"You know I do, and I'm proud of it."

I explained, "Holding the priesthood carries with it the concomitant responsibility to do missionary service. If you like to do this type of service, that's fortunate because it means you will do what you like to do. If you don't like to do this service, it simply means that you will spend the next two years doing what you don't like to do."

When the young man understood that missionary service was not optional, he started to like it. He became an effective and happy servant of the Lord.

What Is Expected of Missionaries

"If there were no converts, the Church would shrivel and die on the vine." (Spencer W. Kimball, op. cit.) Missionaries are the first line of defense for the kingdom of God. Missionary work is daily combat with sin and error, and to be successful, these troops need a very special discipline.

The first discipline of the successful missionary is to teach by the Spirit. "I the Lord ask you this question—unto what were ye ordained? To preach my gospel by the Spirit, even the Comforter which was sent forth to teach the truth. . . . And if it be by some other way it is not of God." (D&C 50:13-14, 18.) "And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith; and if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach." (D&C 42:14.)

The Spirit is given by the prayer of faith. We must want the Spirit enough to fast and pray for it. "Behold, I have fasted and prayed many days that I might know these things of myself. And now I do know of myself that they are true; for the Lord God hath made them manifest unto me by his Holy Spirit; and this is the spirit of revelation which is in me." (Alma 5:46.) Yearning and hoping and praying are not enough. We must act. We must do what the Lord requires—keep the commandments. The Spirit will not dwell in an unclean tabernacle, for "the Lord hath said he dwelleth not in unholy temples, but in the hearts of the righteous doth he dwell." (Alma 34:36.) We must work, for "faith without works is dead." (James 2:26.)

A mission president reported this experience in general conference:

I am thankful for the Priesthood activity of the Church. I want to increase my faith in God. From the time I was a little boy, I have prayed with earnest devotion that I might have faith in God, and I remember one time, after I was a man, I had a serious problem before me—it was in the California Mission—and on my bended knees I prayed to God for strength, for wisdom, for understanding sufficient to enable me to accomplish my work, and I shall never forget how it was brought home to me that humility and righteousness are necessary in this work.

As I arose from my knees, the voice of the Spirit spoke to my spirit, for I had asked God to give me faith like unto Enoch and Elijah, because I felt that I must have that kind of faith to accomplish the purpose I was required to seek to accomplish. And the voice of the Spirit said to me: "Enoch and Elijah obtained their faith through righteousness."

Ah! there is a challenge to every man in this Church to have faith through righteousness. There is no other means of obtaining it, and we may pray until our voices fade away, but if we do not have righteousness in our daily lives, we will never have enough faith to win salvation. (Conference Report, October 1952, pp. 56-57.)

To get the Spirit and be worthy of acceptation by God, it is necessary to petition the Lord and to do the work.

Another discipline of a successful missionary is the attitude of success. He must believe that he will succeed. "All things are possible to him that believeth." (Mark 9:23.) To the missionary God has said, "The voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days. And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them." (D&C 1:4-5.) When we understand that we are on the Lord's errand, we have the attitude of success.

Another discipline of a successful missionary is that of studying and learning the gospel. Gospel knowledge is a great motivator. We are under divine injunction to "teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom." (D&C 88:77.) A missionary must be familiar with the standard works of the Church. He must memorize the discussions in the standard gospel presentation plan, including all scriptures cited in the lessons. He must be familiar with and know thoroughly all tracts and pamphlets used in the work. He should think and talk about the gospel nearly all the time.

Preparation for a Mission

A person does not spring, full bloom, into a mature, productive missionary. He grows through careful cultivation. His whole life should be a preparation to invite persons to come unto Christ. Once again, the Aaronic Priesthood is the preparatory agency to assist in this noble task. It is the garden whence the flowering missionary blooms.

Before a mission call is issued, there are searching interviews to determine worthiness to serve. One of these is between the priest and his quorum president, the bishop. The candidate must be assessed as undefiled, for if he is not chaste, the call will not be made. Virtue is a vital part of the preparation for a mission.

The plan of salvation consists in overcoming the world. It is a matter of putting off the natural man and becoming a saint. (Mosiah 3:19.) As an elemental step in preparing for a mission, a priest must so participate in God's plan as to overcome the world. (John 16:33.)

Financial Preparation

The church and kingdom of God is physical as well as spiritual in nature. Members must be concerned with temporal as well as spiritual matters. Thus, preparation for complete and effective missionary service includes financial preparation.

Thrift is a virtue, and waste is accounted as a sin. (Luke 16:1-3.) Saints are under scriptural instruction to practice economy and exercise good management over their monies and properties. (D&C 59:16-20; Matthew 25:14-29.) One purpose of thrift and frugality is to amass the means of furthering the work of the kingdom.

The Church does not have a professional ministry, so in order to carry out the priesthood obligation of full-time missionary service, a person must prepare himself financially Aaronic Priesthood bearers should have savings plans set apart for future full-time missionary calls. Such funds serve two purposes: (1) to point the attention of a young man toward his future opportunity and obligation, and (2) to provide the means of so serving.

Parents and relatives have responsibilities to see that means are available for family members who are otherwise ready to respond to a mission call. Priesthood quorums are under responsibility to assist missionaries under some circumstances.

The Lord provides the bounties of the earth. We are to turn them to the use of his work. (D&C 104:11-18.)

Intellectual Preparation

Intellect has to do with the powers of the mind by which men may know, reason, and think. It is the faculty of comprehending by reason, as distinguished from the power to feel. Outside of revealed gospel truth, there is no sufficient explanation of the mind of man; through the gospel we understand that the mind rests in the eternal spirit. Man's intelligence is in his spirit and not in the mortal body. The Prophet Joseph Smith speaks of the mind or intelligence of man as being in the immortal spirit. (Teachings, pp. 352-53.)

With specific reference to missionaries who are sent "out to testify and warn the people," the revelation requires a course of learning. It is through the learning process "that ye may be prepared" to accomplish "the mission with which I have commissioned you." (D&C 88:80-81.)

And I give unto you a commandment that you shall teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom.

Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand;

Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—

That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you.

Behold, I sent you out to testify and warn the people, and it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor. (D&C 88:77-81.)

No less a person than our Lord himself directs us to "search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me." (John 5:39.) In our day he expands this instruction to include more than the scriptures: "Seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D&C 88:118.)

The plan of salvation is a reasonable plan, a plausible explanation of where we come from, why we are here, and where we are going. Being able to present the truth in a logical way is part of the preparation for a mission. The chief apostle, Peter, counsels us to "be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you." (1 Peter 3:15.)

Physical Preparation

It is a great privilege to have a body. We are the offspring of God (Acts 17:26, 29) clothed in mortal bodies (Moses 3:5-7). These bodies are not wholly our own to do with as we please; we have a responsibility to them. (1 Corinthians 6:19-20; 3:16-17.) True religion has to do with our temporal bodies just as it has to do with our immortal spirits.

Missionary work is just that—work! It is exacting, strength-draining endeavor that takes physical stamina. Part of the preparation for a mission is to prepare our physical body for the rigors of proselyting.

The Lord has given us revelations relative to our body's proper care. When the Aaronic order held sway he gave elaborate health codes. (Leviticus 11.) In our day, on February 27, 1833, he gave a part of his law of health, which we know as the Word of Wisdom. (D&C 89.)

The Word of Wisdom contains both positive and negative instructions. The affirmative provisions call for the wise use of meat and grain and fruit; the prohibitions direct us to refrain from the use of certain harmful things, including tobacco, alcoholic beverages, and hot drinks (tea and coffee). Compliance to the Word of Wisdom has come to show an acceptance of Christian discipline, while noncompliance signifies rebellion. It is one standard and sign that sets the Saints apart from the world.

The Word of Wisdom has particular applicability to those who hold the Aaronic Priesthood because one cannot hold office therein without adhering to it. "No official member in this Church is worthy to hold an office after having the word of wisdom properly taught him; and he, the official member, neglecting to comply with and obey it." (Teachings, p. 117.)

Missionaries in the field have been given exercises to tone muscles, and those who anticipate this work should do the same. Physical cleanliness and appearance are part of one's general health. These are temporal matters with spiritual overtones.

The Lord wants us to be able to "run and not be weary, and . . . walk and not faint." (D&C 89:20.)

Spiritual Preparation

It is written that Adam "became spiritually dead" (D&C 29:41) when he transgressed the law. Spiritual death is to be cast out of the presence of God.

Spiritual life is to be alive to things of righteousness and the Spirit. "We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren. He that loveth not his brother abideth in death." (1 John 3:14.) Those who enjoy the manifestations and companionship of the Holy Ghost are spiritually alive.

The fundamental responsibility of one holding the Aaronic Priesthood is to become spiritual. The very purpose of the Aaronic Order and the "law of carnal commandments" (D&C 84:27; Hebrews 7:16) is to teach us to overcome worldliness and advance to a condition where the Spirit of the Lord can have full access to our hearts.

We all have the responsibility to develop a greater proclivity toward the things of God, and one of the greatest endowments a mortal can receive is the gift of spirituality. All men don't have the same inclination toward spiritual things. Some readily accept truth while others labor to achieve it. Of all talents to be sought after, none is greater than the talent of spirituality.

While on my first mission I received a letter from my father telling me of the wondrous working of the Spirit in his field of labor. I said to my mission president, "If the Lord wanted me to say the things I've heard my father say, He would have to speak with a loud voice." My wise leader responded, "Perhaps your father has better ears." Part of our preparation is to develop the ears to hear God's voice. "I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, . . . this is the spirit of revelation." (D&C 8:2-3.)

The sole perfect example of a wholly spiritual person is that of our Lord, and the simplest directive as to how to achieve this holy state was given by him: "Follow thou me." (2 Nephi 31:10.) Obedience is the basis of all righteous progression.
