Oscar W. McConkie, Aaronic Priesthood ( 1977)

CHAPTER TEN

Priesthood Enlarges the Soul

Priesthood is bestowed by God for the use and benefit of man. God said to Abraham, "I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations; And I will bless them through thy name; . . . and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) . . . shall all the families of the earth be blessed. . . ." (Abraham 2:9-11.)

How is the world blessed through the priesthood? Through the blessings of the gospel. Since the priesthood administers the gospel ordinances, in a very real sense it administers the blessings of salvation to the world.

As the president of the Aaronic Priesthood within the ward over which he is set apart to preside, a bishop holds the keys of baptism within that jurisdiction. Since all accountable persons must be baptized to enter into the kingdom of God (John 3:3-7), the bishop thus holds the keys to salvation for all persons within his jurisdiction. The priesthood "administereth the gospel" (D&C 84:17-19), as modern scripture says.

Everything connected with the priesthood is designed to point man's attention to God, to mark his course leading to eternal life.

The Lord uses his power and authority—the priesthood—to accomplish his purposes. He revealed to Moses his grand purpose: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) The purpose of the priesthood, then, is to bring about God's work of saving mankind, the ultimate benefit to man.

Paul taught this concept, saying, "For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power." (1 Corinthians 4:20.) Oh, how this truth needs to be understood by all peoples! It is not enough to have the Bible. It is not enough to know what God and angels say. It is not enough to know the doctrines of salvation. Standing alone, these do not bring eternal life. Men must have the word, and they must learn the doctrines of salvation; but they do not gain the kingdom of God until they possess the power of God. The gospel "is the power of God unto salvation." (Romans 1:16.) There must be power; that is, there must be priesthood. Where God's power is manifest, there is the church and kingdom of God on earth. Where his power is not found, there the church and kingdom is not. Therefore, where the priesthood is, there is the church and kingdom of God.

What are the manifestations of God's power? They are found in baptism unto the forgiveness of sins, the gift of the Holy Ghost, revelation, visions, miracles, administrations, healings, eternal marriage, and other endowments.

The gospel of Jesus Christ serves to make bad men good and good men better. We are magnified by the word and the power. Priesthood enlarges the soul and ennobles our natures. It "administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God." (D&C 84:19.) And, finally, "all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord." (D&C 84:35.)

Chosen for Service

In addressing the early converts to the true Christian faith, Peter said: "But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light: Which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God: which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy." (1 Peter 2:9-10.)

Who is the chosen generation? Peter is not talking about people living in a particular period of time. He is talking about people in all ages—the house of Israel in Old Testament times, in New Testament times, and in these latter-days. "But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend. Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away." (Isaiah 41:8-9.) Please note the terminology of the Lord: these persons were chosen to be servants.

Whenever the Lord has a people on the earth, he offers to make them a people composed of kings and priests. That is, he anticipates a whole church consisting of persons who serve as their own ministers. He envisions every man standing as a king in his own right, reigning over his own family-kingdom. The priesthood that makes a man a king and a priest is thus a royal priesthood.

God's offer to ancient Israel was made in these words: "If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation." (Exodus 19:5-6.) Peter told the saints in the Meridian of Time that they have the same promise. It is later recorded that some of these saints did obtain this promise and, in due course of time, will reign with Christ at his Second Coming. (Revelation 1:6; 5:10; 20:4.)

The same blessings are available to Latter-day Saints. The preparatory priesthood, the Order of Aaron, is the beginning of these blessings.

It pleases God when his servants serve their fellowmen. Indeed, his priesthood bearers are chosen to so serve. The inspired wisdom of King Benjamin is recorded in his great farewell address: "When ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) The apostle Paul states how he serves the Lord: "Christ sent me . . . to preach the gospel." (1 Corinthians 1:17.) Aaronic Priesthood holders are directed to serve in like manner (D&C 20:46) in this day. For what are we chosen? Service.

The people of God are those who join his church. They are adopted into his family and set apart from the world. They become part of the kingdom of Israel, in which, in our day, they enjoy an almost universal priesthood concept.

I can think of no better way to assure fulfillment in one's life than to attach oneself to the purposes of God and serve therein until fruition is had. As God's purposes are accomplished, man's are magnified.

Love and Service

The highest manifestation of man's love is found in his devotion to God. "Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord: And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might." (Deuteronomy 6:4-5.) Moses said this was the "commandments, the statute and the judgments" that the Lord directed him to teach to Israel. When Jesus was asked which was the great commandment of the law, he answered, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment." (Matthew 22:37-38.) And indeed it is. All good centers in God. Man's greatest good is to love God.

The Lord continued, "And the second is like unto it, thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matthew 22:39.)

So basic to true religion is love of God and love of neighbor that the Lord says that all else is based on this. "On these two commandments," he says, "hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:40.)

These two commandments are bound together because the love of God is found only in those who love their brothers and sisters. "If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brethren whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? And this commandment we have from him, That he who loveth God love his brother also." (1 John 4:20-21.)

Service in God's purposes means dedication of oneself to righteousness and keeping the commandments. As always, the sole perfect Exemplar said and did it best: "I am among you as he that serveth." (Luke 22:27.)

Service is the child of love. It is through service that love is manifest. If love is the precept, then service is the example. Again, Jesus said, "If thou lovest me thou shalt serve me and keep all of my commandments." (D&C 42:29.) This puts the lie to those who would feign to be Christians, professing love to all of mankind in general, but who do not like their neighbors.

What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him?

If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food,

And one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit?

Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone.

Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works: shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works.

Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils also believe, and tremble.

But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?

Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar?

Seest thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect?

And the scripture was fulfilled which saith, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the Friend of God.

Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only." (James 2:14-24.)

In King Benjamin's farewell sermon he told the listeners this fundamental truth: "And behold, I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God. Behold, ye have called me your king; and if I, whom ye call your king, do labor to serve you, then ought not ye to labor to serve one another?" (Mosiah 2:17-18.)

The priesthood-endowed servants of God are to be known by their love and service one to another. "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." (John 13:35.) One of the privileges of holding the priesthood is that it opens new vistas for service. We should thank our Heavenly Father each day for our opportunities to serve.

On the other hand, where there is no love and no service, there is iniquity: "And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold." (Matthew 24:12.)

Perfect love is an attribute of Deity. Thus the early apostle John said, "God is love." (1 John 4:8.) The priesthood prepares us to "be partakers of the divine nature" (2 Peter 1:4) by inculcating love into our lives.

As love grows in man, so man grows heavenward, for love is one of the gifts of the Spirit, for "the fruit of the Spirit is love. . . ." (Galatians 5:22.) Love expands man. Priesthood is God's service calling. It is a manifestation of his love.

Keep the Commandments and Ordinances

The prophets in all ages have condemned the empty formality, the useless perfunctory performances of rites and ceremonies. In the midst of the Mosaic dispensation, with its multitudes of proper performances and ordinances, the prophet Micah declared: "Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? . . . He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" (Micah 6:7-8.)

Uninspired students have mistakenly said that the priesthood-officiated sacrificial system had no place with the prophets and that it was abandoned by them. Nothing could be further from the truth. The sacrificial system, with its priesthood performances, was divinely appointed. (Moses 5:6-8.) It was to be continued and fulfilled in Jesus Christ. One of the last acts of our Lord was to celebrate the Passover.

What Micah and all the prophets, ancient and modern, condemn is the empty, meaningless performance of ordinances: man's doing something merely to meet his religious obligation, and his ignoring the fact that what gave the performance of the rites true significance was the sincere spiritual attitude of the offerer, his authority so to do, and, finally, acceptation by God.

Micah would take the same position today—as, indeed, the modern prophets have done—regarding acts that are devoid of meaning because they are performed without authority and because the heart is unrenewed and away from God. Such censure does not apply to the true worship and Christian rites of the kingdom of God today. The prophets upbraid spiritually decadent people for observing ordinances; they do not charge legal administrators with folly for performing righteously.

In order to be a partaker of the divine nature, man must strive to be obedient and to develop the attributes of Godliness that are inherent in him. Joseph Smith said: "If you wish to go where God is, you must be like God, or possess the principles which God possesses, for if we are not drawing towards God in principle, we are going from Him and drawing towards the devil." (Teachings, p. 216.) The Aaronic Priesthood is a God-ordained and God-instituted order to assist man to put on the divine nature.

In speaking of the fulness of the priesthood, Joseph Smith said: "If a man gets a fulness of the priesthood of God he has to get it in the same way that Jesus Christ obtained it, and that was by keeping all the commandments and obeying all the ordinances of the house of the Lord." (Teachings, p. 308.) "The question is frequently asked, 'Can we not be saved without going through with all those ordinances?' I would answer, No, not the fulness of salvation. Jesus said, There are many mansions in my Father's house, and I will go and prepare a place for you. House here named should have been translated kingdom; and any person who is exalted to the highest mansion has to abide a celestial law, and the whole law too." (Teachings, p. 331.)

This principle of the preparatory order of things was stated by a modern prophet, President Harold B. Lee, in these practical terms: "The most important of all the commandments of God is that one that you're having the most difficulty keeping today. If it's one of dishonesty, if it's one of unchastity, if it's one of falsifying, not telling the truth, today is the day for you to work on that until you've been able to conquer that weakness. Then you start on the next one that's most difficult for you to keep." (Church News, May 5, 1973, p. 3.) It is thus that we progress, line upon line and precept upon precept, as we learn to abide by the commandments and make the ordinances a real and meaningful part of our lives.

Obedience is the first law of heaven, the means whereby all righteousness is accomplished. It is the basis of all righteous progression. In terms of the plan of salvation, to obey is to follow the guidance of God and to execute his commands. It is to be ruled by his law. Through obedience, meaning and application of the gospel are had in our lives. It is thus a primary principle in heaven and earth.

Man's love of God is measured by his obedience. "If ye love me, keep my commandments." (John 14:15.) It is not form, but principle and service that are the measure of a man. When Saul chose to disobey counsel and to sacrifice cattle according to the religious form of his day, the ancient prophet Samuel rebuked him, saying, "Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry." (1 Samuel 15:22-23.)

The very purpose of this earth life is to provide for a mortal probationary period, a testing ground, for the spirit children of our Father in heaven. "We will prove them herewith," says the divine decree, "to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abraham 3:25.) The Lord created men, placed them on the earth, "and gave unto them commandments that they should love and serve him." (D&C 20:19.) The whole system of creation and existence is bound up in the eternal principle of obedience to law.

All men are directed by divine decree to believe the gospel, to repent of their sins, to be baptized by immersion for the remission of their sins, and to endure to the end by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. It is only in this way that we obtain a hope for salvation in the kingdom of God. (2 Nephi 31; 3 Nephi 27:13-22.) Through priesthood-administered baptism, man may make the solemn covenant to serve God and keep his commandments (Mosiah 18:7-10); and this baptismal covenant may be renewed with each partaking of the priesthood-administered sacrament (D&C 20:77-79).

Priesthood-administered rites and ordinances are more than outward forms of inward graces. They are part of the warp and woof of the fabric of salvation. There is no obedience unto God's commands without them.

All That God Hath

The end of all of our belief, of all of our performances, of all of our service, of all of our doings, of all of our hope is eternal life. The word eternal, used in this connection in the scriptures, is not an adjective qualifying the noun life. It is a part of the noun. It is one of the scriptural names given to God. (Moses 1:3; 7:35; D&C 19:11.) It describes the type and kind of life that he lives: ". . . eternal life . . . is the greatest of all the gifts of God." (D&C 14:7.) Those who gain eternal life enjoy exaltation. They are joint heirs with Christ. They are the Sons of God.

The achievement of all of this is priesthood-centered. In our day it is written:

For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies.

And they become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham, and the church and kingdom, and the elect of God.

And also all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord;

For he that receiveth my servants receiveth me;

And he that receiveth me receiveth my Father;

And he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him. (D&C 84:33-38.)

All that God hath has been promised to his children, conditioned upon their magnifying their priestly callings. God is a superlative personage, exalted, perfect in all the attributes of his nature. He is perfect in knowledge, in faith, in power. He is perfect in justice, in judgment, and in mercy. He is the Lord God omnipotent, the sole perfect manifestation of love. (Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith, pp. 45-51.)

Becoming like God is a process, not an event. The Prophet Joseph Smith said: "When you climb up a ladder, you must begin at the bottom, and ascend step by step, until you arrive at the top; and so it is with the principles of the Gospel—you must begin with the first, and go on until you learn all the principles of exaltation. But it will be a great while after you have passed through the veil before you will have learned them. It is not all to be comprehended in this world; it will be a great work to learn our salvation and exaltation even beyond the grave." (Teachings, p. 348.)

The perfectability of man has always been the nerve center of our Lord's gospel. "Be ye therefore perfect," he said, "even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matthew 5:48.)

In his first general epistle John explains the literalness of this doctrine: "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure." (1 John 3:2-3.)

The apostle Paul shocked the traditional religionists when he discussed the Holy Ghost-taught doctrine of the perfectability of man: "Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God. . . . Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him. . . ." (Philippians 2:5-9.)

Paul tells us that Jesus was equal with God, and John tells us that when Jesus comes a second time in his perfection and glory, we may be like him. This is all according to the doctrine of Jesus. In this last dispensation, President Lorenzo Snow penned the following response to these New Testament citations:

Dear Brother:

Hast thou not been unwisely bold,

Man's destiny to thus unfold?

To raise, promote such high desire,

Such vast ambition thus inspire?

Still, 'tis no phantom that we trace

Man's ultimatum in life's race;

This royal path has long been trod

By righteous men, each now a God:

As Abra'm, Isaac, Jacob, too,

First babes, then men—to gods they grew.

As man now is, our God once was;

As now God is, so man may be,—

Which doth unfold man's destiny

For John declares: When Christ we see

Like unto him we'll truly be.

And he who has this hope within,

Will purify himself from sin. . . .

The boy, like to his father grown,

Has but attained unto his own;

To grow to sire from state of son,

Is not 'gainst Nature's course to run.

A son of God, like God to be,

Would not be robbing Deity;

And he who has this hope within,

Will purify himself from sin.

You're right, St. John, supremely right;

Whoe'er essays to climb this height,

Will cleanse himself of sin entire—

Or else 'twere needless to aspire.

The great prophet of the dispensation of the fulness of times, Joseph Smith, said it best:

Here, then, is eternal life—to know the only wise and true God; and you have got to learn how to be Gods yourselves, and to be kings and priests to God, the same as all Gods have done before you, namely, by going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation, until you attain to the resurrection of the dead, and are able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory, as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power. And I want you to know that God, in the last days, while certain individuals are proclaiming his name, is not trifling with you or me. (Teachings, pp. 346-47.)
