Hugh B. Brown, Continuing the Quest ( 1961)

I

Service—A Way of Life

Relief Society—An Extension of the Home

Who Is My Neighbor?

Service through the Priesthood

Loyal to the Royal in You

Sharing the Gospel

Service in Stake Missions

Temple Building

Missionary Work

Greatness Was Always There

Relief Society—Extension of the Home

This is at once an inspiring and a frightening experience. I think any man would be frightened to stand before 8,000 women with only two men behind him. I feel very humble as I come to you, and I depend upon divine guidance for what I may say. First, may I commend you for the great work you are doing and, in addition to what Sister Spafford has said, bring to you from President McKay his love, his blessing, and his gratitude. He said, "God bless the Relief Society."

This has been a wonderful session of this great conference from the time we sang together "I Know That My Redeemer Lives," through the impressive prayer of Sister Petersen, and the wonderful singing of our mothers' chorus, and then the inspired and inspiring addresses of your general officers. Really, I think we could very well close the meeting now and all feel more than repaid for coming.

It seems to be somewhat of a custom to ask a man to say a word or two at a woman's meeting. I think, perhaps, the reason is you are so fond of contrast. Joseph Conrad said on one occasion, "Being a woman is a terribly difficult task, since it consists principally in dealing with men." I'm sure you would say amen to that. It is a privilege, an honor, and very inspiring to stand before you. As I think of Relief Society, I think of home, and I am glad Sister Spafford has spoken as she has on that subject, for I should like to pursue the analogy a little farther if I may without repetition.

The place of importance that was assigned to the women's Relief Society is really analogous to the place of mother in the home. The sacred and responsible status in each case was established by the Lord himself. In both callings women are to stand side by side with the men who hold the priesthood. Even as a wife is a helpmate in the home, so the Relief Society, being an extension of the home, is a helpmate to the priesthood.

Now, of course, I do not mean to imply in any sense that Relief Society work is just a honeymoon. Quite the contrary. When we speak of other organizations and auxiliaries, we often speak of their programs and their activities, but whenever we speak of Relief Society, the word work is mentioned. We say Relief Society work, or the work of Relief Society. I think that is most significant. The work in the home, as well as in the Church, requires that women, as stated, shall stand side by side with their husbands, not in front of them, not behind them. While by divine decree man is to be the head of the house and the bearer of the priesthood, women are to become joint inheritors, equal partners and custodians with men in all that God has promised to the faithful. As Adam was the first man, so Eve was the first woman. The Lord said in the book of Moses, ". . . Adam called his wife's name Eve, because she was the mother of all living, for thus have I, the Lord God, called the first of all women. . . ." (Moses 4:26.)

Through the divine institution of celestial marriage, with all its privileges, obligations, joys, trials, and sacrifices, men and women, joined together by the Holy Priesthood, may through their faithfulness attain immortality, eternal life, and eternal increase; that soul-satisfying state of eternally becoming, forever achieving. When we speak of eternal increase, we speak not only of increase of posterity, we speak of increase of knowledge and the power that comes with knowledge; increase of wisdom to use that knowledge and power wisely; increase of awareness and the joy that comes through understanding; increase of intelligence, which is the glory of God; increase of all that goes to make up Godhood.

In the 132nd section of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord promised men and women that by obedience to the new and everlasting covenant, they may be sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise and "come forth in the first resurrection," to " . . . inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths" that are promised them, and I ask you please to note that the pronoun in this section is plural all the way through, that " . . . they shall pass by the angels, and the gods . . . to their exaltation and glory . . . which glory shall be a fulness. . . ." (D&C 132:19.) But, of course, he has said that "except ye abide my law ye cannot attain to this glory." (Ibid., 132:21.)

Your role, my dear sisters, as leaders in the Church, requires patience, constancy, tolerance, love unfeigned, and complete dedication. Service, love-inspired service, is the symbol of womanhood. It is the emblem of Relief Society. But, and we tell our brethren this quite often, service does not and must not mean servitude. The role of women in the Church was recognized and defined by the Prophet Joseph Smith soon after the Church was organized, and the leaders ever since have recognized their important assignment. Your intuitive perception, your endowed creativeness, your innate love of beauty and of goodness are invaluable in the Church. The wholesome effect of your influence on your husbands and sons, and others everywhere, is manifest and is generally appreciated. The obligations, responsibilities, and the inspiration of motherhood in the home carry over into the Church, not only in Relief Society, but your influence is felt in other auxiliary organizations and in the priesthood quorums, where the refining feminine touch—physical, mental, moral, spiritual touch—purifies and blesses men and boys.

But we come to you sisters this afternoon not alone to extol or eulogize; we come to you to charge, to exhort, and to challenge you. We charge you, our fellow workers in the Church, to be vigilant in this the most ominous and portentous era of world history. We earnestly call for your continuing support and wise counsel. When we think of the respective roles of men and women, we remember the Lord said, " . . . neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man. . . ." (1 Cor. 11:11.) "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them."

"And God blessed them,"—not him alone, "and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion. . . . " (Genesis 1:27-28.)

The dominion, then, is to be a joint dominion, and the command to multiply and replenish the earth is necessarily a joint injunction. When the Lord made provision for men to have the priesthood and gave the sacred honor and glory of motherhood to women, he divided not only the responsibilities but the blessings of life equally between men and women. Both priesthood and motherhood, if they are to be honored and magnified, must bear the hallmark of service—service sanctified and glorified by love. Hence, neither the man nor the woman should envy the role of the other, but recognize it as a counterpart and complement of their own rule. We must go forward hand in hand and heart to heart as we face the challenging but glorious responsibilities of life.

It is a duty and privilege of mothers to nurse and heal the souls of men, as well as their bodies, to mend the minds of their children, as well as their clothes, and the Relief Society carries these and other duties and privileges into a wider sphere of action. Jesus honored womanhood when he came to this earth as a little child through the sacred and glorious agency of motherhood; thus motherhood became akin to Godhood, and the Relief Society is motherhood on a larger scale. What an honored and blessed privilege is membership in this greatest of all women's organizations.

Love is the distinguishing characteristic of Relief Society, as it is of worthy motherhood and worthy priesthood. The love of which Paul the Apostle spoke, the love that " . . . suffereth long, and is kind; . . . envieth not; . . . vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up,

"Doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil;

"Rejoiceth not in inquity, but rejoiceth in the truth;

"Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things." (1 Cor. 13:4-7.)

I think your own motto is "Charity Never Faileth." In what work then can you best make contributions to the program of the Church? First, and most importantly, you make a contribution as mothers and teachers—two of the highest and most sacred callings in all life. These callings require sanctification. You remember the Master said, "And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth." (John 17:19.) You women exert the first and most lasting influence on your child when you co-operate with God in building its body. As you cradle it in your arms, nourish and nurture it by your love and sacrifice, as you stimulate its intellect, its ambition, strengthen its spiritual and moral fiber, you are intimately co-operating with your Heavenly Father. You are the first to teach the child self-respect, respect for law and order, respect for authority, respect for the father who holds the priesthood.

Where there is love and co-operation in the home, there motherhood is sanctified and glorified by the presence and administrations of the priesthood. Men and women together have a Godlike status, for the Lord said male and female created he them in his own image.

Some have questioned our concept of a mother in heaven, but no home, no church, no heaven would be complete without a mother there. God entrusted children to men and women, and he will hold them jointly responsible for their care, their growth, for their guidance, their development, and for piloting them over the rough and stormy seas of life into the harbor of immortality and eternal life.

And now, sisters, because of the number of broken homes in the world today, and they are increasing rapidly, with a resultant increase in juvenile deliquency, we charge you mothers to unite in a campaign to defeat the enemy, chiefly communism, on the home front, for communism is centering its attack first on God and religion and then on the home. We call upon you to be alerted to this concentration of effort on the part of the enemy and to strengthen our ranks in our efforts to repulse these attacks and thwart their machinations. Divorce, with all of its attendant evils, is rapidly increasing, and our front lines of defense are wavering. While adults are in the front lines, remember children are the innocent casualties. For the balance of their lives, they will suffer from the effects of this "fallout," and the marital fallout is like the fallout from the atomic bomb—it is unpredictable and devastating. Every woman in Relief Society then, if she would be most helpful in Church activity, should enlist in a militant campaign in defense of home and family.

Unless there is urgent necessity, let no mother endanger the welfare of the home and the children by going out of the home to work in order to increase the income, to improve her wardrobe, or to satisfy social status and urges. They who do leave the home weaken its foundation, and they withdraw the cementing qualities of mother's love and presence. They are sowing seeds of heartbreak and frustration, and, thereby, they weaken the Church because the homes are the pillars upon which the Church is built. It should be remembered that the seeds of the divorces of future generations are being sown in the homes of the present generation. Where parents become irritable, get on each other's nerves, are unjust and unkind to each other, where there is bickering and contention, where voices are raised in angry disputations in the presence of children, where the lamp of love burns low, there the seeds of future divorces germinate.

Children reared in the dark, dank cellar of a loveless home are likely to continue in the same pattern as set by their parents and to think that that kind of home is normal marriage. When they have homes of their own, they are inclined, when the first difficulty arises, to turn to the divorce court. Where the highway of conjugal happiness is obstructed by roadblocks of criticism, intolerance, selfishness, lack of charity on the part of either spouse, the resulting detour leads to divorce. Children in such homes pay a heavy toll, and they must travel a lonely, confused, dangerous, and often a dead-end road. That you women of the Relief Society help families to avoid such disasters is part of your charge.

When the opportunity to serve is recognized as a blessing, where thoughtfulness, courtesy, tolerance, kindness, consideration are habitual, where duties become privileges, where virtues are recognized and gratefully mentioned, where faults are minimized or overlooked, where the home is enveloped by love and hallowed by prayer, there is heaven on earth, and there eternal homes are in the making. To foster such homes is the most effective part of your service to the Church.

When Jesus said: " . . . What God hath joined together, let not man put asunder" (Matt. 19:6), he referred not only to the final sundering of the divorce court, but, by implication, to those little termites, those acts or omissions which undermine the home and gradually destroy it. Breaking up the home doesn't come all at once; it is a gradual process. Every broken home weakens the superstructure of the Church, for the homes of the people are the framework of the Church. Men may build houses, but women must breathe into them the spirit which transforms them into homes. When God created man and woman and called the woman a helpmate, which means a companion, her status was established, and in this dispensation it has been revealed anew, that no person, man or woman, can attain the highest degree of the celestial kingdom without a companion.

Salvation then is a joint and progressive undertaking. Jointly earned, the blessings will be equally shared. While the ordinances of the temple are distinctly of priesthood character, still worthy women have access to all of them. The highest blessings of the temple are conferred only upon man and wife together. The Lord endowed you women with many gifts and graces, capacities and capabilities, of a quality that he did not grant to men, and these will strengthen the partnership, as they minister to and increase the intellectual and spiritual stamina of men. He gave you such qualities of mind and spirit as patience, endurance, love, loyalty, devotion, in greater measure than is usually found in men. The Lord's special bequests and endowments to men and women separately can only be fully realized when they are combined, added upon, and enjoyed jointly. The gifts and graces of each must supplement and complement the other, if they are to be fully realized.

The Prophet Joseph Smith in 1842, and reference has already been made to his organizing the Relief Society, said to those women who were before him:

"You will receive instructions through the order of the Priesthood which God has established, through the medium of those appointed to lead, guide and direct . . . in this last dispensation; and I now turn the key in your behalf in the name of the Lord, and this Society shall rejoice, and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time henceforth; this is the beginning of better days to the poor and the needy, who shall be made to rejoice and pour forth blessings on your heads." (A Century of Relief Society, page 16.)

That responsibility for teaching the gospel is to be shared by men and women is evidenced by the 68th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, wherein we are told that " . . . inasmuch as parents have children in Zion . . . that teach them not . . . " the gospel (you remember the quotation) " . . . the sin be upon the heads of the parents." (D&C 68:25.)

But the other side of that is if we teach as we should, jointly in the homes, then we will be entitled to all the blessings that come to those who are instrumental in bringing souls unto him. They who attain the highest glory in the celestial kingdom must enter into this order of the priesthood, meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. From the beginning the Lord arranged for a division of responsibility, not only in the family, but in the Church. The eminent position of women in the work and purposes of the Lord is recognized wherever there is a Relief Society organization, whether it be the smallest branch, the largest stake, or the general board.

More than twenty years ago, President McKay emphasized the sacred responsibility of motherhood, and I quote him:

"Womanhood should be intelligent and pure because it is the living life-fountain from which flows the stream of humanity. She who would pollute that stream by tobacco, poisonous drugs, or by germs that would shackle the unborn, is untrue to her sex and an enemy to the strength and perpetuity of the race." (Gospel Ideals, page 449.)

And again President McKay points to the pre-eminence of motherhood over any other activity as note the following:

"This ability and willingness properly to rear children, the gift to love, and eagerness, yes, longing to express it in soul development, make motherhood the noblest office or calling in the world. She who can paint a masterpiece or write a book that will influence millions deserves the admiration and the plaudits of mankind: But she who rears successfully a family of healthy, beautiful sons and daughters, whose influence will be felt through generations to come, whose immortal souls will exert an influence throughout the ages long after paintings shall have faded, and books and statues shall have decayed or shall have been destroyed, deserves the highest honor that man can give, and the choicest blessings of God. In her high duty and service to humanity, endowing with immortality eternal spirits, she is co-partner with the Creator himself." (Relief Society Magazine 39-269, 1936.)

"Motherhood is the one thing in all the world which most truly exemplifies the God-given virtues of creating and sacrificing. Though it carries the woman close to the brink of death, motherhood also leads her into the very realm of the fountains of life and makes her a co-partner with the Creator in bestowing upon eternal spirits mortal life. Artists may make new visions real: Poets express thoughts never known before or dress old ones in a more becoming garb: Engineers may transform deserts into bounteous fields and fill them with prosperous towns and thriving villages: Scientists may discover new elements, and by various combinations thereof create means contributive either to progress or destruction—all these are in a measure revealers of unknown things: But the mother who, in compliance with eternal law, brings into the world an immortal spirit occupies first rank in the realm of creation." (Millennial Star 86: 296-297, 1926.)

Throughout the history of the Church, the priesthood has honored womanhood. We oday appreciate the wonderful service you render to the Church. We know you will be worthy of your transcendent calling. We want you to look up and listen and believe and make the blessings of Relief Society available to women everywhere. You will not be satisfied until every woman in the Church is engaged in Relief Society work. Some misguided men and nations today—and here I am going to depart from what I was going to say and speak extemporaneously. These men who are building walls, physical and mental walls, which divide people, cities, and nations are emissaries of the adversary. We call upon the Relief Society and all members of the Church to continue to build bridges which unite individual hearts, unite people, groups, and nations, and thereby help to establish universal peace. As we meet here today in Relief Society conference, there is peace and beauty all around us, but we are keenly conscious of the dangers which beset our divided and imperiled world. Nineteen sixty-one and nineteen sixty-two may go down in history as the most crucial years of all times, but, despite the daily dirges of the press, we shall not leave this session in a mood of fearful apprehension.

I read from the writings of a great woman on that. She said, "The gloom of the world is but a shadow, behind it, yet within our reach, is joy. There is radiance and glory in the darkness, could we but see, and to see we have only to look." We beseech you to look.

While we know that all is not well in the world, we bring a message to offset what I said about the awful conditions that confront us, a message from the priesthood to the Church: While all is not well in the world, we testify that God is still in heaven, that Christ will defeat anti-Christ, that the millennium will be ushered in, that Satan will be bound, and there will be a new heaven and a new earth, and you are to join with us in helping to build that new world and prepare for the second coming of the Lord. You are the harbingers and builders of a new and better world.

We challenge you to catch the vision of your exalted callings. Accept the obligation, rise to its privileges and blessings. We recognize the Relief Society as a most important arm of the Church. And now, sisters, part of the duties resting upon some members of the priesthood today has to do with bearing testimony. There never was a time when conviction and dedication were more needed than now. We need men to match our message, men who have the testimony that makes it possible for them to be witnesses of Christ, to stand before the people and testify of him, and women to inspire them. In humility, but with the same authority that enabled Peter to say in answer to the question of Christ, "Whom do men say that I am?" and from the same source of inspiration I declare to you, my beloved sisters, and to him, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." (Matt. 16:16.)

Some years ago in England, Sister Brown wrote a poem. I hope I will not be thought indelicate if I bring you some parts of that poem, for it is in harmony with what I have been trying to say. She titled it "Woman Exalted."

"Ye chosen ones, list to his word:— 'Man is not without the woman in the Lord,' Think ye then that Gods are half-Gods, not whole, And reign, and make these orbs of light, and live incomplete, alone, And in celestial might make harmony with harps half-strung? The answer's thine already. Thou hast it in thy heart. " 'Twas Mary knew from angel bright that she was Chosen to clothe the Spirit of our Lord. Her heart Sang its exquisite joy! Told she this to the other Honored of the Lord. And found believing response from this Her woman kin. "Followers of our Savior and his church were women not a few. How great their love, how complete their trust in him! E'en when the cross the Son and Master bore, and lifted, tortured, Broke the chains that mound the mortal man and bade him sleep forever. How great I say, in that trusting humility, like unto a child's—how supreme! Last at the cross were they—first at the tomb—heralds of the Risen Lord. " 'Not honored,' say you, and 'below your brother man?' Open thine eyes and see what place is given thee, O woman fair! Hold high thy head to wear its crown. Kneel thou, too, in Reverence to thy Lord. For thank offering remember thou his word— 'O be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord.' Prepare thy souls to bear the souls of men. "When the spirits of the dark shall stalk the earth to stay his second coming's time, Fear not to array thyself in armor white, as symbol of thy state And rise in power and womanhood. At the portal of thy home Guard that which is dearer than life itself. By thy companion's side Uphold him in his priesthood and godly power. "Remember thou art high priestess of the home—the home, The heart of all the world, and the altar at his throne, The heart whose throbbing life holds in its power, the molding of good or ill. And sends forth the sinner or the saint, or weak ones 'tween the two. Sends the mortal-clad spirit, born of woman, to sow discord, hate, and greed "Or be messengers of light, who seek to guide their fellows Back to him where only harmonies abide. O be ye strong, and let not the weak ones grope and find him not. Be thou a woman whole and pure, with that militant love That fights for her own, and God's. "Take then thy seat in nations great and small. Still not thy voice when its clarion call should speak for him To thy sisterhood the world around, Thou champions of righteousness, thou mothers of his little ones, Thou believers of his Word. Lend to his priesthood Thy powers of purity and love that falter not. And that faith that makes their faith more strong. "Daughters of Zion, ye mothers of men, hold fast these gifts of thy calling great, Lest they be lost—these priceless pearls of purity and purpose holy. Know ye not that thy place is at the side, and not below, This companion to whom thou art given of the Lord? Thou woman exalted, thou first to forgive and last to forsake, Thou priestess, queen, Thank thy God who made thee thus, that thou wast born A woman."

I leave my blessings upon you, my dear sisters, by the authority I have to bless. O God, bless these mothers of Israel with peace in their hearts. May peace and love and harmony reign in their homes. May they be stalwart as they stand beside their husbands, may they and their husbands and children be guided back to thee. I leave this blessing with you, my dear sisters, with my testimony as to the divinity of this work, and I do it humbly in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.—Relief Society General Conference, September 27, 1961.

Who Is My Neighbor?

A man was asked, "Who is your next-door neighbor?" and he replied, "I do not know his name, but his children run across my lawn, and his dog keeps me awake at night." Another who had not known his neighbor made the following entry in his journal: "I thought the house across the way was empty, until yesterday, crepe on the door made me aware that someone had been living there."

When the Savior was asked, "Who is my neighbor?" he evaded a direct answer but told an illuminating story which flashed out the truth that no direct answer could convey. Through his life and parables he illuminated the meaning of human relationships. The spirit of neighborliness pervades the gospel stories of his life.

In his association with the people of his time, all men were his neighbors and it mattered not to him whether they were Jew or Samaritan, Pharisee or Publican. When he asked the woman at the well for a drink of water, she demurred and reminded him of the custom which forbade a Jew to speak to a Samaritan; but he looked over the wall of prejudice, saw a thirsting neighbor and gave her living water.

The woman in sin needed sympathy and understanding and he, the perfect man, did not hesitate to minister to his imperfect neighbor. Her penitence was so patent that he did not embarrass her with an accusation. She was the wounded traveler who had fallen among the worst of thieves and he the good Samaritan.

His apostles were his nearest neighbors, and he washed their feet. The people at the marriage feast were in need of wine, and he supplied it. The multitude had only a few loaves and fishes, and he fed them, not expecting, nor did he receive their thanks. Even they who come to arrest him were his neighbors, and when Peter drew his sword and smote one of them, Jesus performed a miracle and restored the ear.

The last neighbor to ask a favor of him, ironically a next-door neighbor, was the confessed lawbreaker who was being crucified beside him. Jesus could not extend his hands for they were nailed to the cross, but he extended hope of life after death and promised companionship in paradise.

+

Even the wicked mob, who were responsible for his suffering and ensuing death, were his neighbors, and he prayed for their forgiveness. As always, he practised what he preached and forgave and loved his enemies. Even after his resurrection the glorified, immortal Christ sought out his bewildered and doubting followers, forgave their unbelief and ministered unto them.

In every contact with people he, by his actions, without regard to creed, station or nationality, defined neighborliness in terms of service. Who then are my neighbors? All men everywhere, whether they be across the street, across the continent or over the ocean, whether they be friend or foe, they are my neighbors if I can serve them. Spiritual affinity rather than mere physical proximity establishes the boundaries of a neighborhood.

It is reported that when Prime Minister William A. Gladstone was facing one of the great crises of his political life, he sat writing one morning at 2:00 o'clock the speech with which he hoped to win a great political victory in the House of Commons the next day. At that hour there came to his door the mother of a poor, friendless, dying cripple who besought him to come and bring some message of hope and cheer to the hopeless boy. Without hesitation the Great Commoner left the preparation of his speech and spent the night with the dying child who in the early morning closed his eyes in death. Upon arriving at the House of Commons he was heard to say, "I am the happiest man in the world today" and that day he made the greatest speech of his life in the House of Commons, carrying the cause to a triumphant success.

My neighbor is every man who needs my help, and I should think no more of asking whether he belongs to my country, my family, my party, or my Church than I would if he were calling for help from a burning building.

A university student was walking one day with his professor when they saw by a gate an old coat and a pair of shoes. The owner, a poor man, was working in the field nearby. "Let us hide his shoes," said the student, "and hide ourselves behind these bushes and watch his perplexity when he cannot find them." "My dear friend," said the professor, "we must never amuse ourselves at the expense of others. You are rich and may give yourself a much greater pleasure. Put a silver dollar in each shoe, and then we will hide ourselves." He did so, and they watched behind the bush. Presently the man came out. He put on his coat and thrust his foot into his shoe. Something hard hurt his toe. Thinking that some boy had put in a stone he turned up his shoe and shook out the money. He picked it up and looked at it again and again, then looked about on all sides to see who had done it but could see no one, while all the time four earnest eyes were staring at him from behind the bush. When the second shoe produced another dollar, his astonishment was very great, and his feelings overcame him. Who could have done this? He could see no one, so he knelt down in the grass and thanked God, telling him about his poor sick wife and needy children and how poor he was.

A great joy came into the student's heart, and tears ran down his face while the professor said to him, "Now, are you not much better pleased than if you had played your intended trick?" The student was taught a most valuable lessor in neighborliness which is the fruit of an educated heart.

The good neighbor never asks, "What do I get in return?" He never considers the inconvenience or asks, "Is it my duty?" Every man may have as many neighbors as he chooses to make.

While every act of neighborliness is richly rewarded, the good neighbor neither counts the cost nor considers the reward. True neighborliness will not say, "I will help you if you will help me" or "I will help you because you have helped me." Such reciprocity of service may accomplish some good in the world, but they whose good deeds wait upon assurance of reward are not successors or representatives of the good Samaritan.

May we try to see all men as our neighbors, widen our horizons, and dethrone our prejudices. Then we will be reminded that God is our common Father, that Christ died for all men and therefore we are not only neighbors but brothers, and try to live accordingly.

All church officers and teachers should be the best neighbors in the world.

Yes, in our Father's house are many mansions which are and are to be occupied by our neighbors, each one of whom is dear to the heart of the Shepherd. Many of them are entrusted to the tender care of Sunday School officers and teachers. May we be true to this sacred trust, I pray.—Sunday School Conference, April 1958.

Service through the Priesthood

I have been shivering ever since I left Canada, and I shall be glad to get back there, where I can get warm again. I have shivered more since I came into this building than before.

The Lethbridge Stake, brethren and sisters, comprises the whole of the north end of the world (laughter.) The southern boundary of the Lethbridge Stake is fifteen miles north of the international boundary line, between Canada and the United States. I think the northern boundary of our stake is, perhaps, the southern boundary of South America. We have a very large stake, geographically speaking; I believe, if we were able to discover all of our people there, we would have the largest stake in the Church, numerically speaking, because I believe we have in our stake the Ten Tribes. They are supposed to be up there somewhere, although we haven't found them yet. I received a letter the other day from some member of the Church, asking me to go up into the Peace River country and organize a branch there. That is about 600 miles north of Lethbridge, and Lethbridge is about 700 miles north of Salt Lake City. We have nine wards and eleven branches in the new stake (Lethbridge), and we have some splendid people.

I rejoice in this great work. I thank the Lord for the opportunity of working in this cause. I have come to realize, in the last few years, that men sometimes place high values on things that are not really worthwhile. Sometimes we are found chasing bubbles.

If you will pardon me, I shall refer to a personal experience that I had during World War I. I had taken a few years in military school, in Canada, at the request of the president of the stake. At the outbreak of the war I held a commission in the Canadian army, and it became my duty to go and do what little I could during the war. I had the privilege of serving for a little over three years, and during that time I had the opportunity to preach the gospel more than I had during my missionary experience in England, some seventeen years prior. Quite a number of Latter-day Saint boys went from southern Alberta, and some of them did not return.

Upon several occasions, while I was in England and France, appeals came to me from some of the boys who were sick in the hospital, asking me to intercede for them with officers higher up, asking that they might be returned home while they were convalescing; asking, perhaps, that they might have leave of absence. On several occasions it was my privilege to intercede for the boys and to get favors for them.

When in London, one morning, I received a message that some boy wanted to see me in the hospital; and immediately I thought, here is another boy who would like to return to his mother, who perhaps will ask me to intercede for him, by reason of the authority that I hold as an officer in the army. And as I went in response to that call to the hospital referred to, I believe that I felt just a little pride in my heart because I had the honor of wearing an officer's uniform; by virtue of that fact I held the right to intercede as an officer of the king. With this feeling I went into the hospital, and as I was ushered into the little ward where that boy was sick, with a feeble hand he reached out and said, "Brother Brown, I sent for you to come and administer to me; I'm afraid I'm going to die, and I want you to ask God to spare my life that I can return home to my mother."

Upon that occasion it seemed to me my uniform fell from me. All the pride that I had felt in standing in that uniform of the king vanished. And at that moment I was made to realize, that there is an authority, there is a power inestimably greater than any authority or power that can be given by man. And as I laid my hands upon the head of that boy, I interceded for him, not with the king of England, not with any man, and not by virtue of my authority as an officer in that army. But as I laid my hands upon his head, I said, "In the name of Jesus Christ, and by authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood."

Brethren and sisters, I came to realize that the most valuable thing in this world is the priesthood of God, the right to speak and to act in the name of God. And as I stood there, as it were clasping hands with that boy and his Maker, by virtue of the priesthood that had been given unto me, I forgot any honor that had come to me in the army. And as I knelt at his bedside, my prayer to God was, that never again in my life would I be found seeking the honors of men, that I would remember that the things that are really worthwhile in this life come to us through the gospel of Jesus Christ.

I thank the Lord from the bottom of my heart for the work and the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I thank the Lord for the testimony that I have as to the mission of Brigham Young, the mission of Lorenzo Snow, of John Taylor, of Wilford Woodruff, of Joseph F. Smith; and I thank the Lord, from the bottom of my heart, for the mission and the life of Heber J. Grant today. I don't want to be classed among the people of whom it was said, "You build altars to dead prophets, and hate the living." I honor today men whom God has called. I pray you, brethren and sisters, to sustain and support these men, for they are ordained of God.

I hope we look upon men from a deeper experience and judge them by that. God looketh upon the heart. He looks into the hearts of these men, and he has honored them, and called them to lead this people. The Lord makes no mistakes. Let us support these men; let us rally round them; let us let them know that we support them. And let us not be found questioning the wisdom of God in any choice that he makes. Remember what he said to Samuel, when he went down to anoint a king of Israel. When the oldest son of Jesse came up, Samuel said: Why, this is the man; look at him; such a fine looking fellow, he should be king. But the Lord rebuked Samuel and said, "Do not look upon the outward appearance; God looketh upon the heart." Brethren and sisters, let us remember that lesson. But remember that God alone possesses the perfect power to look into the hearts of men; and he has chosen these men. May we never be found chasing bubbles. May we get the real value fixed in reference to these men. Let us seek those things that are really worthwhile in life.

Let us pray God for the spirit of humility and meekness. Let us keep clean, doing the right as God has given us light to see it, and to do our duty. Let us have the courage of our conviction. This work is of God, and it will continue to grow. It must go on. The good ship Zion has set sail, and if any man wishes to jump overboard, he must take the consequence. The good ship will go on. God help us to remember that, and to be true to our covenants, true to the trust that has been given to us, and always found in the line of duty, so that when the call comes, as it came to me on that occasion—the call to duty, we will be worthy and ready to respond. Amen—General Conference, April 1922.

Loyal to the Royal in You

It is well for you young men to learn early in life the value of character and integrity. You will need courage to do what you know you ought to do, and you will need faith in yourselves, in your destiny, and in God. Maintain high ideals and seek to be worthy of your heritage. Set for yourselves worthy goals in life and keep those goals in mind, even when you may be forced to take a detour such as military service. Having a goal and working toward it gives meaning and purpose to life, unifies one's energy, and helps to bring out the best in us.

You should always remember that you are here for a purpose, that you have a life's mission assigned to you by your Father, that because he is your Father, there is something of him in you, and you can, by diligence and vigilance and purity of life, become like him from whom you came.

Palm trees do not grow from acorns. The acorn, can, under proper conditions, grow into the oak because the oak is involved in the acorn. Only that which is involved can evolve and, as you are the sons of God, he is somehow involved in you, and you can evolve by obedience to law into something like him—evolve into Godhood because God, being your Father, is involved in you. This is one of the most profound and inspiring truths in the world, that man is literally a son of God. He, the King of Kings, is your Father, and you must be loyal to the royal that is in you.

Be assured of this, there is no favoritism with God! He is no respecter of persons. In every country he that serves him and keeps his commandments will be accepted of him.

When I speak of the law of the harvest, I should like you young men to realize that the quality and quantity of the harvest depends upon the seedtime of life. I pray you do the kind of sowing that will make you proud of the harvest when you reap and remember again, as "As ye sow, so shall ye reap." (See Gal. 6:7.)

Sowing is an act of faith—faith in the future, faith that there are certain inexorable laws in this world of ours which apply to all with undeviating justice. Let no one get the idea that he is a favorite with God, that he is an exception to the rule, that because of name or place, color, nationality, or status he may with impunity disregard or disobey God's laws. Faith in him, in his love, mercy, and understanding, faith in your relationship to him, and therefore faith in yourselves and in your destiny is of far greater value than material possessions. Jesus said in Luke 12:15: " . . . man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth."

So many men spend their lifetime accumulating this world's goods, and sometimes they are not particular how they get them; but most men, if they live to old age, get a new sense of values, but too often it is too late.

May I illustrate my point by referring to an experience I had in 1917 as I was returning from my first trip overseas in World War I where I was serving with the Canadian Army. I arrived in New York and while there learned of the presence in the hospital of an aged man whom I had known. As I had some time before the train left for the West, I called on him in the hospital. He was a very wealthy man, had racing stables in Cuba, in the Northwest, and in California, had millions invested in various places, but at the age of eighty he was lying at death's door.

As I stood by his bedside and thought over various parts of his life as I had known it, as I thought of his divorced wife, of his five children, all of whom were estranged, and none of whom cared enough to come to the hospital to see him, as I thought of the things he had lost which money could not buy and noted his tragic situation and the depth of his misery, I asked him what he would do if he had the privilege of living his life over again and could start it with the wisdom which had come through the years, what he considered the real values in life as he stood near the end of it. I asked him what he considered the most important things in life, and if he would tell me as a young man how I could get the greatest riches and enjoy them when I grew old.

This old gentleman, who died a few days later, said to me, "As I think back over life the most important and valuable asset which I might have had but which I lost in the process of accumulating millions, was the simple faith my mother had in God and in the immortality of the soul."

The old gentleman asked me to get a little book out of his briefcase and gave me the page on which he had marked a poem, and then he said, "You asked me what is the most valuable thing in life. I cannot answer you in better words than those used by the poet. Will you read them to me?" And as I read the following lines I thought it was he, not the poet, that was speaking, and I read:

"I'm an Alien"

"I'm an alien, to the faith my mother taught me. I'm a stranger to the God that heard my mother when she cried. I'm an alien to the comfort that, 'Now I lay me,' brought me. To the everlasting arms that held my father when he died. When the great world came and called me, I deserted all to follow. Never noting in my blindness I had slipped my hand from His, Never dreaming in my dazedness that the bubble fame is hollow. That the wealth of gold is tinsel, as I since have learned it is. I have spent a lifetime seeking things I spurned when I found them, I have fought and been rewarded in many a winning cause, But I'd give it all, fame and fortune and the pleasures that surround them, If I only had the faith that made my mother what she was."

That was the dying testimony of a man who was born in the Church but had drifted far from it. That was the brokenhearted cry of a lonely man who could have anything that money could buy, but who had lost the most important things of life in order to accumulate this world's goods. He realized as he lay upon his deathbed that he could not take any of it with him.

Young men, value your character, maintain your standards, do not forsake your ideals. God expects you to be true. He sent you here at this time because he knew something of your pre-existent work. That life in some measure prepared each of us for our assigned tasks and times. To live in the atomic age may be a glorious experience, but it is fraught with terrifying dangers. You will have more power in your hands than your grandfathers ever dreamed of. You will be able to travel faster and reach more people than I would have thought possible when I was your age, but with this increased power, with this ability to reach millions where we touched very few, you have the responsibility to make sure that this terrific speed is taking you where you wish and ought to go. Speed may be a curse and not a blessing if we are going in the wrong direction. Your Father in the spirit world sent you here because you were true in that estate and earned the right to a second estate. He trusted you to come at this, the most important time in all the history of time. It is, in fact, the fulness of time. Protect and preserve your honor, your integrity, and your manhood. In short, be worthy of your trust, and his trust in you.

Sharing the Gospel

Whenever I enter any of the temples I am hushed and humbled because I am reminded that I am actually not only entering the house of God, but to the degree that I may become worthy, entering into the presence of the Lord. In the humble and inspiring prayer that Elder Harold B. Lee offered this morning, we were impressively reminded of the importance of this particular occasion. President Smith's remarks remind us of the covenants and obligations we take and I am sure each of us has breathed a prayer that we may individually be counted worthy to be in God's presence.

When I say we come into his presence, of course I do not mean to intimate that he is on all occasions bodily present in the temple, although there have been occasions when he was, but I do mean that his Spirit is here, and if our spirits are right, and if we can do what Brother Lee intimated in his prayer—tune out anything that would cause static, and tune in to that Spirit—then each of us may know that we are in his presence. Anyone who comes into that presence will be purified as by fire.

So each week I ask myself as we meet in this temple, "Are you worthy to enter here?" And that leads me then to a prayer for forgiveness because I have never yet been fully worthy. I think, my brethren and sisters, this is a wonderful climax to a history-making week. Every part of the Church will be affected by what has been done here this last week.

Now we meet in the temple that the activities of the seminar may be sealed by the Holy Spirit so that we may more effectively carry on our work. Here we will not only lay aside the clothing of the street, but the thoughts of the street, and will try not only to clothe our bodies in clean white linen but our minds in purity of thought. May we profit by the spoken word and, what is more lasting and more impressive, receive instruction from the Spirit.

We know, of course, this room is filled with music, with the spoken word, with news reports, etc., and that, if we had the right instruments we could tune in and not only hear but see what is going on in London, New York, San Francisco, or Tokyo—this is made possible by the use of mechanical appliances invented by men.

But it is equally true—and it is more amazing—that this building at the moment is filled with spiritual messages, with heavenly music, and I dare say some Personages could be seen if we were spiritually in tune. To the degree that we tune in we all become aware that we stand in a holy place. I trust that each of us may be able to tune out the static of the earthy and tune into the inspiration of the Lord so that wherever we may go, and whomsoever we may meet, that spirit may shine through to bless all whose lives we touch.

We are all, of course, convinced that the things of the Spirit are the only things that endure, that the things of God are understood by the Spirit of God. Here in mortality we have contact with the things of the world, but what real riches we have glimpsed during this seminar as we have seen the operation of the Holy Spirit upon our President and those who have been in charge. I am sure that every mission president and every wife of a mission president, and all of us, are going to rededicate our lives to the transcendent work of sharing the gospel.

And now this morning, while we are going to take names and make covenants for and in behalf of someone who is not here in person, while we will make covenants and speak for them, let us, within ourselves, each of us renew our own covenants and pray for forgiveness of anything that might have occurred since last we went through the temple which might interfere with spiritual reception in order that we might return to the mission field and carry with us the spirit that is here, because, brethren and sisters, not only are we entitled to have that presence in this house, and to have it to the degree that we can be sensitive to its inspiration, not only is that true here, but it may be true with all of us wherever we may be, if we will but keep ourselves in tune and in harmony, and avoid everything that would in any way interfere with the free flow of the Holy Spirit.

It would be presumptuous and inappropriate for me to speak longer. We are all anxious to hear from the President. May I simply say that I know better than I know anything else in this world that Jesus the Christ is really the Head of the Church; that Joseph the Prophet stands and will stand at the head of this dispensation. I haven't the slightest doubt that the Savior, the Prophet, and they who have succeeded him are aware of what we are doing. It is because of their awareness and interest and contact that President David O. McKay, the present leader of the Church, the Prophet of God, was inspired to call us all together.

I leave my testimony with you, and my blessing, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—Mission Presidents Seminar, in Salt Lake Temple, July 5, 1961.

Service in Stake Missions

I am very happy to greet you brethren and sisters. I am grateful that my assignment this morning is simply to greet you and not to preach to you. I think if I should be asked which particular activity in which I have engaged in Church work through the years stands out as most significant and satisfying in my own life, or if I were asked to select from the various activities the one that I enjoy most in retrospect, it would be missionary activity, in fact, the missionary spirit has pervaded all the others. It has been the source of the greatest satisfaction in my life and I am sure all of you have felt the same way.

I happened to pick up this morning an amusing definition of a missionary, but I'd like to suggest a more serious, more accurate definition: "Somewhere between the whirl of teenage activity and the confinement of cane and rocking chair, we find a strange creature called a missionary. Missionaries come in two varieties, called elders and L.M.'s. They also come in assorted sizes, weights, and colors, but green is the most common among the new ones." Under the new interpretation given by the President of the Church, a missionary is a thoroughly converted member of the Church, and each such is a missionary to the degree and the extent to which he becomes dedicated to the great privilege and opportunity of bearing witness of the truth to his neighbors and to all whose lives he touches. So under the latter definition, we are all missionaries.

Now we have met this morning under the direction of President Moyle and the Council of the Twelve to consider together ways and means of furthering missionary work nearer home. During the past two weeks, we have been considering the work in foreign fields, the regular missionary service of those who are called for full-time service, and I think a more significant meeting or convention has seldom been held in the Church. In the hope that the spirit of that occasion might carry over and be shared with the people closer to home, I understand missionary-minded members were invited from Utah, part of southern Idaho, and eastern Nevada; also I note there are many here from the auxiliaries and from the BYU. We feel that if you could catch something of the spirit of what took place here the last two weeks, the missionary work in the stakes might get, in the language of the street or the clinic, "A shot in the arm."

Sometimes some of our people complain that they are kept a little too busy and that those of us who have to do with making plans and formulating programs have little to do but try to make work for others. In this connection I wish you could follow President Moyle for a week, I wish you could see him in action, note the energy and activity of the man, his vigor and enthusiasm and physical endurance. He was called by the President of the Church to direct one of the most vital and far-reaching organizations in the Church, its world-wide and ever-expanding missionary system. I think if we could catch a little of his devotion and enthusiasm it would revive, reactivate, and make us enthusiastic; it would do something comparable to what was done to my battery just a few days ago. Someone who drives my car—and I am the only one who drives it—left one of the doors open and the light on, and in the morning when I wanted to drive it, the battery had run down. I sent for the serviceman, and he came up with some kind of apparatus which he attached to my battery, and somehow he shot new energy into that battery. I got in, stepped on the starter, and went to the office. Something comparable to that is done every time you meet men like President Moyle, Elders Spencer Kimball, Mark Petersen, Marion Romney, Gordon Hinckley, and others who have given this their special attention.

Now as to the general nature of our work and the over-all supervision of it, I read this morning a word which was given to the twelve in the Doctrine and Covenants:

"And again, I say unto you, that whosoever ye shall send in my name, by the voice of your brethren, the Twelve, duly recommended and authorized by you, shall have power to open the door of my kingdom unto any nation whithersoever ye shall send them—" (D&C 112:21.)

And then the Lord said in this same section, still speaking to the twelve:

"For unto you, the Twelve, and those, the First Presidency, who were appointed with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the dispensation of the fulness of times.

"Which power you hold, in connection with all those who have received a dispensation at any time from the beginning of the creation;

"For verily I say unto you, the keys of the dispensation, which ye have received, have come down from the fathers, and last of all, being sent down from heaven unto you.

"Verily I say unto you, behold how great is your calling. Cleanse your hearts and your garments, lest the blood of this generation be required at your hands.

"Be faithful until I come, for I come quickly; and my reward is with me to recompense every man according as his work shall be. I am Alpha and Omega. Amen."(Ibid., 112:30-34.)

Reading that has given me a new thought. That is, that I am part of a team, the captain of which is Jesus Christ, and my teammates are not only the men called today, but all of those who have been thus called from the beginning of time. With that thought in mind, I would like to charge you, and all of us that we do not let our teammates down. They are counting on us to figuratively carry the ball and play the game while they are not here personally. They are not merely spectators but are working on the other side.

I am thinking of Adam, Enoch, Abraham, Moses, and others of the prophets; of Peter, James, John, and Paul. I have no doubt, brethren and sisters, that the Prophet Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, and other leaders of the restored Church are cognizant of our activities. I have no doubt at all that the Spirit of the Lord prompted President David O. McKay to put new impetus into this work. He, himself, is one of the greatest missionaries of all time. Acting under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit and in anticipation of what is to come, the President of the Church has called every member of the Church to put on the armor of God and become a missionary for the Church because the whole world must be warned. Here is what the Lord said:

"Behold, vengeance cometh speedily upon the inhabitants of the earth, a day of wrath, a day of burning, a day of desolation, of weeping, of mourning, and of lamentation; and as a whirlwind it shall come upon all the face of the earth, saith the Lord.

"And upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord:" (Ibid., 112:24-25.)

Now if these things are about to happen, and they are now in process, and if they are starting here at home, and if, through negligence or carelessness or lack of interest, we fail to warn those immediately around us, then whatever success may have attended our efforts in foreign fields, our work will be incomplete, and we will be under condemnation if our neighbors have not been warned.

I have felt of late as my soul has been melted in the furnace of responsibility, and as I have pleaded humbly with God for help and guidance, that it is the duty and responsibility of every man to warn his fellow men and bear his testimony concerning the restoration. You as missionaries, and again that includes every member of the Church, have been asked to bear testimonies to your neighbors and friends. There is something about a testimony that is more persuasive than anything I know of because when you look a man in the eye and say, "I know whereof I speak," that is more convincing than all of the intellectual arguments you might produce.

In deep humility and gratitude I say to you, my brethren and sisters, that I know better than I know anything else in this life that the gospel of Jesus Christ was restored to this earth through a personal visit from the Savior of the world, accompanied and introduced by his Father. They thought the occasion of sufficient importance to come personally, the two of them. I know they came, and they talked to Joseph the Prophet. Later there were other heavenly visitors; the priesthood was restored; the Church was organized; the kingdom of God set up that all men might have the blessings of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Whenever we can reach the heart of another person with a firm and fervent testimony of the gospel, we transmit to him a power which will enable him, figuratively again, to step on the starter and go forward under his own power. That is our job. I leave you that testimony and pray God's blessings upon you and all of us. May he bless these of the twelve who have been especially called, and the assistants, who have been giving twenty-four hours a day, some of them, to this cause. God bless them for their diligence and their faith, and may we catch from them a vision of what it means to be dedicated to the work of the Lord, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—Stake Area Mission Supervisors, July 9, 1961.

Temple Building

With others who attended the morning session, I was profoundly moved by the beautiful spirit of this occasion. I approach this assignment in humility and with a prayer for divine guidance.

This occasion is to Sister Brown and me the realization of a dream which has continued through the years and also it is the fulfilment of prophecy. We are very grateful to President McKay for his gracious invitation to be present. We feel we belong, in part at least, to the British Commonwealth of Nations. Sister Brown was born in Canada, and we lived there thirty years. Also we spent nearly ten years in this land. We feel, therefore, that we have come home.

We greet you, our brethren and sisters of the British and Netherlands Missions. It was a pleasure to visit in the Netherlands a few days ago and to listen to their wonderful choir. We congratulate them on the work they are doing there and regret that it was not possible to hear them sing today as the musical program had previously been arranged.

Now for a moment, brethren and sisters, I would like to bring to you some thoughts regarding temples and temple building. On this momentous occasion it is well for us to consider the meaning of temple building and perhaps point out a little of the history of it.

Throughout the Old Testament there are many references to the building and use of temples by the children of Israel. They were holy sanctuaries in which men holding divine authority performed sacred ordinances, rites, and ceremonies for the salvation and exaltation of those who were worthy to enter therein. Each one was literally a house of the Lord, a place to which he could come or send his messengers.

Dr. James E. Talmage advises us that the Latin word, Templum, was the equivalent of the Hebrew Beth Elphim and signified the abode of Deity. Hence it meant literally the house of the Lord.

The people of Israel were distinguished among the nations as the builders of sanctuaries to the name of the Living God. The Latter-day Saints are similarly distinguished today.

The Latter-day Saints do not build temples as monuments of commercial wealth, nor for the purpose of attracting the attention and soliciting the praise of the people who see them, and yet they have always been built of the best materials available to the builders. In the early days of the Church, when bread was scarce and clothing scant, we find the people arduously engaged in building temples, which they looked upon as edifices belonging to the Lord. Nor are they built as various sects build chapels, churches, cathedrals, or synagogues. We build the equivalent of these in our meetinghouses and tabernacles and places of worship. But temples are not used for general or congregational services.

But for a moment let us go back and consider briefly the history of temple building and note how in various ages God has placed the stamp of his approval upon the sacrifice of his people and has accepted the temples as sanctuaries and sanctified them by his Holy Spirit and his presence.

When the children of Israel were released from the bondage of the Egyptians through the power of God, exercised through Moses, and when they had escaped from the environment of the Egyptian idolatry, they were required to prepare a sanctuary in and radiating from which the presence and Spirit of Jehovah was manifest.

Though this early tabernacle was but a tent, we are told it was made of the best, the most prized, and the most costly materials the people possessed. It became the nation's offering unto the Lord and its construction was prescribed in minutest detail, both as to design and material. (Quoted from The House of the Lord by Talmage.)

Among the most sacred appurtenances of the tabernacle was the Arc of the Covenant. It was a casket or chest made of the best wood available, lined and overlaid with pure gold and provided with four rings of gold to receive the rods or poles used in carrying the Arc during travel. The Arc contained certain objects of sacred import, such as the golden pot of manna, preserved as a remembrance, and to this were afterwards added Aaron's rod that had budded and the tablets of stone inscribed by the hand of God.

After forty years of wandering in the wilderness, the children of Israel possessed Canaan, and there their tabernacle was taken to Shiloh, and the various tribes came to the tabernacle to receive the word of the Lord. Later it was taken to the City of David, or Zion.

David desired and had planned to build a house unto the Lord, or a temple. He felt it was not fitting that he himself should dwell in a palace of cedar, while the sanctuary of God was but a tent, but Nathan, the prophet, was inspired of the Lord to decline his offer and to tell him that it was not acceptable unto the Lord. Herein we learn the great truth that it is not enough that the gift be appropriate, but the giver must also be worthy.

While David was not permitted to build the temple because of his sin, he was permitted to gather materials for the house of the Lord, and his son, Solomon, was to build it. This he did in due course. With all the wealth and service at his command it took him seven and one half years to erect the great edifice. We are told that scores of thousands were employed in its construction and that every department was in charge of a master craftsman. The erection of the temple of Solomon is looked upon as a great event in world history. It was finished about 1005 B. C. and is known as one of the most remarkable buildings in history. The dedicatory service lasted seven days, and the tabernacle and sacred Arc of the Covenant were brought into the temple, the Arc deposited in an inner sanctuary, the most Holy Place.

This temple of Solomon, which held such glorious pre-eminence, was to stand for a short time only. Within thirty-four years it began to decline, and, through desecration, was finally ruined. The people were divided into factions and sects and parties and creeds, and Jehovah withdrew his protective presence from the temple and the Egyptians were again permitted to oppress Israel. The king of Egypt took away the treasures from the house of the Lord, and the desecration continued through centuries. Part of the gold and silver were taken from the temple and given as a present to pagan kings. The altar and the font were removed, and Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, completed the despoiling of the temple.

The Israelites were divided into two kingdoms, Israel and Judah, and they were at enmity with each other. They were adulterous and wicked, and the Lord rejected their sanctuary as well as them.

When under the friendly rule of Cyrus the Jews were permitted to return to Jerusalem, they again reared a temple in accordance with their faith. This was known as the temple of Zerubbabel. This temple was finished in 515 B. C. While it was not equal to Solomon's temple, it was the best they could build under the circumstances.

But this temple, too, was permitted to go into decay and ruin during the succeeding five centuries and, shortly before the birth of Christ, Herod, King of Judea, commenced its reconstruction. Christ recognized the temple and acknowledged the sanctity of its precincts as is evident from the action he took against the money changers therein. The Savior looked upon it as the house of the Lord, and when he was crucified the veil of the temple was rent and, pursuant to prophecy, in the year 70 A. D. the temple was utterly destroyed by fire when the Romans captured Jerusalem under Titus. This temple had, by this time, come to be known as the Temple of Herod. It was the last temple built in the Eastern Hemisphere.

The Book of Mormon tells us of temples having been built on the American continent, and when Christ appeared to the people in America, they had assembled in and about the temple.

Today there are many churches and cathedrals, some dedicated to Peter, to Paul, to James, to John, the Magdalene, and the Virgin. This temple in which we stand, and other temples built in this dispensation, were built by the authority of and in the Name and to the honor of Jesus the Christ.

It should be noted that authority to speak and act in the name of God is essential to temple ordinances, they are void without that sacred authority. This was given by divine revelation and manifestation to Joseph Smith, the Prophet, who was first visited by the Father and the Son and later by other heavenly beings who bestowed upon him the Holy Priesthood and opened the door and restored the keys, not only of the ministering of angels, but of turning the hearts of the fathers to the children and the children to their fathers.

The Church was organized in 1830, and three years later the Lord directed the Prophet, (D&C 95), to build a temple. In spite of their dire poverty and unrelenting persecution, this commandment was carried out, and in 1836 the first temple of modern times was dedicated in Kirtland, Ohio, and in it some of the greatest manifestations of all time were witnessed, where heavenly beings appeared in the sacred precincts, and the Lord himself was seen and heard. (See Ibid., 110:1-10.)

The Saints were driven from state to state, Missouri, Iowa, and Illinois and finally Nauvoo became the central seat. Shortly after settling there the authorities again heard the voice of revelation, and the people were commanded to build a house sacred to the name of the Lord. The cornerstone of the Nauvoo Temple was laid April 6, 1841, and the capstone placed in position March 24, 1845, each event celebrated by solemn assembly and sacred service.

The people knew at the time that they would be forced to flee again, and the leaders were aware that they would have to abandon their temple soon after its completion, but they labored on with might and diligence, and it was dedicated April 30, 1846.

When the Mormon people were driven from Nauvoo, they made the memorable trek across the plains, and on the 24th of July, 1847, they entered the valley of the Great Salt Lake. Four days later Brigham Young, the then prophet and leader, dedicated a site in the sagebrush wastes and, striking the arid ground with his staff, proclaimed, "Here will be the temple of our God." The site was dedicated in 1853 in a sacred service. This magnificent edifice was forty years in building and was dedicated in 1893. Since then other temples have been built and still others are contemplated. This is the second one in Europe. In addition to those in the United States and Canada, there is one in Hawaii and one in New Zealand.

It is altogether fitting that temples should be built in England and in Switzerland, and later no doubt others will be built in Europe for the people of these countries who have given so many valiant ones to modern Israel, the countries in which there are so many of the tribe of Joseph through Ephraim and Manasseh may have temples near at hand where they can perform their work for the living and the dead.

It is significant that of all the churches in the world, only the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints provides for the baptism and endowing of those who have gone before by the vicarious, love-inspired work performed by the living for the dead.

Baptism by water is taught by the Church in this dispensation as it was in former times. It is the gateway leading into the fold of Christ, the portal to the Church, the established right of naturalization in the kingdom of God. Christ himself entered through that portal with the simple statement, "Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness," and later he said, "Verily, verily I say unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:1-7.) After his resurrection he commanded his apostles to go into all the world and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. (Matt. 28:19.) He further said, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved and he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16:16.)

The question is often asked, "How is it possible for the dead to comply with the terms of the gospel and do in the spirit what they failed to do in the flesh?" We believe in vicarious service in which one person acts in behalf of another, and the Bible attests that such service is acceptable to the Lord.

The very epitome of vicarious service is the atonement of the Christ, the greatest work ever wrought among mankind, the supreme achievement which was at once the most glorious consummation and the most blessed beginning, and this was pre-eminently a vicarious offering.

No one who believes that Jesus died for men can doubt the validity and efficacy of vicarious ministration. That his death was literally an accepted offering in behalf of human kind is attested in modern revelation. (See D&C 19:16-19.) "For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men."

Many of the ordinances of the gospel, such as baptism, bestowal of the Holy Ghost, ordination to the priesthood, etc., may be performed in any suitable place, but when such ordinances are performed for and in behalf of the dead, they are acceptable only when administered in places especially provided, set apart, and dedicated for these and kindred purposes. That is to say, such ordinances belong exclusively to the house of the Lord.

How fortunate we are to be this day permitted to enter this holy house and participate in the dedicatory services presided over by the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, David O. McKay. May God grant that all of us may catch the spirit of this occasion, have our lives enriched thereby and from now on live worthily that we may participate in the temple work to be performed in this holy house in the years to come.

I add my humble testimony and again express appreciation for the privilege of being present and ask that God will bless you people not only in Great Britain, but you in the Netherlands and other lands in Europe and elsewhere that there may be sealed upon your hearts, not only the testimony of the gospel but also a desire and determination to spend the balance of your lives in his service in helping to build up his kingdom in the world.—Address given at Dedication of London Temple.

Missionary Work

Never in my life have I felt so humble, so inadequate, so much in need of divine guidance as I feel today. Someone said that speech is the faculty given to man to conceal his thoughts. This morning I wish I had the facility to reveal my thoughts and what is in my heart. I am only sure that whatever I shall say will be less than what I feel.

We octogenarians have learned that as one gains knowledge he becomes more aware of the scope of his ignorance. Someone has said, "Conscious ignorance keeps pace with the acquisition of knowledge." By the same token, as one's responsibility increases, his inadequacy becomes more apparent; his dependence more complete. But this is not the time nor place for me to refer to myself or to what has recently happened to me, however, the warmth of your greetings, your pledges of support and prayers seem to make it necessary for me to say thank you. Thank you very much. And may God bless you.

Our message to the world is positive, definite, unequivocal. I read in Time magazine recently something that I would like to share with you. It is indicative of the thinking of some of the leaders of modern Christianity.

"While the country rang last week with commencement exhortations to cherish the spiritual legacy of the past, the graduating class at Princeton Theological Seminary heard that ancient dogma is a dangerously heavy burden. From the dean of Harvard Divinity School came the suggestion that Christianity may be at death's door, and that its spiritual legacy is more likely to push it through the door than the atheism of the present.

"Tall, gray Dr.Samuel Howard Miller, 61, Harvard Divinity's former professor of pastoral theology and the first Baptist to be dean of the 149-year-old seminary, told Princeton's fledgling ministers that if religion is to have any real place in the modern world, it will have to 'undergo a radical revolution.' In fact, he warned, 'the critical point of no return may have been passed.' The churches are addressing themselves in a dead language to situations and issues that no longer exist. 'The ancient dogmas no longer dominate the imagination; the shape of life has changed; the patterns of truth are different; the questions have new terms; the doubts have deeper dimensions; the hunger of the heart and mind has been enlarged.'

"THREE DARK AREAS. Specifically," said Dean Miller, "there are three developments with which religion must cope:

"The 'Freudian probe' that has unveiled 'an abyss within man, full of new embarrassments and a new terror.'

"The space probe, and the danger that man's new power to colonize the stars will turn demonic and destructive.

"The interdependence of the technological world, in which human beings must somehow live in new intimacy, 'although as races, religious and continental blocs, we simply do not know the first ABCs of understanding each other.'

"'If religion cannot illuminate these three dark areas of modern life,' said Dean Miller, 'it should then in decency get out of the way so that men will not be tripped up by frumpery or fooled by its solemnity. There is serious work to be done, lest the world descend into darkness deeper than we have ever known before.'

". . . It is the movement of the spirit by which religion itself may be saved from itself. Nothing could be more tragic than to find ourselves hugging our own sanctified, even pseudo-Christian idol, blind and hostile to the living revelation of God's mystery in our own time.'

". . . Religion which is interested only in itself, in its prestige and success, in its institutions and ecclesiastical niceties is worse than vanity; it is essentially incestuous. Religion is to help the world fulfil itself."

Contrast that with living revelation of the Church. It is not accidental, it is providential and foreordained that at this time, when the scope of missionary activity of the Church exceeds anything that could have been imagined in the past, that at this time when we must carry out the Savior's injunction to preach the gospel to every creature, we have at the head of the Church one of the greatest missionaries of all time: Joseph, the Prophet and Seer, the Revelator and Restorer, had no peer; Brigham Young, the prophet, colonizer, and leader of men was great and equal to his day. Each of their successors has been qualified by him who sent them for their particular time and calling, and the man who now stands at the head of the Church was chosen as they were from among the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones.

From among this select group, one was foreordained to become the leader of the Church at the most crucial and critical, and yet most inspiring epoch in the history of the world. Now President McKay would not have me say more along that line, in fact, he didn't authorize me to say this much. But I know that all of you dedicated people join with me in thanking God that at the head of the great missionary movement stands this great missionary, teacher, inspired leader and prophet of God.

Now brethren and sisters, speaking again for a moment on the callings that come to us and the support we receive from our friends, speaking now directly to you mission presidents and your lovely wives and to all who are called to serve. May I sound the note of warning, warning against the wiles of the adversary, warning against the danger inherent in authority and power. Let us not become heady or high-minded because of the success that may come to us, the success that is coming to the Church. Let us as individuals and as a group be humble. Mission presidents, both at home and abroad, are praised and honored and rightly so, but I counsel you to be deaf to applause.

Sometime ago my daughter taught me a lesson. Sister Brown and I were at a cafe having lunch with our daughter from California. A couple from an adjoining table came over and introduced themselves and said they had attended a conference where I had spoken. They proceeded to tell me what a great talk I had given. They praised me lavishly for ten minutes. When they left, my daughter put her hand on mine and said, "Now, Daddy, that kind of talk won't hurt you as long as you don't believe it."

Along that line I would like to quote what the Prophet Joseph Smith said, and this appeal has a warning admonition to all of us to beware of pride, to remember that our effectiveness and success will depend upon our humility and our dependence upon divine guidance. The Prophet said, "When the Twelve or any other witnesses stand before the congregations of the earth and they preach in the power and demonstration of the spirit of God, and the people are astonished and confounded at the doctrines and they say, 'That man has preached a powerful discourse, a great sermon,' then let that man or those men take care that they do not ascribe the glory unto themselves, but be careful that they are humble and ascribe the praise and glory to God and the Lamb. For it is by the power of the Holy Priesthood and the Holy Ghost that they have power thus to preach. Who art thou, O Man, but dust. And from whom receiveth thou thy power and blessings but from God."

When I think of missionary work—and incidentally it is my first love—I remember the words of Alma, "I know that which the Lord hath commanded me, and I glory in it. I do not glory of myself, but I glory in that which the Lord hath commanded me; yea, and this is my glory, that perhaps I might be an instrument in the hands of God to bring some soul to repentance; and this is my joy." (Alma 29:9.)

When I think back on early missionary experiences, there comes to mind one incident which I shall never forget. Fifty-six years ago I was in Norwich, England, on a mission. I had been tracting, and in those days we went three times to every door regardless of the reception. On this occasion I came to a door where I remembered the woman had been particularly antagonistic, and I knocked on the door with the big brass knocker. I knocked as a mature missionary knocks, for I had been there nearly two years. New missionaries, as you know, sometimes knock rather carefully hoping they won't be heard, but I knocked vigorously and had no response. I looked through the window and saw a woman sitting in the front room knitting. I recognized her, for she had given me a tongue lashing before, and I knew she wasn't deaf nor dumb. She wouldn't respond so I went around to the back door. In those days we carried a walking stick. We had those long Prince Albert coats and derby hats. I took my walking stick and knocked on the door so hard that she came out like a setting hen comes off the nest in response to a troublesome boy. I think for several minutes she gave me the worst Scotch blessing I have ever had. But she had an impediment of speech; she had to stop every fifteen minutes to draw her breath, and when she did stop I said, "My dear lady, I apologize for having annoyed you, but our Heavenly Father sent me 6,000 miles to bring you a message and inasmuch as he sent me I can't go home until I give you that message." She said, "Do you mean the Lord sent a message to me?" I Said, "I mean just that. He sent it because he loves you." She said, "Tell me the message." And I told her as best I could the Joseph Smith story. She listened intently, apparently impressed. And then I again apologized for having been rude enough to insist on her coming out and then I added, "Sister, when you and I meet again, and we will meet again, you are going to say 'thank you, and thank God that you came to my back door and insisted on speaking to me.' "

That was in 1906. Ten years later, in 1916, I was in England again, this time in uniform. President George F. Richards was the president of the mission. He had the flu, and he called me at the military camp and asked if it was possible to get a leave and go down to Norwich and hold a conference for him. I, of course, was very glad to visit my old mission field. At the close of the morning session a woman and four grown daughters came down the aisle.

I was shaking hands with old friends, and as I took her by the hand she bowed her head and kissed my hand and wet it with her tears. She said, "I do thank God that you came to my door ten years ago. When you left that day I thought about what you had said, I couldn't get it out of my mind. I was fighting it, but I couldn't sleep that night. I kept thinking, 'God has sent a message to me.' But," she said, "I fought it for three days. I tried to find the missionaries from the address on the tract, and when I found them, you had returned to Canada. We continued to investigate until my daughters and I joined the Church, and next month we are leaving for Utah." I cite that as a word of encouragement to you, my brothers and sisters. The joy that comes into the heart of a man or woman who has been instrumental in the hands of God in carrying the message of life and salvation to some soul, be it only one, is a joy beyond anything that men in the world can know. I am sure I need not emphasize that to you for you know it from experience.

And now just one specific word to you, and it is a word of caution. I hope I am not out of place. I know I am not intentionally out of harmony with the spirit of this occasion. Among your many grave responsibilities there is none more sacred than your responsibility to your missionaries. The relationship and responsibility of mission president to missionaries is second only to that of parenthood. Love them. Care for them. Pray for them. Be with them. Encourage them. They need your help. Their parents and God have entrusted them to your care during the most impressionable years of their lives and though you convert the whole world, if, by reason of any neglect on your part or any misjudgment or any lack of consideration or appreciation, sympathy, or love, one of them is lost, you will not be blameless on the judgment day.

Those of us who were raised on a farm, those of us who have had to do with the breaking of colts to a harness or saddle, know that every colt is different from every other colt, and some of us have learned by sad experience that in breaking a colt if we are not careful how we tighten the rope we may break his neck, or what is worse, his spirit.

These young people under you are like colts. They are purebreds but all are not intended or fitted for the same kind of work. Remember that some horses are Clydesdales, and some are Hambletonians. We do not expect a Hambletonian to be a good plow horse nor a plow horse to be a good racer. So with these young men. Classify them and do not yoke them together unequally. Do not expect the same speed or pulling power from each. Beyond all else, inspire and save them. Do not allow competition to become the chief incentive to work. Encourage them all, of course, to do their best, but let your competition from now on be with your own mission, your own past record, and not with the other mission. Teach your missionaries that their competition must be with themselves and not with the other missionaries, but inspire them with ambition and enthusiasm. Encourage them to be humble and prayerful. Do not downgrade them with unfavorable comparisons. Preserve their self-confidence and self-respect. Do not break their spirits. When great movements get the impetus of a prairie fire there is danger. I hope I have not spoken out of place. I am just sounding this word of warning.

In your enthusiasm to increase the flock, be careful you don't lose the shepherds. The Lord spoke about leaving the ninety and nine and going out to save the one; I am thinking in reverse order. You are asking the one to go out and get the ninety and nine, but be sure you don't lose the one. God bless you, my brethren and sisters. God bless the missionaries. One of the most effective techniques of your work is that which all of you are employing and asking your missionaries to employ, that of bearing testimony. I want to tell you from the very center of my heart that I know that Joseph the Prophet talked with Jesus the Christ. I know that this is the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, that it is led by revelation and that the man who stands at the head of the Church today is a prophet of God. My soul almost melts when I think that it is my high privilege to sit at his side. I leave you that testimony and ask for your prayers for all of us that we may remain humble and somehow be efficacious and partly, at least, equal to the task assigned to us. I leave you that testimony and my blessing, a blessing of peace in your souls, wisdom in your minds and hearts, enthusiasm for the work. I bless you that you may go back inspired as never before to carry out the greatest work of all time. I pray that we may negate what some people, to whom I have referred, have said, and prove to all the world that real Christianity is not on the way out, it is just starting on the last lap, the final sprint. Revelations from God will continue to come and the world will yet know, as they are beginning to know, that there is a force in the world that is capable of combating the satanic and implacable foe called anti-Christ.—Mission Presidents' Seminar, June 26, 1961.

Greatness Was Always There

It is exhilarating and challenging to stand upon an intermediate hilltop as one is climbing toward great peaks beyond. He can look back into the valley from which he came and forward across canyons through which he must pass to reach his goal. He has learned something from the gain and losses made and suffered. Pleasant memories recall the beauty spots he passed along the way and, if he tarries too long, nostalgia tempts him to return to them. The rules of his Alpine Club, however, are "onward and upward until you reach the peak." He reviews with alternate satisfaction and regret the difficult and dangerous cliffs he's scaled and the lost time and energy involved in getting back on to the trail after making a wrong decision or risking an unnecessary and costly hazard.

Each evening is, in a sense, a pausing place where we can "mark the distance run," and with each dawn there comes the challenge of the climb.

We look back upon an era in which millions of youth of this generation have been standing at the gates of death. Before they attained their majority they offered, and many of them gave, their lives for a cause. Other millions are and will be cut off from many of life's joys through the loss of limbs or even sanity. All this and more has been burned into our consciousness until, unless we stop to search among the ruins for some remaining values, we'd count the journey a total loss with nothing on the credit side.

But there are values to be found as we uncover seeming paradoxes in our search. We note, for instance, that amidst the whirlpools and the down drag of the epoch, many have risen to the sublimity of vicarious sacrifices and in this mass undertaking have demonstrated the truth of the Master's statement that we really find life only when we are willing to lose it. Many who left hum-drum occupations with their ego at freezing-point, have been transformed by the fire of zeal, the urge of loyalty and the lift of vision, into beings of such heroic stature that they and all who knew them stand amazed. They have found latent in themselves a joy in service more satisfying than any self-seeking undertaking in their pre-war lives. A great resilience is evoked by the very dangers which they face. And these are not isolated cases, but in varying degree may be counted by the hundred thousands. Men and women, both on the battlefield and in the factories, on the sea and in the air, have been heroic far beyond anything imagined. That exhilaration and hope replace fear and frustration when one is motivated by love of others is a fact which many have discovered for the first time even though we've mouthed the precept for two thousand years.

Figuratively, we seem to have drilled into a vast pool of heroism and have been amazed to strike so rich a flow among the common men and women. The important thing is the discovery that these qualities of greatness were there among the ordinary folk with whom we lived and worked in office, farm and factory. That it needed only to be released seems evident to us now, but the terrific cost of that release is a reflection upon sanity, especially when it is remembered that One who knew from personal experience had told us not only of the presence of the riches but how they could be obtained.

Having seen what human beings are capable of under stress, when life is compressed into a fraction of its normal space, when young men live a decade in an hour, having witnessed the release of much of the finest as well as some of the worst in human nature, let us undertake in the years ahead to find less drastic and more natural ways of developing these resources and of controlling those other forces which break forth periodically into volcanic eruptions.

These vast undeveloped resources of human greatness are available to us in times of peace. The war had no more to do with their creation than the wine-press has in making grapes. War is the antithesis of the Creator's plan for discovering and utilizing human personality. These tragic experiences should teach us what the prophets have long known, viz. that in religion we find the greatest intrinsic force for the motivation of human conduct.

One important objective, then, as we face the future is the recovery of a faith on which we can rely as we undertake the climb ahead. Faith in ourselves and in our fellow men as being in very deed, the offspring of Deity. Let us try to maintain and improve the quality of our loyalty to our country and the causes which we and our allies strive to serve. But we must have such faith in ourselves and in our destiny that we shall become conscious of an obligation which goes deeper than the obligation we owe to collective relations in which modern community life involves us. It is an obligation to that inner self in each of us which we must never yield to anyone's keeping if we would be true to the individual human dignity which we have come to recognize as the most valued treasure in our keeping. To rejoice in victory will not be enough unless in our inner selves we feel that the victory is for a cause which we can approve and to which we can dedicate our lives. The moral responsibility of personal decision is ours alone.

We who are members of the Church of Christ are favored in having an inspired leadership. The Church is not confined to nationalisms or political opinions, but, because of its prophetic power transcends them as it points the way ahead, provides the kind of leadership which down through the ages has saved the people when they were willing to listen and follow. With courage unabated and with renewed faith in God we face the future. The past has revealed unbeatable qualities in the human spirit and has, we hope, renewed our faith in Him who is still overruling the affairs of men and nations.
