Hugh B. Brown, Continuing the Quest ( 1961)

II

Jesus the Great Examplar

and Joseph Smith his Latter-day Prophet

The Atonement of Christ

"Whom Say Ye That I Am?"

Biblical Testimony

Joseph Smith's Testimony

Book of Mormon Testimony I

Book of Mormon Testimony II

Jesus and the Abundant Life

The Open Tomb

"My Redeemer Liveth"

Joseph Smith among the Prophets

The Atonement of Christ

An ancient prophet gave the assurance that God would require nothing of his children save he provided a way for them to carry out his commandments. I rely on that promise and pray for divine guidance. Speaking of the Lord making provision for carrying out his commandments, I am reminded that in ancient days and in our times he required that the gospel of the kingdom should be preached to all the world. When this commandment was given to the founders of the Church perhaps it seemed to be an insuperable task, but God has kept his promise and has made provision whereby we are able to reach more people with the gospel in a few minutes than our fathers could reach in years. We are grateful for the microphone, the radio, and television, but these facilities, great as they are, are just in their infancy, and he will, in his own due time, give us such improvements and amplifications as will enable us to carry out his great commandment.

We greet you, our friends out there in the radio and television audience who are not members of our Church. We join with Christians everywhere, as has been indicated all through this conference, commemorating, and giving thanks to God for the resurrection of the Lord. The significance of this transcendent event was emphasized in Corinthians, in which, among other things, Paul said: "If Christ be not risen from the dead then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain." (See 1 Cor. 15:14.)

We believe that the greatest story ever told in all the annals of history, is the story of the atonement of Christ. The record of his resurrection and ascension, without which the atonement would not have been complete, is the climax to that story, and now, two thousand years after the event, it is still central and pivotal in all true Christian thought.

Christ was both mortal and divine—mortal through his mother, Mary, divine through his Father, God—and because of that unique combination he was able to yield voluntarily to death in order that through his divinity he might conquer death, break its bands, and make the resurrection possible to all men. The resurrection is not for a select few, nor is it alone for believing Christians, but every man and woman who ever lived upon the earth, or who ever shall live thereon, will be raised from the dead.

Paul, the apostle, epitomized the cause and consequences of the atonement in one sentence:". . . as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.) And the Savior said, "Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice,

"And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." (John 5:28-29.) But we must not assume because of this promise that regardless of what we may do we shall have exaltation and eternal life. These blessings are reserved for those who accept the gospel of Jesus Christ and observe and keep the commandments of God.

We not only commemorate the resurrection of the Lord as an event in history, but we recognize it as a harbinger of things to come. When he gave his life on the cross, he did not indicate that his interest in his fellow men had ceased. He promised, and his apostles predicted, as did the prophets of the Old Testament, that there should be a second coming of the Lord, when, as Peter said, ". . . the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first:" (1 Thes. 4:16.)

But before his coming certain things must happen. Among them, as he said in answer to the question of his apostles as to what should be the sign of his coming and the end of the world, ". . . this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." (Matthew 24:14.) It is significant that he said "this gospel of the kingdom," not "a gospel," or "some gospel," but "this gospel." And the Apostle Paul, with his usual exactness and zeal, said, "But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed." (Gal. 1:8.)

And still there are some who say it matters little or not at all which church one joins, which gospel one preaches, whether it be the gospel of Luther, Knox, or Calvin, whether one belongs to the Roman or Greek Catholic Church, to one of the numerous Protestant denominations, or to some group which emphasizes some one aspect of the gospel such as faith healing, mode of baptism, which day is the Sabbath, etc. Unfortunately the world is faced with a variety of religious denominations which in some measure neutralize each other's influence in the minds of people.

The question then arises, "Where shall we find that gospel?" The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints makes certain definite statements with respect to what the gospel is. A commission was appointed in England recently by the Archbishops of Canterbury and York to make a complete survey of modern evangelism, and they were asked to seek and discover if they could the causes for the wide and deep gulf that exists between the church and people. This commission in the preamble to their report, emphasized the irrelevance of the church in the life and thought of the community in general.

The most arresting observation made by the commission was, "We believe that the tendency to preach another gospel, or a partial gospel, has been the weakness (not to say the sin) of the church." This observation reminds us of Paul's warning and anathema which for emphasis he repeated: "As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed." (Gal. 1:9.)

What gospel did Paul preach? All will agree that he was converted to the gospel of Jesus Christ as now taught in the New Testament through personal communication and instruction. He became one of its chief exponents, most effective and fearless defenders, and finally one of its martyrs. Many are asking, "Where can one find a church which teaches the gospel as Paul taught it?" Any search for the true gospel leads at once to the matter of origin and authority.

In a brief consideration of that subject we shall not challenge the claims of other churches unless our claim that we have the gospel is taken as a challenge. The Catholic Church bases its claims to authority on the long line of apostolic succession. Many of the other churches began with a protest against or an attempted reformation of the so-called mother church. As the great reformers failed to change or reform the false teachings and undesirable conditions they claimed to have discovered, and as they were successively excommunicated, some of them undertook to establish new churches without claiming new revelation or authoritative ordination.

The restored gospel of Jesus Christ does not base its claim to authority on apostolic succession, nor did it begin with a protest against or attempt to reform other churches. Furthermore, this Church did not have its beginning in scholarly analysis of the gospel as taught in the Bible. Its founder, at the time of his first vision, did not claim to be a profound student of theology, and he knew little of the writings of the early church fathers. His message came as a direct revelation from heaven.

We say humbly but fearlessly that the restored gospel of Jesus Christ is the divinely inspired way of life, the plan of salvation. It is the gospel of the kingdom of which Jesus spoke. It is, as was its prototype in the Meridian of Time, the fulness of the everlasting and unchangeable gospel, the very power of God unto salvation, the everlasting gospel which, through angelic ministration in the latter days, was, according to John the beloved, to be carried to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people.

Some express amazement and disbelief when we claim that the restoration began with a vision of heavenly beings and revelations from God. These claims should not be thought incredible to anyone who believes in the Holy Bible, for such events were standard procedure in both the Old and New Testament.

Mormonism is a message of glad tidings to all people, a glorious declaration that the prophecies recorded in both Old and New Testaments concerning the latter days have been and are being fulfilled. It is an announcement that the God of heaven has set up a kingdom as predicted by Daniel. It is a proclamation that the times of refreshing have come from the presence of the Lord, when there is to be a restitution of all things which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began as predicted by Peter. (Acts 3:19-21.) We humbly and gratefully announce the opening of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times in which, as promised by Paul, all things are to be gathered together in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth. (Eph. 1:10.)

The above scriptures concerning the restoration refer to the whole gospel. We think neither individuals nor groups of men, under whatever title, are justified in their attempts to pick and choose between particular aspects of the whole gospel. We profoundly dissent from the opinion that there is an element in the message which changes with varying conditions. The message of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is that there has been a restoration of the identical gospel which Jesus taught and which the apostles preached at his command. It is a gospel of glad tidings of great joy, a gospel of hope and saving power such as was enjoyed by members of the Church in the days of the Savior and his apostles.

The restored gospel is also a warning of judgment to come, a judgment which is neither fiction nor superstition, but is a tremendous and solemn truth, when all that is found valueless or out of harmony with the purposes of God must be abolished.

Some may not understand how this message of good news can include a warning of judgment to come, but judgment is integral to the gospel. It is the assertion of the final triumph of good and the abolition of evil.

While the Church, which was organized under divine direction, is the kingdom of God on earth, its membership consists of men and women who are not yet made perfect. It is a mixed society with an international complexion, subject in varying degrees to the weaknesses of humanity. It does not claim to be a picture gallery where every portrait is a masterpiece, therefore, Church membership requires continued tolerance, charity, and love of fellow men.

We do not claim to have achieved perfection, we often fall short of our ideals, but with additional revelations from the Lord, and with the gift of the Holy Ghost to help us, we hope it may be said of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints what Peter said to the Church of Jesus Christ of Former-day Saints: "But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light:" (1 Peter 2:9.)

We look upon the restoration and the second coming of Christ as sequels to the resurrection. We believe that a full understanding of the significance of the resurrection must include consideration of and belief in his second coming which, as he himself declared, must be preceded by the preaching of the gospel of the kingdom to all the world.

There are those who wonder at our assurance, and sometimes they say our presumption as we make such positive and definite statements, but we ask you, our friends, if you knew of a revelation from God, and knew it to be a revelation, would you equivocate or water it down, or be afraid to defend it, or assert it? In my own opinion, no greater message has come to this world since the angel standing at the open tomb said: "He is not here; he is risen."

The announcement of the Church today, and let all people heed as they hear, is that this same Jesus has appeared again, established his kingdom, organized his Church with apostles and prophets and set in motion a great missionary system by which the gospel of Jesus Christ shall be carried to all the world as a witness, and then the end shall come.

Humbly I bear my testimony to you, my friends, and brothers and sisters, that from the center of my heart to the ends of my fingers and toes I know that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God. I know that he came forth from the tomb with his body which he displayed to his disciples and invited them to feel of the wounds. I know that he has spoken again. I know that the gospel has been restored to the earth. If this message be true, it should be heard and heeded by all men everywhere for it has in it the saving principles of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ.

I leave this testimony with you, and thank God that he has given it to me, and pray that I may be able to live so as to come back into his presence, and I remind all of you that any of us may come into his presence when our conduct has been such that we can feel at home there.

God bless us to that end I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—General Conference, April 6, 1958.

"Whom Say Ye That I Am?"

BIBLICAL TESTIMONY

"When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?

"And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets.

"He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am?

"And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.

"And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 16:13-17.)

Christmas day has passed but it would be well if Christians everywhere should pause and consider the status and stature of the Divine Being whose birthday Christians everywhere celebrate on December 25th.

If a stranger should come among us who had never heard of Christ or of the Christians and should see our celebrations, he might well ask, "Who is this Jesus of Nazareth whose birthday is so universally celebrated? Is he someone whom I should know? Where can I learn of him?"

To these inquiries we should answer, "Yes, every man who is seeking eternal life should know of Jesus—in fact, He himself said, 'And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.' (John 17:3.) The second question, "Where can I learn of him?" we answer in his own words, "Search the scriptures . . . they are they which testify of me." (John 5:39.)

His transcendent position in this world and its affairs, both before and since its creation, is indicated by the fact that the first sentence of the first book and the last sentence of the last book of the Bible refer to him, and, as Peter said, "And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you.

. . .

"Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days." (Acts 3:20, 24.)

The first verse in the Bible reads, "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth." (Gen. 1:1.) That we may know who is referred to as the Creator of the earth, let us turn to the Gospel according to John:

"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

"The same was in the beginning with God.

"All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made." (John 1:1-3.)

In this scripture the Word (Christ) is called God, and the definite statement is made that "all things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made."

If there is any question about who the "Word" is we need only to read the 14th verse of the same chapter. "And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth." (John 1:14.) Paul adds his testimony to that of John when he says:

"God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets,

"Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds." (Hebrews 1:1-2.)

And in Colossians he writes:

"For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him:

"And he is before all things, and by him all things consist." (Col. 1:16-17.)

From these passages and many others which might be quoted, Jesus Christ obviously is the Creator of the world, the Jehovah of the Old Testament. In this connection we quote from the Compendium by Franklin D. Richards and James A. Little: "That Jesus Christ was the same being who called Abraham from his native country, who led Israel out of the land of Egypt with mighty miracles and wonders, who made known to them His law amid the thunderings of Sinai, who delivered them from their enemies, who chastened them for their disobedience, who inspired their prophets, and whose glory filled Solomon's temple, is evident from all the inspired writings, and in none more so than in the Bible."

Let us read a few of the numerous Old Testament scriptures which clearly refer to Jesus the Christ and couple with such scripture New Testament passages in which Christ or his apostles acknowledge the reference and in many cases state that the ancient scripture was fulfilled in him.

In Deuteronomy we read: "The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken." (Deut. 18:15.) Now let us turn to the Acts of the Apostles:

"And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you:

"Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began.

"For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you." (Acts 3:20-22.)

"They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture." (Psalm 22:16-18.)

Matthew referred to Psalms when he wrote:

"And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots." (Matt. 27:35.)

"He keepeth all his bones: not one of them is broken." (Psalm 34:20.)

"For these things were done, that the scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken." (John 19:36.)

"Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel." (Isaiah 7:14.)

"Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying,

"Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us." (Matt. 1:22-23.)

"He is despised and rejected of men: a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him: he was despised, and we esteemed him not." (Isaiah 53:3.)

"But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed." (Isaiah 53:5.)

"Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures,

"And said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day:" (Luke 24:45-46.)

"That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses." (Matt. 8:17.)

We might go on quoting Old Testament scriptures and referring to their fulfilment in the New Testament, but time will not permit. Let us ask for a moment what did the men who were closest to Christ think of him? Peter, as previously mentioned, in answer to Christ's question, "Whom say ye that I am," declared without hesitation, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God."

John testifies:

"And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book:

"But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name." (John 20:30-31.)

When Peter, James, and John accompanied the Master to the Mount of Transfiguration, the Father testified of him as he did at his baptism and at other times. Mark records what took place on the Mount:

"And after six days Jesus taketh with him Peter, and James, and John, and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves: and he was transfigured before them.

"And his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow . . .

"And there appeared unto them Elias with Moses: and they were talking with Jesus.

"And Peter answered and said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.

"For he wist not what to say; for they were sore afraid.

"And there was a cloud that overshadowed them: and a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him.

"And suddenly, when they had looked round about, they saw no man any more, save Jesus only with themselves."(Mark 9:2-8.)

In Exodus the name "I Am" is used by the Lord. "And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?

"And God said unto Moses . . . Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you." (Exodus 3:13-14.)

When Jesus told the Jews that their father, Abraham, rejoiced to see his day, they retorted, "Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham?"

Jesus answered, "Verily, verily I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am." (John 8:57-58.)

This statement bears out the claim that Jesus of Nazareth was indeed the Jehovah of the Old Testament and the God of Israel. That he had an existence prior to his birth in Bethlehem, there can be no doubt. Paul understood the doctrine of pre-existence when he wrote: ". . . God; Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our words, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began,

"But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel:" (2 Timothy 1:9-10.)

And Jesus said:

"For I come down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me." (John 6:38.)

"What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?" (John 6:62.)

In the sixth chapter of the Gospel of John, he records Jesus as having said: "I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst." (John 6:35.) Jesus testified of himself: "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:

"And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die." (John 11:25-26.) And again, "I am that bread of life.

"Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead.

"This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die.

"I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever:and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world." (John 6:48-51.)

Let all who celebrate the Christmas season hearken to the angel: "Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." (Rev. 14:7.)

Yes, let us worship him, not only during the Christmas season but also throughout the year. And let us be reminded that the sincerest form of adoration is emulation. I humbly add my own testimony to his divinity and do it in his name. Amen. Radio Station KSL, December 26, 1954.

JOSEPH SMITH'S TESTIMONY

In a former address in this series we called witnesses from the Old and New Testaments to answer the question, "Whom say ye that I am?" Tonight we call another witness, whose testimony is as authoritative and unequivocal as that given by Peter, James, or John for it derives from the same divine source. This witness enjoyed the same blessed privilege as was accorded to them on the Mount of Transfiguration, namely, to be introduced to the Son of God by the Father, who said on both occasions, "This is my Beloved Son, hear him."

We condense the Prophet Joseph Smith's own story and rely upon it to qualify him as a witness. If this account, already known to many who are reached by this program, be true, and the present speaker testifies that it is true, then its retelling is justified. Joseph Smith said:

"I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and 5th verse . . . 'If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.' Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. . . . I at length came to the determination to 'ask of God.'. . . I retired to the woods to make the attempt. . . . I had scarcely done so, when. . . I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me. . . just at this moment. . . I saw a pillar of light. . . which descended. . . until it fell upon me. . . When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description. . . . One of them. . . said, pointing to the other—'This is My Beloved Son. . . hear him!'

"I asked the Personages. . . which of all the sects was right—and which I should join. I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that. . . 'they teach for doctrine the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof'. . . many other things did he say unto me. . .

". . . my telling the story excited a great deal of prejudice against me . . . and was the cause of great persecution . . . it was nevertheless a fact that . . . I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated . . . for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true . . . I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it. . . "

Joseph Smith was told that the fulness of the gospel should, at a future time, be made known. He received many revelations and visitations from heavenly messengers one of whom revealed the existence of the Book of Mormon—the American volume of scripture which makes known the origin of the American Indians and dealings of God with their forefathers. It gives an inspiring account of the visit of the risen Christ to the people on the American continent after his resurrection. Here we have a sacred record in which a multitude of people testify to the divinity of Jesus Christ in answer to the question, "Whom say ye that I am."

Other heavenly messengers restored the priesthood of God to Joseph Smith and others, and men were again authorized to speak and act in the name of God. With this divine agency there came the responsibility and the injunction to proclaim the gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people and to say to all the world, "Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." (Rev. 14:7.)

Joseph Smith was born in Vermont, reared on the frontier in New York State, had no opportunity for high school or college education, spent months in vile prisons on trumped-up charges none of which were ever proved, was hounded like a fugitive, tarred, and feathered and left for dead; was, with his followers, driven by mobs from New York to Ohio, thence to Missouri and Illinois; and his followers, after his death, moved westward to the Rocky Mountains.

The following is from the book, Joseph Smith, An American Prophet, by John Henry Evans:

"Yet this man became mayor of the biggest town in Illinois and the state's most prominent citizen, the commander of the largest body of trained soldiers in the nation outside the Federal army, the founder of cities and of a university, and aspired to become President of the United States.

"He wrote a book which has baffled the literary critics for a hundred years and which is today more widely read than any other volume save the Bible. On the threshold of an organizing age he established the most nearly perfect social mechanism in the modern world, and developed a religious philosophy that challenges anything of the kind in history, for completeness and cohesion. And he set up the machinery for an economic system that would take the brood of Fears out of the heart of man—the fear of want through sickness, old age, unemployment, and poverty.

"In thirty nations are men and women who look upon him as a greater leader than Moses and a greater prophet than Isaiah; his disciples now number close to a million; and already a granite shaft pierces the sky over the place where he was born, and another over the place where he is credited with having received the inspiration for his Book."

The prophet made a profound impression upon all who met him, especially his followers who looked upon him as a seer and prophet in the Biblical sense. More than any other American he called forth the homage of his followers, many of whom were willing to die for him. Many did give their lives in defense of the principles he taught. Brigham Young, business executive, colonizer, independent thinker, organizer of the first rank, said of him:

"What I have received from the Lord, I have received by Joseph Smith; he was the instrument made use of.

"Joseph Smith has laid the foundation of the Kingdom of God in the last days; others will rear the superstructure. . .

"Who can justly say aught against Joseph Smith? I was as well acquainted with him as any man. I do not believe that his father and mother knew him any better than I did. I do not think that a man lives on the earth that knew him any better than I did; and I am bold to say that, Jesus Christ excepted, no better man ever lived or does live upon this earth. I am his witness. He was persecuted for the same reason that any other righteous person has been or is persecuted at the present day." (From Discourses of Brigham Young, pages 458-460.)

John Taylor, scholar, author, prophet who was with the Prophet at the martyrdom, said:

"Who was Joseph Smith? The Book of Mormon tells us he was the seed of Joseph that was sold into Egypt, and hence he was selected as Abraham was to fulfil a work upon the earth. God chose this young man. He was ignorant of letters as the world has it, but the most profoundly learned and intelligent man that I ever met in my life, and I have traveled hundreds of thousands of miles, been on different continents and mingled among all classes and creeds of people, yet I have never met a man so intelligent as he was. And where did he get his intelligence from? Not from books, not from the logic or science or philosophy of the day, but he obtained it through the revelation of God made known to him through the medium of the everlasting gospel."—JD, 21:163, December 7, 1879. (From the Gospel Kingdom by John Taylor, p. 353.)

Others besides his followers have written eulogies of him. Time will not permit reference to more than a few of them, but I should like to read again what many of you have heard before, namely, the estimate of one who visited the prophet and studied him who was well qualified to pass judgment on the stature of his contemporary. I speak of Josiah Quincy, one-time mayor of Boston, who visited the Prophet at Nauvoo in 1844. He later wrote, "It is by no means improbable that some future textbook for the use of generations yet unborn will contain a question like this: 'What historical American of the nineteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen? 'And it is by no means impossible that the answer to that interrogatory may be thus written: 'Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet.' And the reply, absurd as it doubtless seems to most men now living, may be an obvious commonplace to their descendants. History deals in surprises and paradoxes quite as startling as this. . .

"Born in the lowest ranks of poverty, without book-learning, and with the homeliest of all human names, he had made himself at the age of thirty-nine a power upon earth. Of the multitudinuous family of Smith, none had so won human hearts and shaped human lives as this Joseph. His influence, whether for good or evil, is potent to-day, and the end is not yet." (Figures of the Past, Josiah Quincy.)

And now, referring to the Christmas season which we have just passed, what it means and what it portends to the members of the Church and amplifying what we said last week about the second coming of Christ, the Lord revealed the following to the Prophet: I read from the Doctrine and Covenants.

"And they have done unto the Son of Man even as they listed; and he has taken his power on the right hand of his glory, and now reigneth in the heavens, and will reign till he descends on the earth to put all enemies under his feet which time is nigh at hand—" (D&C 49:6.)

"Verily, I say unto you, I am Jesus Christ, who cometh quickly, in an hour you think not." (D&C 51:20.)

"For I will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand." (D&C 29:11.)

"But blessed are the poor who are pure in heart, whose hearts are broken, and whose spirits are contrite, for they shall see the kingdom of God coming in power and great glory unto their deliverance. . . ." (D&C 56:18.)

"Wherefore, prepare ye for the coming of the Bridegroom, go ye, go ye out to meet him." (D&C 133:19.)

"These things are the things that ye must look for; and, speaking after the manner of the Lord, they are now nigh at hand, and in a time to come, even in the day of the coming of the Son of Man." (D&C 63:53.)

"Call upon the Lord, that his kingdom may go forth upon the earth, that the inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days to come, in the which the Son of Man shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth." (D&C 65:5.)

We who believe Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, who believe that through him the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored to the earth, are convinced that we are helping to prepare the world for the coming of the Son of God, in whose service the Prophet Joseph Smith spent his life, for whom as a devoted follower, he finally became a martyr.

But we come not to eulogize Joseph Smith but to present him as a witness who answers the question, "Whom say ye that I am?" Listen to his fervent testimony:

"And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

"For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

"That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:22-24.)

These testimonies renew the hope that we shall have peace on earth and good will among men. With that faith may we have courage to face the future unafraid, I pray in his name. Amen.—Radio Station KSL, January 9, 1955.

BOOK OF MORMON TESTIMONY—I

The question which forms the title to these addresses refers to Jesus of Nazareth, and we are attempting to present some answers by the use of scripture. We have considered the testimonies of Old Testament prophets concerning one who was to come. We found by reference that some of the prophecies were fulfilled during the lifetime of the Messiah and that many were to be fulfilled later. Also we have referred to the testimonies of those who knew him best during his ministry in Judea. These witnesses testify that he was indeed the Christ, the Son of the Living God, that he was the Jehovah of the Old Testament and the Creator of the world.

If, as the scriptures affirm, Jesus of Nazareth was the Creator of the World, its Redeemer and Savior, and if there were other descendants of the house of Israel, other sheep to whom he referred in John 10:16, it is reasonable to expect that they would have the blessings of his personal ministration. During the time of the Old Testament prophets and of the life of Christ in Judea, there was a great civilization on the American continent. This is attested by the ruins of ancient cities, temples, and by the presence in this country of a sturdy race of red men when Columbus first landed in America.

On this continent, as on the Eastern Hemisphere, men spoke and wrote as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost. In America the records were miraculously preserved and later translated by the gift and power of God. What a blessing it would be to Christians everywhere and how their faith would be strengthened if someone should discover an ancient record, ever so small, containing words spoken by the Master. One clergyman and author expressed the thought and wish in these words, "Were a parchment discovered in an Egyptian mound six inches square, containing 50 words which were certainly spoken by Jesus, this utterance would count more than all the books which have been published since the first century." In the Book of Mormon we have not only fifty words but many chapters telling of Christ's visit among the Nephites and recording his spoken word to them.

On the title page of the Book of Mormon we are told the purposes for which it was written. We quote from the title page: ". . . And also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations."

In First Nephi we read:

"And the angel spake unto me, saying: These last records, which thou hast seen among the Gentiles, shall establish the truth of the first, which are of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, and shall make known the plain and precious things which have been taken away from them; and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be saved." (1 Nephi 13:40.)

The earliest of the pioneers to this country are referred to in the Book of Mormon as Jaredites who left the land of Shinar, afterwards called Chaldea, about 2500 B.C. They came to America shortly after the attempt to build the Tower of Babel. It is interesting to note that a general migratory movement actually took place about that time. The historian Josephus who relied on both Hebrew and Greek sources, says of the times immediately following the attempt to build the Tower of Babel:

"After this they were dispersed abroad, on account of their languages, and went out by colonies everywhere, and each colony took possession of that land which they lit upon and unto which God led them; so that the whole continent was filled with them, both the inland and the maritime countries. There were some, also, who passed over the sea in ships and inhabited the islands."

From a much more recent work we read, "All history demonstrates that from the central focus (Babylon) nations were propelled over the globe with an extraordinary degree of energy and geographical enterprise."

The Jaredites were one of the groups of people who left that country after the confusion of tongues. A brief history of them is to be found in the book of Ether, who was a Jaredite prophet. His book was abridged by Moroni and is now found in the Book of Mormon. There were also other sheep who were to hear the Master's voice, who were led to America by the Jehovah of the Old Testament under the leadership of Lehi, who left Jerusalem about 600 B.C. His descendants became a mighty people on the American continent and were later known, because of divisions among them, as Nephites and Lamanites.

In reading the scriptures of the Western Hemisphere as contained in the Book of Mormon we find explicit declarations such as were found in the Old Testament, that the Son of God would be born in the flesh. In fact these records abound in predictions and promises of the Christ, and these predictions are followed by a record of the actual visitation of the resurrected Savior to the Nephites and the establishment of his Church among them.

Let us quote one of the prophecies made by Lehi, and recorded by his son Nephi, one of the outstanding characters of this sacred record:

"Yea, even six hundred years from the time that my father left Jerusalem, a prophet would the Lord God raise up among the Jews—even a Messiah, or, in other words, a Savior of the world.

"And he also spake concerning the prophets, how a great a number had testified of these things, concerning this Messiah, of whom he had spoken, or this Redeemer of the world.

"Wherefore, all mankind were in a lost and in a fallen state, and ever would be save they should rely on this Redeemer.

"And he spake also concerning a prophet who should come before the Messiah, to prepare the way of the Lord—

"Yea, even he should go forth and cry in the wilderness: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight; for there standeth one among you whom ye know not; and he is mightier than I, whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy to unloose. And much spake my father concerning this thing.

"And my father said he should baptize in Bethabara, beyond Jordan; and he also said he should baptize with water; even that he should baptize the Messiah with water.

"And after he had baptized the Messiah with water, he should behold and bear record that he had baptized the Lamb of God, who should take away the sins of the world.

"And it came to pass after my father had spoken these words he spake unto my brethren concerning the gospel which should be preached among the Jews, and also concerning the dwindling of the Jews in unbelief. And after they had slain the Messiah, who should come, and after he had been slain he should rise from the dead, and should make himself manifest, by the Holy Ghost, unto the Gentiles." (1 Nephi 10:4-11.)

In addition to the above prediction by Nephi we find many explicit statements concerning the coming of the Messiah. The prophets of the Book of Mormon went into greater detail than did the writers of the Old Testament as is evidenced by the following short quotations from various Book of Mormon prophets. Among other things connected with his mortal existence they declared of him that:

" . . . God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people." (Mos. 15:1.)

"He should take upon him flesh and blood. . . . " (Mos. 7:27.)

"He should be born in the land of Jerusalem, the name given by the Nephites to the land of their forefathers whence they came." (See Alma 7:10.)

"His mother's name should be Mary." (See Alma 7:10.)

"She should be a virgin of the city of Nazareth; very fair and beautiful, a precious and chosen vessel." (See 1 Nephi 11:13.)

"She should be overshadowed and conceive by the power of the Holy Ghost." (See Alma 7:10.)

" . . . his name shall be Jesus Christ, the Son of God." (2 Nephi 25:19.)

"He should call twelve men as his special witnesses, to minister in his name." (1 Nephi 1:10; 11:29.)

" . . . he shall suffer temptations, and pain of body, hunger, thirst, and fatigue, . . . blood cometh from every pore, so great shall be his anguish for the wickedness and abominations of his people." (Mos. 3:7.)

" . . . he was lifted up upon the cross and slain for the sins of the world." (1 Nephi 11:33.)

"He should be buried in a sepulchre where he should remain three days." (See 2 Nephi 25:13.)

"After he was slain, he should rise from the dead and should make himself manifest by the Holy Ghost unto the Gentiles." (See 1 Nephi 13:42.)

He should lay " . . . down his life according to the flesh, and taketh it again by the power of the Spirit, that he may bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, being the first that should rise." (2 Nephi 2:8.)

At his resurrection many graves should be opened, and "yield up their dead and many of the saints, who had beforetime passed away, should appear unto the living." (See Heb. 14:25.)

" . . . he shall redeem all mankind who believe on his name." (Alma 19:13.)

In this American volume of scripture, then, we have a new witness for Christ. In fact, an array of witnesses from men who lived on the American continent at various times from about 2500 B. C. to 400 A. D. These men were prophets of God. From among them we name the following: Ether, Lehi, Nephi, Jacob, Abinadi, the Almas, Samuel the Lamanite. These and the other Book of Mormon prophets testified of Christ that he was the Son of God. Some testified that he should come subsequent to their time, and others testified that he had come during their lifetime.

Not only did the Book of Mormon prophets join with the prophets of the Old Testament in predicting the birth, and mission of the Master in Judea, but these American prophets also promised that he would appear on this continent in his resurrected body and minister to the people. Later prophets, together with a multitude of people who lived on the American continent at the time of his crucifixion, testify that he did appear among them. Here we find the most convincing array of evidence and testimony to be found in all literature. Referring to the predictions of prophets on both hemispheres concerning the coming of Messiah, the late Dr. James E. Talmage wrote:

"Thus the scripture of both hemispheres and in all ages of ante-meridian time bore solemn testimony to the certainty of Messiah's advent; thus the holy prophets of old voiced the word of revelation predicting the coming of the world's King and Lord, through whom alone is salvation provided, and redemption from death made sure. It is characteristic of prophets sent of God that they possess and proclaim a personal assurance of the Christ, 'for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.' Not a word of the inspired prophecy relating to the great event has been found void. The literal fulfilment of the predictions is ample attestation of their origin in divine revelation, and proof conclusive of the divinity of him whose coming was so abundantly foretold."

Should there be any reading this who question the qualifications or reliability of the witnesses referred to herein I should like to have them consider the promise which was made by the last of the Book of Mormon prophets, Moroni, who hid up the record and who subsequently revealed its hiding place. He said: "And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

"And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things." (Moroni 10:4-5.)

The answer of the Book of Mormon prophets to the question, "Whom say ye that I am?" is, without exception, the same answer which Peter gave to the Master, namely, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." To the truth of this declaration we humbly add our testimony in his name. Amen.—Radio Station KSL, January 16, 1955.

BOOK OF MORMON TESTIMONY

In our last address we called an array of witnesses from among the prophets who lived on the American continent prior to the earthly advent of the Master. These men not only testified to the fact that he was the Savior and redeemer of the world, but they predicted with great exactness the time of his birth at Bethlehem. The following statement by Nephi is recorded in the Book of Mormon: "For according to the words of the prophets, the Messiah cometh in six hundred years from the time that my father left Jerusalem; and according to the words of the prophets, and also the word of the angel of God, his name shall be Jesus Christ, the Son of God." (2 Nephi 25:19.)

In the year B. C. 6, Samuel, the Lamanite, prophesied that on this continent at the time of the Savior's birth, there should appear great lights in the heavens so that there should be a day, a night, and another day without darkness; a new star should rise; and many signs and wonders should be seen in the heavens. Again at the time of the Redeemer's death the sun should be darkened and refuse to give its light and also the moon and stars; and there should be no light upon the face of this land from the time he died to the time that he arose again from the dead. At his death there should be mighty thunderings and lightnings for many hours and the earth should shake and tremble, and the rocks which are upon its face should be broken up, and there should be great tempests, and many mountains should be laid low, and valleys should become mountains of great height and many cities should become desolate. Then many graves should yield up their dead, and many Saints who would then be resurrected should appear unto the living. I quote and paraphrase from the Dictionary of the Book of Mormon by the late George Reynolds:

When six hundred years had passed from the time Lehi left Jerusalem the time arrived of which Samuel, the Lamanite, and other prophets had borne testimony, when the phenomena should appear to bear witness of the birth of the Son of God. As the day drew near, signs and miracles increased among the people. But the hardened in heart began to circulate the idea that the time had passed and the prophecies had failed. They even went so far as to appoint a day when all who believed in the coming of the Savior should be slain, except the sign be first given.

This gross wickedness caused Nephi, the high priest, great sorrow. Before God, in mighty prayer, he bowed all the day long. At last the comforting word of the Anointed One came unto him, saying: "On this night shall the sign be given, and on the morrow come I into the world, to show unto the world that I will fulfill all that which I have caused to be spoken by the mouth of my holy prophets." (3 Nephi 1:13.) As was thus declared so was it fulfilled. At the going down of the sun it was as light as day and so continued until the morning when the sun again rose in its usual course. A new star had also appeared in the heavens. Then the faithful rejoiced. They knew that their Redeemer was born and that the great plan of salvation had entered its most glorious phase; but the wicked quaked with awful dread. They realized the extent of their iniquity; they knew that they were murderers at heart, for they had plotted to take the lives of the righteous; and in the terror that this overwhelming sense of their piteous condition wrought, they sank to the earth as though they were dead.

Many now believed who previously had scorned the divine messages that the prophets bore; but others, inspired of Satan, as soon as they recovered from the fright which the appearance of the promised signs had produced, began to explain them away and by various lying rumors endeavored to nullify the good that had been done in the hearts of many. Others commenced to teach that it was no longer expedient to observe the law of Moses or to offer sacrifices, not comprehending that the infinite sacrifice had not yet been made.

On the fourth day of the thirty-fourth Nephite year after Christ's birth the promised signs of the Savior's crucifixion began. A terrible and devastating tempest burst upon the land. The earth quivered and groaned and opened in wide, unfathomable chasms. Mountains were riven and swallowed up in yawning gulfs or were shattered into fragments, and dispersed like hail before the tearing wind. Towers, temples, houses, were torn up, scattered in fragments, or crushed by falling rocks, and together with their inmates were ground to dust in the convulsion. Blue and yellow flames burst from the edges of sinking rocks, blazed for a moment, and then all was the deepest darkness. Rain poured down in torrents. Cloudbursts, like floods, washed away all with which they came in contact, and pillars of steaming vapor seemed to unite the earth and sky. This unparalleled storm raged throughout the land for three hours only, but during its short continuance the whole face of nature was changed. Mountains sank; valleys rose; the sea swept over the plains; large stagnant lakes usurped the place of flourishing cities; great chasms, rents, and precipices disfigured the face of the earth.

Three days of unnatural and impenetrable darkness followed the horrors of the tempest, and from the heavens the voice of the Lord was heard by affrighted people proclaiming in their terrified ears the destruction that had taken place.

Terrible was the catalogue of the woes which that heavenly voice rehearsed. Nearly all their cities, great and small, were destroyed by flood or fire, by earthquake or hurricane. The desolation was complete; the face of the land was changed; tens of thousands, probably millions, of souls had been suddenly called to meet the reward of their sinful lives; for this destruction came upon them that their wickedness and abominations might be hid from the face of heaven and that the blood of the prophets and Saints might not come up any more in appeal unto God against them.

When the heavenly voice had finished the recital of the calamities that had befallen the land and its inhabitants, the speaker appealed to those who yet lived to repent of their sins and return unto him, and they should have eternal life and revealed to them who he was. He declared unto them that:

" . . . I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. I was with the Father from the beginning. I am in the Father, and the Father in me; and in me hath the Father glorified his name.

"I came unto my own, and my own received me not. And the scriptures concerning my coming are fulfilled.

"And as many as have received me, to them have I given to become the sons of God; and even so will I to as many as shall believe on my name, for behold, by me redemption cometh, and in me is the law of Moses fulfilled.

"I am the light and the life of the world. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end." (3 Nephi 9:15-18.)

After the people had heard this glad message, they ceased their mourning for their dead relatives, and there was silence in the land for the space of many hours. Then again was the voice of Jesus heard recounting how often he had sought to gather his Israel but they would not and promising in the future that he would again gather them if they would listen unto him. But if they would not heed him, the places of their dwellings should become desolate until the time of the fulfilling of God's covenant with their fathers. When the people heard this awful prophecy, they began to weep and howl again because of the loss of their kindred and friends.

As on the eastern continent, so on this at the time of Christ's resurrection, numbers of the Saints who were dead arose from their graves and were seen and known by many of the living.

Three days had passed in darkness, in terror, and in woe when the thick mist rolled off the face of the land, revealing to the astonished eyes of the survivors how great had been the convulsions that had shaken the earth. As the darkness passed away, the earth ceased to tremble; the rocks were no longer rent; and the tumultuous noises ended. Nature was again at peace; and peace filled the hearts of the living; their mourning was turned to praise; and their joy was in Christ, their Deliverer.

Some time after these terrible events, exactly how long we know not, a multitude assembled near the temple, which was in the land of Bountiful. Possibly many of the high priesthood had assembled there to call upon the Lord and to officiate in the duties of their calling. The multitude spake one to another with regard to the Savior, of whose death the three days of unexplained impenetrable darkness had been a sign.

While thus engaged a strange, sweet voice fell upon their ears, yet it pierced them to the center so that their whole frames trembled. At first they knew not what it said or whence it came, nor even when the words were again repeated, did they understand. But when they came a third time, they understood their glorious import and knew that it was the voice of God. He said unto them, "Behold, my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him." (3 Nephi 11:7.) Obedient to this heavenly voice they cast their eyes upward and to their joyous astonishment beheld the Messiah, clothed in a white robe, coming out of heaven.

Even yet they did not comprehend who he was but thought him an angel. As he descended to the earth and stood in their midst, their wondering eyes were all turned towards him, but for awe not a mouth was opened nor a limb moved. Then the Redeemer stretched forth his hand and said unto the multitude, "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

"And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning." (3 Nephi 11:10-11.)

Then the whole multitude fell to the earth. They remembered the sayings of the prophets; they realized that their God stood in the midst of them.

Again the risen Redeemer spake: "Arise," said he, "and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world." (3 Nephi 11:14.)

Now they who heard him from the first to the last went forth and assured themselves that it was he of whom the prophets had spoken. Then with shouts of praise they cried: "Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High God!" (3 Nephi 11:17.) And they fell down at his feet and worshiped him.

In this record of the visit of the Master to the people of the American continent, we have the testimony not only of a few men but also of a multitude solemnly bearing witness to the fact that he appeared to them after his resurrection, that he declared himself to be the Son of God, and that God the Father acknowledged him as his Son and introduced him to the people requesting them to hear him.

The church which Christ organized on the American continent flourished for two hundred years with almost universal righteousness, peace, and prosperity.

This new witness for Christ, the Book of Mormon, confirms and elaborates upon many important facts and doctrines concerning Jesus Christ, his life and mission as recorded in the Bible. Dr. James E. Talmage some years ago in his Sunday night talks pointed out fifteen important points substantiated by the Book of Mormon account as follows:

His pre-existence and ante-mortal Godship.

His foreordination as the Redeemer and Savior of mankind.

Predictions of his embodiment in the flesh as the Son of the Eternal Father and of mortal woman; and the fulfilment of these predictions in his birth as Mary's child.

The sending of a forerunner, John the Baptist, to prepare the way for the Lord's public ministry.

Christ's earthly life, covering about a third of a century, characterized by beneficent service, by authoritative administration, and by unexceptional example.

The establishment of his Church with duly ordained apostles, who, with other ministers invested with the Holy Priesthood, carried forward the work of salvation after the Lord's departure.

The specific and authentic enunciation of the fundamental principles and ordinances of the gospel, by which the way of salvation has been opened to all, and without which none can abide in the kingdom of heaven, these comprising: (1) faith in him as the Son and the Redeemer of the world; (2) repentance of sin; (3) baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; (4) bestowal of the Holy Ghost by the authoritative laying on of hands.

The Lord's sacrificial and atoning death.

His actual resurrection, whereby his spirit was reunited with the crucified body, and he became a glorified and immortalized Soul.

His ministry as a Resurrected Being among men.

His exaltation to the place he had won at the right hand of God, the Eternal Father.

The general apostasy of mankind from the gospel of Christ, bringing about an era of spiritual darkness.

The restoration of the Holy Priesthood in the latter days, by which the gospel would be preached again in power and its ordinances administered for the salvation of men.

The assurance of our Lord's yet future return to earth in glory and judgment to inaugurate the predicted millennium of peace and righteousness.

His eternal status as judge of both quick and dead, and the eventual victor over sin and death.

And thus in addition to the testimonies of him which were borne in and about Jerusalem, we have a multitude of people bearing witness that he is the Christ, the Son of the Living God. Two continents join in adoration and in testimony. Two records have been given to the people to attest his divinity. The stick of Judah and the stick of Joseph as predicted by Ezekiel are joined and become one in his hand in convincing Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ.

Will you take time to read the scriptures which testify of him—will you read the record of his visit to America and put the promise of Moroni to the test? Hundreds of thousands from many nations bear witness that they did read the record as sealed up by Moroni and later by him revealed to Joseph Smith. They bear witness that they did ask God the Eternal Father in the name of Christ if what they read was true and that Christ had manifested the truth of it unto them by the power of the Holy Ghost. They now join other hosts of former and latter days in testifyng to the divinity of Jesus Christ, and I humbly join them in his name. Amen.—Radio Station KSL, January 23, 1955.

JESUS AND THE ABUNDANT LIFE

In this short series we have considered the testimonies of some of the prophets from two hemispheres concerning Jesus the Christ. They have all testified to his divinity. Let us briefly inquire into the purpose of Christ's mission and its effect upon our own lives.

We know, of course, that he offered himself as a sacrifice for the sins of the world, that he came to atone for a broken law, and that by his death and resurrection he made it possible for every man to be resurrected from the dead. The Apostle Paul emphasized the universality of the resurrection by saying, "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.)

But must we wait for the next world to enjoy the blessings vouchsafed by his sacrifice, or may we by applying his teachings in our lives enjoy here and now a richer and more rewarding earth life in preparation for promised heavenly blessings? After considering the purpose of his life and his part in the divine plan to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man, let us inquire into the meaning of our own lives. Let each of us ask himself, "Why am I? What is the purpose of my being?"

Some scholars have attempted to answer these questions, but they often give us a stone when we ask for bread. One says life is endless pain, leading only to a painful end. Another pessimist declares, "Life is an adventure leading only to resignation and despair." One gets a discouraging, pessimistic outlook on life if he relies alone on philosophical deductions.

If we are to escape the mental down drag of these ominous times, we shall need the vision and inspiration of Christ's teachings which come to us from holy men of God who spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. One prophet answers the question by declaring, " . . . Men are, that they might have joy." (2 Nephi 2:25.) The Master said, " . . . I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10.) To achieve the joy of the more abundant life, then, is the object of our being; to gain more understanding and appreciation with wisdom to spend our earthly lives for things which will outlast them.

The gospel of Jesus Christ, restored in our time, beckons today as anciently and promises joy to all who yield obedience to its teachings. Obedience—that word which seems to whisper servitude, but which in fact is the key to real liberty—is an indispensable ingredient of the joy we seek. The meaning of more abundant living was demonstrated by the Master's life, for "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered;

"And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him." (Heb. 5:8-9.)

The abundant life is not a state of being which may be achieved at any given time by a confession or a single act; it cannot be bought and paid for on a cash basis; it is a continuing achievement, the result of constant vigilance. It is not reserved for the few only but is available to all who qualify to enjoy it. "We shall be permitted to enter the celestial kingdom when we shall have so conducted ourselves that we shall feel at home there," said Dr. Talmage. We believe the abundant life is eternally becoming. It is the growing life; and when it ceases to grow, it ceases to be abundant. It is not fixed and static but of necessity is ever changing. What might be abundant life to the child would, if unchanged, become less abundant as he matures. He who enjoys the abundant life is aware of the need for constant adjustments in preparation for the ever changing conditions of tomorrow.

The abundant life is the joyous life. One must be healthy to be completely happy. The Lord's law of health promises mental and physical fitness and radiant living. The abundant life is the teachable life, the life of discovery, of seeking and finding, of knocking and having doors opened and horizons pushed back. One prepares for more abundant living by gaining knowledge and becoming more like God whose glory is intelligence. A candidate for the abundant life must be spiritually responsive and in tune, must have faith, virtue, knowledge, and love of fellow men and of God.

He who enjoys the abundant life will not confuse price with value; will not mar tomorrow's happiness by today's folly; will not mortgage the future in an attempt to enjoy immediate, unearned pleasures. He will have the courage to resist desire today, in order that tomorrow's joy might be full. A working knowledge of the past and some understanding of and preparation for the future will help to make the present radiant and joyful. No isolated moment can be treated as independent of what was and is to be. The abundant life is eternal life, and eternity is now.

The life we seek must be lived in harmony with law and be in tune with God. Because of its eternal nature, it should be lived and measured by eternal standards. In order to live fully we must believe and obey the gospel of Jesus Christ as a plan formulated for our good and operative both before and after as well as during earth life. It is a plan which requires our participation and intelligent co-operation.

The candidate for the abundant life must believe in the gospel of free agency and accountability without which he would lack dignity and self respect. He must know that the law of the harvest is inexorable—that he must reap as he sows; that all blessings are predicated upon obedience.

He who has this concept of the abundant life may enjoy it here and now. Though he may not have all the things he desires, and though some of his best-laid plans may not succeed, his life may be rich and radiant if he will get the broader view afforded by the gospel's higher ground. His life is becoming more abundant if he is making the best use of his experience and knowledge in solving today's problems and preparing for the future.

The abundant life is the growing life, virile, positive, progressive; where each today is better than yesterday; where there is no stagnation or retrogression; where the better self controls desire; where there is continuing hope and expectation of the things about to be. The gospel of Jesus Christ marks the way to this life which may become available to all. The Savior came that we might have it. He gave us a faultless formula for its achievement. He demonstrated by his own life that it may be enjoyed under conditions which men generally term adverse. He did not seek material things but taught, "A man's life consisteth not of the abundance of the things which he possesseth." Abundance of things is not essential to abundant living.

The Church of Jesus Christ provides ways and means for all its members to live the more abundant life. It fosters education—physical, mental, aesthetic, moral, and spiritual education. The Church is guided by revelation from the source of all knowledge and points the way to perfection. It affirms that as God is, man may become. It strives to stimulate motives rather than merely communicate precepts. It emphasizes the eternal truth that all blessings are predicated upon obedience to law.

Obedience involves self-restraint and self-control. One may find temporary pleasure in the gratification of an appetite, in the indulgence of desire, but lasting joy comes only to the man who is willing to pay the price of self-denial. To achieve self-realization, "Everything worth while in life must be bought and paid for by giving up some habits and indulgences which are irreconcilable to its possession." "Wickedness never was happiness." (Alma 41:10.) Nobody ever found real or permanent satisfaction in doing wrong.

The man who would live radiantly, joyously, abundantly, will strive to increase his power of appreciation. Too many go through life with eyes closed, with ears stopped, with the sense of feeling deadened or never awakened, and with shutters on the windows of the soul. They who are absorbed in material things alone miss much of the beauty and richness that lies all about them. God's glory is intelligence, and we must climb the ladder of knowledge if we are ever to share that glory.

"Fools believe," says one, "that if they can only achieve wealth their desire will be completely gratified." A man of means is supposed to be a man with means for the fulfilment of every desire. A life devoted to the acquisition of wealth is useless unless one knows how to turn it into joy, and that is an art that requires culture and wisdom. A succession of sensual pursuits never satisfied for long. One must understand the ends of life as well as the art of acquiring means. Some men are more intent upon becoming rich than on acquiring culture, though experience proves repeatedly that what a man is contributes more to his happiness than what he has. He who lives the abundant life does not speak of his relationships as only duties, obligations, and responsibilities. To him life is a blessed privilege, affording constant opportunity for joyous service.

The road to the abundant life may lead through valleys of sorrow, disappointment, and defeat; but the prize is always worth what it costs. Great souls in all ages have been willing to accept poverty, ostracism, and persecution rather than forsake the quest. They knew the necessity and the joy of self-sacrificing service to reach an ideal. "It is the set of the soul that determines the goal and not the toil and the strife."

Yes, man is that he might have joy—the joy of conquest over self, the joy of achievement, of having fought the good fight, of having kept the faith, the joy of peace that is earned, the joy of increase, of living in the presence of the best, the joy of comradeship. Jesus knew the joy of all of these and more. Although he was known as "A Man of sorrows and acquainted with grief," he knew a peace and joy which "passeth understanding." His Spirit was too great to be submerged by sorrow. He said to his disciples: "These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full." (John 15:11.)

The joy which Jesus knew was not at the mercy of men and circumstance. He had resources which the hand of men could not touch. Because of these resources his was an unconquerable soul. When the angels announced his birth to the shepherds, it was a message of joy: "Fear not . . . I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people." (Luke 2:10.) And John in writing the last book in the New Testament ends with the same message, as he tells of an innumerable host singing hallelujah choruses and saying, ". . . Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.

"Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him. . . . " (Rev. 19:6-7.) His final word of greeting to the faithful will be: ". . . Enter into the joy of thy Lord." (Matt. 25:21.)

An All-wise Heavenly Father knew that this joy which is the purpose of our being could not be achieved without the refining fires of life's experience. If man had remained in that untried, innocent state of pre-existent infancy, he would have "done no good for he knew no evil, would have had no joy for he knew no sorrow." (See 2 Nephi 2:23.)

Let us, then, give thanks to God for the continuing benefits to be derived from the gospel of his Son. May we as beneficiaries prove our gratitude by living according to his precepts and example and thereby achieve abundant, joyous, eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. KSL Radio Station. January 30, 1955.

The Open Tomb

We worship God the Father through his Son, Jesus Christ. It is he, the Savior, who is the Head of the Church, its great High Priest, its Founder, and its Inspiration. All others, whether they be prophets, apostles, elders, members—all others are willingly subservient to him. We agree with the Apostle Paul that ". . . there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.)

We are informed that there are perhaps more non-members than members present and listening in: to all of you out there we bid a hearty welcome and wish to include you in the usual Latter-day Saint greeting, "Brothers and Sisters."

Perhaps many of you would refer to the Church as the Mormon Church; while we do not object to that designation, it may be a bit misleading. Mormon was an ancient American prophet, whose name was given to a sacred record which he compiled; but though this may be called the Mormon Church, it is not the Church of Mormon, nor is it the Church of Joseph Smith or of Brigham Young, or of any other man. It is the Church of Jesus Christ.

Reference has been made in this conference to the chaotic condition of the world on account of communism. While I shall not dwell on this at length, we all know that our world is divided and imperiled; that though the western nations believe in God, or claim to, and in the freedom of men and the worth of the individual, there are hundreds of millions of our fellow men who are being taught that God is a myth and religion but an opiate; who are being indoctrinated, while their minds and bodies are enslaved, to believe in the monstrous supremacy of the totalitarian state.

While we are preaching Christ and him crucified, there are millions on the earth who dare not mention his name except in derision and anathema. The battle fronts in this cold war are divided into sectors, social, economic, scientific, geographic, ideological, but the one front on which the enemy is concentrating, the one front which makes him gnash his teeth at its very name, is the front which may be called "God and religion." The war, cold or hot, will be waged by the followers of Christ versus anti-Christ.

That being true, it is incumbent upon all Christians everywhere, and again I am speaking to you, our friends out there, it behooves us to re-examine our creeds, our fundamental concepts, our basic faith, and ask ourselves again the meaning of the word God in our theology, and the place of God in our lives? Our allegiance must be intelligent and well defined.

Every man should answer for himself the question, "What think ye of Christ?" I should like to bear my testimony of him and indicate briefly his status in the minds and hearts of all Latter-day Saints as background and introductory, or, by way of contrast—for none other, however great, can be compared to him—may I call attention for a moment to what the tourist may see when he goes to Europe or the Middle East, as he visits the birthplace and the resting places of the notable ones of the earth—the poets, authors, soldiers, and statesmen.

The tourist will probably be impressed by the ruins of ancient cities and the crumbling monuments and tombstones of many who are called great. Some of these ancients built and garnished their own sepulchres and gilded their tombs in order to display their wealth, and to indicate their status. The visitor will be impressed by the Coliseum in Rome, the Acropolis in Athens, and admire the work of former masters in art, literature, philosophy, and government. He will be reminded of the pomp of the Pharaohs in Egypt as he visits the pyramids, and may ask, "Why such colossal expenditure of money and time and lives to build a tomb?" He will probably leave without an answer to his question and remember only the inscrutable smile of the sphinx.

But if his tour leads him to the Holy Land, he will be inspired by the thought that though Rome had her Ceasars, her master artists, and her geniuses; though Athens had her conquerers, her statesmen, and her philosophers; though Egypt had her pompous dictators and her unrelenting Pharaohs, it remained for little Bethlehem, and later for Nazareth and Galilee, to give to this world its most transcendent Personage.

In Jerusalem one has the privilege of standing before an open tomb, a tomb that was once closed by a great stone, on which was placed the seal of Rome, and over which a guard was mounted. But that stone was rolled away; that seal was broken; that guard was overcome; that tomb was opened by an angel of the Lord. That borrowed sepulchre was neither gilded nor decorated, and in it was found no earthly treasure, for its temporary tenant was destitute of worldly goods. In life he had no place to lay his head, and in death there was no place to lay his body—hence, the pity of a friend.

But there came forth from that lowly tomb riches beyond all price. The lifeless body, which was placed there by loving hands three days previously, came forth from that tomb trumphant over death, a resurrected, glorified Personage, the first fruits of them that slept. And the rewards of that victory are to be shared among all men everywhere, for as Paul said, "for since by man came death, by man also the resurrection of the dead.

"For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:21-22.)

And what was it that came from that open tomb? Was it merely a spirit? He himself answered that question when he stood among his followers who were amazed and frightened at his appearance. He said to them. "Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?

"Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." (Luke 24:38-39.)

This Babe of Bethlehem, this Carpenter of Nazareth, this Man of Galilee, never wrote a book, and yet the story of what he said and did during the three short years of his ministry, which was faithfully, though only partially, recorded by his humble disciples, has been read and reread by more people in more languages than any other book.

He left no masterpiece on canvas, and yet his life and death have been the inspiration for more artists than any other subject. He left no monument in stone or bronze or marble, and yet the image of his divine manhood has been an ispiration to millions down through the centuries.

But we testify of and worship not only one who lived and died two thousand years ago—and we hope you, our friends, will note what now we say, for we declare it by authority and by commandment—we testify of one who was resurrected from the dead and is now living—one who is comprehensible, one who has a material, though an immortal, body; as he himself declared when he said to his astonished followers: "Handle me and see." It was that same body which ascended into heaven out near Bethany when a cloud enveloped him, and to the amazement and astonishment of his followers, he ascended into heaven. Two men in white standing by said, "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing into heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as you have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1:11.)

Peter declared that the heaven must receive him until the time of the ". . . restitution of all things—which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Ibid., 3:21.)

Yes, we testify of the First Begotten of the Father in the spirit, the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh, a member of the Holy Trinity, the Creator of the world. To prove he was the Creator we quote the words of John, the Apostle: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

"The same was in the beginning with God.

"All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made." (John 1:1-3.) That the Word referred to was none other than the Christ becomes evident when one reads the 14th verse: "And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth." (Ibid., 1:14.)

The Apostle Paul also bears testimony of him as the Creator: "For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things were created by him, and for him:

"And he is before all things, and by him all things consist." (Col. 1:16-17.)

We read of him in Hebrews: "God, . . .

"Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds;

"Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high;" (Heb. 1:1-3.)

We speak of him whom Isaiah prophesied when he said: ". . . behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel." (Isaiah 7:14.) That he had reference to the Babe of Bethlehem is evidenced by what the angel said to the confused and bewildered Joseph, whose beloved Mary was about to bear a child. The angel said to Joseph: ". . . Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.

"And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins.

"Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying,

"Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call this name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us." (Matt. 1:20-23.)

He himself proclaimed his Godhood, and his heirship when he was challenged by his persecutors after he had said, "I and my Father are one."

They wanted to stone him, and he said, ". . . for which of my works do you stone me?" And they said,

"For a good work we stone thee not; but for blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God," and he answered them,

"Say ye of him whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?

"If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not." (John 10:32-33, 36-37.)

As to the actuality of the resurrection of Christ, his divinity, his universal Godhood, let us hear his own declaration and read the testimony of a multitude of people on the American continent, to whom he appeared just after his crucifixion.

This scripture may be new to many of you, but in America, as in Jerusalem, there were holy men of God who spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. You will remember reading in Luke's account of the crucifixion: "And it was about the sixth hour, and there was a darkness over all the earth until the ninth hour.

"And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in the midst." (Luke 23:44-45.) And in Matthew: "And behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent;

"And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose." (Matt. 27:51-52.)

Now this thick darkness, which covered the earth, and the convulsion of the earth at the time of the crucifixion extended to America. Here the darkness lasted three days, and it was so thick upon all the face of the land that the people could feel the vapor of darkness, and they could make no light.

At the end of the period of darkness and upheaval, they who survived were assembled near the temple. There they heard a voice as if it came out of heaven. They did not understand it at first, but afterwards understood when the voice said:

"Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him.

"And it came to pass, as they understood they cast their eyes up again towards heaven; and behold, they saw a Man descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe; and he came down and stood in the midst of them; and the eyes of the whole multitude were turned upon him, and they durst not open their mouths, even one to another, and wist not what it meant, for they thought it was an angel that had appeared unto them.

"And it came to pass that he stretched forth his hand and spake unto the people, saying:

"Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

"And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning.

"And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words the whole multitude fell to the earth; for they remembered that it had been prophesied among them that Christ should show himself unto them after his ascension into heaven.

"And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto them saying:

"Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world.

"And it came to pass that the multitude went forth, and thrust their hands into his side, and did feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet; and this they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth, and did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come.

"And when they had all gone forth and had witnessed for themselves, they did cry cut with one accord, saying:

"Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High God! And they did fall down at the feet of Jesus, and did worship him." (3 Nephi 11:7-17.)

And thus we have the testimony of eyewitnesses from two continents that Jesus is the Christ. We add our testimony not only that he did live, but that he still lives, and this fact is the greatest hope of this divided and imperiled world, for if the Christ still lives, then the anti-Christ will be defeated. There can be no peace in a godless world.

But our testimony would not be complete if we did not reaffirm our faith in the second coming of Christ, in the millennium which is to come, when he will reign as King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. That this climactic event is not far distant is indicated by the signs of the times, by wars and rumors of wars, by the satanic schemes of evil men, who would enslave not only the bodies but the minds of all who dare refuse to subscribe to the ideologies invented by the anti-Christ.

May the time soon come when he again will say to this troubled world, "My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.)

God grant that we may be prepared for that day and in the interim be unafraid, knowing that he still lives and that as he said of himself: "All power is given unto me, in heaven and in earth." (Matt. 28:18.) Of him I humbly testify in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—Semiannual General Conference, October 9, 1960.

"My Redeemer Liveth"

Two things conjoin to subdue and humble me. One is the fact that on very short notice I must attempt to substitute, and the other is that the season of the year indicates that only one subject may properly be discussed this morning. That subject is one that should cause any man to stand in awe and reverence. Before I say what I would like to say on that subject, and by way of background, I should like to refer to world conditions, and perhaps could not refer in more impressive words than to read a line from a recent address by Governor Nelson Rockefeller of New York, as recorded in the New York Times. He said:

"We know this is a time of historic decision, because we see the world divided, the weapons of war perfected to deadly extremes, and humanity seeming at times about to turn and prey upon itself. And we know something else. We know how and why this world is divided and imperiled. It is divided, essentially, between those who believe in the brotherhood of man under the Fatherhood of God, and those who scorn this as a pious myth. It is divided between those who believe in the dignity of free men, and those who believe in the monstrous supremacy of the totalitarian state. It is divided between those whose most potent force is their faith in individual freedom, and those whose faith is force itself. This division of the world and this time of decision leave no corner of the earth, no fraction of humanity, untouched. From this basic struggle there can be no refuge, no escape."

As we approach the Christmas season, and as we are made serious by contemplation of these facts, the question naturally arises, "To whom may we look for help?" I should like for a moment to ask you to think reverently with me about the most transcendent character of all time, and to think of him in the various ways in which he has been manifest and the terms in which he has been defined. I would like you, first, to think of him as the Apostle John understood him when he said,

"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

"The same was in the beginning with God.

"All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made." (John 1:1-3.)

The second sentence indicates that the beginning, to which the first sentence refers, was a beginning which antedated Eden, for he created Eden. He was then in the beginning with God and he was God; he it is whose mortal birth we celebrate this month.

Paul, speaking of his status as a Creator, is a little more explicit even than John, when he says,

"For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him:

"And he is before all things, and by him all things consist." (Col. 1:16-17.)

And Peter testified:

"But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot:

"Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you." (1 Peter 1:19-20.)

The Savior himself said,

"For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.

"I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world." (John 6:38, 51.)

Jesus, chiding his disciples on one occasion, said:

" . . . Doth this offend you?

"What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?" (Ibid., 6:61-62.)

I ask you, then, to hold in your minds a moment this thought of Christ as the Creator, as God, as the one who is responsible for all that is. He was before Abraham, he associated with Adam, known as Michael; he talked with Moses; was the author of the ten commandments; and delivered the children of Israel out of their bondage in Egypt and led them to the promised land. He was, in fact, the Jehovah of the Old Testament, the God of Israel.

Then think of him, again, as a Babe in a manger. The marvel of it always amazes me, to think that the Creator of all that is, the Son of God, should condescend to tabernacle in the flesh and live among men. It is an inspiring thought, that he would descend from his throne above, become—partially, at least—mortal and show us how to live and reveal God to us. We know of him, then, as the Babe of Bethlehem. This is what Luke tells us about him:

"And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid.

"And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.

"For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.

"And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying,

"Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace, good will toward men." (Luke 2:9-11, 13-14.)

Yes, he came as a little child, and the remarkable thing is that not only the humble of the earth adored him, shepherds came to worship him, but the wise and the mighty and the rich men also came, for there was something divinely significant about the birth of this baby, the Son of God and of the Virgin Mary.

Then we read of him as the boy of Nazareth. Not much was written about him during those years. Yet, Luke tells us,

"And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him." (Luke 2:40.)

And we cannot forget that memorable scene when he stood in the temple before those doctors and wise men,

"And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers." (Luke 2:47.)

We come next to the man, the teacher of Galilee, sometimes called the Stranger. We hear him in the Sermon on the Mount, which is forever illuminated by the character of him who spoke. We hear him extolling the things which most men had minimized. We hear him saying,

"Blessed are the poor in spirit: . . .

"Blessed are the meek: . . .

"Blessed are the merciful: . . .

"Blessed are the pure in heart: . . .

"Blessed are the peacemakers: . . .

"Blessed are they which are persecuted. . . . " (Matt. 5:3, 5, 7-10.)

We see him going about healing the sick, cleansing the leper, raising the dead.

We come then to the Savior on the cross. We see him there looking down to his mother, then at John, and commending each to the other. Knowing that he must leave her who gave him birth, he was solicitous for her welfare. We hear that memorable plea, speaking to his Father as he hung in agony, " . . . Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." (Luke 23:24.)

After the cross, the Risen Redeemer came out of the borrowed tomb. They thought, and some have said since, that it was only a spirit that met various of them, the women at the sepulchre, the men on the way to Emmaus, the apostles and five hundred of the brethren. But when he met with his disciples and some of them were doubting and fearful, he extended his wounded hands:

"And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?

"Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." (Ibid., 24:38-39.)

His appearance in resurrected form attested the glorious fact that, as Paul declared:

"But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept.

"For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

"For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:20-22.)

While more than five hundred people saw the Risen Redeemer in and around Jerusalem, other thousands saw him in America. It was in America that he declared himself more definitely than at any other time. Hear his inspiring words, as he had descended from heaven in their presence. As they fell to the earth, in fear and in worship, he said:

"Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

"And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning." (3 Nephi 11:10-11.)

The whole multitude fell at his feet, and he asked them to arise and come forward and convince themselves, by touch as well as by sight and sound, that he was what he claimed to be.

You will remember his followers in Jerusalem accompanied him out near Bethany, and there in their presence and in the presence of angels, a cloud enveloped him, and he was taken into heaven. His followers were amazed; they were startled; it was unprecedented, and the angel said:

" . . . Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1:11.)

The coming of this Divine Personage of whom we speak and whom we worship this month—and I hope through the year—was predicted by the prophets of old, preceded and announced by John the Baptist and heralded by the angels. He was honored and introduced by his Father at the baptism and again on the Mount of Transfiguration, when he not only said, "This is my beloved Son," but indicated that the Son would represent him, the Father, for he said in each case, "Hear him." (Matt. 17:5; Mark 9:7.)

I should like to bring to this student body of young men and young women a plea that you learn, by constant communion, to know the Master, and knowing him, to emulate his example, to follow his teachings, to qualify to come into his presence. As Dr. James E. Talmage said, "Any man may enter the highest degree of the celestial kingdom when his actions have been such that he can feel at home there."

I admonish you to watch your conduct and be constantly aware of your possible destiny. You have a potential Godlike status, for he is your Elder Brother who gave his life for you and for all men.

I plead with you young people to seek to know the Shepherd, to hear his voice and follow him.

I remind you again that God the Father acknowledged him and declared his Sonship and agency, and that the prophets of old predicted his coming, and that his apostles testified to his divinity. Hear Job's testimony. "For I know that my redeemer liveth. . . . " (Job 19:25.) And Peter, when asked who Jesus was, by virtue of a revelation from God, as Jesus declared it to be, said, " . . . Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." (Matt. 16:16.)

We remember also at Christmas time the birth of the Prophet Joseph Smith, to whom the Savior appeared. This is his testimony:

"And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

"For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

"That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:22-34.)

May I presume to add, humbly, my testimony, that from the same source that inspired Job and Peter, and later Paul on his way to Damascus, that is, divine revelation, I come to you now, as an older brother, and from the depth of my soul I say to you, " . . . I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth:" (Job 19:25.) With Peter, I say, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." (Matt. 16:16.) I bear this testimony in deep humility and gratitude as we approach another glorious Christmas.

I ask you now, as you leave to go to your homes, that you make this not only a festive time, but a holy time; that you will go home, worshiping God, thanking him for his Son, and understanding a little better who it was that came to Bethlehem.

So, to connect up with what I read in the beginning, though the times are perilous, though the world is divided, though the forces of the adversary are organized as never before and are more numerous than ever before, there is hope, there is assurance that he whom we serve is still in command. He who made all that is, can control all that is, including men. God bless you, my young friends.—BYU Assembly, December 9, 1959.

Joseph Smith among the Prophets

I am highly honored in being asked to meet and participate with you on this occasion. I feel especially humble as I read the list of those who have appeared on this program on previous occasions, including members of the First Presidency and other outstanding speakers. I am sorry it was necessary to lower your sights in selecting a speaker today; presumably others were not available. I humbly pray for divine guidance.

There is, of course, but one subject which could appropriately be considered on this occasion, and as it has been discussed in previous meetings from almost every angle, I cannot hope to add anything new.

We missionaries have, through the years, had occasion to discuss Joseph Smith the Prophet with men in all walks of life and in many countries; lawyers, judges, doctors, teachers, presidents of universities, members of Parliament, senators, stockmen, ranchers, cowboys, and others. As one thinks back over these experiences and recalls some of the questions asked by these various individuals and groups, one wonders if a brief review of what has been said or might have been said on such occasions might help some young student to more clearly state the reasons for his faith.

And so with your permission I should like to forget for the moment that you are members of the Church and imagine that I'm talking to a group of nonmembers. I should like to imagine they're sitting here, and undertake to answer some of the questions which have been asked. If I, therefore, seem to be talking to others rather than to you, I ask that you listen in, and then in your own way supplement what I say or might have said in support of our faith.

And so, my imaginary audience, I come to you with a startling declaration, the most important message, as I believe, that has come to this earth since the angels announced the birth of Christ. I say that thoughtfully and honestly, and I ask you, my friends, to hear me out. What I shall say will have to do with the miraculous, therefore some of you might not accept my message. I'd like to talk with you about prophets and prophecy, ancient and modern.

Perhaps before proceeding we should define prophecy. Hartwell Horne defines it as "A miracle of knowledge, a declaration or representation of something in the future beyond the power of human sagacity to discern or to calculate, and it is the highest evidence that can be given of supernatural communion with Deity, and the truth of revelation from God. . . . The man who reads a prophecy and perceives the corresponding event is a witness to the miracle."

I should like to speak today of prophecy with that definition in mind. "The highest evidence that can be given of the supernatural communion with Deity, the truth of revelation from God."

We all know, of course, that not only the Jews but the Christians and others also believed in prophets. Christ's coming to earth was in fulfilment of the predictions of Old Testament prophets. He quoted them frequently and was himself the greatest of the prophets. "And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself." (Luke 24:27.) And so belief in prophecy is not limited to any special group or to some chosen people. Believers in prophets and prophecy are found in all nations.

Then perhaps another definition. What is a prophet? How may we test a man who claims to be a prophet? Is there some measuring rod by which we may determine the validity of his claim? I define a prophet as one who speaks for God; one who predicts the things to come; one to whom God has spoken.

My message is that a modern prophet, with all the qualifications possessed by ancient prophets, has arisen, and I humbly bear witness that I know what I say is true. And now let us apply some tests by comparing this man, his writings and predictions with others who have been and are accepted as prophets. They differ as all men differ, in temperament, and personality. But there were certain characteristics which were common among them, and we shall expect to find them in any man who claims to be a prophet. We shall expect him to measure up to these standards.

All the prophets of whom we have record—and there were, according to Jewish reckoning, forty-eight prophets between Adam and Malachi—every one of them began his ministry with the solemn declaration, "God has spoken to me." And each of them followed that declaration again and again with the unequivocal statement, "Thus saith the Lord." They did not say, "This or that may be true." They did not say, "I have found this to be true through my research or scientific investigation." Few of them were scientists and many were unlearned. These prophets merely said, "Thus saith the Lord." They were his witnesses and messengers.

Prophets generally castigated many of the teachers and practices of their respective times, but criticism was not their chief function. While there is always implicit in a prophet's message something of criticism, his calling is primarily to bear witness; witness to what he has seen and heard and knows to be true. As John said, "We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen; and ye receive not our witness." (John 3:11.) And the people shouted back at him in derision, "Art thou greater than our father Abraham, which is dead? and the prophets are dead: whom makest thou thyself?" (Ibid., 8:53.) That's the way they usually responded to the prophet's message. "Who makest thou thyself? How presumptuous—you a prophet—blasphemy"—and yet these very people accepted the prophets of former times. Apparently it requires distance to bring prophets into focus or perspective.

Each of these prophets had a definite message, and, in most instances, it was unwelcome and objectionable to their contemporaries. It was a message that cut across the thinking of the time and criticized severely the creeds and conduct of the people. These prophets were fearless in calling people to repentance. They did not dilute or water down their message to suit the opinions of the people or to make themselves popular or to save their lives. They fearlessly declared, "I have seen and heard and know whereof I speak. God knows that I know it and I dare not equivocate." That has been the fearless attitude of all the prophets.

While they generally were scoffed at and ridiculed by their own generation, the sermons they preached, the letters and epistles they wrote, became scripture to the people of succeeding generations. Keep that fact in mind as we present the credentials of a modern prophet, one who has arisen in our own time.

Prophets almost invariably warned of judgments to come. They, being God's messengers, were forerunners and predicted future events. The Lord always gives warning of calamities to come. Prophetic warning is another test of a prophet.

These witnesses and messengers boldly declare that they are commissioned agents of the Lord, authorized to speak for him. In other words, they claim to have authority. Now, any lawyer will tell you that the best evidence of agency on behalf of any claimant is for the principal for whom he claims to act to certify or acknowledge his agency. If a prophet is really an agent of God and makes a prediction in his name, we will then expect that God will validate his message by fulfilling his prophecies concerning things which only God himself could bring to pass. And so each prophet is also an authorized agent of God.

Prophets invariably have been without honor in their own counties. They were generally persecuted, hated, despised, rejected, and many of them were murdered. You may expect when a man seeks admission to that select body or quorum of prophets and apostles, he will have to pay the price, which they were willing to pay.

All of the prophets throughout their lifetime, in all that they said and wrote, were in strict and meticulous harmony with what other prophets had written and spoken under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. That, of course, must be so because if they are authorized agents and messengers, speaking in the name of the Lord, their messages cannot be contradictory. The prophet's message proves him genuine or counterfeit.

The prophets always maintained a high moral standard in all their teachings; they distinguished rigorously between right and wrong. Their messages are always for the welfare and good of the people of their time as well as for succeeding generations. By their fruits ye shall know them. A valid and searching test of a prophet is "what was the result of his ministry; what has time done to his message, his predictions—How does he wear."

Now I have mentioned some "Hall Marks" which were common to the prophets of old. I should like now to declare to you, sincerely and soberly, that a prophet of God was sent to this earth in the nineteenth century having the same authority as other prophets. You may consider that a startling, if not an astounding statement, but before rejecting it let us subject him to the tests to which we have referred.

The first declaration of the man of whom I speak was: "God has spoken to me. I have seen the Lord." Thus he passed that first test. This young man said more often than any of his predecessors, "Thus saith the Lord." He did not say, "I have a theory or hypothesis or new philosophy." He did not say, "I think, I believe." He said fearlessly, "Hearken to the voice of the Lord your God." His message attracted great men, great in experience, knowledge, and character, devout men who were independent and honorable. They listened to and believed this young man, and they followed him faithfully to the end. Some of them became martyrs because of their faith in his message.

What about his message? We said that each of the prophets had a message which ran counter to the theories of his time and challenged the opinions of men. This young man came into the world when the majority of the churches were teaching that God is immaterial, incomprehensible, without body or parts or feeling (and I ask you in passing, can you think of a better definition of nothing, or a more complete denial of him than to say he is incomprehensible, impersonal, immaterial, and has no parts or feelings?) He boldly challenged their creeds with the declaration that "God is a personal being and Jesus Christ, the Risen Redeemer, is separate and distinct from yet in the express image of his Father." He said the Trinity is made up of three Personages, two of them with material bodies and one is a Spirit: they, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost constitute the Godhead, the presiding council of the universe. The Lord had told him that the creeds of men were an abomination in his sight. Yes, he had a message, and it ran counter to the creeds of the time and yet was in strict harmony with the teachings of other prophets. Thus he passed another test.

He was unequivocal and he never did water down or dilute his statements or change his message to agree with current thought. He, who was finally murdered, could have escaped that fate at any time had he been willing to deny his testimony or change his message to agree with the sectarian teachings of contemporaries. He could have avoided persecution and have saved his own life. But what did he do? He said to them, "What I have told you is what God told me, and I dare not deny it, come what will."

I've often wondered why those early American Christians persecuted Joseph Smith as they did. Many of the mobs that came against him were led by professed ministers of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Now why did they persecute him? Did he come to them and say: "There is no Christ"? Did he say to them, "I am the Christ"? Did he say to them, "Some other man, not Jesus of Nazareth, is the Christ"? He said none of those things. He said, "Jesus of Nazareth is the Christ, the Son of God, and his is the only Name under heaven whereby men must be saved." That was his declaration. Then why did they, the Christians, persecute him? He might well have said to them what the Apostle Paul said to the people of Athens who had built an altar on Mar's hill "to the unknown God." Paul said, ". . . Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you." (Acts 17:23.)

And so in effect this prophet of whom I speak said to the people of his time, "I'm telling you of a God whom you claim to worship, but a God whom you do not know. You draw near to him with your lips, and with your mouths you honor him, but your hearts are far from him. You have a form of Godliness but deny the power thereof."

I again ask why should they persecute a man when he comes to them, professed Christians, and tells them that the one whom they claim to believe in is in fact the Christ? What they couldn't tolerate was his—to them—blasphemous statement, "I have seen him, and I have heard him." Why should it be thought a thing incredible to anyone who believes the Holy Bible that a man could see and hear and talk with God? Did not all the prophets make that claim? So this man passed the test of persecution.

The next distinguishing characteristic of the prophets was that their word became scripture, and their writings are preserved as the word of God. This prophet gave to this world more scripture than any of the prophets of whom we have record. Do you question that? I call your attention to three books for which he is responsible. He is not the author, in the strictest sense, of all of them, but he is responsible for their publication, and in those three books there are 917 pages. If you count the pages of scripture written by the biblical prophets, you will find that none of them equaled that record.

Yes, this man gave us scripture, and I remind you too that any man who presumes to write or speak that which is to be known as the word of God must be absolutely sure that what he says is in complete harmony with the word of God previously given. Test him by reading what he wrote and comparing it with what other prophets have written.

We said that a prophet is usually without honor in his own country. This prophet was persecuted, tarred and feathered, imprisoned, driven from city to city and state to state. He was an outcast and finally a martyr in this free country of America. This modern prophet met the final test of martyrdom without flinching, and as he said was "as calm as a summer's morning."

Joseph Smith was less than fifteen years old when he had his first vision in which he saw the Father and the Son; seventeen years old when an angel from heaven came to him and told him that hidden in a certain hill there were records of the ancient inhabitants of America inscribed on metal plates; twenty-one when he received those plates and proceeded to translate them by the gift and power of God; twenty-four years of age when he organized the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He only lived fourteen years after organizing the Church, and he died at the age of thirty-nine. I'm telling you of a great American who did superhuman things during the brief time he lived.

I think I'd like to read to you an estimate or appraisal of this man as it was published in the New York Times in 1843. "It's no small thing, in the blaze of this 19th Century, to give to men a new revelation; found a new religion; establish new forms of worship; to build a city with new laws and institutions and orders of architecture; to establish ecclesiastical, civil, and military jurisdiction; to found colleges; send out missionaries; and make proselytes on two hemispheres."

Another test was that the prophet's messages are on a high moral plane. The Prophet Joseph Smith denounced evil and taught and practised virtue and righteousness; he abjured ignorance and acclaimed intelligence. He said, "The glory of God is intelligence; man cannot be saved in ignorance, and men are saved no faster than they gain knowledge." He said: "We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed, we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul—We believe all things, we hope all things, and hope to be able to endure all things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things."

And then the test which Jesus gave: "By their fruits ye shall know them." My friends, I wish time would permit me to tell you of some of the fruits of the work and teachings of this man; of the millions whose lives have been blessed by what the Lord revealed through him, but I ask you to read the history of the Mormon Church; read the history of Western America and evaluate the work of this man.

He prophesied repeatedly and fearlessly and told of things that were to come. He prophesied to individuals and warned them. I cite the case of the man that was called the "Little Giant," who was seeking to become President of the United States. The Prophet said to Douglas, "Judge, you will aspire to the presidency of the United States; and if you ever turn your hand against me or the Latter-day Saints, you will feel the weight of the hand of Almighty God upon you; and you will live to see and know that I have testified the truth to you, for the conversation of this day will stick to you through life." At the time he said it, it looked as if Douglas were sure to win. He turned against the Latter-day Saints and was defeated.

Joseph Smith's prophecies on war are well known. He predicted where war would start and said war and desolation would come upon the world. He prophesied that his people would be driven to the Rocky Mountains and that there they should become a mighty people.

Now there may be those who will say, "Joseph Smith imitated the prophets; he tried to write the way they wrote and used some of their phraseology." I remind you of this: that while he might—and I do not admit it, but deny it—but though he might be called an imitator, I ask you, would God have put his stamp of approval on his prophecies by bringing them to pass? And God did just that. And I repeat that the best evidence of agency is for the principal to acknowledge the agent. God vindicated the Prophet again and again.

Now I want to bring another test which was mentioned earlier, but I've left it to the last: All of the prophets did superhuman things. To cite one or two: Moses, the great lawgiver, performed miracles in Pharaoh's court in the name of Israel's God; he led the Israelites dryshod across the Red Sea; he struck the rock and brought forth much-needed water; Daniel, harmless in the Lion's den; the three Hebrews, impervious to fire; Elijah fed by the ravens; Joshua marching into Canaan and by the mere blowing of trumpets causing city walls to fall. The New Testament is replete with miraculous incidents.

Yes, the prophets did superhuman things. Did the man of whom I speak? I suggest three or four things which I claim were superhuman. He organized a church such as was not known in the world, and yet it was identical with the Church of Christ in former times. All the churches around him claimed to be the Church of Christ, but he copied none of them. I ask you whence his superior wisdom?

He undertook to carry the gospel message to all parts of the world, and the success of that project is miraculous. He undertook to weld men from practically all parts of the world into a brotherhood. They came by the thousands from Germany, France, Italy, Holland, Belgium, the British Isles, the Scandinavian countries, and the isles of the sea; man of almost every nation, tongue, and people, pursuant to the predictions of some of his predecessors. These people, despite national antagonisms, were bound together in a brotherhood such as is not known anywhere else in the world. That's a superhuman undertaking for a young man without much education and with only thirty-nine years of life.

The Prophet Joseph Smith translated a record which was placed in his hands by an angel from God. It's a book of about 600 pages. He translated it in just under two months. It purports to be a sacred history of the ancient inhabitants of America. In it he told of cities and peoples, of wars, of civilizations, of political organizations. Now, among my congregation there are some teachers and students. I'd like to ask you if you would undertake to write a history of the ancient inhabitants of America and limit your source material to that which was available in 1829. You must write 239 chapters—54 chapters to deal with wars; 21 historical chapters; 55 chapters on visions and prophecies and seventy-one chapters on doctrines and exhortations; 17 chapters on missionary work, and 21 on the ministry of Christ; and remember that every word you write must be in meticulous agreement with the Holy Bible. Therefore you must become so well acquainted with the Bible that you can with confidence write your book with no inaccuracies or contradictions.

Speaking of the Book of Mormon, I call your attention to the fact that from beginning to end its purpose is to convince both Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ. "The Book of Mormon teaches faith in God; it strongly urges obedience to his will; it testifies to the divinity of Jesus of Nazareth—that he is the Son of God and the Savior of the world; it declares the truth and the divine origin of the Bible and corroborates its teachings; it pleads for purity in thought, word and deed, and sets heaven as the final goal of life. Then how can straight thinking Christians oppose it?" (Wm. A. Morton—From The Book of Mormon Message and Evidences, by Franklin S. Harris, Jr., page 202.)

Some of the prophets were authors of great literature. I'd like for a moment to refer to one. I think the book of Job is one of the most fascinating books of the Old Testament. It deals with a universal theme as wide as the world. The theme is the reason for human suffering and the why and wherefore of man's afflictions. The book of Job is a masterpiece of literature; listen to him for just a moment: "Oh, that one could hear me. Behold, my desire is that the Almighty would answer me." And the Lord answered Job's prayer and said:

"Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?

"Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me.

"Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding.

"Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it?

"Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof:

"When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?"—(Job 38:2-7.)

And listen again to Job:

"For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth:

"And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God:

"Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me." (Ibid., 19:25-27.)

Now, if Joseph Smith was in fact a prophet, you would expect him to write something, in a measure at least, comparable to that. Consider a verse or two from a modern prophet also in tribulation. He was in Liberty Jail, having been hounded, persecuted, hated, reviled, beaten and now imprisoned. And from this jail in the midst of his suffering and the afflictions of his people he cries out:

"O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?

"How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries?" (D&C 121:1-2.)

And the Lord replied:

"My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment;

"And then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes."(Ibid., 121:7-8.)

The rest of it is beautiful, but I turn to the next section, where the Lord continues:

"The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee;

"While the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand.

"And thy people shall never be turned against thee by the testimony of traitors. (and that was prophetic)

"If thou art accused with all manner of false accusations; if thine enemies fall upon thee; if they tear thee from the society of thy father and mother and brethren and sisters; . . .

"And if thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers, and the sentence of death passed upon thee; . . . if the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become thine enemy; if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good.

"The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he:

"Therefore, hold on thy way, and the priesthood shall remain with thee; for their bounds are set, they cannot pass. . . . " (Ibid., 122:1-3, 6-9.)

His testimony of the Redeemer is also comparable to Job's:

"And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

"For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

"That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (Ibid., 76:22-24.)

I refer next to Isaiah:

"In the year that king Uzziah died I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple." (Isa. 6:1.)

Others of the prophets, notably Micah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, of whom I had thought to speak, make similar declarations that they had seen him. Listen to this modern prophet:

"It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (Joseph Smith 2:17.)

And again:

"And while we meditated upon these things, the Lord touched the eyes of our understandings and they were opened, and the glory of the Lord shone round about.

"And we beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness;

"And saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever." (D&C 76:19-21.)

I think I could not bring to you better evidence of the calling of this man than to refer you to Third Nephi in the Book of Mormon. There is no better evidence anywhere than is there recorded that Jesus is the Christ, for not only two or eleven or 500 declared they saw him, but a whole multitude of people, and they one after another came forth and felt of his hands and the wound in his side and did bear record that it was he of whom it was written by the prophets that should come. And in that chapter you will read how they had been by the temple lamenting and yet marveling and wondering over the conditions that existed after the death of the Son of God in Jerusalem, and they heard a voice. It was a small voice, and yet it pierced them to the very center. They did not understand what they heard, and it came again, and the third time they understood it; it was the voice of the Father who said, "Behold my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him." And then the Savior appeared from the heavens and said, "I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world. I am the light and the life of the world." And the people fell to the ground. They could not stand his holy presence. These are but excerpts. Read I pray you the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants.

The Apostle John said: "The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." Joseph Smith had the testimony of Jesus and therefore the spirit of prophecy—he was a prophet.

Much of what I have said, brothers and sisters, might be termed an intellectual approach to the subject, which could possibly result in some intellectual conviction. But such evidence alone will not give you a testimony of the restored gospel of Christ. That can only come by the whispering of the Holy Spirit, and it is by that Spirit that I bear my own testimony. In that connection I like the words of Dummelow, speaking of the Spirit that causes the heart to know outside the five senses. He said, "The heart knowledge, after all, to every individual who has it, is the most direct form of evidence for the existence of God. The heart knowledge, the personal intercourse with Him of your spirit, the communion in virtue of which you can say, 'I know there is a God, because I know Him.' " My testimony of the gospel is heart and soul knowledge, valid beyond any knowledge I have. I solemnly declare that I know that Jesus of Nazareth is the Son of God. I know from the same source and with the same certainty and assurance that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. I know that with every fiber of my being, for it has come to me not through reading and study and argument or through reading and study and argument or through logic and evidence alone. God has manifested the truth of it unto me by the power of the Holy Ghost. I have the sacred honor to be a witness for him, and now with the solemnity of an oath, standing before you as in a witness box, I declare that our Heavenly Father, preparatory to the second coming of his beloved Son, commissioned the Prophet Joseph Smith to establish his Church and through him the priesthood was restored by which men today are authorized to speak and act in the name of God, as did the prophets of old.

We rejoice in singing "We Thank Thee, O God, For a Prophet"; and "Praise to the Man Who Communed with Jehovah" and also "Joseph Smith's First Prayer."

We thank thee, oh, God, for the testimony thou hast given us and the opportunities which come to bear witness of thee, thy Son, and thy prophets. May we all remain true to the truth, true to ourselves, and true to thee. I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—LDS Institute of Religion, Logan, Utah. Sixteenth Annual Joseph Smith Memorial Sermon, December 7, 1958.
