Hugh B. Brown, Continuing the Quest ( 1961)

III

The Gospel . . .

Directions for the Good Life

Revelation: The Challenging Message of Mormonism

Education and the Charge to Subdue the Earth

We Believe

"Take off Thy Shoes . . . "

What Is Man and What May He Become

The Phenomenon of Mormonism

The Law of Obedience

This I Know

Face the Light

" . . . Become the Sons of God"

Some LDS Beliefs

"I Am the Resurrection and the Life"

The Power of God unto Salvation

Being, Not Seeming—Living Testimonies

The Book of Mormon—A Divine Record

One Modern Temple

Red-letter Days on Time's Calendar

Thy Will Be Done

A Letter to New Zealand

Some Differences between the LDS Church and Other Churches

Revelation: The Challenging Message of Mormonism

My brothers and sisters, and in that salutation I should like to include all who are listening regardless of their Church affiliation because we are convinced that we are brothers and sisters. We believe in the universal brotherhood of man under the Fatherhood of God.

As this is the first conference since my change of status in the Church, I should like to take this opportunity to express publicly to President [David O.] McKay and his associates, my sincere appreciation for the confidence which prompted them to submit my name for your approval and I wish to thank you members of the Church for your confidence in their judgment. I pledge only that I shall do my level best to make that judgment good and to that end humbly invoke divine guidance and your indulgence. I shall need your prayers of faith.

But we are speaking this morning not alone to Church members. We are advised that perhaps more than fifty percent of those attending in person or through the use of modern media are friends of the Church who are visiting us. We appreciate your interest—we extend to you a hearty welcome. Your attendance seems to indicate that you have heard something about the Mormons and perhaps would like to know more. We should like to respond briefly to your implied inquiry about the Church. We shall avoid dogmatism, for that ordinarily brings antagonism. We simply invite you, our friends, this morning to, as Isaiah said, "Come and let us reason together."

We respect all men in their religious beliefs, but the divergent beliefs and multiplicity of creeds have, through the centuries, been the cause of much confusion and concern. The condition of the world religiously is stated in the Catholic Encyclopedia, from which I quote the following:

"A Babel of religious organizations all proclaim themselves to be the Church of Christ. Their doctrines are contradictory and precisely in so far as one of them regards the doctrine which it teaches as vital, it declares those of rival bodies to be misleading and pernicious."

Now, while we do not agree that the beliefs of others are necessarily pernicious, we do think it regrettable that the original Church of Jesus Christ, as outlined in the New Testament, has been broken up into so many creeds. We believe the Lord's house should be a house of order, not divided against itself.

The question is often asked, what are some of the distinguishing characteristics of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints? What, if anything, has this Church to offer which is new? Would it be worthwhile to take a closer look at Mormonism?

Though there are many fundamental differences between this Church and others, we must today be content to mention—and that only briefly—just one of them. We refer to our faith in continued revelation from God to men. It seems somewhat paradoxical that this fundamental doctrine of the Church should make it unique or distinguish it from others, inasmuch as in all dispensations of the gospel current revelation has been the sustaining power, the vivifying spirit of the divine Church.

In a concrete statement of beliefs knowns as the Articles of Faith, we declare our faith in all that God has revealed, all that he does now reveal, and we believe that he will yet reveal many great and important things.

History proves that when the spirit or gift of revelation is withdrawn from the Church, there is nothing but a dead form left, and men are prone to worship God with their lips and honor him with their mouths, but, because there is no communication and therefore no understanding, their hearts are far from him.

The things of God can only be understood by the Spirit of God and the Spirit of God is a revealing Spirit. The Master promised, before he left the earth, to send another Comforter which would lead men into all truth. Divine revelation has always been a characteristic of the Living Church—it is absolutely essential to its continued existence in an organized state on the earth.

You remember the Prophet Amos said, "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.)

And in the Proverbs we read, "Where there is no vision, the people perish: . . . " (Prov. 29:18.)

We have ample scriptural authority for our declaration that a man must be called of God by prophecy and by the laying on of hands by men of authority to preach the gospel and administer its ordinances. The Apostle Paul said, "And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Heb. 5:4.) And Aaron was called by direct revelation through Moses. When revelation ceases, people dwindle in unbelief, and not only the people but the Church apostatizes in the absence of inspired leadership.

That is exactly what happened in the Primitive Church and that situation was a harbinger of a universal apostasy, of which the Church of England speaks in its "Homily against Peril of Idolatry," as follows: "So that laity and clergy, learned and unlearned, all ages, sects, and degrees of men, women, and children of whole Christendom—an horrible and most dreadful thing to think—have been at once drowned in abominable idolatry; of all other vices most detested of God, and most damnable to man; and that by the space of eight hundred years and more."

Without continued revelation there can be no authorized ministry on the earth and without authorized officers there can be no Church of Christ. If some say there is no revelation and will not be further revelation from God, we ask, "Why not? Has God lost the power to reveal his mind and will to men?" Of course, to so state is tantamount to blasphemy. Do we not need revelation or word from God? I ask you to consider the condition of the world and note the dire need of the world for some divine guidance and direction.

Well then, if God could reveal and we need revelation, is the fault with man? Have we lost the gift or the faith or the understanding that will enable us to receive revelation? Certainly it would be more modest of us to admit the fault in ourselves than to blame God for not speaking, if he does not speak. Or perhaps there may be some jamming of the messages by the enemy, as a result of which some have been led to believe that there is no power that can transmit. We ask, in radio or television language, "Has the broadcasting station gone out of business or broken down, or are there no receiving sets?"

So long as men believe there can be no revelation they will make no attempt to tune in. They will lose their faith and will no longer look up and listen. Some even deny there is need for revelation, but the daily press challenges that statement; in this imperiled, divided, and chaotic world the need for God's help was never more apparent and urgent.

An English divine recently said, "Oh, that some man would arise who could authoritatively say to the world, 'Thus saith the Lord!' "

Is it possible, our friends, that religion is the one department of human interest, investigation and research where progress is impossible? Would any professor say to his class in chemistry, astronomy, physics, or geology, that no further discovery or revelation of scientific truth is possible? Is religion the only human interest which is static and quiescent? Did Christ leave his Church leaderless and intend it to continue so to be?

For ourselves, because of our faith in the universal and unchangeable love and justice of God, we cannot believe that his Church in one dispensation would be blessed and led by what in television parlance might be termed "live" revelation and in another dispensation leave a distraught and imperiled world with only the recorded messages of ancient prophets, some of which messages were for specific purposes and under special circumstances. We believe that revelation both "live" and recorded is now and will continue to be available to men. Whenever the Lord has recognized his Church, he has given through his prophets messages of warning, instruction, and hope.

When we say that we believe all that God has revealed, we declare our faith in the scriptures. We believe the Bible to be a repository of divine truth and that it is authoritative, though not beyond the need for interpretation and proper translation and, therefore, we say, when we declare our faith in the Bible, "as far as it is translated correctly." When we declare that we believe that God does now reveal, that he still speaks through his prophets, and that his word is scripture whenever and wherever given, when we make this statement we are simply teaching the gospel of Jesus Christ and declaring as true the Judeo-Christian religion.

We sometimes meet with skepticism when we say that he still reveals, but let us paraphrase the words of Paul for a moment. Why should it be thought a thing incredible that God will do what he has promised to do? If time would permit we could take you through the scriptures from Genesis to Revelation and show the promises of God with respect to the latter days. Why should it be thought incredible not only that he would keep his promise but that he would continue to do what he has done through all the dispensations of the gospel from the beginning?

The Church of Jesus Christ was established and is now directed by revelation, and that fact is largely responsible for the appeal which this new Church makes, and when I say "new" I wish to emphasize that to us it is not new but a restoration of that which was. The true Church of Christ is not a blind alley, it is an open thoroughfare, where men may confidently pursue truth in the light of revelation. That the Church is progressive and responsive to revealed truth is evidenced by our further declaration that we believe that God will yet reveal many great and important things.

This Church, our friends, is not committed to any formal or inflexible creed, but its members are taught to believe in and live by the revelations of the past and the present and thus prepare themselves for the revelations yet to come. Our concepts and even our faith must be held subject to new light. The present and urgent need for continued revelation in this age of communism, atheism, godlessness, and the spirit of the anti-Christ, becomes more apparent when we realize that revelation gives us our most conclusive proof that there is a divine Being and how the world needs to know him.

In an age when hundreds of millions of people are being systematically indoctrinated with the abominable doctrines of communism which are that there is no God, religion is an opiate, Christ is a myth; surely in the midst of such determined, persistent and relentless attacks from the enemy we may expect from God our Father some direction and for that direction we constantly pray.

But our message is this, our friends, God has spoken from the heavens, communication between heaven and earth is still possible, the lines are open. That is the challenging message of Mormonism, it is an ensign to the nations, a message of hope to an imperiled world. If we are to exercise saving faith and accompany it with works and, of course, faith without works is dead, we must know something of him, of his existence, his personality, his laws, his purposes with respect to man, and realize that we are, in fact, his children, related to him. He said, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.)

We do not say that God is immaterial and incomprehensible and without a body. Rather we say he is approachable as our Father. Now, revelation may come through dreams or visions, the visitation of angels, or, on occasion such as with Moses, by face to face communication with the Lord. You remember the Lord spoke to Adam, not only while he was in the Garden of Eden, but after he was cast out. He spoke to other patriarchs and prophets through the ages. He spoke to Enoch, who was called "The Seventh from Adam," and it is said that he was translated because he was especially favored with the presence of the Lord. The record reads, "And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him." (Gen. 5:24.)

The Lord by revelation warned Noah of the coming flood. He talked with Abraham and told him to leave his country and go into a new land and gave him some promises with respect to his posterity. By revelation he commissioned Moses to go into Egypt and under God's personal direction he released the children of Israel from the bondage of the Egyptians.

So we may trace the line of revelators, men who have stood, each in his time, as the medium through whom God spoke to his people, from Moses to Joshua, through the Judges, on to David and Solomon and down to Zachariah and Malachi. Christ, himself, came to this world to reveal God to men and he, himself was led and directed by revelation from his Father while he dwelt on this earth.

The Lord, as you know, revealed to Zacharias, the father of John the Baptist, what was to happen, and you remember what happened to Zacharias because of his lack of belief. The Lord revealed to Mary that she was blessed among women, that she should bring forth a son and call his name Jesus. (Luke 1:28, 31.) Christ himself said: "For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say and what I should speak.

"And I know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the father said unto me, so I speak." (John 12:49-50.)

The apostles in the Meridian of Time were in touch with the heavens by revelation. Note what Paul says:

"But God hath revealed them (divine truths) unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.

"For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? Even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God." (1 Cor. 2:10-11.)

You remember John, on the Isle of Patmos, wrote the book of Revelation, and, incidentally, this is sometimes called the Apocalypse, and that means in Greek "revelation." This is what he wrote in the first chapter of his book—it was not written of his own wisdom:

"The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him (speaking of himself), to shew unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant John:" (Rev. 1:1.)

The scriptures, then, are not only replete with evidence, but conclusive proving that God does and always has, whenever there has been a dispensation of the gospel upon the earth, been in touch with his people.

Remember Paul said this, and he is speaking now of our time:

"That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on the earth; even in him:" (Eph. 1:10.)

From the scriptures cited and many others, it seems evident that revelation from God to man has been a vital characteristic, standard procedure in all dispensations of the gospel. All the prophets and leaders of ancient times were led, directed, chosen, inspired by God himself through revelation.

Eusebius records what happened after the apostles had been slain and where no authoritative answers could be given. He writes, "When the sacred choir of apostles became extinct and the generation of those that had been privileged to hear their inspired wisdom had passed away, then also the combinations of impious error arose by the fraud and dilusions of false teachers. These, as there were none of the apostles left, henceforth attempted without shame to preach their doctrine against the Gospel of truth."

And Mosheim reminds us that both Jews and heathens were accustomed to a vast variety of pompous and magnificent ceremonies in their religious service. All the records of the second century mention the multiplication of rites and ceremonies in the Christian Church. "But," you ask, "were these the times that have been." Some of you may say, "We can believe in revelation in Adam's day and in the days of Moses, in the days of Christ, in the days of the apostles, but not now."

Is there any indication that we might, with reason, expect some word from God? Hear John's testimony as he spoke of things that were to come in the latter days. He said:

"And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,

"Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him: for the hour of his judgment is come:. . . " (Rev. 14:6-7.)

That, my dear friends, is a prophetic promise of revelation in our time. The Church today is founded on the rock of revelation as securely as it was in the days of Peter when Christ said to him, after Peter had spoken of his knowledge of him,

". . . upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." (Matt. 16: 18.)

We think we are justified in anticipating future revelation and we believe that it will be surpassing in importance and glorious fulness anything that has yet been revealed. We believe that he will continue to reveal himself as long as man continues his probation here on earth.

Now, you friends of ours probably ask, "What particular revelation is the one on which you found your Church?" Time will not permit, of course, a complete answer to that, but humbly, and from the very center of my heart, I say to you, our friends, and to you members of the Church, God has restored the gospel of Jesus Christ and there was a great revelation, one of the greatest of all time, when the Father and the Son, anticipating our very day and the events of these times, appeared to a man. They were personal Beings; they were separate and distinct; they were in form like man, thus proving the first scripture in Genesis, "So God created man in his own image." They spoke to him. Other revelations followed. The whole message of Mormonism centers around the life and mission of Jesus, the Christ, and we proclaim to the world in contradiction to the hellish doctrine of communism, God does live. He still speaks to men. There are prophets on the earth.

If that statement is true, it is the greatest message that has come to this earth since Christ ascended into heaven because it is a message of his coming, and if it is true, all of you should know it. That it is true we humbly testify.

We ask you to listen, to read, to pray—ask God for guidance—and we promise you, paraphrasing the Prophet Moroni, that if you will ask of God in faith in the name of Jesus Christ, whether what we declare is true, he will reveal the truth of it unto you by the power of the Holy Ghost.

We believe this is the message for which the world has been waiting. We declare it is the very truth of God, and for my own self I bear witness to that effect and say to you in humility, but without any equivocation, by the same power and authority with which Peter spoke, I say, with him, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." (Matt. 16:16.) I know this to be true and plead with men everywhere to hearken, for it is a message from the heavens, to which I testify in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—General Semiannual Conference, October 1, 1961.

Education and the Charge to Subdue the Earth

I was called by President Grant without notice, just five minutes to four to speak in the concluding session of the general conference which I was attending as a stake president from Canada. At the close of the meeting a good sister came up and said, "Brother Brown, you're one man who can speak without thinking." She saw the expression on my face and said, "What I mean is that the shorter your talks are the better I like them." So do not be apprehensive, you may have a short but thoughtless talk.

I should like to read some of the first words ever written. "In the beginning God"—In the beginning—God. I wish you would carry that thought over and perhaps we may remember to refer to it again. Now I should like to read part of the briefest story ever written, covering the longest period of time.

"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.

"And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.

"And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters. . . .

"And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so. . . .

"And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years: . . .

"And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also. . . .

"And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly . . . And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, . . .

"And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

"So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him: male and female created he them.

"And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth." (See Genesis, Chapter 1.)

As I say, that is at once the shortest and most comprehensive story ever written. I should like now briefly to answer a question that was asked by one who did not believe what I have just read. His question was briefer than the statement. After I had read to him part of the story of the creation he asked, "Why? Why did God do all that in the face of what we see in the world today?" To you this is an answer:

"And the redemption of the soul is through him that quickeneth all things, in whose bosom it is decreed that the poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it.

"Therefore, it must needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness, that it may be prepared for the celestial glory;

"For after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father;

"That bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for this intent are they sanctified.

"For intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own; justice continueth its course and claimeth its own; judgment goeth before the face of him who sitteth upon the throne and governeth and executeth all things.

"He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, for ever and ever.

"And again, verily I say unto you, he hath given a law unto all things by which they move in their times and their seasons;" (D&C 88:17-20, 40-42.)

I should like to think through with you for a moment on this subject of the creation of the earth, and of man and the purpose of that creation; of the fact of God and of man's relationship to him. It took intelligence to create the eatrh, and it will take intelligence to subdue it. Only as we subdue the earth in the finest sense of that term, will we be entitled to inherit it. We in the practice of law have found at times that though a parent may give, devise, and bequeath unto his heir certain things, he may not in the better sense inherit those things until they understand them and can use them to their own advantage. And so I'm suggesting that perhaps subduing the earth has something to do with inheriting the earth. And I'm suggesting that either subduing or inheriting the earth will come about by reason of the intelligence of the people who are to subdue or inherit it. That as the glory of God is intelligence, so our glory will be measured by the degree of our intelligence. And herein I see some connection between the two parts of the title, "Education and the Charge to Subdue the Earth."

I should like to bring to you the words of a very wise man, a Jewish scholar of the twelfth century A. D. Speaking of the first chapter of Genesis he said, "The foundation of foundations and the pillar of all wisdom is to know that the first being is, and that he giveth existence to everything that exists." Incidentally this man's name was Moses Maimonides, concerning whom the Jewish proverb runs, "From Moses to Moses there was never one like Moses." He had in mind the first chapter of Genesis, "The object of which is to lay a foundation to declare the existence of God, just one God, to teach that the universe was created by him alone and not by a multitude of deities; that it is the product of a living person, a living will, not a necessary development of the forces inherent in matter; that it is not the sport of chance, but the harmonious result of wisdom. For the exercise and training of human faculties, God in his wisdom and goodness has left men to find out the physical truths by the use of powers he has given them." There is wisdom, is there not, in that? "He left to men to find out the truths of their universe." Job asked, "Canst thou by searching find out God?" Perhaps not but by searching, man may become acquainted with his universe; by intelligent searching, gaining knowledge, becoming educated, man may come to understand and appreciate, not only his immediate surroundings, but by constantly pushing back his horizons in all directions he will discover ever more compelling evidence of plan, design, and purpose—hence a planner, a designer, a mind—God.

Another wise man, David Starr Jordan, said in this connection, "The infinite expanse of the unfathomed universe, its development through countless periods of time, the boundless range of its changes and the rational order that pervades it, all seem to demand an infinite intelligence behind its manifestations. . . . To thoughtful minds it becomes increasingly evident that the majestic mechanism of the universe and the perfect fitting of life to the earth on which it rests are no chance products of 'Fortuitous clashing of atoms.' So far as we can see there is no chaos in the universe, nor was there ever any."

As to the purpose and destiny of the earth we read:

"This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom, or all kingdoms of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it; and this earth will be Christ's. . . .

"There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

"And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:9, 20-21.)

In this world and the universe the student finds constantly increasing evidence of the operation of law; whether it be in stellar space, among the planets, or in the minute revolving universe within the atom, the same law is operating.

I should like to pause long enough to say to you that the most arresting declaration that you can make to the youth of your wards and stakes and missions is that there is a law which applies to them; it is inexorable, immutable; it is known as the law of the harvest. "As ye sow, so shall ye reap." The Lawmaker is not capricious or arbitrary, there are no favorites, no one is exempt. "As ye sow, so shall ye reap." It would be well for you to remind them that in the springtime of life as in the springtime of seasons the soil and the seed determine the harvest and that sowing is an on going continuing process.

"The more thorough a person's education, the more he yearns for and is pushed forward to new achievements. The better a man is in this world, the better he is compelled to be. We all know the story of the young man who climbed up the natural bridge in Virginia and carved his name higher than any other, and found when he had done so it was impossible to descend and that his only alternative was to go on, scale the heights, and find safety on the top. Thus it is with all climbing in life. There is no going down. It is climbing or falling. Every forward and upward step makes another needful; and so we must go through the endless eternities." May we never arrive, may each goal be a starting place!

Education, if it be defined only as the acquisition of knowledge, may and often is dangerous. In support of that statement I quote Mr. Justice Robert Jackson of the U. S. Supreme Court who was chief prosecutor of war criminals of Nuremburg, Germany. He said, "The strange paradox is that modern society needs to fear only educated men. The primitive people of the earth constitute no menace, the more serious crimes against civilization can be committed only by educated and technically competent people. We need not only a good education, but it must be consciously directed to the development of high ethical ideals."

And then attention might, with profit, be called to the words of Dr. Hardin, "Greek civilization with all its intellectual and literary achievement, with its brilliant statesmen and wise philosophers, failed because it subordinated heart to brain. The spiritual element was subordinated to the intellectual. Other civilizations have failed through lack of intellectual development. Recent experience has taught that a nation of matchless scientific achievement may fail through lack of humanitarian and spiritual development. Scientific achievement alone without a corresponding development of the moral, spiritual natures of man may easily furnish the means for destroying civilization."

Latter-day Saints have been taught from the beginning that a man cannot be saved in ignorance—that a man is saved no faster than he gains knowledge. But they are taught constantly to remember that the mere acquisition of knowledge or the gathering together of facts or the accumulating of degrees are not in themselves sufficient. Wisdom, the intelligent use of knowledge, is what we seek.

"Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life it will rise with us in the resurrection.

"And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." (D&C 130: 18-19.)

Over the door of a courthouse in Massachusetts, there are chiseled in stone these words, "Obedience to law is liberty." The thing we seek most, the thing we treasure most, the thing for which we're prepared to die if needs be is liberty. "Obedience to law is liberty." The student sometimes says, "I don't like the word obedience, and especially I don't like to have it coupled with the word liberty, because obedience to me means slavery which is the opposite of liberty. I want to do what I want to do. Give me my liberty." Such a one would perhaps prefer to drive down Center Street in Provo at 100 miles an hour—if one had a Ford. He would prefer to disregard the red lights; he would prefer to drive on the left side of the road whenever he chose and thereby demonstrate his liberty. In the first place he would be deprived of his physical liberty and locked in jail, provided he lived long enough to get to jail. Disregarding the law robs him of his liberty and freedom.

Dr. Robert A. Millikan said: "Two great pillars upon which all human well-being and human progress rest are (1) the spirit of religion, and (2) the spirit of science, or knowledge. It is primarily to promote and strengthen the second of these that the world's universities and research institutions exist, and many of us are in position to be helpful to these institutions. But the supreme personal and individual opportunity of everyone, without exception, is with respect to the first. But I wish to go a step farther, for someone asks, where does the idea of God come in? Isn't it a part of religion? Yes, I think it is, because I do not see how there can be any sense of duty, or any reason for altruistic conduct which is entirely divorced from the conviction that moral conduct, or what we call goodness, is somehow or other worth while, that there is something in the universe which gives significance and meaning, call it value if you will, to existence, and no such sense of value can possibly be in mere lumps of dead matter interacting according to purely mechanical laws."

Now regarding the assigned title, "Education and the Charge to Subdue the Earth." Think of what it took to create the universe and of the purpose of that creation; think of our own place in that creation to have dominion over all things, to inherit the earth and subdue it; consider that we as individuals are the sons and daughters of God, not merely another part of his creation, for he did not create us as he did the animals, but we are "begotten of him." And what does that mean? It means that there is something of him in us. It means that we may become like that from which we came. Palm trees do not come from acorns. Only oaks come from acorns because somehow oaks are involved in acorns. That which evolves must have been involved. In this sense God is involved in us. We will evolve into something like him as we gain education, as we increase in intelligence, as we come to understand his purpose with respect to us.

The Lord said through the Prophet Joseph,

"Let the mountains shout for joy, and all ye valleys cry aloud; and all ye seas and dry lands tell the wonders of your Eternal King! And ye rivers, and brooks, and rills, flow down with gladness. Let the woods and all the trees of the field praise the Lord; and ye solid rocks weep for joy! And let the sun, moon, and the morning stars sing together, and let all the sons of God shout for joy! And let the eternal creations declare his name forever and ever! And again I say, how glorious is the voice we hear from heaven, proclaiming in our ears, glory and salvation, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life: kingdoms, principalities, and powers!

"Behold, the great day of the Lord is at hand; and who can abide the day of his coming, and who can stand when he appeareth? . . . " (D&C 128:23-24.)

I bring to you, my brethren and sisters, my own humble testimony of the divinity of the work which is known as the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. I bring to you a heart full of gratitude to God that he thought enough of me to give me a little insight into his purpose with respect to this earth and with respect to myself, that he has been so good as to make it known to me that Jesus of Nazareth is the Son of God, that he is my personal Redeemer, my Savior, my Friend, and that it is his work and his glory to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of men. Let us then seek to get an education and let us remember that it does not stop with graduation, with the attaining of great age, with death, nor in eternity but throughout the countless ages we will never find a place beyond which we cannot go. We will never have accumulated enough knowledge so that we cannot accumulate any more. In the providence of God it is an eternal quest.

Let us come back to where we started, "In the beginning God"—in the interim man—at the end God and man; exalted, glorified, redeemed man capable of enjoying eternal life, immortality, eternal increase, and that does not refer only to posterity but to the increase of understanding, increase of knowledge, increase of intelligence. We are inspired by the presence here of these older men and women who somewhere along the line have caught the vision of what I have tried to say. Some of them are now eighty-five and over, still seeking education, increasing in wisdom. God bless you older folk and all of you who have come from far and near to attend Leadership Week. Go back and carry the word to the people from whom you come that the God of heaven is your Father and their Father, and his Son is their Savior, but that there is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven upon which all blessings are predicated and that there is only one way to get a blessing and that is to keep the law.—BYU Leadership Week, June 25, 1954.

We Believe

I humbly pray that I may have the liberty which comes from the possession of the Holy Spirit and that your prayers and mine may be effective to that end.

We have just returned from a tour of the missions in the South Pacific, and we are sure that you parents, friends, and relatives of the missionaries, who are laboring there, will be interested in knowing that they are well, happy, and doing a wonderful work. They send to you and to all members of the Church their love, greetings, and gratitude. We met 575 of them, while there, held meetings with them, listened to their testimonies, discussed with them some of their problems, and were inspired by their faith and devotion.

Everywhere we went the people were living in the afterglow of the recent visit of President and Sister McKay. To thousands it marked the pinnacle of their spiritual experiences. We wish publicly to thank him and his Counselors for the priceless privilege of visiting the wonderful people of those islands and for the honor of attending the ceremony of laying the cornerstone of the New Zealand Temple.

Two other names are immortal among the Polynesians. Their love for Elder and Sister Matthew Cowley borders on devotion. They mention their names in hushed tones and sing special hymns written in remembrance of their years of loving and devoted service.

In addition to these regular missionaries there are another 500 local labor missionaries and 120 Zion labor supervisors working there under the inspired and able leadership of President Wendell B. Mendenhall.

There are now 41 chapels under construction, five major college projects, four mission homes and another 30 chapels will be under construction within the year. I think in all the history of the Church we have never had a more inspiring example of voluntary co-operative effort than we saw in the college and temple projects in New Zealand and Hawaii. Not only do the missionaries and supervisors work on these projects without pay—often singing as they work—but most of them are housed and fed by the local members of the Church. A representative of the press, after visiting the New Zealand project, expressed amazement and said, "A more completely unselfish work has never come to my attention."

There are now over 59,000 members of the Church in the South Pacific, and as we traveled among them we were reminded of the early missionaries who were there when conditions were quite different. We thought of President Joseph F. Smith, George Q. Cannon, of my own grandfather, James S. Brown, and others, who endured hardship and privation under those primitive conditions. In fact, some of them were in danger at times of becoming the chief ingredient for an oldfashioned stew. They were mercifully preserved from that. We hope that they who planted these early seeds are sharing with us the joy of a wonderful harvest. We bring you then, from the dignified, humble, faithful Polynesians and others in the South Pacific, who covered us with love and leis, their Alohas—Kiaora Koutou Katoa, or in other words, "Greetings, and God bless you."

During our tour, many questions were asked concerning the Church and its activities. The one most frequently asked was, "Are the Mormons Christians? and if so how does the Church differ from other Christian churches?" Now, if to be a Christian means to believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world and to follow his teachings, if being a Christian means to live or try to live the Christian life as he directed, then we answer the first part of that question with a categorical "Yes, we are Christians."

The answer to the second part of the question is a complex one and cannot be given in a short address. However, perhaps some of our nonmember friends who have honored us with their presence here or in the radio and television audiences would be interested in a brief reference to some of those differences.

The thirteen Articles of Faith, published by the Church in 1842 are roughly the equivalent of creeds in other religious organizations. Therein is set forth a concise and authoritative statement on the teachings of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Of course, to point out the differences between these teachings and others would require an analysis and discussion far beyond the time limits of this occasion and the ability of the speaker. We may, however, refer in passing to some of them. It is worthy of note and doubtless surprising to some that everything we teach or practise is based upon and is in strict harmony with the King James version of the Holy Bible which we accept as the word of God.

We believe in other scriptures in addition to the Holy Bible; scriptures that were produced as scriptures have always been produced by, as Peter said, "holy men of God, speaking and writing as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost." There is meticulous agreement between the Book of Mormon and the Holy Bible, agreement not only on basic doctrine but each has the same central theme, viz: predicting the event, recording the advent, and bearing witness to the import of the life and mission of Jesus the Christ. The fact that these sacred volumes were written on different hemispheres, at times when there was no intercommunication, is not only evidence of divine purpose indicates inspired authorship.

The Latter-day Saints, like the Former-day Saints, believe in the gifts of the Spirit as enumerated by the Apostle Paul: tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions, healings, interpretation of tongues, etc. (1 Cor. 12:7-10.)

We believe that these gifts as enjoyed now are part of the blessings that have come through the restoration of the gospel. We realize that when we say they have been restored to the Church it implies they were taken away or were no longer enjoyed. History, both profane and sacred, confirms that fact. Many candid and devout Christian writers assert and deplore the loss of these gifts and agree with John Wesley that they were not enjoyed beyond the second or third century and were seldom known after, "that fatal period when the emperor, Constantine, claimed to be a Christian."

Our observance of the Word of Wisdom, God's law of health, is distinctive and is a physical and spiritual blessing to the people. Reference has been made in this conference to the awful price the world is paying for the use of things which God has said are not good for man. We practise the law of tithing as it was taught and practised anciently, and, being the Lord's financial law, we find it superior to any man-made economic system. Fast offerings, the welfare program as administered by the priesthood, and the Relief Society, and other agencies are an extension of the Church's economic policy, always having in mind the physical as well as the spiritual well-being of the people.

Some complain that we are too materialistic, that our teachings lack spiritual emphasis, saying we should keep the spiritual life free from contamination with the material, which, according to them, is gross and evil. But we are reminded that man's body was made in the image of God, from the dust of the earth. That the Savior did not consider earthly substances as evil, is evidenced by the fact that he was baptized in the earthly element of water and pointed to such baptism as the gateway to his kingdom to all who would follow him. Furthermore, he taught the deepest truths about the human spirit by reference to common material things, such as the birds of the air, the lilies of the field, sheep and shepherds, and farmers sowing seed. He chose humble fishermen for his disciples and not only taught them to become fishers of men but also gave them a lesson in fishing for fish. He and his apostles spent much of their time ministering to the poor, healing the sick, moving among the common people as they were engaged in the mundane affairs of life, mending the bodies as well as the souls of men.

We believe that religion should touch the lives of men redemptively here and now, at every point of human experience, that matter is not essentially evil but that its purpose is to serve spirit while spirit controls and glorifies matter. There is a beneficent and eternal relationship between spirit and element. The Lord, speaking through the Prophet declared, "For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy;

"And when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy.

"The elements are the tabernacle of God; yea, man is the tabernacle of God, even temples; . . . " (D&C 93:33-35.)

We believe the gospel of Jesus Christ must be preached to all the world, and to this end we have a great and unique missionary system. Young men and women are called, thousands of them each year, to spend two or three years of their lives in missionary service, at their own expense. They are willing to interrupt their education, postpone their marriage, or give up their employment in order to perform this service. As we heard yesterday, there are now 13,000 of them at home and abroad, in various phases of missionary activity. These young people are instructed that they are not to attack or cast any aspersions on other churches but to respect every man's right to worship God as he may see fit.

The organization, government, and discipline of the Church have attracted wide and favorable attention. The Church bestows the priesthood upon all worthy male members over 12 years of age. With a total membership of less than a million and a half [1957], we have 372,530 men and boys who hold some office in the priesthood. This means a sharing of authority and responsibility and results in widespread interest and activity. Last night, for instance, a general priesthood meeting of the Church was held in this tabernacle and the proceedings carried by closed circuit radio to groups in 96 chapels in surrounding cities and states, where a total of 37,180 men holding the priesthood received instructions from the leaders of the Church.

So we might go on, far beyond the limits of time here, in simply listing the distinctive teachings of the Church. But there is one basic and fundamental difference to which we call attention for a moment, namely the doctrine of Deity. On this transcendently important subject we take sharp but friendly issue with the creeds of men, and we are willing to rest our case upon biblical precedents and divine revelation. We worship the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the Jehovah of the Old Testament. We believe that Jesus of Nazareth is the Son of God and the Messiah who was expected through the centuries but rejected when he came.

We believe that the Godhead consists of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, generally known as the Holy Trinity, but we believe that they are separate and distinct Personages, that the Father and the Son are personal and material and increasingly comprehensible as men progress and gain understanding; that the Father and Son have bodies composed of parts and possessed of feelings. That the Holy Ghost is a Personage of Spirit.

If Jesus of Nazareth was and is God as John the Beloved and others declared him to be (see John 1:1-3), then God must be personal and material. It was not an incomprehensible, immaterial essence that came forth from the tomb, but the glorified resurrected body of Jesus the Christ; it was a body of flesh and bone as he himself declared, and as Thomas was called upon to verify by touch as well as sight. It was this body which ascended into heaven in the presence of the amazed disciples. It was this body which the attending angels declared should come again. (Acts 1:11.)

When Jesus came and revealed God to man, he held up to them a personal, living ideal and exhorted them to become perfect, even as his Father was perfect. The value of having an ideal is that it inspires emulation. We seek to become like that which we adore. Surely no one aspires to become diffused, immaterial essence, devoid of body, parts, or feeling and without center or circumference. Faith that a living, personal God is the Father of the human spirit encourages men to push back their horizons to look up instead of down for their source. It enlarges their vista and life takes on new interest and new meaning. It encourages men to live more abundantly, and he said this was one purpose of his coming.

Because the Father called us sons and the Savior called us brothers, we posit for man an exalted God-like status with almost limitless possibilities. This God-image quality in man, which is the root of his dignity, gives deeper meaning and a higher purpose to life, establishes faith and fortitude, and supplies the necessary valor to realize the vision without which people perish. It renews man's determination to pursue the eternal quest for answers to the whence and why and whither of life.

Again, if God is not comprehensible, then man's salvation is impossible, for Jesus said, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) If, therefore, we cannot know him, then we cannot have life eternal, and if this be so then the whole plan of salvation fails, the doctrine of the atonement is false and meaningless and men are left in Dante's deepest hell, "desiring without hope." We agree with Milton that "the end of all learning is to know God and out of that knowledge to love and emulate him."

Unfortunately in the minds of many religious people the term God is ambiguous. But there was nothing ambiguous about the Hebrew prophets' concept of Jehovah. To them he was a Living God with whom Moses and others talked. Certainly there was nothing mysterious or hard to understand in Christ's revelation of his Father. He said, "He who hath seen me hath seen the Father." We believe in a Living God, a conscious, sentient, intelligent Being with whom we associate the highest attributes of personality in their fullest development.

If this claim of a restoration be true, then we should expect the pristine Church to be a prototype of the restored Church, for not only he but his teachings are the same, yesterday, today, and forever. It follows then that to outline and delineate the differences between the restored Church and other churches, one needs only to become familiar with the Church as it was organized by Christ and his apostles in the Meridian of Time and then compare the churches of modern times with that primitive Church. Whatever differences appear they are the differences between the churches of men and the restored Church of Jesus Christ.

Also, our faith in the materiality and separate individualities of the Father and the Son, sustains faith in the doctrine of the second coming of Christ, when he shall reign during the millennium, and we shall have a thousand years of peace. The prophets of old predicted his second coming in no uncertain or mystical terms. We refer to Job, David, Isaiah, Joel, Zechariah, Malachi, and others. He himself promised that he would come in the glory of the Father with his angels. We read in Matthew, "When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory.

"And before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats:" (Matt. 25:31-32.) Paul, in writing to the Thessalonians said, "For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first:" (1 Thess. 4:16.)

We bear witness to the restoration of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. We bear witness that the Church has been organized and that it is like its prototype, the primitive Church, built upon the foundations of apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone. Through this restoration men have been given the right to speak and act in the name of God as anciently, and through the endowment and employment of these gifts among men, the truth has been restored and we humbly proclaim it.

Time will not permit even the mention of other, and there are many other, differences, but we repeat, we are Christians, we believe in the Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in the Holy Scriptures, ancient and modern; we believe in the doctrine of the second coming of the Christ, and we believe that when he comes he will be as the Bible has promised, a glorified, resurrected Being, whose feet shall stand upon the Mount of Olives. We look forward to that coming and pray that God will help us and all men to prepare for it, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—General Conference, April 7, 1957.

"Take Off Thy Shoes . . . "

Moses heard the voice of God from the burning bush and removed his shoes in reverence. His limitations, his weaknesses, his past misdeeds seemed magnified and revealed as, in the presence of God's majesty, he listened to the call to service.

At this most beautiful and inspiring season of the year, the thoughtful traveler in the countryside is constrained to remove his shoes—and his hat—as he sees the resplendent evidences of God's handiwork and from a thousand burning bushes he hears a call to co-operate with him in freeing his people from bondage.

But, even as in Egypt, it seems necessary to display his power and his displeasure to those responsible for our slavery. How many plagues must come upon the world before his people can be released from their taskmasters and seek the promised land. And to what extent do we contribute to our enslavement by adopting as our own the alien ways of the "Egypt" in which, for a time we are compelled to live.

Have we developed such an appetite for the "fleshpots" that we somehow prefer them to the freedom which is promised to all who are willing to follow divinely appointed leaders through the wilderness? Or do we resist instructions and guidance if our established ways of doing things is disturbed. Have we the faith and courage to go down to the shores of the great sea knowing that he will command and it will obey, or do we prefer the cramping security of slavery to the freedom which may be had for the price of sacrifice and effort?

Human nature has not changed much since the days of ancient Israel. Moses was taken from them for a brief season and they made and worshiped a golden image. At the first turn in the road they insisted on looking backward. Since they could no longer see the familiar evidences of worldly power on which they had relied, they complained that Moses had betrayed them. They lacked the vision and the valor which all adventurous living demands and had to be sustained along the way by miracles, by food from heaven, and by water from the rock.

After six years of devastating plagues on a scale which ancient Egypt never knew, the world seems little nearer to a day of deliverance. We have harvest festivals and observe thanksgiving days; our leaders set aside days of prayer and among the victor nations we sing praises and give lip service to our great Deliverer. But is there less hatred in the world? Do greed and selfishness still dominate our motives? Are we amenable to counsel when to follow it seems to be against our immediate personal interest? Are we willing to follow inspired leadership even when it leads through the valleys which inevitably lie between the mountain peaks which mark the course to the promised land?

At a time when social, political, and economic systems are being challenged; when new and alien ideologies are being advocated, when tried and established methods are being forsaken and when people in large numbers follow after strange gods, it is well that the Latter-day Saints be reminded that, for them, there is but one voice of authority, that to them there is always open a safe passage through the sea if they will but hearken to the one who said, "They shall be my people, and I will be their God."

The students of church history, ancient and modern, and they who have had the responsibility of leadership have called attention to the contrast between the ways of God and the methods of Satan and have urged all to cultivate the spirit of discernment, humility, and obedience. All history demonstrates how fatal it is to the individual or the nation to follow leaders who are either uninspired or are inspired only by selfish ambition, lust for power, desire to dominate.

Gradually such usurpers of authority have gained control of the machinery of government and have not only enslaved the people but have led them down to destruction. The Apostle Paul warned the people of his day of the danger of yielding to the dictates of usurpers. "Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?"

Brigham Young, the inspired leader of the modern exodus, courageously warned his people of the reality of the forces of evil. He said: "The devil's forces are particularly marshalled against us. The adversary presents his principles and arguments in the most approved style, and in the most winning tone, attended with the most graceful attitudes; and he is very careful to ingratiate himself into the favor of the powerful and influential of mankind, uniting himself with popular parties, floating into offices of trust and emolument by pandering to popular feeling, though it should seriously wrong and oppress the innocent."

Members of the Church have never been asked to follow blindly and without question. The great principle of free agency has been emphasized since before the fall of Lucifer who was determined to employ compulsion and deny the right of choice. And yet there are times when we must walk by faith and not by sight alone; when we must believe without seeing. They who thus believe were classed as "more blessed" when the Savior submitted to the unbelieving examination of the doubting Thomas. There are times when it is not given to us to view the whole plan, to know all of the details of a proposed campaign, to be consulted on general policy, and it is then that we should show our faith in inspired leadership by subjecting our opinions and our will to that of those who, because of their wider contacts, more complete information, elevated viewpoint, can see the whole field of action while our own vision is limited to the little sector to which we have been assigned.

The few men in a pillbox at the crossroads may come to look upon their little concrete house as the nerve center of the battle line. If the commanding officer should send down word to time and place, the wise non-commissioned officer will without question obey orders. He is aware that disobedience here might result in his being cut off with his men, or perhaps his position will be shelled or bombed by his own artillery or planes.

And so in church leadership. There are times when from our limited horizon we cannot see the wisdom of some move or policy. If we persist in holding to our own views and refuse to join in the general scheme, we are liable to find ourselves isolated behind the lines and included in the casualties.

Quoting a prophet of modern times: "Every son and daughter of God is expected to obey with a willing heart every word which the Lord has spoken, and which he will in the future speak to us. It is expected that we hearken to the revelations of his will, and adhere to them with all our might; for this is salvation, and anything short of this clips the salvation and the glory of the Saints."

And so, as the glory of this autumn time is translated into a prophecy of the spring which is to follow, let us listen to the voice from the burning bush and reverently remove the shoes of our unbelief and stand on holy ground. "Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord."—Millennial Star, November, 1945.

What Is Man and What May He Become

President Wilkinson and fellow students, I learned this morning that this is a finishing school: Men are not complete until they are married, and then they are finished.

I should like to read a text and may talk about it. The Psalmist said, as he gazed into the starry heavens:

"When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained;

"What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?

"For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour.

"Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet:" (Psalm 8:3-6.)

As I look out upon this sea of faces, I feel, I think, somewhat of the awe that inspired those words; but I believe that what I behold here is potentially grander and greater and more precious than what the psalmist saw in the starry heavens. He saw the handiwork of God: I see his offspring. I say "potentially" greater, and it is to man's potential that I would like to direct your attention.

I can best express my feelings, I think, by borrowing an expression from Will Durrant: "I feel like a droplet of spray proudly poised for a moment on the crest of a wave, undertaking to analyze the sea." Humbly and prayerfully I approach the subject of what is man and what might he become. What are the limits, if any, to his potential, especially as we think of our present-day world? As I think of man—potential man—and his relationship to God, his origin, and his possible destiny, and as I ask what is to be the limit of his accomplishment, I think the answer is found in another question: What will man do with his freedom, and will he bring his life into harmony with the laws of his universe, the laws of God?

We are very grateful in the Church and in this great university that the freedom, dignity, and integrity of the individual is basic in Church doctrine as well as in democracy. Here we are free to think and express our opinions. Fear will not stifle thought, as is the case in some areas which have not yet emerged from the dark ages. God himself refuses to trammel man's free agency even though its exercise sometimes teaches painful lessons. Both creative science and revealed religion find their fullest and truest expression in the climate of freedom.

As you proceed to make your individual "declarations of independence," I hope you will not become young radicals. I hope you will distinguish between liberty and license. I hope you will realize that freedom is only a blessing if it is accompanied by wisdom and intelligence. And so I would say, beware of radicalism. At the same time I would urge you to resist the down drag of mental laziness which someone has said leads to the premature hardening of the intellectual arteries. I would urge you, also—and especially, to avoid sluggishness of spirit, which is the worst kind of lethargy. You know there are some men who are phlegmatic to a degree that would make a turtle seem intolerably vivacious.

I hope that you will develop the questing spirit. Be unafraid of new ideas for they are as steppingstones to progress. You will, of course, respect the opinions of others but be unafraid to dissent—if you are informed.

Now I have mentioned freedom to express your thoughts, but I caution you that your thoughts and expressions must meet competition in the market place of thought, and in that competition truth will emerge triumphant. Only error needs to fear freedom of expression. Seek truth in all fields, and in that search you will need at least three virtues: courage, zest and modesty. The ancients put that thought in form of a prayer. They said, "From the cowardice that shrinks from new truth, from the laziness that is content with half truth, from the arrogance that thinks it has all the truth—Oh, God of truth, deliver us."

Both religionists and scientists must avoid arrogant dogmatism. The former know only what God has been pleased to reveal about himself, and the latter frankly admit that today's truth may be modified and amplified by tomorrow's discovery. Both science and religion beget humility. But as we consider together the subject of man's potential—and I am thinking now especially of these splendid young men who are assembled here on the stand and who are participating in the world's largest basketball tournament; I think of their fine physiques, their agile bodies, their minds capable of split-second decisions—I am constrained to say, let us not make the mistake of assuming that the body is the man.

David Sarnoff said, "Man is the greatest miracle and the greatest problem in the earth." And President Clark, in that splendid little book of his, Man, God's Greatest Miracle, gives us a learned and a beautiful description of the body of man. But man is also spiritual, mental, moral and aesthetic. And if he is to find satisfaction, it will be the satisfaction of his own complete and true and unavoidable nature. These satisfactions are the things for which we strive. Alexander Pope said:

"Know then thyself; presume not God to scan.

The proper study of mankind is man."

You will find this study of man—of yourselves—more challenging, more intriguing, more satisfying than the study of any other subject, whether it be stones, stars, trees, flowers or the strata of the earth.

In the first chapter of our oldest book we read:

"So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.

"And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: . . . " (Gen. 1:27-28.)

Man, then, from the beginning, had a unique status, a derived and image nature, and to him alone was assigned a participative role. The statement "created in the image of God" was never made concerning any other of God's vast creations.

The Latter-day Saint view of man's potential is in the vanguard of religious or scientific thought. Before the gospel was restored, no one was heard to say, "As God is, man may become," and yet Jesus said, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) Does not that injunction imply limitless possibilities? And the Apostle John said, "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but this we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is." (John 2:2.)

Now if any of you have been bothered about the subject of evolution, I submit that here is an inspired concept of evolution which exalts rather than debases man. It relates him to a divine Creator both as to origin and to destiny. Here is true evolution, to which you can subscribe with absolute safety. But when we speak of man's potential Godlike status, let us not forget that the difference between us and our Heavenly Father now is incomprehensively great. And that concept can only be made tenable in the light of the eternities that lie ahead and in the understanding and application of the principle of eternal progression.

If we would find true happiness we must continue the quest for which our spirits crave; a craving which is God-given and Godlike. A hunger for faith and understanding gnaws at the mind and spirit of man. Remember, though, what Weiman said: "The greatest enemy of truth is man's tenacity in clinging to unjustified beliefs." You must always be ready to reinterpret your concepts when they fail to pass the test of newfound facts. You must dethrone your prejudices." Someone has said that prejudice is a vagrant opinion without visible means of support.

As we go forward we will discover that there are certain laws, universal, inexorable, immutable, and eternal, and that all blessings are predicated upon obedience to those laws. We learn some things from the past. We must respect the past for it has much to teach, it is not dead. But a knowledge of the past alone cannot solve the problems of the present or the future. "The past," the philosopher says, "is the sum of the factors operating in the present."

Our earth life, which someone has likened unto a guided missile, was not accidental: it was planned and purposeful and voluntary. We were endowed with a divine spark, with potential ability to maintain and enlarge our orbit as we develop intelligence and self-mastery.

As we gain intelligence, we shall progressively understand the overall plan, the grand strategy and our own place and part in it. Let us undertake by obedience to law to fit our lives into that plan and play our several parts. When that plan was first presented to us we were not deterred by the fact that the journey would be dangerous. We, with millions of others, shouted for joy at the prospect of earth life, even though we doubtless had some warning that problems and perils lay ahead.

Just as the slightest defect in the mechanism of a guided missile or space ship may not only take it far from its objective, but may destroy it altogether, so our failure to understand and obey the laws of God will retard our journey, deflect our course, and may seriously impair future effort with tragic results.

There is no mechanism as delicate, sensitive or wonderful as the Holy Spirit, by which our lives may be guided if we will adjust the mechanism of our souls and attune our minds to its impulses; but this great guiding power may be insulated or cut off by improper conduct or deflected even by an impure thought. We have complete freedom to heed or disregard the promptings of that spirit, but we must abide the consequences of our choice.

"For each descent from fair truth's lofty way, For each gross error which delays the soul, By that soul's gloom and loneliness we pay And by the retarded journey to its goal."

Man is more than just what someone has called "a fortuitous combination of molecules." One great scientist has recently reminded us that no atom or molecule ever had a thought; no combination of elements ever gave birth to an idea; no natural law ever built a cathedral. Man is more than what scientists can test or weigh or measure. There has never been a scientific analysis of man that did not leave a residue, something which the most searching analysis cannot reach.

Scientists and teachers of religion disagree among themselves on theological and other subjects. Even in our own Church men take issue with one another and contend for their own interpretations. But this free exchange of ideas is not to be deplored as long as men remain humble and teachable.

For example, there are various opinions on the subject of the time involved and the method employed in the great and continuing drama of creation, the biblical account of which is compressed into a few lines of print. It seems obvious that the scriptures were not intended as texts in biology, anthropology, geology or any other of the sciences.

The Bible tells us briefly what happened "in the beginning," but as Dr. James E. Talmage points out, the word "beginning" is indefinite. Any question as to what that beginning was is largely futile because unanswerable. The information given in the scriptures on the time involved in the first great acts of creation, refers only to the spiritual creation. President Joseph Fielding Smith tells us: "Life did not commence upon this earth, life existed long before our solar system was called into being." Dr. John A. Widtsoe made this statement: "It seems reasonable to suppose that the great acts of creation could well have continued through eons of time." In fact it is doubtful if man can measure, according to man's method of measurements, the time involved. Dr. Talmage said that the earth passed through ages of preparation, unmeasured and immeasurable.

I call your attention to some words by President Anthony W. Ivins. He said, "I do not argue with the men who say the earth is only six thousand years old, or those who say it is 600,000 years old, or those who say it is six million. I know we are here on the earth, and I know the Lord has told us why we are here. The time will come when we will know all the rest. It is our misinterpretation of the word of the Lord that leads us into trouble."

And President Anthon H. Lund said, "Anything that is a tenet of our religion must come through revelation and be sustained by the Church, and we need not do battle for anything outside the works that have been accepted by the Church as a body."

Thinking of these things, does it not seem, then, that we should keep open-minded and be teachable on all these matters and not give too much time to a discussion of things that have not yet been revealed.

But while very little was written originally on the details of the creation of the world and man's advent upon it, it should be observed that God is the author of two accounts of the creation, one is written in the Bible and amplified by modern revelation and the other was written in the strata of the earth. Each has at times been wrongly interpreted and misunderstood and they sometimes seemed to be contradictory or at variance. If you will remember that these two records have the same divine Author, you will know they cannot be fundamentally opposed, though man's interpretation of either or both may be seriously at fault.

Some scriptures in which we believe were written by the finger of God and given to Moses on tablets of stone, and other scriptures were dictated by the Lord to his prophet scribes, both in ancient and in modern times, and here we find the world's greatest literature.

Also there is no more fascinating story—nor one more accurate, when properly interpreted and understood—than that written, also figuratively by the finger of God, on the stony pages of the earth's crust. But from neither of these records have men been able to determine exactly the time involved in the organization of the earth or the creation of the physical body of man. The answer to these questions is not important, so far as man's salvation is concerned, else it doubtless would have been revealed. Any protracted discussion of these subjects is unprofitable because all of the facts are not available.

From the standard works of the Church we learn that the Lord formed or organized the earth from existing materials. That it is impossible to create something from nothing is a scientific as well as a spiritual axiom. Again quoting Dr. Widtsoe, "It is an established doctrine of the Church that the ultimate elements which constitute the universe are eternal, indestructible, everlasting. Whether these ultimate realities be in the language of present-day science, molecules, atoms, electrons or pure energy is of little concern. Whatever is the ultimate reality is eternal. Matter, as we know it, from which the earth was organized, consists of eternal elements."

But it would be presumptuous for me this morning to attempt to discuss this matter fully or give my personal opinion with respect to either the religious or scientific aspects thereof. Nor shall I undertake to answer debatable questions. I may be able to tell you where some answers may be found, or to indicate where to place the emphasis.

I have tried to assure both students and teachers that neither fear of consequences nor any kind of coercion will be used to secure uniformity of thought in this university or in the Church. But let us never lose sight of the fact that the Church is led by revelation, that the Lord has one agent through whom he speaks to the Church, and that is the President of the Church. President David O. McKay said from this rostrum recently, "Whatever the subject may be, the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ may be elaborated upon without fear of anyone's objecting, and the teacher can be free to express his honest convictions regarding it, whether that subject be in geology, the history of the world, the millions of years that it took to prepare the physical world, whether it be in engineering, literature, art, any principle of the gospel may be briefly or extensively touched upon for the anchoring of the student who is seeking to know the truth."

In the 93rd section of the Doctrine and Covenants we read: "Man was . . . in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be. . . . For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy; and when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy." (D&C 93:29, 33-34.)

It is interesting to note that one hundred years after this great truth was given through the prophet regarding the spirit and element, the noted author, Elton Trueblood, made the penetrating observation that, "The more we identify our spirits with the natural order, the more we see matter and spirit as a mutually beneficent combination, and the more we are compelled in reason to posit the reality of a transcendent creator of both."

From modern revelation we learn that the spirit of man consists, in part at least, of intelligence, or the light of truth, which is co-eternal with God. Which means it has always existed. We also learn that the elements are eternal. This eternal, immortal spirit was, pursuant to plan, tabernacled in a mortal body which was organized out of eternal elements which are not destroyed by the dissolution which we call death. When eternal spirit and eternal elements are joined again, man, then an immortal soul, may receive a fulness of joy. Dr. James E. Talmage sums up the discussion of creation of the universe as follows:

"What is man in this boundless setting of sublime splendor? I answer you: Potentially now, actually to be, he is greater and grander, more precious in the arithmetic of God, than all the planets and suns of space. For him were they created; they are the handiwork of God; man is his son. In this world man is given dominion over a few things. It is his privilege to achieve supremacy over many things.

"'The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament showeth his handiwork.' (Psalm 19:1.) Incomprehensibly grand as are the physical creations of the earth and space, they have been brought into existence as a means to an end, necessary to the realization of the supreme purpose, which in the words of the creator is thus declared: 'For behold this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man."'

May you ever strive to be worthy of your source, equal to your opportunities and be constantly preparing for your destiny.—BYU Student Body, March 25, 1958.

The Phenomenon of Mormonism

My brethren and sisters, and I hope our friends who are present and who are listening in, who are not members of the Church, will permit me to include them in that salutation, brothers and sisters. We believe in the brotherhood of men under the Fatherhood of God, and his Fatherhood is universal.

Although I come to this assignment semiannually, it is always humbling and sometimes almost overwhelming. But it is reassuring to know that one has the sympathy and prayers of this great congregation and, we hope, the interest of an even larger audience of friendly listeners who are attending conference by means of radio and television.

We are mindful of the unseen audience and prayerfully attempt to assist all who seek a better understanding of some phases of what has been called the "Phenomenon of Mormonism."

In the past, unfortunately, when discussing basic religious questions, it has been more difficult to find common ground of understanding than when considering, for instance, science or philosophy. The prejudice of the past has closed some minds to truth and made communication impossible. Victor Hugo promised that "A day will come when the only battlefield will be the market open to commerce and the mind open to new ideas." Thank the Lord that day is dawning, at least in our western world.

I should like to enter a plea for friendship, understanding, brotherhood and tolerance, all so badly needed in our confused and troubled world. In one of our Articles of Faith we claim for ourselves and freely accord to all men the untrammeled right to worship God according to the dictates of conscience.

Intolerance, one of the bitter fruits of ignorance and bigotry, has plagued the world from the beginning and has been responsible for much of its sorrow and misery. Maurice Samuel, defender of the Jews, wrote in The Professor and the Fossil:

"For all peoples, are, alas, in the habit of killing their prophets and teachers. The English martyred their protestant teachers, (having failed to martyr Wycliffe they desecrated his corpse); the French martyred Joan of Arc; the Bohemian princes betrayed John Huss. If these do not rank among the world's greatest, Socrates, put to death by the Athenians, does."

When we think of historic intolerance, two names come immediately to mind. In chronological order, but not in the order of importance, they are Socrates of Athens and Jesus of Nazareth. They, of course, cannot be compared, but their experiences illustrate the subject.

As we read in "Great Books of the Western World," the first named gave to Plato and Aristotle their lofty inspiration, and the name of Socrates has come down through the centuries as the most virtuous man of his time. Yet he was convicted of impiety and immorality, and he was condemned to die—mercifully by hemlock.

The second, the only perfect person who ever lived, took upon himself the sins of the world and suffered the ignominy of crucifixion—to him more agonizing than physical pain. He is now, after nearly twenty centuries, supreme above all others in moral grandeur and to millions is revered as the Only Begotten Son of God, the Savior of the world.

These two and many others since their time were rejected by their contemporaries because they dared to question current belief, were impatient of the status quo, and pioneered new areas of thought and teaching.

Phillips Brooks reminds us that there are different brands of tolerance. He named six as follows:

"First, the tolerance of pure indifference. We may be tolerant because we do not care, because the issue at stake does not concern us.

"Second, the tolerance of policy. We may be tolerant because we think we would lose more than we gain by fighting the man or the measure.

"Third, the tolerance of helplessness. We may be tolerant because we realize that the enemy holds the field and that resistance will be futile.

"Fourth, the tolerance of pure respect for man. We may be tolerant because we respect even a man's right to think wrong, because we agree with Voltaire when he wrote to Helvetius, 'I wholly disapprove of what you say, and will defend to the death your right to say it.'

"Fifth, the tolerance of spiritual sympathy. We may be tolerant because we feel a spiritual comradeship with the man whose purpose is fine even if his proposition is false.

"Sixth, the tolerance of an enlarged view of truth. We may be tolerant because we have come to realize that truth is larger than any one man's conception of it, even if we are the one man in question."

The first three are mean; the last three magnificent.

The early members of the Mormon Church were forced to drink to its bitter dregs the cup of prejudice and intolerance. They were mobbed, dispossessed of their homes and properties, beaten, imprisoned, banished, and some of them, including their leaders, were murdered; the main charge against them being that they were unorthodox, dared to question the teachings of other churches, and claimed new revelation.

John Stuart Mill, in his well-known essay on liberty, said;

"I cannot refrain from adding to these examples of the little account commonly made of human liberty, the language of downright persecution which breaks out from the press of this country whenever it feels called on to notice the remarkable phenomenon of Mormonism."

Mill further called attention to the fact that such persecution, far from being in any way countenanced by the principle of liberty, was a direct infraction of that principle and was a mere riveting of the chains of one half of the community and the emancipation of the other from reciprocity of obligation toward them.

History shows that not only individuals and smaller groups, but governments and powerful church organizations have been guilty of cruel intolerance toward those who dared to differ with them. The alleged universal church resorted to violent acts of intolerance and went to almost unbelievable extremes in their attempts to enforce adherence to the orthodox view. By persecution, torture, expulsion, and extermination of so-called heretics they sought to stifle inquiry and investigation, as though men could by fire and sword be compelled to profess certain doctrines. The remarkable thing is that they who first broke the yoke of that church were themselves unwilling to permit differences of religious opinion as soon as they became established. Unbridled power often breeds intolerance and leads to tyranny.

The Christlike life is always a combination of earnest, personal conviction and generous regard for the other man's opinion. Dedication to and defense of truth never require or justify breaking the second commandment to love our fellow men. A divine code was given by revelation for the guidance of all who exercise authority.

"No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;

"By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—

"Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;

"That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death." (D&C 121:41-44.)

However, the church must not condone evil or wrongdoing in the name of tolerance. It must not acquiesce or become an accessory, even by silence, when error and sin are arrayed against truth and righteousness. We must be on guard against alien ideologies and subtle, subversive concepts, leading to immoral conduct and apostasy. Whenever symptoms of apostasy appear in propaganda or conduct, remedial measures are applied. But when counsel, admonition, and instruction fail, the church has a duty to its members to take positive action and either heal or amputate malignant growths.

The Savior said: ". . . if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell." (Matt. 5:29.) But the church has no jurisdiction outside its own membership; nor does any church have jurisdiction over any other. Various churches stand in much the same relation to each other as private persons among themselves. As John Locke said long ago:

"If any one of the churches has power of treating the other ill, which of them is it to whom that power belongs, and by what right? It will be answered undoubtedly that it is the orthodox church which has the right of authority over the erroneous and heretical. This is, he says, in great and specious words to say just nothing, for every church is orthodox to itself. The decision as to which is right is a question which belongs to the supreme judge of all men."

Some traditionally orthodox churches have seemed to be concerned primarily with the perpetuation of conventional beliefs, formulas, rituals, and institutions. They require meticulous conformity to traditional modes of belief and ceremony. Their chief objective seems to have been to maintain the status quo.

But the Church of Jesus Christ, whenever organized on the earth, whether during the brief sojourn of the Savior in the Meridian of Time and the subsequent activities of his apostles, or since the restoration in the fulness of times, has always subjected traditional beliefs and ritual to searching criticism in the light of continued revelation and ever-increasing knowledge. Its inspired appraisals of human and spiritual values go directly to the core of individual and social living here and now with a constant reminder of the effect of such living on the life hereafter. Its latter-day organization was preceded by a sweeping indictment of sectarianism and the creeds of the time and a proclamation of a new revelation from God. Criticism of traditional beliefs and ritual has often been met by persecution rather than sound argument.

When Jesus was on the earth, he was frequently met with objectors and hecklers who, looking backward, appealed to the law of Moses. His characteristic forward-looking reply was, "It has been said by them of old . . . but I say unto you. . . . " In other words, he spoke with divine authority. He was concerned as we are with the individual, with the social order, and with establishing the kingdom of God on earth preparatory to the coming of the kingdom of heaven. He invited his listeners to put his teachings to the test of actual experience, saying if any man would do his will he would know of the doctrine. That is a continuing promise to all men everywhere.

In the spirt of friendship and brotherhood we ask our listeners to consider our message prayerfully, put our doctrines to the test of which Jesus spoke, and we promise you that you shall know whether our doctrine is of God or merely of men.

Briefly the message of Mormonism is that the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob is the true God, the Messiah of the New Testament, that the King James version of the Holy Bible is in fact the word of God, and that Jesus of Nazareth is in fact the Christ; that the prophecies recorded in the Bible concerning the last days are now in the course of fulfilment; that a new dispensation of the gospel has been given to men and that the kingdom of God is now divinely organized on earth preparatory to the coming of the kingdom of heaven. This message, if it be true, and to its truth we humbly testify, is the most important message that has come to this world since the resurrection and ascension of the Savior of the world. This may seem to some to be an extravagant statement, but it refers to a visit of the same glorified being who ascended into heaven with his resurrected body in the presence of his followers and of angels who promised he would come again. He has made an appearance to men in our time preparatory to his promised second coming when he is to rule and reign as King of Kings and Lord of Lords.

We declare that God has intervened in the affairs of men in anticipation of the final struggle against the hosts of hades, the anti-Christs, who are organized and marshalled for war against religion and God and all the principles of freedom, justice, love, and tolerance for which the Savior died.

Coupled with this declaration of faith in a Personal God and in his nearness to this world is a reaffirmation of the biblical doctrine that man was created in the image of God and therefore has a potential Godlike status, with capacity to live and progress forever. We believe in the essential dignity of man, that he was intended by his Creator to be free and not a slave to any man or nation. We shall never surrender to the belief that man is a soulless device made to serve a machine or a state. We believe that his freedom is, next to life itself, his most precious gift. In fact, man is willing to sacrifice his life to secure and preserve his freedom.

We believe in the immortality of the soul; that death is integral to life, a phase of life, its continuance, not its end; and that men who keep the commandments of God need not fear death, for we shall, as Tennyson said, meet our pilot face to face when that which drew from out the boundless deep turns again home and we have "Crossed the Bar."

Grant us peace, oh, Lord, the peace which comes from understanding, from tolerance and brotherhood, from love of our fellow men and love of thee, the Lord. May thy kingdom come and thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.—Semiannual General Conference, October 10, 1959.

The Law of Obedience

Good evening, folks: May I come in and sit at your fireside and relax and chat a bit?

I am glad, as I am sure you are, that a lecture or sermon is not expected this evening. I hope there is a fireplace for each participating group. This may indicate that I am old-fashioned, but the old log fire always seemed to extend a special welcome. It seemed to say, "Come in, take off your hat and coat, and even your shoes if you wish, and be comfortable." But whether or not there is a fire in the grate, I'm sure there is a warm and friendly atmosphere, where no one needs to be concerned with dress or hair-do, or even posture. I suspect there are in each group some young men sitting on the back of their necks, and some of the girls with cushions on the floor. All of this is in contrast to the more formal meetings and classes where discipline requires the speaker and the audience, the teacher and the class, to be dignified and sedate. The speaker and the listener seem to be on different levels. Any attempt to hand messages down from above in a patronizing way is resisted, creating static or interference. This idea of fireside chats, of feeling that we are on the same level, this intermingling or horizontal communication was well-expressed in a little couplet:

"The parish priest of Austerly Climbed into a high church steeple To be near to God, so that he might Hand His word down to the people. "In his age God said, 'Come down and die,' And he cried from out the steeple, 'Where art thou, Lord?' and the Lord replied, 'Down here among the people'."

Really, all of us are traveling companions on the journey of life. We are pilgrims—I was about to say fellow travelers, but that has an odorous connotation—but the thought of journeying together encourages fellowship. Some of us have been on the road longer than others and have perchance tried to put up road signs or build bridges for the use of those who will follow. Bridges, in contrast to walls or fences which separate, are links which may connect past and present.

This attempt on my part to describe the nature of these groups and introduce us to each other reminds me of an incident which occurred in a courtroom. Two lawyers on opposite sides of a case exchanged some angry words. One said to the other, "You are a blank, blank cheat," and the other replied, "You are a blank, blank liar." The indulgent judge said, "Well, gentlemen, since you have so accurately described each other, let us get on with the case." So let us get on with our discussion.

Someone has suggested that we discuss this evening some of the rules of life, rules which all must know and observe if they would live joyously and abundantly.

We know that in our universe all things are governed by divine law, and that divine law is inexorable and universal. Drummond tells us, There is natural law even in the spiritual world. We may at times disregard or disobey these laws, but although they may be sufficiently elastic to permit certain latitude, disobedience inevitably causes sorrow and results in remorse of conscience. Remorse is the greatest disturber of individual peace of mind. The Lord has told us that these laws were established before the foundations of the world were laid.

"There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

"And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.)

Some people get the erroneous idea that they are just a little different from common men, that they may disregard the rules that apply to the crowd. You may be assured that the author of this universe, the God of this world, our Heavenly Father, is not arbitrary or capricious. He has no favorites. His laws are undeviating, and anyone who violates them must pay the penalty, or, conversely those who obey the law will get the reward, and one rich reward will be the forming of the habit of obedience.

In our America, too, as well as in other countries, there are laws, regulations, ordinances, often patterned after divine law. They also are enacted for the benefit of the people. Here too they who will not obey the law must pay the penalty. They who observe the law will find freedom within the law, in fact, obedience to law is liberty.

As we go forward in life, we come more and more to realize the wisdom of being obedient, not in any slavish way, not because we are afraid of the law, but because we recognize the importance, wisdom, and necessity of law in civilized life. Freedom within the law is indispensable if your life is to be rich and radiant. Liberty is a prized possession, which should be jealously guarded, but it may be jeopardized by disobedience. We should not assume that liberty and license are synonymous.

Sometimes we find people of all ages who resent regulations, restraints, or prohibitions of any kind. They seem to assume that rebellious disregard for rules or laws indicates emancipation and independence. In a foolish attempt to demonstrate their freedom they lose it, forgetting that real liberty can only be enjoyed by obedience to law.

Consider for a moment our traffic violations, with their daily toll of suffering, loss, and death. It must be evident to all that these laws are enacted and enforced for the good and protection of people and property. Is it not, therefore, foolhardy to endanger oneself and others simply to show one's independence or importance? Of course, we may disregard the traffic laws, drive on the wrong side of the street, exceed speed limits, go through red lights, etc., just for the satisfaction of showing off and doing as we please, but if we continue to act in such an irresponsible manner, we must eventually pay a price all out of proportion to any momentary satisfaction.

We are all more or less familiar with the ten commandments, which the Lord gave to the world through Moses. They form the basis of all our laws. If they were strictly and universally obeyed, together with the injunction of Jesus to love our neighbors as ourselves, there would be little need for other laws.

Sometimes men speak of breaking the ten commandments, but as Cecil B. DeMille observed, "Men do not break the ten commandments, they only break themselves against them." In the same sense laws of nature cannot be broken, though we may try to ignore them; for instance, we cannot break the law of gravity. One may try to defy it by jumping off a cliff, but whether he be prince or pauper, and however repentant he may be on the way down, there will be no mitigation of consequences. He will be broken by the law through his own folly.

Knowledge of and obedience to law is evidence of maturity and good sense, while flippant flouting of rules and regulations is childish, immature, and often tragically foolish. The obedient person is humble and teachable, while the disobedient are haughty, disdainful, and defiant, willing to infringe the rights of others in order to demonstrate what they call their own independence. Wilful disobedience is not only childish, it is churlish, while self-discipline and obedience are evidence of maturity and intelligence.

There are some laws and regulations, whose observance may be optional. The Lord's law of health, of tithing, of love for neighbor are examples. The wisdom of complying with these laws has been demonstrated through the centuries. They are educational and admonitory, calling for self-discipline and self-mastery, but though optional, they carry their own rewards and penalties.

Most men obey those whose authority they recognize and who have the power to help or hurt them. To obey is to honor; to disobey, to dishonor. Obedience is the first commandment given with a promise. Children, by obedience, honor their father and mother. Parents would rather have obedience than gifts or words of praise. The prophet said, "To obey is better than sacrifice."

We are all subject to law from birth to death—parental, civil, military, or divine law. Therefore, to know the law and bring our lives into harmony with it is a continuing obligation and privilege.

The Lord said, "If ye love me keep my commandments." Now the cynic may call this dogmatic and arbitrary, but when we realize that all of his commandments are given for our good, that all divine law is inspired by love, and that observance will contribute to our happiness and well being, then obedience becomes a pleasure.

When we are very young, our parents may properly compel or restrain us for our own protection and education. A parent may and should restrain a child from crossing a busy street or using dangerous instruments. He does this not merely to show his authority, but because of his love and concern for the child. Speaking of the duty of parents to children, Locke said, "Liberty and indulgence can do no good to children; their want of judgment makes them stand in need of restraint." When you young folk become parents, you will find that guiding and restraining, instructing and insisting on obedience do not stem from desire to show one's authority or superior strength. All parental disciplinary action should be and usually is motivated by concern and love for the child. As children grow older, they are allowed more freedom of choice and action. But with this freedom comes responsibility for conduct. Free agency is an eternal law, and the Lord himself respects it. But the law of cause and effect is also eternal and hence the warning, "As ye sow so shall ye reap."

So our Heavenly Father, because of his love for us, has established rules of conduct, sometimes called commandments. It is expected that as we mature, our obedience will be voluntary and cheerful.

But some of you may ask, "What about the law of repentance? Does it not promise forgiveness and reinstatement?" Yes, the law of repentance is also eternal, but:

"There is no swift repentance Can retrieve a violated principle, No crying 'I believe,' No, we must wear it out by patient years. "For each descent from fair truth's lofty way For each gross error which delays the soul, By that soul's gloom and loneliness we pay And by the retarded journey to its goal."

If you would be true to yourselves, would be honest with yourselves, then be obedient to them who are in authority over you or who have the right to direct your activities. Obedience is always evidence of strength of character, disobedience indicates weakness. Obedience is compliance with that which is required by authority; subjection to rightful restraints.

The Savior, who is our ideal in all things, not only taught obedience but exemplified it. He said, "I come not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me." In Gethsemane he prayed, saying, ". . . . O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt." (Matt.26:39.) Thus the Son of God gave us a supreme example of true obedience. He honored his Father by obeying his will. Obedience is the key to the kingdom of heaven. He said, "Not every one that sayeth unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter the kingdom of heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven."

Some of you may be called in to military service, and there you will find military law. In the army, navy, and air force there are regulations which are specific and rigidly enforced in the interest of efficiency, safety, and discipline, and for the good and benefit of all concerned. Failure to obey may result in loss of privileges, loss of freedom, and even loss of life.

Any person is stupid who thinks he can defy the law with impunity. They who obey the law find it to be a safeguard and protection, a guarantee against privilege and favoritism; it applies to all, regardless of rank, station, or status. When properly administered, its rewards and punishments are inflexible. They are at once a warning, a promise, and a safeguard.

If they whose duty it is to enforce the law were whimsical or capricious, or if the laws were not administered and enforced with undeviating justice and equity, there would be confusion, defiance, and rebellion. With the average, normal person, force will not become necessary, but sometimes, for the safety of society, drastic measures must be employed. The Lord himself, though all powerful, refuses to use force to accomplish his purposes. Christ's obedience was always voluntary and love inspired. He has said that his work and his glory is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man, but this he will not do by force. If we were forced into heaven, it would not be heaven to us. The poet speaks of freedom in the following verse:

"Know this, that every soul is free To choose his life and what he'll be, For this eternal truth is given That God will force no man to heav'n. "He'll call, persuade, direct aright, And bless with wisdom, love, and light, In nameless ways be good and kind, But never force the human mind. "Freedom and reason make us men; Take these away, what are we then? Mere animals, and just as well The beasts may think of heav'n or hell."

Good night and God bless you.—Fireside, June 1961.

This I Know

I am subdued and humbled by this vast audience of vibrant youth. I was inspired by the opening hymn "Come, Ye Children of the Lord," and especially by the line, "Oh, how joyful it will be When our Savior we shall see."

I feel especially humble, as any man must, in contemplating the significance of the life and mission of Jesus the Christ, the greatest character in all history. I think it important that young people who are on the threshold of life have a knowledge of him and of the meaning of his mission and atonement. There is no life or biography from which you may get the inspiration and guidance that will come through acquaintance with him.

If then it is life eternal to know him it is of transcendent importance that we do know him. One purpose of his earthly mission was that we might have life, the abundant life, which a knowledge of God guarantees. This question that ever challenged human reason. Especially in times of crisis, whether personal or national, this grave query introduces itself.

You young people have come to the earth at a time when moral conflict and moral skepticism are raging on an unprecedented scale. Millions of young people of your age have been systematically and relentlessly indoctrinated by agents of the anti-Christ. Some day you will be called upon to meet that challenge and you will need faith to sustain you in that conflict. Furthermore, not only do millions deny him positively, but other millions, thoughtlessly mouthing wornout creeds, deny him as effectively when they say he is incomprehensible, immaterial, and has neither feeling nor parts.

Faith in the fact that God is your Father will inspire each one of you to hold a high opinion of himself. I recommend that you include in your daily prayers this sentence and supplication: "Remembering my kinship to thee, O God, help me to hold a high opinion of myself."

Dr. Robert A. Millikan said on one occasion, "The most important thing for young people to learn is that they come from somewhere and that they are going somewhere. The great architect of the universe never built a stairway that leads to nowhere."

In considering this problem, the question arises to what extent is the modern mind influenced by modern science. Does science disprove God or does it reveal only a scientific Deity or does it say the question is insoluble or leave it as an open question, or do scientists frankly say they do not know anything about it?

Any true scientist will probably say, when confronted with such a question or asked to give a definition of God, that as a scientist he has nowhere discovered any such being, but this is not meant to imply that the scientist is atheistic. Many scientists are men of great faith.

One may ask, which science is it that deals with the problem of God? Surely not biology, chemistry, nor physics, nor even psychology. The problem is entirely outside the realm of every particular science.

The only basis on which science can be said to disprove God is the gratuitous assumption that whatever science does not or cannot prove is thereby disproved. The critical attitude of the modern scientist is that while science does not prove God, neither does it disprove him.

Some men say God is the "Ultimate Reality," "the Unknowable," "the Totality of Things." Of course, we believe that God is the supreme reality in the universe, but men cannot get much enthusiasm for or religious comfort from the mere unknowable or the totality of things. When meeting a crisis or when in deep distress, men instinctively cry out "Oh, my God." Can you imagine anyone in a similar situation calling "Oh, my Unknowable" or "Oh, my Totality of Things"? What possible moral use could such things add? They cannot become an ideal or moral aspiration; no one would wish to become the Unknown or the Totality of Things. Amid all the differences that divide us into sects and religions, this much is common, that when men mention God they refer to the perfect being, possessing perfect power, perfect knowledge, perfect goodness or holiness. He thus becomes a moral ideal toward which we may strive, a power that in some way guarantees the final triumph of righteousness.

Perhaps at this point we should stop and ask just what Latter-day Saints mean by the word "God." In answer I read from Jesus the Christ by Dr. James E. Talmage: "We claim scriptural authority for the assertion that Jesus Christ was and is God the Creator, the God who revealed himself to Adam, Enoch, and all the antediluvian patriarchs and prophets down to Noah. Jesus Christ is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of Israel as a united nation, and the God of Ephraim and Judah after the destruction of the Hebrew nation. He is a God who made himself known to the prophets from Moses to Malachi. He is the God of the Old Testament record and of the Book of Mormon. We affirm that Jesus the Christ is Jehovah the Eternal One, the Creator of heaven and earth, the Redeemer and Savior of the world."

The Father, in the work of creation, operated through the Son who thus became the executive through whom the will, commandment, or word of the Father was put into effect. It is with incisive appropriateness, therefore, that the Son Jesus Christ is designated by the Apostle John as the "Word." The part taken by Jesus Christ in the creation, a part so prominent as to justify our calling him the Creator of the world, is set forth in many scriptures ancient and modern. The author of the Epistle to Hebrews refers in this wise distinctively to the Father and to the Son as separate, though associated, beings. He said:

"God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets,

"Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds;" (Hebrews 1:1-2.)

reaffirming the statement previously made concerning him as the Creator, and therefore in a very real sense, the Father of this world, the God of our fathers.

Paul, in Colossians, says further:

"For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him:

"And he is before all things, and by him all things consist." (Col. 1:16-17.)

For more than a hundred years the Latter-day Saints have been asserting their faith in a personal God, beginning with the declaration of the Prophet:

"We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost." (First Article of Faith.)

And we declare them to be separate and distinct personages.

For many years practically all churches took a contrary view. Some of us were mobbed because we dared to refer to God as a personal being. Fortunately, times have changed and are changing. I quote from a recent author, who says, "There has been a marked change in the teaching of the churches concerning God, and most thinking men and scholars now believe him to be a personal being and not an abstract essence."

In his book, The Century's Change in Religion, George Harris speaks of the change that has come about and makes a note of the fact, and it is a fact, that within the last fifty years there has been more change in the thinking and pronouncements of men with regard to religion than in all the time that preceded that time. He says, "There has been a change in our thought of God from the conception of sovereignty to the conception of Fatherhood. Emphasis has shifted from sovereignty to fatherhood." I should like to leave with you young people as you approach him—and I hope you will approach him day and night and talk with him as your Father—the assurance that he is a reality, that he knows you and who and where you are. He sent you here for a purpose, he trusts you with free agency and asks you to trust and be true to him.

Harris goes on to say, and he is speaking for a large number of people today. "God is a person. He is intelligence and that is purpose, plan; he is will and that is realizing purpose; he is love and that is person related to person. Whatever more than personality, as we know it, he may be, he is that in perfect degree which our best is in imperfect degree."

He emphasized the fact that the discoveries and influences of the modified religious beliefs have come upon us within the recollection of many of us who are now living. I ask you to become acquainted with modern authors on this subject because until now you have been considering God in terms of your Primary, your Sunday School, your MIA, your home teachings, all of which have contributed to and made for true faith in God; but that faith is now going to be tested, not that in this great church-supported institution there will be any contrary opinions expressed, but as you are trained to think logically and independently, you will need the anchor of a personal testimony of a personal God.

Holm says, "If God is not a person; if the divine spirit in whom we live and move and have our being is not personal as we are personal; if the fundamental reality, which is in all and through all and over all, cannot be addressed by the personal pronoun, cannot be accurately described as a Father and Friend, then why should we build our churches or speak our prayers or join in public services of worship?

"The thought of God as a personality is a necessary condition of everything that is contained within the field of religious experience. If this thought can be justified, then every idea and practice of religion can be justified against the most violent assaults of its enemies."

Professor Hocking of Harvard wrote, "The alternative to the thought of God as a person is the thought of him as substance or energy or chiefly as law." He asks us to stop and consider for a moment what it would mean to try and obey the will of substance or to love energy or worship law.

Down through the ages the prophets have testified of Jesus the Christ as the God of this world, the Creator thereof, and the Redeemer of men. Moses walked and talked with him. Isaiah predicted in very definite terms his birth and the conditions which would surround him at the time and all the prophets from Adam to Malachi bore testimony of him.

God the Father spoke on several occasions and introduced his Son as the executive head of all his operations in this world. He appeared at the baptism of Jesus; he appeared on the Mount of Transfiguration; he appeared to the Nephites. I think of no more moving or dramatic or beautiful passage in all literature than is contained in the eleventh chapter of Third Nephi. I wish we had time to consider it together and think of its import and significance to a doubting world. I shall take time only to paraphrase. The descendants of Lehi, here on this continent, were assembled near the temple. There had been three days and nights of intense darkness and terrible upheavals in the land. While they were praying to God for deliverance, they heart a voice:

". . . as if it came out of heaven;. . . and it was not a harsh voice, neither was it a loud voice; nevertheless,. . . it did pierce them that did hear to the center." (3 Nephi 11:3.)

They heard the voice twice and did not understand.

"And behold, the third time they did understand the voice which they heard; and it said unto them:

"Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him.

"And it came to pass, as they understood they cast their eyes up again towards heaven; and behold, they saw a Man descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe; and he came down and stood in the midst of them;. . .

"And it came to pass that he stretched forth his hand and spake unto the people, saying:

"Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

"And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning." (Ibid., 11:6-11.)

Then the record tells us that in his presence the people fell to the earth. They could not comprehend the meaning or endure the glory of the occasion. Seemingly they found it difficult to believe that they were hearing the voice of Jesus the Christ who they knew had been crucified in Jerusalem. Noting their consternation and lack of understanding he said to them, as he said to Thomas in Jerusalem:

"Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet,. . .

"And. . . the multitude went forth, and thrust their hands into his side, and did feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet;. . .

"And when they had all gone forth and had witnessed for themselves, they did cry out with one accord, saying:

"Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High God! And they did fall down at the feet of Jesus, and did worship him." (Ibid., 11:14-17.)

In our own day Joseph the Prophet appealed to God for guidance, and the Father and his Son appeared to him and God the Father, pointing to his Son, said, "This is my beloved Son, hear him." It was Jesus Christ who directed and inspired Joseph during the balance of his dedicated life. (See D&C 121:7-16.)

He appeared again to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple where they received and recorded one of the most sublime and moving testimonies ever given of him.

Sometimes young people say that we old folks are behind the times and no doubt they are right, but I remind you of what President Clark said from this rostrum recently: "There is a lot of time behind us."

Young men and women, out of the time and experience that are behind me I have distilled a faith in a personal and living God which I consider to be my most priceless possession. It has been my glorious privilege to know him. After a lifetime of service I—even I—have been asked to become a witness for him. I say to you young people, and I stand very close to the brink of eternity as I say it, that I have a personal knowledge of God, the Father, and of Jesus of Nazareth, his Son, the Savior of the world. This I know.

I bring you that testimony with a humble prayer that God will help you as you leave this building today to carry with you and retain not necessarily what has been said but what you now feel, for as his servant I say to you that this room is filled, even as on the day of Pentecost, with the Holy Ghost which bears witness to you that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God. Under the influence of that Spirit I leave my testimony with you humbly in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—BYU Student Body, October 8, 1958.

Face the Light

I should like to say to my fellow missionaries that as I see it, your work, our work, is just beginning. We went out, all of us, to take a message to others and as Christ promised, we received the greater good from that mission. But it was in a sense, a preparatory work in which we were engaged because I firmly believe that after this war is over, a call is going to be made for men to help to uproot the weeds which are growing today from the seeds of hate which are being sown all over the earth. There are perhaps today 10,000 returned missionaries who are able to go, and I can think of no group in the world better fitted to go back into these nations than people who are their friends to try and offset and to overcome the terrible effect of this catastrophe. If we are to prepare the world for the coming of the Son of God, then we must have in place of what exists in the minds of people today, a feeling of reverence and charity and tolerance, and so I say again to you missionaries your work has just begun.

I pray that all of us may be able to live in such a manner as to be able to continue in our course, that we may be able to so live that if the call should come to us, we may be able to go among those people with our hand in his, guided by him, inspired by him. I pray that we may have the spirit which actuated the labors of those early missionaries who carried on after Christ was crucified. The things that are going to be needed in these next few years are stamina, courage, fortitude, faith. We are going to learn that the apostle knew what he talked of when he said that endurance to the end is the thing that will be required. He who has undertaken to disrupt and defeat the works of Jesus of Nazereth is not only working among nations and on an international scale but has his own fifth column organization and is attacking every individual, and it seems to me has been advised of the weak points of all of us, and that is where he is attacking.

I hope that there will come a rededication on the part of all of the missionaries for the great missionary movement so that we may not only go to preach faith, repentance, and baptism to the people but that we may teach the first and second great commandments, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God and thy neighbour as thy-self." We must not forget that God made of one blood all nations of men, and that which is existing in the world today, the strife and contention, is the work of the adversary. We must not allow hate of fellow men to get into our hearts. For these 10,000 or more men and women are going to be sent out to all parts of the earth to sow seeds of love, peace, and harmony in the minds of people, hence they must themselves be free from hate and sin. A great work is being done. A greater work must be done. You men in uniform, and you who soon will be in uniform are also missionaries. Some of you will carry on your missionary work in another realm after you have paid the full measure of devotion to your country and your God. On that other side you will help to direct those of us who will carry on here. In the two great realms, the spiritual and the temporal, the missionary work of the Church, the Army of God, will move forward. I have had reason to know that they who do go there continue their work and inspire and help us who stay here.

I pray God that we may have stamina and courage and faith to meet the future, come what may, whether it be sickness, poverty, death. May we keep our faces toward the light, believing in God, carrying on, for I testify in his name that he who was nailed upon the cross is extending his wounded hands to all the world and repeating the plea, "Come unto me, and ye shall find peace." God help us to do it, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—Washington Stake Quarterly Conference, May 24, 1942.

". . . Become the Sons of God"

I should like you students to think with me this morning for a few moments, if you will, on the meaning, the purpose, the significance of life—your life—on the extent to which you having your free agency may be able to determine what your life and destiny is to be.

I shall take as a text the words of John in the first chapter of his Gospel and in the third chapter of his first epistle: ". . . as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God,. . . " (John 1:12.) "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is." (1 John 3:2.) We believe our own effort is an important factor in attaining this Godlike status.

If we are to become Godlike, I think it important that we undertake so far as it may be possible to know him, to determine how he became what he is. "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) What are his distinguishing characteristics which we would like to emulate and achieve? We know of course that he is omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent. We are told that "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." (D&C 93:36.) This would seem to indicate that we should walk in the light: ". . . if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin," (1 John 1:7); undertake an eternal quest for truth: "And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free," (John 8:32), and by gaining knowledge and applying it with wisdom, achieve Godlike intelligence.

Your generation has come upon the earth at a time of man-made miracles, which have been variously referred to as "stupendous, baffling, superhuman, Godlike," and it is with respect to these developments that I would like to speak for just a moment. We who can remember almost a hundred years ago, cannot help comparing the world we now live in with the world we knew. If some person from another planet had come to this earth in 1856, and spent, say, thirty days on this earth, and if he had returned in 1956, I think it likely that his guide would have difficulty in convincing him that he was seeing the same world.

I should like to discuss one infant industry as indicative of what is happening in the world of science. I shall not, in mentioning the changes that have come about in my own lifetime, refer to common things such as motorcars, airplanes, telephones, radio, and television; I shall not even take time to refer at length to atomic bombs and H-bombs, to fusion and fission, or to the release of great energy measured only in megatons or to the accompanying luminosity which exceeds five hundred suns. But just last week there came to my desk, from a corporation in New York, a report, sent out not primarily to enlighten us, but to induce us to make some investments. I should like to read a few paragraphs from that report. You students of science will be familiar with what I am going to read, as will all the faculty, of course, and our distinguished guests, but we laymen are intrigued by some things scientists say.

The President of Bendix Aviation recently declared that:

"Electronics, in its broadest concept, is an almost miraculous extension of man's senses and abilities. With the aid of electronics, he can see otherwise invisible things; he can hear what would otherwise be silent; he can calculate in an hour what would take a lifetime. Electronics is a practical method for sensing anything you want to sense, whether it is movement, light, temperature, pressure, humidity—practically anything but love. (And I think I should warn you young men that you had better get busy or electronics will take over in the area of emotions as well.)

"Electronics has already found a way to ease a man's work, brighten man's youth, speed his education, lighten his daily tasks, entertain his family, defend his home, and prolong his life.

"The future of electronics appears even more baffling than its past. This is a science based on the electron, the smallest particle to be found in nature. Roughly thirty thousand trillion trillion electrons (that is twenty eight ciphers if you would like to write it out) would weigh less than one ounce.

"It is estimated it would take more electrons to weigh one ounce than it would take snowflakes to create a blizzard covering twenty-five hundred square miles. To light one hundred watt bulb requires six million trillion electrons every second."

Dr. William Temple, formerly Archbishop of Canterbury, sounded a warning note when he said, "Purely scientific education must produce a generation adept at dealing with things, indifferently qualified to deal with people, and incapable of dealing with ideas. We hope your knowledge—which is of the head—will be motivated by wisdom—which is of the heart. One is determined by what you know, the other by what you do with what you know. Surely out of the heart cometh the issues of life."

I should like to bring to you the thought that wonderful as is the advancement being made and prophetic as is the future in the field of science, something comparable is happening in the field of religious thinking. In order that I may not be thought to be giving only the Mormon view of what is taking place in the religious field, I am going to read a few words from a recent author.

George Harris in his book, A Century's Change in Religion, says:

"A contrast almost startling is observed when we turn to the last half century. It is within fifty years that this mighty change or extension of belief, has come about. The new thought is of the kingdom of God on earth, of the Christian society. Could there be a vaster change than that from the salvation of the individual,—whether to heaven or from hell, but the salvation of the individual,—from that to the kingdom of God on earth? Yet such a change, speaking largely, had occurred. . . . The gospel of the kingdom on earth is the latest, the newest, the oldest, the truest gospel."

As we are made poignantly aware of the dangers that threaten the peace of the world, as our hearts go out in sympathy to the people of Hungary and in anxiety for the situation in the Near East, as we see what is being done with the wonderful inventions of men, and as we contemplate what might be done, I think all of us are impelled to pause and appeal to a personal God for personal guidance.

Having a Perfect Person as an ideal inspires hope in eventual self-fulfilment, in the possibility of becoming a perfect person. This God-image quality of man's nature is the very root of his dignity. There is a spark in man which is not found in any other of God's creations, and if we are going to utilize and bring to fruition that holy spark, we as individuals must come to have personal concepts with relation to God and some understanding of our relationship to him. If we are justified in following the Master's injunction to appeal to him as "Our Father which art in heaven," then I think we must conclude that there is a relationship between him and us; it is a relationship of parent and child. If that be true, then as like begets like, we shall become more like him as we move forward, providing the knowledge we gain is used with wisdom, and we gain intelligence.

I have spoken of the possibilities that lie ahead of man. I would like to bring to you the thought that basic to all activity is faith—faith in ourselves, faith in the ultimate triumph of righteousness, faith in God and in his power and love. It was this faith which enabled the ancients to subdue kingdoms, stop the mouths of lions, and do all the things of which the apostle writes in the Book of Hebrews, "Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear." (Heb. 11:3.) It is this faith which we shall need as we go forward if we are to succeed in meeting the problems of this modern world.

The idea of our divine origin, the purpose and possible destiny of man, should inspire intelligent and reverent facing of life's experiences. A great deal of the Christian religion in the world touches the lives of men at distressingly few points. We believe with Trueblood that that religion is most potent and most effective which touches life redemptively at most points, which affects the lives of men, how they live and love and work and die. Religion should be a vital part of everything we think and do. An understanding of God and man's relationship to him should inspire us, in humility, to dare to say, "As God is, man may become." Even though the difference between us is inestimably great it is one of degree rather than of kind. Given time, with God as a teacher, and with his love in the relationship of Father and Son, there is no limit to what man may accomplish in the field of religion as well as in the field of science.

I read the other day,

"You are as young as your faith, as old as your doubt; as young as your self-confidence, as old as your fears; as young as your hopes, as old as your despairs."

I like this ancient prayer.

"From the cowardice that shrinks from new truth, From the laziness that is content with half-truth, From the arrogance that thinks it knows all the truth, Oh, God, deliver us."

My young friends, whether a man is seventeen or seventy, there is in every heart love of wonder, amazement at the stars, a hunger for adventure whether physical, mental, or spiritual. The Master said, "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness. . . ." (Matt. 5:6.) Now righteousness is a fruit of intelligence and therefore all honest searchers after truth are blessed. Hence our emphasis on education.

Awareness and aliveness are two of the fundamental requisites for this atomic age, and aliveness is in large measure determined by awareness. Perhaps you think I am rather presumptuous to speak of aliveness to a young and vital group like this, but I wish only to indicate that there should be purpose behind your pep. In other words, "Pep without purpose is piffle."

Now our present problem is what higher education is going to do when it confronts the awful monster which higher education, in its technological training, has helped to create. We face a future fraught with limitless possibilities, but with terrific danger. As we go forward, we are going to need faith, hope, courage, determination, not only to be alive and aware, but also to be understanding, to have the kind of faith our fathers had, to have the kind of faith that brought the pilgrim fathers to this country, that sustained Washington and Lincoln, that enabled the founders of our country to write the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States, in which they acknowledged Divine Providence.

If it were possible, then, to summarize a rambling talk, I would simply say this:

You live in the greatest age of all times. You will witness greater things than we have ever dreamed, but there are certain eternal verities which change not. There are certain values which endure. You are related to God. Through faith, coupled with wisdom leading to intelligence, you may become like him.

Keep clean in thought and word and deed. Look up. Aspire. Push back your horizons. Seek for the answers. Search for God. May he grant that we may all find him, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—BYU Student Body, November 13, 1956.

Some LDS Beliefs

My dear brethren and sisters, I with you esteem it is a great blessing to attend this wonderful conference, and especially to listen to the profound and inspiring opening address of our President. I should like to add my tribute to the Tabernacle Choir. It seems to me the choir reached new heights today.

As this Church continues to extend its boundaries and increase its membership, we receive an ever-increasing number of requests to explain and distinguish some of the tenets of Mormonism.

Perhaps the two most frequently questioned concepts of the Church have to do with, first, our belief in a living, personal God; and secondly, our understanding of man's unique position and part in his divine plan. It is necessary that one have faith in the first before he can understand and accept the second of these tenets, namely, man's relationship to Deity. If that relationship be real, then certainly man occupies not only a unique but a Godlike status, and it is with respect to that I would like to direct your attention for a moment.

The accomplishments of man in the last one hundred years, his ever-widening search for truth, his insatiable appetite for knowledge, his discovery and partial control of the laws of nature, are convincing evidence of man's supreme position among God's creations. Did any animal ever gaze into the heavens and wonder?

We are told that in the last one hundred and fifty years, there has been more truth accumulated, more knowledge gained, than the sum total of all truth previously gathered. The fact that man has the genius to discover and partially master the elemental forces of nature causes men to stand in awe and ask again the age-old question, "What is man?"

That question was formulated by the Psalmist when he said:

"When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained;

"What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?

"For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour.

"Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet:" (Psalm 8:3-6.)

One wonders when he reads that, how the Psalmist might have framed his question if he had had the benefit of modern facilities as he considered the heavens. I am sure it would have tended to deepen and confirm his faith in the great Organizer of it all.

But as we consider man's increasing knowledge and power, we must not forget that power can be very dangerous. General Omar Bradley, former Chief of Staff, speaking to a graduating class sometime ago, sounded this warning in the following words:

"With the monstrous weapons man already has, humanity is in danger of being trapped in this world by its moral adolescence. Our knowledge of science has clearly outstripped our capacity to control it. (We have too many men of science; too few men of God.) We have grasped the mystery of the atom and rejected the Sermon on the Mount. Man is stumbling blindly through a spiritual darkness while toying with the precarious secrets of life and death. The world has achieved brilliance without wisdom, power without conscience. Ours is a world of nuclear giants and ethical infants. We know more about war than we know about peace; more about killing than we know about living. This is our 20th Century's claim to distinction and progress!"

But the question, "What is man?" was answered long before the Psalmist asked it. In the first chapter of our oldest book, we read:

"So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.

"And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth." (Gen. 1:27-28.)

From this it is evident that from the beginning man had a unique status, an image nature, and that there was assigned to him a participative role in the great plan of redemption. The statement, "created in the image of God," was never made concerning any other of his vast creations. Only man is in his image: only man is his son.

Sometime ago, a sceptical student was heard to say that man is nothing but a fortuitous combination of molecules. But his older and more modest teacher replied by asking him, "Did any atom or molecule ever have a thought? Did any combination of elements ever give birth to an idea? Did any natural law ever build a cathedral or a temple?"

Within the lifetime of some of us there have come into use such marvels as automobiles—airplanes, wireless communication, etc.; and later radio, television, radar, guided missiles, atomic power, etc. As we think of these things, and utilize them, scientists and scholars are turning their attention and their instruments to a consideration of the greatest phenomenon, God's greatest miracle—Man!

We are indebted to an internationally famous scientist, Dr. Henry Eyring, for a learned discussion of man's world. He said:

"We are living in five different worlds, none of which have been fully explored. They differ from each other in the size of the units of space and time.

"1. In our every-day practical world we go along nicely with such units as feet and seconds.

"2. In the chemical world of molecules and atoms, the electrons complete their revolutions in one hundred million millionths of a second, while one hundred million atoms set side by side extend only a distance of one inch.

"3. Inside the nucleus of the atom we enter a third world where events happen a million times faster still and distances are a thousand times smaller than in the atom.

"4. In the fourth world the astronomers measure revolutions of planets in years and the unit of distance, the light year, in about ten thousand million miles.

"5. Finally we come to the spiritual world where time is measured in eternities and space is limitless, thus in thought we can travel from almost infinitesimally small to the infinitely large."

As we consider the vastness of an orderly universe governed by undeviating law, the majesty of the Organizer and the preferred place of man, we are intrigued into a re-evaluation of the meaning and purpose of life.

Is it likely, for instance, that the most intelligent creatures in the universe are here by chance? Is it possible that God is unaware of man's existence or unconcerned about his fate?

Mormonism asserts on the authority of divine revelation that man is the central figure of an integrated plan, and as Dr. James E. Talmage has said, he is potentially greater and more precious than all the planets and the suns of space, for him they were created; they are God's handiwork; man is his son. The Lord said:

". . . this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

The injunction of Jesus, "Be ye therefore perfect even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect" (Matt. 5:48), clearly envisions an eternity for its achievement, for no mortal man can gain perfection during his brief sojourn upon the earth.

The Savior further stated, "This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent."

If, then, we are, in fact, the sons of God, and if it is life eternal to know him, all men should seek him, become familiar with his laws, and bring their lives into harmony therewith.

Man's spirit was with his Father in the beginning; he was designed to be free, and expected to gain wisdom and intelligence in the exercise of his agency. His freedom is, next to life itself, his most priceless possession. He has freedom to think, to explore, to discover, and to act. We encourage men to search for truth, to be unafraid of new ideas which are and always have been steppingstones to progress.

According to the holy scriptures, our earth life was not accidental, it was not only planned and purposeful, but it was voluntary. When the Lord asked Job where he was when the foundations of the earth were laid, he clearly indicated a pre-existent state of man, and asserted that all the sons of God shouted for joy, doubtless at the prospect of earth life.

When men speak of ultimate and satisfying values, their concepts must involve the relationship of the individual to others, to the universe, and to God. Men must not be approached as animals for they are intelligent images of a Divine Father. He has said, "The worth of souls is great in the sight of God."

Man, then, is a child of God, created in his image. He is destined to be free, and, though subject to death, his spirit will continue to live, will again become united with his body, and he will become a living, immortal soul. "Whatever degree of intelligence we attain to in this life it will rise with us in the resurrection."

While we have complete freedom to heed or disregard the promptings of the spirit or the teachings of the prophets, let us always remember that we must abide the consequences of our choice.

"For each descent from fair truth's lofty way, For each gross error which delays the soul, By that soul's gloom and loneliness we pay, And by the retarded journey to its goal."

While we may draw near to him through intellectual contemplation of his handiwork, it is more important that we seek spiritual communion, by which alone we may gain a testimony of him and of man's relationship to him. This thought prompts the prayer: "Help me, O God, to hold a high opinion of myself."

This inspired doctrine of man's relationship to Deity involves communication between them, without which intelligent co-operation is impossible. Continued revelation from our Heavenly Father is a third unique doctrine of the restored church. We humbly bear witness to the existence of a living, personal God, to man's sonship and heirship, and to continued revelation to the Church through constituted authority, for which we humbly thank God, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—General Conference, April 3, 1960.

"I Am the Resurrection and the Life"

I am subdued and humbled, as we come to the final session of this great occasion, and humbly pray for divine guidance. Germane to all that has been said in all the sessions and basic to the whole idea of temple building and temple ordinances, is the great principle and doctrine of the immortality of the soul of man, for as Paul says, "If Christ be not risen from the dead, then is our preaching vain and your faith is vain."

Jesus said, "I am the resurrection and the life. He that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. And he that liveth and believeth in me shall never die."

As we think of those who have gone before, we visualize them as living entities, personalities, individuals who still live, in fact, we believe they are more alive than when they were in mortality. Belief in the immortality of the soul follows and grows out of faith in God; we cannot believe the one and doubt the other—there is a filial relationship between God and man. And therefore as he is immortal, so we must be immortal. Faith in the great principle of the Fatherhood of God gives us the courage, fortitude, and faith to carry on through the trying vicissitudes of life.

President McKay, in talking with some of us recently, said that though his body is older than it was, his spirit is young. And those of us who have been close to him have often noted how young his spirit is. I think my own mother said it well in talking to her children before she died—and there were seven of her sons and six of her daughters around her bed as she passed—she said, "My body has grown old and must die. Certain organs are not functioning properly, but when I close my eyes, I am a young woman again." She said, "There is something about me that time has not touched. Age has affected my body, the passing years have made me old physically, but there is something about me that has not been affected by time. And," she said, "if in eighty years, time could not affect my spirit, then I'm sure my spirit is immortal." I thank my mother for that testimony of the immortality of the soul.

Some men fear death, and sometimes they feel that it is an awful enemy; there are those who say they do not believe there is anything beyond the grave, that they think death ends conscious existence. I doubt very much if any man really believes that as the idea of complete annihilation is one that cannot be entertained by the mind of man, when referring to himself. But men say they are afraid of that other world because they don't know much about it; they don't know what it will be like; and they fear the unknown. But really, brethren and sisters, do we not know as much about the world into which we are going as we knew about this one when we came into it? If an unborn babe could speak and it should be told that it must be born into an unknown world, it would doubtless say, "I must not be separated from my mother or I will die. I depend upon her for my life. I must not be born, as you call it, for that would be death," and yet, we know that if the child were not born in due course it would die. The remarkable thing is that when it is born, the little child finds itself possessed of faculties and organs that begin to function only after birth—organs which were in process of creation during the pre-natal period but not intended to function until after birth.

How wise our Heavenly Father is in making provision for the unborn babe to come into an environment where it can feel at home, and where its every need has been anticipated. I wonder whether we are now preparing—in this figuratively speaking pre-natal life—to be born into a new and more glorious world. When we are born into that life, I think we shall find that God has prepared us for that birth—we shall find ourselves possessed of spiritual organs, so to speak, which will function fully as we become adapted to a purely spiritual environment. Then we shall refer to that transition as birth, not death. I am sure that he who made provision for our coming here has made provision for our going there.

This testimony which I bear with respect to the immortality of the soul is deepened and heightened by experiences I have had with some of my loved ones who have preceded me over there. I believe in the immortality of the soul of man. I believe that man is a child of God and that there is something of him in us and therefore it is not blasphemy to say that as God is, man may become, for like begets like. But we may only become like him by obeying law, the laws of our being, the laws of our universe, the laws of God.

We believe in immortality, eternal life, eternal increase and eternal progression. May I say to you Latter-day Saints in Britain, and to you who are here from other missions, and to all of us, that though at times our path may be difficult and though we may not be able to understand some of "life's outrageous fortunes," we must continue to believe in a merciful and loving Heavenly Father and go forward with faith and fortitude and courage, knowing that when life ends in this sphere, it continues in another. We shall not then refer to this change as death, but rather as birth, where we shall know our loved ones and associate with them throughout eternity. For the revealed principle of celestial marriage I humbly thank God. I am sealed to my parents and grandparents, my wife and my family, and we shall live together throughout eternity.

Let us live the gospel of Jesus Christ and show by our lives that we are what we teach. Let us go forward without fear and not complain if God does not say "yes" to all your prayers. Let us remember that the very insignia of Christianity is a cross, and that the King whom we serve wore a crown of thorns.

"Though through fiery trials thy pathway shall lie, My strength all sufficient to be thy supply The flame shall not hurt thee; I only design Thy dross to consume and thy gold to refine."

God grant that as we leave these sacred services and this sacred spot we may carry into our homes, into the branches and districts of the missions in which we serve and live, the spirit that we have felt here in this holy house. God bless these young men who are serving as missionaries and who are serving in the services of their country, and the young women as well, that they may be true to themselves and true to God. God grant that if we make mistakes we may have faith that God is our Father and that we may go to him with our mistakes and if our repentance is true and genuine, we may be forgiven.

I bear witness to the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the doctrine of the immortality of the soul. I bear witness that they who live and believe in him shall never die, and I pray God's choicest blessings upon all of us.—London Temple Dedication, September 1958.

The Power of God unto Salvation

The Apostle Paul defined the gospel as the power of God unto salvation to everyone that believeth. (Rom.1:16.) The gospel, then, is power. It is the power of God and when properly used will result in salvation to man.

Here, as elsewhere in life, all blessings are predicated upon obedience to laws. We must fulfil the conditions.

The Lord has set forth in the scripture certain conditions, the observance or fulfilment of which will make men eligible for the blessings of this power.

Perhaps by analogy we may illustrate what we mean by conditions precedent.

Let us suppose that a man not knowing of the availability of electric power and light should build a house and install old-fashioned gas burners and chandeliers for his better room and rely on candle or kerosene lamps in other rooms of his house.

If a neighbor or an agent of the power company should call on this man and point out to him the advantages which could be had if he would prepare his house to utilize the benefits of electric power and light, the man, perhaps, would at first doubt the existence of such magic light and power and would require proofs to support the statements of his friends.

Upon being taken to his neighbor's house, upon seeing the electric light turned on by a switch, upon noting the use of electric power in the utilities which his neighbor had installed, the man becomes convinced, not only of the existence of, but the value of this new light and power. He, in other words, has taken the first step by believing, but surely the agent would not tell him there was nothing more for him to do—just believe.

Perhaps this man, not having been properly instructed, would say to the agent of the power company, "I am convinced that I should have the blessings of your utility, and I request that you make it available to me." The agent would doubtless thereupon advise the man that certain changes in his house would be necessary. He must take out his old installations, make some necessary alterations in his house before the power company would consider entering into a contract with him.

In this case the man would, no doubt, see the reasonableness of the request of the company's agent and would immediately make such changes as were found to be necessary to make him eligible for the blessing he seeks.

In the case of the power of God unto salvation the investigator has probably been told by the agent of the Divine Power House of the blessing which could be had if the investigator were willing to conform to the rules and regulations laid down.

By study and investigation, by observation in the lives of others, he may become persuaded that there is something to the claim. He would, in other words, believe in a story which he had heard. He would have faith.

Here, as in the case of the applicant for electric power, the new investigator may say, "All right, I now believe so let me have the blessing." Would the agent in this case have said belief alone was sufficient? Here too, he would be confronted with the necessity of making certain changes in his life which are prerequisite to his receiving the desired blessing. In other words, he must repent.

Returning again to the man who is seeking electric light, he, having made the required changes in his house, now says to the agent, "I am ready to have you connect my house with the light and power company," whereupon the agent again demurs and says, "It is necessary first that you sign a contract with the company to provide the light and power under certain regulations and conditions contained in the contract. The man agrees and says, "I am ready now to sign the contract. Will you sign for the company?" The agent probably would tell the man he had no authority to execute such a contract—that it must be done by one specially authorized by the company to act for them and that when so signed and executed by both the applicant and the company's authorized agent the man becomes entitled to the blessing so long as he conforms to the laws, rules, and regulations set forth.

Perhaps this man would ask, "Who made the laws and regulations. Why should I conform to statements or requirements of others. I want to make my own laws." Of course he would know that he could not get the blessings he seeks unless he is willing to conform to the laws or meet the conditions precedent.

After having been assured, then, of two things, first, that the rules and regulations are laid down by proper authority and are binding upon everyone who desires the blessings to be derived from electric light and power; secondly, that the execution of the contract by a duly authorized agent of the company would bind the company as much as though the president and board of directors of the company had individually signed the contract. The contract, then, is finally executed and the man asks that the light now be connected, whereupon he is told there are still some formalities to be complied with and that only the qualified agents of the company may finally authorize the connecting of the house to the power house and turning on of the light.

Returning now to the other man who is making application for the blessings which come from the gospel of Christ, he too, having had faith and repented, or having believed in the existence of the light and power, having changed his house or his way of life, conformed to the requirement; he, too, is told there is a contract which he must execute. This is not a contract in the same form as that which the power company presents, but it is an undertaking on the part of the applicant that he will do and perform certain things, that he has, as prerequisite to these acts had faith in God and repented of his sin, the contract which he now in effect will execute is the ordinance of baptism and here too it must be done by one who has the authority to speak and act for the company, in this case, the Lord. In other words, it must be one who holds the priesthood authorizing him to speak and act in the name of the Lord.

In this case the man is told that the contract which he entered into is solemnized by the ordinance of baptism. By this ordinance, if he has complied with the prerequisites he is admitted into the kingdom if the one officiating has authority to act.

In this case too there is still something that must be done and this must be an authoritative act. Whereas a priest might be able to baptize him into the Church, someone holding the Melchizedek Priesthood would be required to lay hands on him for the reception of the Holy Ghost or the turning on of the light. Here too he might ask who made the laws that govern here. Why should I conform to all these regulations and requirements, and the answer is, "These laws and regulations are made by the one who is in charge of the light, the power and the blessings that you seek and they are made for your own protection and benefit. So long as you conform to them you will be entitled to the blessings."

Returning again to the man who is getting the electric power and light, he may by foolishness or ignorance, or by breaking the rules and regulations of the company, disentitle himself to further service and the light may thereupon be cut off, or he may, by improper interference, cause a short circuit which would blow the fuse and leave him in total darkness, greater darkness indeed than he experienced before he knew of the light. In other words, the continued enjoyment of the blessings of the light and power depend upon his conforming to the laws and regulations with respect thereto. It depends upon his being willing to pay his monthly bills, to conform strictly to the ordinances of the town or city where he lives with respect to fire hazards, proper insulation, proper installation, in fact, his enjoyment of the blessing depends upon his own actions.

Returning then to the convert to the Church. If he has had faith and repented of his sins and been baptized and received the Holy Ghost, he is entitled to certain blessings. He may, however, cut himself off from these blessings by his own acts. He may plunge himself into utter darkness by sin, or he may limit his enjoyment of the blessings of the gospel by neglecting to inform himself, to become educated in the gospel, to, in effect, make new installations for greater light and power.

The man who made the connection with the power house, electric light company, may be satisfied with a ten-watt bulb in one back room of his house and leave the rest of his house in darkness. He might be so foolish as to say, "I am now connected with the power house, I have electricity in my home, that is all I need." How foolish such a man would be. The wise man would want to install electric fixtures in every room and, when possible, to purchase the other equipment necessary for power and heat in his home. In other words, before he can enjoy the full blessings of electricity he must have the necessary equipment and utilities to enable him to enjoy these blessings.

And so it is with those who join the Church. Merely having been baptized and received the Holy Ghost is not enough for full salvation. He is on the right road, it is true, but if he is content to live figuratively in a back room of his house with a ten-watt bulb, certainly his blessings will be abridged, and he will continue to live in semi-darkness.

Merely having been baptized and having received the Holy Ghost is not enough for full salvation. He is on the right road, it is true, but if he is content to live figuratively in a back room of his house with a ten-watt bulb, certainly his blessings will be abridged, and he will continue to live in semi-darkness.

Herein is seen the force of the Prophet's statement that a man is saved no faster than he gains knowledge. A man cannot be saved in ignorance. Education is, in a sense, putting in new equipment for more thorough utilization of the blessings of the gospel.

Both the enjoyment of electric light and power, heat, and the enjoyment of the blessings of the gospel are dependent upon our capacity to enjoy them and our willingness to conform to the laws and rules and regulations laid down by the company officials, the city authorities, or others having to do with the use of electric power and light, or, in the other case, keeping the commandments of God. In both cases it is up to the applicant or the recipient to determine whether he is to go through life with a ten-watt bulb or with a floodlight of truth in every room of his house.

Being, Not Seeming . . . Living Testimonies

The dictionary definition of testimony is: "A solemn declaration or affirmation to establish or prove some fact; or, evidence given or declarations made, orally or in writing, sometimes under oath."

Such declarations usually refer to some objective fact, event, or happening, and may have little to do with one's own convictions or beliefs.

But when we speak of a testimony of the gospel, we refer to a motivating soul-transforming conviction. One may not know how he received the testimony, nor will he be able to give it to another. There is but one source, and it is available to all who comply with the conditions.

A testimony of the gospel is of inestimable and eternal value. It is predicated upon obedience, as are all blessings from God, and it may be lost through disobedience or sin.

The value of an abiding or living testimony is portrayed in the Doctrine and Covenants, from which the following is quoted:

"They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, . . . who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, . . . who are the church of the Firstborn, . . . who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness and of his glory. . . . Wherefore, as it is written, they are Gods, even the sons of God. . . . These shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever. . . . These are they who are just men made perfect, . . . whose bodies are celestial, whose glory is that of the sun, even the glory of God, the highest of all." (D&C 76:51-70, 87; 88:4, 5; 128:23; 129:3; 130:15.)

It is obvious that the blessings of a testimony of Jesus that will lead to exaltation are reserved for those who overcome by faith, who are just men made perfect, and whose bodies became celestialized. Such blessings are not for those who claim to have a testimony and give only verbal expression of it. Our lives must confirm our words. When one's testimony has to do with convictions concerning conduct, then both consistency and honesty require that his conduct attest his belief. If one's declarations and his actions are at variance, then all who hear and see and note will disregard his protestations, be they ever so eloquent, and appraise him by what he does.

"Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 7:21.)

When one is heard to say, "I bear testimony that the Word of Wisdom is a revelation from the Lord," and then clandestinely uses liquor and tobacco, he acknowledges either pitiful weakness or deliberate deceit. Furthermore, his insincere and hypocritical pretension will weigh heavily against him on the day of judgment.

"He that saith, I know him, and keepth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

"But whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected: hereby know we that we are in him.

"He that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked." (1 John 2:4-6.)

The gospel of Jesus Christ is not only a theory to be believed, a creed to be recited, or a set of rules of conduct to be adopted. It is a goal to be achieved by "patient continuance in well doing." (Rom. 2:7-8.) Christ is more than a theological dogma. He is a moral ideal. He was what he taught, and he asked that we show our love for him and our testimony of him by keeping his commandments. In other words, by being, not seeming.

The very essence of Mormonism is practical and active morals. In our articles of faith we say, "We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, etc." Merely repeating the words or giving intellectual assent to the idea of honesty, virtue, etc., will never save a man.

Bringing one's life into harmony with God's laws is prerequisite to baptism, confirmation, and partaking of the Sacrament.

"And the members shall manifest before the church, and also before the elders, by a godly walk and conversation, that they are worthy of it, that there may be works and faith agreeable to the holy scriptures—walking in holiness before the Lord." (D&C 20:69.)

The apostles were uniform in denouncing pretense.

"Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord." (Acts 3:19.)

Jesus denounced the scribes and Pharisees as hypocrites who

". . . draweth nigh unto me with their mouth and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me." (Matt. 15:8.)

The burden of the message of the writers of the New Testament was to forsake sin and become living testimonies. James was specific when he wrote:

"But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.

"For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass:

"For he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was.

"But whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed." (James 1:22-25.)

And John warned:

"If we say that we have fellowship with him; and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth:" (1 John 1:6.)

The Lord's estimate of a man's worth is based upon his daily conduct, what he is from the center of his heart out. A man's outward appearance and what he claims or professes will carry no weight with him, for God looketh upon the heart. (1 Sam. 16:7.)

Obedience, or conforming to the law, is emphasized throughout the Doctrine and Covenants:

"There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

"And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which is it predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.)

The Book of Mormon is equally emphatic in proscribing pretense, denouncing deceit and commending righteous conduct:

"And now behold, my beloved brethren, I say unto you, do not suppose that this is all; for after ye have done all these things, if ye turn away the needy, and the naked, and visit not the sick and afflicted, and impart of your substance, if ye have, to those who stand in need—I say unto you, if ye do not any of these things, behold, your prayer is vain, and availeth you nothing, and ye are as hypocrites who do deny the faith.

"Therefore, if ye do not remember to be charitable, ye are as dross, which the refiners do cast out, (it being of no worth) and is trodden under foot of men." (Alma 34:28-29.)

When a man dies, his own life will be not only his eulogy but his testimony; and when he stands before the judgment bar, he will be judged by what he is and that will be the sum total of what he has thought and said and done. If what he has said concerning a testimony was idle and insincere, intended to deceive, then his words also will be held against him.

It is obvious then that if what we say is inconsistent with what we do, we will lose our own self-respect, the respect of others and the blessings which might be earned by living a testimony.—The Instructor, August 1959.

The Book of Mormon . . . A Divine Record

As we grow older and have more experience in the ministry, we become increasingly aware of our utter dependence upon divine guidance and inspiration, and therefore it is not just habit that causes us so frequently to ask for that guidance and to solicit your help, sympathy, and prayers.

It was my pleasure to attend the dedication of the temple in London, England, and I appreciate the privilege.

One of the most frequent questions asked of us as we travel is, "What is your creed? What distinguishes your Church from others?"

We do not have a written creed in the usual sense of the word. However, we do have a concise and authoritative statement of the beliefs of the Latter-day Saints given by the Prophet, Joseph Smith, in the early days of the Church, known as the Articles of Faith. In that statement we declare our faith in God the Father, in Jesus Christ, his Son, and in the Holy Ghost, known generally as the Holy Trinity. We declare our conviction that men will be held accountable for their own sins and will not be answerable for the sins of others, that there are certain principles and ordinances that must be believed and observed by those who would gain salvation and that those principles and ordinances must be taught and administered by men who have authority in the apostolic Church as organized in the Meridian of Time, of which Jesus Christ was and is the chief cornerstone.

In this declaration we affirm our faith in the atonement of Christ and its universal applicability. We believe that he will come again, that there will be a thousand years of universal peace. We make the statement that we believe in sacred scriptures, ancient and modern; that we believe that men are entitled to freedom of religious belief. We honor and sustain the laws of the land. We commit ourselves to Christ's standard of moral conduct and service based on love of God and of fellow men.

As many sermons have been preached and much has been written on each of these articles, I shall not elucidate, but I should like to refer for a moment to the ninth Article of Faith:

"We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God."

This simple and forthright statement of faith in revelation has elicited the criticism of some of our friends, because it includes past, current, and future revelation. Many other churches profess belief in the revelations recorded in the Bible, but they do not believe that God still reveals his will through chosen prophets on the earth.

We declare that the line of communication between heaven and earth is open, and operating, as anciently. We believe that revelation is continuous and expedient and is suited to the times in which it is given. When we make that statement, it follows that we believe in scriptures other than the Holy Bible, because divine revelation is the word of God, and his word is scripture. We unequivocally declare our faith in the Bible as the word of God, and we specify the King James version thereof.

Our acceptance of other revelation does not diminish our faith in the Old and New Testaments. On the contrary, our belief in the Bible is strengthened and our understanding of it clarified by these new corroborative revelations.

Among the volumes of scripture in which we believe, the one most frequently referred to by friends and critics is the Book of Mormon. It has had the largest circulation and has elicited more comment during the past century, favorable and otherwise, than any other modern book.

This book is an inspired text, having been written by various prophets who lived in America at the times of which they write. It is a sacred record of the ancient inhabitants of America, covering in the main that part of their history from about 600 B.C. to 400 A.D.

Its message was inscribed on metallic plates by various authors. These writings were abridged by the Prophet Mormon, one of the last survivors of a dwindling race. It is therefore known as the Book of Mormon. He entrusted the plates to his son, Moroni, who was the last of the Nephite historians. Moroni deposited the plates in a stone box on a hillside and some fourteen hundred years later he, at that time a resurrected being, revealed their hiding place to Joseph Smith, the Prophet, who had translated what is said to be reformed Egyptian characters into English by the gift and power of God.

It is doubtless this element of the miraculous which disturbs many who hear of this record and causes some to shrug it off without further interest. It seems strange to us that believers in the Judeo-Christian Bible should be skeptical of the miraculous.

Miracles form an important part of the Old and the New Testaments. The story of the earth life of Jesus of Nazareth continues to grip the hearts and fascinate the minds of men, largely because of the miracle of his birth, the almost daily miracles he performed during his ministry and the transcendent miracle of his resurrection and ascension. Moreover he left his apostles and disciples with a promise of a miraculous reappearance in the last days. Paraphrasing the Apostle Paul we ask, "Why should it be thought a thing incredible that God should reveal his will to his servants, the prophets, as he promised to do"?

One remarkable fact about this book is its continued popularity and appeal. One hundred thirty years after the first edition was published, it is still a best seller, over thirty-five thousand copies being printed in English each year and other thousands distributed in the twenty-seven different languages into which it has been translated. Nearly three million copies of this book have been distributed in almost all countries of the world in the last century.

Yes, we do believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God, and we believe in the miraculous that was involved in its preservation and production. There have been many who have sought to discredit it, many things have been written against it, but in more recent times some of our friends who have made a careful study of the book have made statements which are significant. I shall refer to one or two taken from a little book called, The Book of Mormon Message and Evidences by Dr. Franklin S. Harris, Jr. Charles H. Hull, Professor of American History in Cornell University wrote:

"I am perfectly willing to say to anyone that I suppose the Book of Mormon to be one of the most famous and widely discussed books ever published in America."

Again—"The book itself remains," says a Rochester newspaper, "on which was founded the greatest religion of the continent and the century. It was not the book itself, but the wonderful influence it had on America that counted."

And a former Secretary of Agriculture, who had read the book carefully said, "Of all the American books of the nineteenth century, it seems probable that the Book of Mormon was the most powerful. It reached perhaps only one percent of the United States, but it affected this one percent so powerfully and lastingly that all the people of the United States have been affected, especially by its contribution in opening one of our great frontiers."

Now, our declaration regarding the Book of Mormon is a solemn one. If it is false, it is almost blasphemous. If it is true, then all who believe it are under a solemn obligation to its author to proclaim its truth.

One of the prophets of that book emphasized this fact in the following words, and I read from Second Nephi:

"Wherefore, how great the importance to make these things known unto the inhabitants of the earth that they may know that there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God save it be through the merits, the mercy, the grace of the holy Messiah, who layeth down his life according to the flesh, and taketh it again by the power of the Spirit that he may bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, being the first that should rise from the dead."

And further in this same book, after reciting the miraculous events in the history of the Israelites, he said,

"I say unto you, that as these things are true and as the Lord God liveth, there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ of which I have spoken, whereby man can be saved."

It is the message of the Book of Mormon that has caused people from almost all nations of the earth to accept it as the word of God. Its inspiring theme and divine message, from the title page to the last chapter, constitutes the testimony or witness of a whole nation of people that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, the Creator of the world, the Redeemer of mankind. It bears witness to the efficacy of the atonement, of its universal application and its value to all individuals who will accept his word and keep his commandments.

We urge our friends to examine the book itself, to check its claims, listen to its message and to feel of its spirit. Yes, we believe in continued revelation, ancient, continuous, current and future.

And personally, I wish to bear my testimony with those that have already been borne that the Church today, the kingdom of God, is being led by revelation. God is not the author of confusion. He does not work in dark places. He makes it known to the world when he appoints a prophet, and I testify that I know as I know I live that this Church today is guided by prophecy and by revelation and that these men whom we honor are prophets of God.

I pray that he may help us to live as though we believed it, to be true to ourselves, to them and to God, by carrying out the instructions they give, and living the gospel of Jesus Christ, I pray, in the name of Jesus Christ Amen.—Semiannual General Conference. October 11, 1958.

One Modern Temple

". . . And the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant whom ye delight in: behold he shall come, saith the Lord of Hosts." (Malachi 3:1.)

Just fifteen months after the Church was organized, the Lord, by revelation, designated a site near Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, for the building of a temple. While it has not, as yet, been possible to build on that site, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has been from that time a temple-building church. Its members, under the authority of the Holy Priesthood, have faithfully performed rites and ceremonies, for the living and the dead, which may only be performed in a house of the Lord.

It is significant that since the destruction of the Temple of Herod in the year 70 A.D., when Jerusalem was captured by the Romans, no temple—as distinguished from churches, chapels, cathedrals—was built and dedicated to the Living God until March, 1836, when the first modern temple was dedicated at Kirtland, in the state of Ohio, USA.

At the time of the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, there were divine manifestations comparable to anything recorded in the Old Testament. We quote from the Doctrine and Covenants: "The veil was taken from our minds and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

"We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the temple, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber." (D&C 110:1-2.)

Moses appeared to them and delivered the keys of the gathering of Israel; Elijah the prophet stood before them and announced the arrival of the time for the fulfilling of the prediction of Malachi; Elias appeared and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham! Apparently this sacred house had accomplished the purpose of its erection, as within two years the people were forced to flee, and the temple, which still stands, is in the hands of strangers.

The Saints moved westward and established themselves in Illinois, where they built the beautiful city of Nauvoo. Here they erected the second of the modern temples. It was dedicated 30th April, 1846, but it, too, had to be abandoned because of persecution, and it was finally destroyed by flames and tornado.

Again a westward trek, a modern exodus, and the Mormon pioneers arrived in the Salt Lake Valley. Despoiled, dispossessed, weary though they were, their great leader, Brigham Young, four days after their arrival, standing in what appeared to be a desert, declared, "Here we will build the temple of our God." Although it took forty years to realize that promise, it was fulfilled, and on that spot there stands today the most magnificent of our temples. On the main inscription stone facing the Main Street of Salt Lake City, the tourist may read, "Holiness to the Lord" and above it he will note the inspiring emblem of the All-seeing Eye.

"The stonework of each of the six towers ends in a sphere of granite. The termination of the east centre tower is the highest stone in the building and constitutes the capstone. Anchored to this granite globe is a figure wrought in copper overlaid with gold; it stands over twelve feet high, and represents Moroni, an ancient Nephite prophet, who as a resurrected being visited the boy-prophet Joseph Smith, in 1823, and afterwards delivered to him the ancient record since published to the world as the Book of Mormon. The design is that of a herald with a trumpet at his lips." (The House of the Lord, James E. Talmage.)

This group of exiles adopted for their emblem a Bee Hive, and they called the territory "Deseret," meaning honeybee. But these "busy bees" were not content with one "swarm" so far as temples were concerned. During the erection of the Salt Lake Temple, the pioneers built three others, one at St. George, one at Logan, and another at Manti, all in Utah, and they were dedicated respectively, April 6, 1877, May 17, 1884, and May 21, 1888.

As the church membership has grown in various parts of the country the call for temples has become insistent "that we may feel we are permanently settled," and, as circumstances permitted, the following temples were erected: Hawaiian, near Honolulu, dedicated Nov. 27, 1919; Alberta, in Cardston, dedicated August 26, 1923; Arizona, at Mesa, dedicated October 23, 1927; and Idaho Falls, Idaho, dedicated September 23-25, 1945. Two additional sites have been purchased, both in California—Los Angeles and Oakland. The last copy of the Deseret News tells of a recent visit to Los Angeles by the First Presidency and other church authorities for the purpose of completing arrangements for the eleventh temple to be built in this dispensation.

(Since this article was published the Church has built four additional chapels: Swiss, dedicated Sept. 11, 1955; Los Angeles, dedicated March 11, 1956; New Zealand, dedicated April 20, 1958; and London, dedicated September 7, 1958.)

Although each temple is distinctive in plan, material, setting, decoration, and furnishings, a brief description of one will serve to indicate the attitude of the members of the Church toward making a group offering unto the Lord. As in olden times, only the best available materials were used, and the highest craftsmanship employed in order that the house of the Lord may be what its name implies.

The Canadian Temple in Cardston is a sermon in granite, testifying, among other things, that prophecy did not cease with the breath of the ancient apostles. Thirty-two years before President Joseph F. Smith dedicated the site for the Cardston Temple, one of the twelve apostles of the Church, John W. Taylor, standing on that site, said, "This land will yet become a bread-basket to the world; and in this land a temple shall be reared to the worship of Almighty God."

The following notes on the construction of the Canadian Temple are taken from an article written by President Joseph Y. Card, of the Western Canadian Mission and published in The Improvement Era, 1923:

"The temple proper, also the retaining wall, is built of a light gray granite from the quarries of Nelson, British Columbia. The foundations of the temple are thirty-two feet deep and in some instances twelve feet wide at the base, and are of reinforced concrete. The building throughout is lined with hollow tile, steel lathed and hard finished plastered. . . . Floors and ceiling are of strongly reinforced concrete, all fireproof and noiseless. . . . In addition to the ornamental wood furnishings for the interior, there are steel window and door frames, steel grates, several carloads of marble and onyx and various fittings and inlays, tile, etc. Interior finish is the best. Baths and toilets are of white marble, trimmed with nickel and silver. A modern ventilating system of warm, scoured, and moistened air with thermostat regulators with a private lighting system and heating plant.

"Approaching the town of Cardston from any direction, the large, white, straight lines of the temple are first to greet and attract the eye. Impressive and unique, the temple occupies a distinctive place in the historic field of architecture. It has the Grecian massiveness, a Peruvian touch, and is similar to the ancient temples of the Aztecs and other aborigines of Central and South America, ruins of which have been discovered in recent years. The optic impression is that of the pyramid, or the huge pile effect.

"The building is on a pronounced elevation around which appear to nestle and cluster the dwellings of 1,800 people of the prairie town of Cardston.

"The main structure is of octagonal shape or of a Maltese Cross ground-plan, being 118 feet square and is surrounded on its four sides by a solid concrete retaining wall, 165 x 165 feet, the latter being some ten feet in height.

"The double approach from the west leads up broad granite steps of easy tread towards the large ornamental steel gates which are surmounted with bronze lamps. An outside fish pond about 12 x 30 feet, between the two approaches, is fed by a stream of water falling out of a solid concrete wall. On this wall is engraven a most impressive and artistic frieze of cast concrete in color to match the granite. The subject, about 20 feet in width by 8 feet high, facing the west and about 30 feet from the sidewalk, is that of Jesus and 'The Samaritan Woman at the Well,' saying he would give the woman of 'living water.'

"On either side of this ornamental pool are stone steps leading up to steel gates and into a tile-covered outer court, in size 93 X 90 feet, similar to the 'Court of the Gentiles' of former day temples. On all sides and in the court itself, are ornamental flower beds and at both right and left, small goldfish ponds fed by a streamlet of water coming out of the stone and rather typifying the stone which Moses struck for the children of Israel. All is conducive to a sacred atmosphere.

"A roof garden over the first floor, and outer rooms of the building are accessible from this court by granite steps right and left and extends with a Tarraza marble tile walk of some 600 feet entirely round the main temple building. Entrance to the main building is through the 'Annex' directly across the outer court. The temple proper, technically faces east, where an entrance is provided for those who officiate; the cornerstone being the south-east corner and inscribed '1915.'

"On entering the outer rooms or Annex, to the left is the Recorder's office and vault for all records; to the right a small cloak-room and supply wardrobe. Proceeding farther are two large cloak-rooms, one to the left and one to the right, and a dining-room to accommodate the 'Temple workers,' and an electrically-equipped culinary department of most modern design. Continuing to the right is a small laundry fitted with steam coil heaters and driers. These rooms are finished in oak with tinted and stenciled ceilings and painted walls. From these rooms entrance is again directly in front of the outside door of the temple proper into the Assembly Room.

"The Baptistry, a large steel, white tiled baptismal font, rests on the back of 12 life-sized oxen, constructed out of granite concrete and standing a few feet below the floor level. These oxen are symbolical of the twelve tribes of Israel, and are in groups of three, each group facing a cardinal point of the compass. Twelve marble pillars, extending from floor to ceiling in the Baptistry, are arranged in groups of three in each of the four corners of the room. These are further emblematic of the twelve sons of Jacob or the twelve apostles of the Lord. The room is furnished with four large bronze chandeliers of most modern and artistic design, is finished in Tennessee marble and oak, and has an elaborately ornamented plaster ceiling about 30 feet in height. Appropriate seats are provided for those in waiting, also a desk at the font, and a place for those who witness the baptism-by-immersion ordinance, for each rite of this holy house is attested by witnesses.

xs

"Through a marble stairway, access is gained to what is termed Lecture Room number one, or the Creation Room. This, as the other three main lecture rooms, has a seating capacity of one hundred facing the lecturer's platform, which is raised about eight inches above the floor level. Walls are panelled and finished with ebony and maple inlay.

"A few steps up, symbolising the advancement of the faithful in Christ, we pass to room number two, or 'The Garden Room,' wherein is depicted, with grace and excellence, the Garden of Eden. A well-lighted room, entirely panelled in the best of Birdseye maple with inlays of tulip and ebony, rose and maple woods, finished in light colour scheme, greets the eyes, and here the tourist is wont to linger. The mural panel decorations by Lee Green Richards, of the Bozart and Julian Schools of Paris, are of soft, soft and subdued colours of perfect tonality and represent nature's greatest beauty in her gardens of plant, flowers and leaf, and also animals of field and forest, and all at absolute peace. The blend of colours, woodwork and picture, coupled with the perfect light effect, makes a scene of which the eye never tires.

"Passing through the Garden Room and ascending a few steps brings us to Lecture Room number three, or 'The World Room.' In sharp contrast with the peace and harmony of the Garden of Eden, here is shown in picture and colour the nature of our present surroundings, 'The World.' This room is finished and panelled in deep, rich South American walnut.

"Here is portrayed local scenes, showing Old Chief Mountain, Yellow Mountain and Waterton Falls. In the foreground is shown the fox and wolf ready to devour a young lamb, the ewe bleating for its lost lambkin, the eagle in descent with outstretched talons, and the mountain lion calling for its lost mate. Mural scenes of the tropics in other panels show birds and beasts of prey helping to tell the story of present-day strife, and point the way for mankind to overcome and live above such and not to become 'of the world' but to 'subdue it.'

"Passing through the World Room, a few steps bring us to the upper lecture or 'Terrestrial Room,' which is finished in rich African mahogany, with inlays of maples, rose and other woods. The ceiling is here ornamented in plaster of Paris and coloured and together with the softly-tinted walls, gives a pleasing contrast to the room just left.

"The Celestial Room typifies the celestial glory of heaven, the aim and goal of all true followers of Christ. This room, the most luxuriantly furnished, is some 40 feet square with a 36 foot ceiling ornamentally plastered to a pattern and decorated in gold leaf and stencil work. The wood finish used is chiefly the rich African mahogany with inlays of ebony, rose, maple and tulip woods. The wainscoting, of polished Utah onyx of deep variegated brown, or a baseboard of alternate small squares of marble, splendidly blends in colour with all other materials. The furnishings include a large solid bronze chandelier, and a very rich Wilton rug on the floor, with several fine tapestry hangings, and suitable and comfortable furniture made to order.

"In the semi-circle of the four high arches on each side of the room is gilded steel grill work, while underneath, and set back a foot or so, are painted panels on west and south, while the entrance to the room from the one previously mentioned, and the openings to the corridor on the east occupies the other two sides. Suitable paintings and statuary help to complete this splendid, if not gorgeous, setting.

"Rich windows of variegated colours, and of 144 small panes each diffuse a blended light, and altogether the effect is one of a fitting climax to the sacred rites of this house dedicated to the worship of God.

"To the east are three smaller rooms, each 15 feet square, used for prayer and sealing ordinances, each being furnished with an altar. The entire walls of these, save two small panels, are finished in the following woods, describing from right to left: American walnut; cross-grained African Mahogany cut into triangles, forming squares of about two feet each way; and third, Circassian walnut, each of the many panels being finished with the wood from one tree. The wood-work, finish and inlays may not be described better than as exquisite. Deep rugs, decorated ceilings, tapestries and panel paintings, complete the excellence of the unstinted decorations of these three impressive rooms."

This description of one of our smaller temples indicates the attitude of Latter-day Saints toward these sacred buildings. To us they are really "Houses of the Lord," sanctuaries built and operated for a definite, distinctive, and sacred purpose. In them are administered the saving and exalting ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ, including baptisms, ordinations, marriages, sealings of husbands and wives, parents and children for both the living and the dead.

The hope which was held out to the spirits in prison when the Master visited them after his crucifixion was, and is, based on two prerequisites, their acceptance of his message and the vicarious work to be done by friends on earth that, as Paul said, they "might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit."

Latter-day Saints everywhere should try to live worthily so that when they have an opportunity they may obtain a recommend admitting them to one of these Holy Houses to receive their own endowments and to officiate for loved ones who have preceded them into the spirit world. Truly, "Hearts must be pure to come within these walls. Where spreads a feast unknown to festive halls."—Millennial Star, April 1946.

Red-letter Days on Time's Calendar

The timing of world events indicates that God's eternal plan is regulated by a celestial clock. Each important event in world history must wait until its hour strikes. History records long and patient preparation for the birth of each new epoch, age or dispensation. Before the birth of the Messiah there was divine manipulation of world events which made the ancient calendar year of Rome, 753, propitious for that pivotal event.

The most glorious and eventful morning of all history dawned with the birth of Jesus of Nazareth. The earth life of the Son of God marked the Meridian of Time, the noon-tide of eternity. But shortly the evening shadows foretold the coming of night.

The crucifixion of our Lord and the subsequent violent death of each of his apostles, save John, were followed by persistent and cruel persecution of officers and members of the Church. This continued under Roman authority from the reign of Nero (A.D. 46) to the close of Diocletian's reign (A.D. 305). During interims of comparative tranquility there were many disputations on doctrine and struggles for precedence resulting in schisms and a multiplicity of sects within this leaderless and dwindling Church. After the abatement of persecution a more ominous move was made by the adversary in the guise of friendship. A wily pagan emperor saw an opportunity to gain political advantage by combining church and state under his own leadership. It was then that time's clock struck midnight, and the apostasy was complete. This was followed by almost total darkness from the third to the twelfth century.

To a finite observer of these eventful times, that awful and foreboding night would have appeared to be interminable. But the setting of the sun has always been a prophecy of dawn, and the midnight finally passed. Hopeful signs appeared in the eastern sky and brought reassurance that God was still at the controls. Let us note briefly some of the preparatory events, each of which was prerequisite to the promised restoration of the gospel and the subsequent opening of the British Mission.

Men began to resist the bondage of the feudal system and to demand that tyrants recognize the innate dignity and God-given liberty of the individual. On June 15, 1215, King John of England, under duress, signed the Magna Charta at Runnymede. This document was, in a sense, a constitution guaranteeing rights and privileges and laying the foundation for the security of English political and personal liberty. This was the first step in preparation for the coming to England of the restored gospel with its doctrine of free agency. The discovery of a new continent, where the English-speaking people were to be most successful in planting colonies, marked a notable step in the onward progress of events. This was followed by the independence and subsequent growth of the United States.

During the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the Crusades, with their resultant travel and extended commerce, started a change from feudal to central and representative government. Later came the "revival of learning," the establishment of universities where men were brought together from many parts of the world, resulting in a renaissance, or intellectual awakening in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.

During the next century a measure of religious freedom was wrested from the politico-religious tyrants and a reformation or revolution which started in Germany and Switzerland was to spread over Europe like a prairie fire. The national churches of Britain, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Holland, together with parts of Germany and Switzerland, became separated from the Church of Rome. This paved the way for the separation of church and state.

The various upheavals resulted in some measure of intellectual, religious, and political freedom, the very cornerstone of the plan of salvation. Learning was within the reach of many and some knowledge of the Bible became general in protesting nations. As people became acquainted with the predictions and prophecies of the Holy Bible, there was observable among common people in many lands an air of expectancy, or looking for a new revelation from God.

One wonders what would have been the fate of the American nation if it had been established before the Elizabethan period in England, the Lutheran period in Germany, the heroic struggle of the Dutch for liberty in Holland—in short, before the religious revolution, generally known as the Reformation. Certainly there had been a power at work creating conditions propitious to the restoration of the gospel and the reorganization of the pristine Church. The ground in many lands had been prepared for the planting of the seed of truth and nowhere was the soil more fertile than in England. In 1820 the celestial clock struck the hour for the beginning of the restoration of the gospel. The first vision shook the religious world to its foundation by revealing, among other things, four erstwhile wellknown facts which had been buried in the rubble of the apostasy, namely: (1) that the Father and the Son are separate and distinct Personages, (2) that man is created in the bodily image of God, (3) that the canon of scripture was not full, and (4) the Church of Jesus Christ was not upon the earth.

But while there had been preparation of world events leading to this reappearing of the Son of God, individual preparation of chosen servants was also necessary. The Prophet had ten years' schooling under angelic teachers before the Church was finally organized in 1830. During that time the plates of the Book of Mormon were revealed and translated; the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods were restored and men were authorized to speak and act in the name of God.

Another seven years elapsed before the time arrived to open the British Mission. Then on the 4th of June, 1837, the Prophet Joseph smith said to Heber C. Kimball, "Brother Heber, the Spirit of the Lord has whispered to me, 'my servant Heber is to go to England and proclaim my gospel and open the doors of salvation unto that nation.' " Accordingly he and Dr. Willard Richards, a convert of six months, who was later to play so vital a part, not only in the British Mission, but also in the early history of the Church, proceeded to England. The third member of the party was Joseph Fielding, a native of England, who had emigrated to Canada and been converted to Mormonism by Parley P. Pratt. The party landed in England on the sailing vessel Garrick, June 20, 1837.

Shortly after arriving, the three missionaries, having prayed for divine guidance as to where to start their work, were inspired to go to Preston, Lancashire, a manufacturing town on the River Ribble, about thirty miles from Liverpool.

Upon arriving in Preston, Joseph Fielding, of the party, called on his brother, the Reverend James Fielding, who was the pastor of a congregation there. The missionaries were well received and were permitted to preach in the Vauxhall Chapel to a large congregation on the Sunday following their arrival.

Space will not permit a detailed account of the growth of the Church in Britain, but the reader will find a complete record in the history of the Church, the Millennial Star, A Century of Mormonism in Great Britain, by Richard L. Evans, and other Church publications.

There was opposition to the missionaries and their work from the beginning, but in spite of that many were responsive to their message, and the first baptismal service was held in the River Ribble on Sunday, July 30, 1837, when nine persons were immersed in the presence of several thousand people assembled on the banks of the river to witness the unusual open-air ceremony. (See Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball.) One hundred years later President Heber J. Grant, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Richard R. Lyman, and Joseph J. Cannon, who was then president of the British Mission, and Hugh B. Brown held a service on the banks of the River Ribble near the spot where the first service was held. Hundreds of people on this occasion assembled to commemorate the event.

The rapid growth of the Church from the beginning is shown by the fact that five months after the arrival of these three missionaries the first conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Great Britain was held on Christmas day, 1837, in Preston. The Cockpit was a spacious auditorium generally used for cock-fights. About three hundred Saints were assembled. Many others for miles around Preston had joined the Church but were unable to be present.

The next decisive step in establishing the Church in Britain was taken as a result of a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, now section 118 of the Doctrine and Covenants. In this revelation, John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, and Willard Richards were called to fill vacancies in the Council of the Twelve, and in it the Lord said, "And next spring let them depart over the great waters and there promulgate my gospel, the fulness thereof, and bear record of my name. Let them take leave of my saints in the city of Far West on the 26th day of April, next, on the building spot of my house, saith the Lord." (D&C 118:4-5.)

When the place and date designated in this revelation became known, Satan's infuriated agents undertook to thwart the purposes of the Lord and make it impossible for the members of the twelve to start from that sport on their journey pursuant to the commandment.

While it was not usual for a definite date and place for a future event to be given by revelation, the dauntless leaders and valiant Saints of the Church determined that the word of the Lord should be carried out. Mobocrats had sworn that this was one of "Joe Smith's revelations" which would not be fulfilled. But early in the morning of April 26, 1839, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, and John E. Page met at the designated spot. Others of the council were unable to be present, but Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith, having been recently ordained apostles, joined the others and this made seven or a majority of the council in attendance, together with ninety members of the Church, and thus the word of the Lord was vindicated, and shortly thereafter members of the quorum left for Great Britain.

When preparations were being made for opening the British Mission, there was raging one of the bitterest and most severe persecutions in the Church's history in Missouri. It was at this time that the Haun's Mill massacre occurred. The president of the Church and some of the twelve were imprisoned on false charges and detained for months at a time. Many of the Saints were forced to flee because of Governor Boggs' exterminating order.

Indicative of the divine guidance of these early missionaries, and of the fact that the soil had been prepared for the gospel seed, is the success attained by Wilford Woodruff, later to become President of the Church. He, during the first thirty days after his arrival in Hertfordshire, baptized forty-five preachers and one hundred sixty members of a sect known as the "United Brethren." One chapel and forty-five other houses licensed for religious service were placed at his disposal. During the next eight months some eighteen hundred souls were brought into the Church through baptism, including two hundred preachers of various denominations. The work of Wilford Woodruff centered at that time in Hertfordshire, Gloucestershire, and Worcestershire. During his labors there he was visited by President Brigham Young and Dr. Willard Richards, and it was here that John Benbow, to become noted in Church history, was baptized. It was he who advanced the first three hundred pounds to print the first British edition of the Book of Mormon.

During the year 1840, a majority of the Council of Twelve Apostles were in England. They convened in quorum capacity and held a conference in the Cockpit at Preston, Lancashire.

The missionaries were busy publishing and distributing the Book of Mormon, tracts, and hymnbooks. They held regular meetings, baptized hundreds of people, organized branches of the Church and ordained men to the priesthood. The three months period from April to July, 1840, is known as the busiest and most successful in the history of the British Mission. Another conference of the Church was held in Carpenters Hall, Manchester, on the 6th of July, 1840.

The Millennial Star became the official publication of the Church in England in May, 1840 with Parley P. Pratt as editor. It has the longest record of continued publication of any periodical in the Church, and many of the General Authorities of the Church have served as its editors.

During these early days the gospel was also carried to Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and the Isle of Man, and from these countries have come many of the leaders of the Church. David McKay (father of President David O. McKay) and Charles W. Nibley came from Scotland; Charles A. Callis from Ireland; Charles W. Penrose from England and George Q. Cannon from the Isle of Man. Wales gave the Church Evan Stephens who became leader of the Tabernacle Choir and composer of many favorite LDS anthems; also Dan Jones who became a close associate of the Prophet and was with him the night of his martyrdom. He later did a wonderful work in Wales, where hundreds were brought into the Church and numerous branches organized. Also, most of the Present General Authorities of the Church trace their lineage back to the British Isles.

Eight of the nine Presidents of the Church—excepting only the Prophet Joseph Smith—have labored in or presided over the British Mission, and twenty-six men, who were at various times members of the Council of the Twelve, have presided there. The European and British Mission were under one presidency until the year 1928 when, by appointment from the First Presidency, Elder A. William Lund became president of the British Mission to preside under the direction of the European Mission president, Dr. John A. Widtsoe. He was followed in turn by James H. Douglas, Joseph J. Cannon, Hugh B. Brown, Selvoy J. Boyer, Stayner Richards, A. Hamer Reiser, and Clifton G. M. Kerr. Others were appointed as acting mission presidents during periods of war.

In the early days of the British Mission there was considerable opposition and some persecution which persisted down to and including World War I, but there was a noticeable change after 1918, and today the Latter-day Saints are well and favorably known throughout the British Isles. There are at present sixty-five Church-owned buildings in Great Britain. Through the years a total of 7,124 missionaries have labored in the British Isles where 128,852 converts became members of the Church, and 56,767 of them emigrated to America. In the fourteen districts and nineteen branches now organized there are 9,850 members and 175 full-time missionaries. The LDS servicemen who were stationed in England during World War II, (and there were thousands of them) made many friends and helped to allay prejudice.

Since the recent tour of President David O. McKay and the Tabernacle Choir, when ground was broken for a temple in England, the attitude of the British people toward the Church is more tolerant and friendly. On the 11th of May, 1957, Elder Richard L. Evans, of the Council of the Twelve, presided at the ceremony of laying the cornerstone of the temple, the first to be erected in England and the third in the British Commonwealth.

Indicative of how times have changed, it is noted that on his first trip to England Brigham Young spent twenty-eight days on the water. The same trip can now be made in nine hours or less.

We commemorate the one hundred twentieth anniversary of the opening of the British Mission, which, like the restoration of the gospel, was the culmination of long and thorough preparation. The rich harvest, which is still being garnered, attests the inspiration of those who prepared the soil and all others who planted and watered. He who gives the increase knew the end from the beginning and overruled all to conform to his calendar of events.

The restored gospel is not only a direct result of all this world-wide preparation, but the Church is the Lord's chief agency in preparing for the greatest of all world events. The celestial clock will soon strike again to signal the beginning of the millennium, when Jesus the Christ will rule and reign as King of Kings and Lord of Lords during one thousand years of universal peace.—The Improvement Era, 1957.

Thy Will Be Done

(Comment by the Editor: This article has an added message and significance when it is recalled that it was written little more than two months after Lieutenant Hugh Card Brown, eldest son of President Hugh B. Brown was reported missing in action.)

To the Saints in Britain, Greeting!

More than ever, now, we feel that we are a part of Britain. Hopefully we look forward to the time when we can return and help in some way to repair the damage done by the awful impact of war.

We are anxious that the seeds of hate, which fall from the machines of war, shall not take root in the hearts of the people, for the tares which grow from such seeds will, if nourished, choke out the tender plants of love and extend and continue war's miseries after the war itself is ended.

When Satan's proposal to rule by force was rejected by the council in the heavens, he swore to carry on his fight as long as he could get agents on earth to champion his cause. Knowing that his kingdom is nearing liquidation, he has marshalled his forces for a last stand fight. Ours is the task of meeting force with force until his power is broken and the people of all nations are released from the baneful influence of his agents who have usurped power over the people and challenged even God.

It was because Christ had an international outlook that he said, "Go ye into ALL THE WORLD and preach the gospel." The adversary saw the danger of its becoming world-wide, and so he used vicious and cunning tools to organize a final effort to defeat it. That he will fail we have no doubt at all.

But the world situation calls for many sowers of the seeds of love, if there is to be a crop to harvest when the reaping time shall come. We may be honored with a call to labor in his vineyard, but only if, through all the provocations of the times, we have adhered strictly to his injunction "Thou shalt love." To the extent that we keep this command shall we contribute to the downfall of Satan's kingdom and defeat his "flank attack" by which he purposes to inject the fatal virus of hate into the ranks of those who oppose him.

With all the might of righteous loyalty we shall oppose his legions until they are defeated, and then, clothed in the armour of charity and love, we must help to lift and heal our brothers, God's children, all who will forsake the ways of war and force and sin; for only when love is universal can the world be prepared for Christ's coming.

Many sacrifices will still be required; faith and fortitude and courage will be needed; closer companionship with God must be sought; and in it all we must achieve the power to victory which will come after, in Gethsemane, we have learned with broken hearts to say, "Thy will be done."—Millennial Star, September 3, 1942.

Some Differences between the LDS Church and Other Churches

We feel that we should warn new members of the Church that merely joining the Church does not insure them against future difficulties, problems, sometimes heartache and sorrow. This is the Church of Jesus Christ, and he himself was a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, a man who was crowned with thorns and finally crucified. Therefore, they who accept his name must be prepared to take up their cross and follow him.

In this connection a man said to me sometime ago, with real delight, "I have joined the Church now and therefore have come to the end of all my troubles." I told him that he reminded me of a young bride who said to her mother on her wedding day, "I am the happiest girl in all the world because I have come to the end of all my troubles," and the wise old mother answered, "Yes, my dear, but you don't know which end." So it is with new members of the Church. However, we do promise them ultimate victory and eternal happiness if they endure to the end.

We who travel extensively have occasion to interpret our faith to nonmembers. The question most often asked of us is, "What is the difference between the Mormon Church and other churches?" Of course, in one short sermon no one could even refer to all the differences, but there are some fundamental doctrines on which we differ.

Every religious person must have a concept of God. Every church organization has some creed in which the members undertake to define him. It is with respect to the definition of God and the Godhead that we differ fundamentally. We believe he is a personal being, in whose image we were made. In the first book of the Holy Bible we read:

"So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." (Gen. 1:27.)

If, then, we are created in the image of God, simple logic leads us to a concept of a personal being.

Many of the Christian churches accept the Nicene Creed, which declares God to be incomprehensible, immaterial, and without body, parts, or passions. To us this itself is incomprehensible, for anything without parts has no whole, or in other words, does not exist, and to declare that he is incomprehensible is to make it difficult to understand how anyone can receive salvation for the Savior said, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.)

If, then, we cannot know him, and if it is life eternal to know him, there is no hope.

We believe that all men are the spirit children of God, created in his image. This concept is supported by the Holy Bible from Genesis to Revelation, and the Bible is the law book to which those discussing religion should refer, as lawyers would refer to the statutes or the Constitution for interpretation of the law.

Most Christian churches refer to the Godhead as "God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost." They, therefore, give to Christ the name of God. We ask, "Did he have a body?" and, of course, all will agree he had, but most of them say he did not take the body to heaven with him. His body was taken down from the cross and placed in a borrowed tomb, but three days later it came forth from that tomb. That it was the same body as went into the tomb is evidenced by his own statement to his disciples when he met with them. They were frightened, thinking he was a spirit, and he said to them, ". . . handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." (Luke 24:39.)

They beheld the wounds in his resurrected body. They were not wounds in the spirit, and to emphasize that it was his real body, he ate with them.

Later he went out near Bethany, and there in their presence was caught up in a cloud and ascended into heaven.

There is no record anywhere in the Bible that there was a residue where he had stood. In other words, he did not lay off his body when he ascended into heaven. If he had, there would be some record of it, but he ascended with the body which came forth from the tomb, and Zechariah tells us he will come again with that body and stand on the Mount of Olives, which shall be split in twain. He shall extend his wounded hands, and they will ask whence these wounds, and he will reply, "These I received in the house of my friends."

Thinking men of our time are recognizing the truth of the personality of God. A professor in Harvard recently wrote, "If God is not personal as you and I are personal, if he cannot be addressed in the personal pronoun, then why build our churches and say our prayers?"

That he is a God of feeling or passion is evidenced by many passages of scripture in the Old and New Testaments. In the ten commandments he says, "I am a jealous God." We read elsewhere that his anger was kindled against people, that he is a God of mercy and of love. To say that he has no body and no passions and no parts is to deny him.

Jesus Christ was not only a member of the Godhead but is the Creator of the world.

In Colossians we read,

"In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins:

"Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature:

"For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him:

"And he is before all things, and by him all things consist." (Col. 1:14-17.)

Surely this interpretation of God gives a more comprehensive and understandable faith in the ultimate outcome of righteousness, for if he is the Creator of all things, then he will so order all things as to bring about his desired purpose.

There is no more inspiring thought than that God is my Father, and that therefore there is something of him in me. If this be true, I can become more like him as time goes on.

When we note the growth of an individual from babyhood to manhood, when we note what can happen in twenty, fifty, or ninety years, when from a little helpless child, the individual develops into a Washington, Lincoln, or Churchill—one naturally asks the question, if he believes in immortality and eternal progression, "What will happen to this individual in ten thousand or ten million years?" We have an eternity in which to live and to become more like our Heavenly Father. We believe in eternal increase, increase of knowledge and the power that goes with it, increase of awareness and of intelligence, which is the glory of God, increase of all the things that go to make up Godhood.

Another difference between the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and other churches is that we believe in continued revelation. We believe that the Lord in all ages referred to in the Bible talked to men, gave revelations to the prophets, and guided his people. His voice was heard by Adam, Abraham, Moses, and others of the prophets. We believe he has spoken again in our time, just as Saul of Tarsus heard him on his way to Damascus, and as he said to Saul," . . . I am Jesus whom thou persecutest:" (Acts 9:5.) So he has appeared again and been introduced by his Father. If this statement be true, it is the most important statement in the world today, and all men should heed it. We humbly bear testimony to its truth.

Ministers of other churches are saying today, "What we need is a prophet to tell us authoritatively what is the word and the will of the Lord." Eight thousand missionaries are out today declaring to the people of the world there has been a new revelation from heaven, that the gospel has been restored, and that we are approaching the end of the earth. This is the most hopeful message in the world in face of the fear and uncertainty that is abroad in the word.—Norwalk Stake Conference, January 8, 1961.
