Hugh B. Brown, Continuing the Quest ( 1961)

IV

The World and Moral Dicta

The More Abundant Life

Justice without Vengeance

The Value of Good Books

Churches and the Church

Life's Purpose

Hold a High Opinion of Thyself

The Garden of the Good Neighbor

Fit to Live

Divine Prophecy and World Events

Old Testament Prophecies

Prophecies Fulfilled

The Night of the Darkness

The Promised Restoration Occurs

Freedom Will Survive

Seeds of Peace

Attributes to Cultivate

Retrospect . . . Today . . . Prospect

An Old Veteran Speaks

The More Abundant Life

What is "the abundant life" and why should we seek it? Is it a state of being which may be achieved at any given time? Can it be bought and paid for at one time and price? Is it reserved for the few, or is it available to all who qualify to enjoy it?

The abundant life is eternally becoming. It is not fixed and static, but of necessity is ever changing. What might be abundant life to the child would, if unchanged, become progressively less abundant as he matures. It is a state of being where constant adjustments are necessary; where one is ever preparing for the changing conditions of tomorrow.

The abundant life is the joyous life. One must be healthy to be happy. The Lord's law of health promises physical fitness and radiant life. It is the teachable life, the life of awareness and appreciation; therefore education helps to determine its quality. One prepares for more abundant living by gaining knowledge, and intelligence will be his glory.

A candidate for the abundant life must be spiritually responsive and in tune. He requires diligence, faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, Godliness, brotherly kindliness, charity—if his life is to be abundant rather than barren.

It is a discerning life where price is not confused with value; where tomorrow's happiness will not be marred by today's folly; where one does not mortgage the future in an attempt to enjoy immediate unearned pleasures. One may find it necessary to resist some desires today in order that tomorrow's joy might be full. Living the abundant life today involves preparing to enjoy it tomorrow.

The past as well as the future determines the measure and quality of life today, and each holds something to make it more abundant. No measure of time may be isolated with the view to treating it as independent of what was and is, and is to be, for the abundant life is eternal life, and eternity is now.

The life we seek is lived in harmony with law, and is in tune with God. It is ever active, but not impatient. Because of its eternal nature it is lived and measured by eternal standards.

In order to live fully one must believe in the gospel of Christ as a plan formulated for his good and operative both before and after his earth life. It is a plan which requires his participation and determines his dividends by the nature of his daily investments. This life is not a matter of a day, a year, a period, or a lifetime, but is a part of that eternal plan in which each day is conditioned by the preceding one, and in turn conditions that which is to follow.

The candidates must believe in the gospel of "free agency" and accountability. He must recognize the inexorable law of the harvest, and those other irrevocable laws upon which all blessings are predicated, and let obedience be his watchword. He must seek to know something of what lies beyond the hills on both sides of the valley of life. He will seek inspiration and be guided by revelation.

With this conception of the abundant life, one comes to see the possibility of enjoying it here and now. Though he may not have all the things he desires, and though some of his best-laid plans may not succeed, his life may be rich and radiant if he will get the broader view afforded by higher ground. His life is abundant if he is making the best use of the experience of the past and proper provision for the future. The abundant life is a growing life—virile, positive, hopeful, healthful, achieving—where each today is better than yesterday; where there is no stagnation or decay; where the better self controls desire; where there is "a sound mind in a sound body, controlled by a God-filled soul."

This life is available to all, for "men are, that they might have joy," and God is no respecter of persons.

The gospel of Jesus Christ marks the way to this life which all men desire—the more abundant life. The Savior came that we might have it. He gave us the faultless formula. He demonstrated by his own life that it may be achieved under conditions which men would term adverse. He lived the abundant life. His hunger was to give, and not to get. He did not seek material things but reminded us that "a man's life consisteth not of the abundance of things which he possesseth." Abundance of things is not essential to abundant living.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints provides ways and means for all its members to live the more abundant life. It fosters education. It encourages participation. It is guided by revelation and holds high the ideal of perfection. Daring to declare "As God is, man may become" and willing to pay the price, we seek the more abundant life.—Millennial Star, June 23, 1938.

Justice without Vengeance

By the use of modern scientific inventions large cities like London and Berlin have been brought into the second line of battle. They are under devastating fire. Millions of civilians, without any of the basic training which hardens the soldier for the rigors of war, find themselves at grips with the monster in their own neighborhood, on their own street, or amid the ruins of their own homes.

This sudden flooding of the sullen, murky stream beyond its banks spreads ruin and havoc far beyond its accustomed channel and threatens an epidemic of miasma and utter desolation. The danger of which we speak is more sinister than that which takes lives and destroys property. Seeds are being sown in the muck, the backwash of war, which, if allowed to grow and mature, will bring a harvest of desolation and despair.

We regret that responsible persons in the press and on the radio advocate the culture among our people of the very virus which our enemies have broadcast in their effort to exterminate all whom they could not conquer. Seeing the effect of hate, they still suggest the paradox of overcoming the effect by increasing the cause. The public mind is being nourished with a daily diet of vengeance and hate. The atmosphere of war stimulates primitive impulses in the centers of our civilization where bombings prepare the soil for these poisonous seeds, which are blown across the channel by the fetid breath of Mars.

We have witnessed some of the effects of the flying bombs and know something of the dull terror among the civilians of quiet neighborhoods where one bomb razes a dozen homes, burying the families in the debris while hundreds of other homes are made untenantable. We can understand the rising sense of indignation and the burning desire to strike back as fathers and mothers carry little mangled forms away from burning ruins. But we still take issue with those who advocate reprisals and attempt to whip up primitive impulses by encouraging vengeance and hate and calling for an eye for an eye, or, if possible two eyes or four.

In spite of our boasted mastery of the elements and our vaunted mechanical efficiency, we have not yet succeeded in changing the law of the harvest with its inexorable decree that "as ye sow, so shall ye reap." Throughout the ages retaliation has brought more retaliation as soon as the vanquished could rise and strike. There is little hope of saving our civilization by retaliatory measures amidst the mounting ingenuity of aerial warfare. A seedtime of hate will always be followed by a harvest of misery.

We are not unmindful of the necessity of opposing force with force until we are in a position to dictate terms to those who have relied upon the exploitation of primitive impulses to raise them to world mastery.

But our victory will be followed by another war, which is to say we shall lose as surely as they have lost if we employ the same mental and spiritual weapons or adopt any of their lethal indoctrination. No, the antidote must not be more of the same thing, but rather its antithesis, something with greater vitality than the menace we seek to eradicate. Light will dispel darkness; truth will triumph over error; but adding to the darkness or the error is sheer madness. Two wrongs never made a right.

For nearly two thousand years most of the nations which are now at war have professed to be followers of Jesus of Nazareth, the Prince of Peace. Christians in these nations have spent fabulous sums on churches and cathedrals; they have adopted creeds and ceremonies and liturgies. Parliaments have established state churches and levied taxes on the people to support them; missionaries have been sent to the "heathen" nations to give them the enlightenment of Christianity. And yet Christian nations today vie with each other, while locked in a colossal struggle, to devise more effective methods of mass killing.

We of the United Nations are convinced that we fight only to resist aggression and to thwart the ambitions of power-maddened tyrants. We have found it necessary to use some of the measures adopted by our enemies in order to prevent their domination and subjugation of the world. But only to the extent that we stamp out the satanic doctrines which they have sought to impose shall we ourselves be worthy of victory and equal to the grave responsibility which it will bring.

Now that we have superior strength and the means and numbers at our disposal to defeat the enemy, we must watch our propaganda and eliminate any poison which the enemy, at home or abroad, may seek to inject. We quote Professor Bowie: "You can fight evil and not become its victim; you can espouse a great cause without arousing primitive action. Men do not fight better by frothing at the mouth. Leaders of the countries which sing their hymns of hate will learn when it is too late that wars are not won by dosing people up with a lot of synthetic hatred. Wars are won by clear thinking, positive purpose, and disciplined will, and these are needed in civilian life as well as on the field of battle. Hate is a poison in the blood, and if injected during the war, it will find some class or race or religion on which to vent itself when the present object of its venom has been destroyed. A world order conceived and built according to principles of justice and human consideration cannot be created by men still stupid and truculent with the hangovers of deliberate hating. It will require men whose souls have been big enough to keep sober in a maddened time."

The leaders of the United Nations need vision as they assume the stupendous obligation of bringing a maddened world back to sanity: vision which is not visionary, which is supported by the courage to act on the basis of prophetic insight. If we are to set the pattern and make the blueprints of an international structure, we must insist that the materials used are according to the specifications of the Master Builder. "Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it." (Psalm 127:1.)

If we would build a world order based on the moral law, courage must accompany discrimination if faulty and dangerous materials are to be rejected. Only those materials which have been tempered in the gospel kiln will be accepted. In this world structure there will be no place for hate or reprisals or vengeance. "Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." (Rom. 12:19.)

We are not pleading for a soft hand in dealing with the criminals who have caused so much misery. They should be brought to judgment and punished. But wherever discipline is to be maintained, whether in the family, the community, or among the nations, corrections and punishments, if they are to be salutary, must be void of vengeance, made and administered without rancor, malice, or hatred.

Madame Chiang Kai-shek, whose people have had as much provocation as any people anywhere, recommends the Christian spirit to the Christian nations in these words.

"There must be no bitterness in the reconstructed world. No matter what we have undergone or suffered, we must try to forgive those who injured us and remember only the lessons gained thereby."

Let us heed the noble words of Abraham Lincoln who, at the end of four years of bitter warfare, called upon his countrymen, victors and vanquished alike, to approach the stupendous task of reconstruction with "charity for all and with malice toward none."—Editorial, Millennial Star August 1944.

The Value of Good Books

Recently an out-of-state visitor came into the Church headquarters and was directed to my office. He had in his hand a copy of the MIA June Conference program. He said, "I have studied this wonderful program of activities very carefully, and by it was directed to some of the various groups; to the athletic, the dancing, the drama, and other events. I also attended some of the inspiring general sessions." He mentioned with enthusiasm the Friday Music Festival and called it magnificent. And then he said, "There seemed to be a religious fervor through all the activities I have seen and heard. I marvel that the MIA can get so many thousands to co-operate with such zest and dedication. Tell me," he asked, "what is your purpose and objective? What are you striving for? What is the aim of MIA?"

After calling his attention to the full name of the young peoples' organizations, "Mutual Improvement Associations," I suggested that one word might answer his question regarding purpose and aim, viz. "Education." We are trying to educate our people physically, morally, mentally, and spiritually, seeking a perfectly rounded development. I explained that education is an integral part of the religion of the Latter-day Saints. We believe that a man cannot be saved in ignorance; that he is saved no faster than he gains knowledge. As the glory of God is intelligence, so the degree of man's glory will be determined by the measure of his intelligence. Among the blessings which the Savior promised his followers as he was about to leave them was that his Father would send the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, (who) " . . . shall teach you all things." (John 14:26.) He thus emphasized the importance of learning, of education. Gaining knowledge, using it with wisdom, building character, and achieving intelligence are steppingstones to the joy which is the purpose of life.

A short time ago I visited the Air Force Academy in Colorado. An officer, while directing a tour of the campus, drew my attention to a monument, topped by a great bird—a falcon—and at its feet some young ones. Its wings were spread, obviously to protect its young, and seemingly encouraging them to fly. On the base of the monument I read: "Man's flight through life is sustained by the power of his knowledge." On another campus recently I read over the door of one of the buildings: "A hunger for truth and understanding gnaws at the mind and spirit of man." The spirit of inquiry, an appetite for knowledge, is innate in the soul of man.

There is an editorial in a recent issue of Wisdom Magazine which I commend to your thoughtful consideration. From it I quote and paraphrase briefly. "What one knew at 21 or 35 or 60 is never enough to last a lifetime. The degree of our achievement in business, profession, home, family life, social affairs, civic duties—in fact, our religious and personal philosophy—is largely determined by our education. That there are limitless areas all about us which are as yet unexplored becomes increasingly evident, as we push back the horizons of our knowledge."

The quest for knowledge becomes an important and necessary part of life, and it does not end—in fact, sometimes it does not begin in college. We should all continue to be deeply possessed by ideas. Education is not only a lifetime process, it is an eternal process. We believe God's purpose in creating man is that man may gain immortality, eternal life, and eternal increase, among other things, increase of knowledge, and the power that comes with knowledge, increase of wisdom, of awareness, of intelligence—which is the glory of God—all to the end that he might achieve self-mastery and exaltation.

We seek to arouse in all who are young in mind a broad and well-rounded acquaintance with and enthusiasm for fine books, that their increasing knowledge shall continue to be vigorous, dynamic, and zestful, that life may be worth living. Liberal education—the education that liberates the human mind from prejudice and provincialism—is education for freedom.

The love of great books should be earnestly desired by every person. If we are to be free, our minds must be free. He who loves and becomes acquainted with great books is the richest and happiest of men. Beginning with the Bible, great books are always and everywhere contemporaneous. Reading minds are growing minds, and when we cease to read, we cease to grow. If we do not read well, we will not think well. Someone has said we have 10,000 readers for one thinker. The truth of this statement seems to be borne out as we note the kind of books on the best seller lists and those called for most often in our libraries; they are often worse than mediocre, some are even vulgar and unclean. Unfortunately some of the cheap and trashy reading matter is most popular. Some adults lead lives comparatively rich in material comforts but very poor in moral, intellectual, and spiritual tone.

"We must learn to differentiate between the worthwhile and the useless and trashy in our reading. Magazine racks and some of our libraries are flooded with indiscriminate books which are not only low in character and vulgar and corrupting, but they often saturate the mind with unpurgible filthiness." Why go to garbage cans for mental food? Let us teach our young people the value of good books and remind them, with Henry Fielding, that "we are as liable to be corrupted by books as by companions."

Leon Gutterman wrote in a recent issue of Wisdom Magazine: "Great books are the key to man's culture. If they vanished overnight and could not be replaced, our civilization would disappear. Great books (and at the top of the list are the scriptures) are a treasure and a precious storehouse. They contain enough to make us rich for time and all eternity. They stand alone in human literature. They abound in plain truth and are expressed in plain language. In this they surpass all other books." Companionship with great and worthwhile books is a prime necessity for complete and radiant living. They are the daily bread of the soul, the best friends a man can have, and the best consumers of our leisure.

How wonderful and profitable it would be if in every Latter-day Saint home we had a regular home evening, where the family could read together the scriptures and other great books, great poems, great histories, biographies, philosophy—great literature; read the Sermon on the Mount; memorize the Beatitudes; read the Book of Mormon in the family circle. That is the challenge I would like to throw out to the MIA—that throughout the Church as a project we become a reading people, and in our reading select the best.

"Without the love of books, the richest man is poor, but endowed with this treasure, the poorest man is rich. He has wealth which no power can diminish, riches which are always increasing, possessions which the more he scatters the more they accumulate, friends who never desert him, and pleasures which never end."

Listen to the appraisal of great books by some great authors: "Great books are great men of higher stature, and the only men that speak aloud for future times to hear." (Browning.) "Great books and thoughts rule the world." (Emerson.) "Great books are portions of the soul of man. Great thoughts are portions of eternity." (Lowell.) "Learning is an ornament in prosperity, a refuge in adversity, and a provision in old age." (Aristotle.)

Let us not, then, allow our MIA members to think—and thousands of them have recently received their diplomas from high schools and colleges—let us not permit them to assume that they have finished their education. To become liberally educated those who have finished with formal schooling must keep their minds at work. Oliver Hertford recently said, "The great American myth is that when someone is handed the skin of a dead sheep at graduation time, it will keep his mind alive forever." Of course that is a myth. "Nothing is more terrible than ignorance in action," said Goethe. We must teach our young people that the purpose of life is self-mastery, the development of character, and its destiny is salvation, exaltation, and eternal increase of knowledge, wisdom, and dominion.

Let us follow the admonition of the ancient prophet and with all our getting, get understanding—understanding of God, of man and of life; and with that understanding, increase our faith in life, faith in ourselves, faith in God and in the ultimate triumph of righteousness. We shall need such faith in the times ahead.

General Omar Bradley, former Chief of Staff, issued the following warning: "With the monstrous weapons man already has, humanity is in danger of being trapped in this world by its moral adolescence. Our knowledge of science has clearly outstripped our capacity to control it. (We have too many men of science and too few men of God.) We have grasped the mystery of the atom, and have forgotten the Sermon on the Mount. Man is stumbling blindly through a spiritual darkness while toying with precarious secrets of life and death. The world has attained brilliance without wisdom, power without conscience. Ours is a world of nuclear giants, and ethical infants."

Speaking of faith, I am reminded of what happened in New York at the close of the First World War. A very wealthy man—a multimillionaire—was lying near death in a hospital. He was nearly 90 years of age. He had made his money by gambling, bootlegging, and in other illegal and unlawful pursuits. None of his family was present. They had become estranged and had forsaken him; his wife had divorced him; he was actually one of the poorest men in New York, though his assets were listed at 17 million dollars.

A young man, his nephew, called on him, and after exchanging greetings, the young man said, 'Uncle, you know you are about to die. You have lived your life and have had everything that money could buy. I am a young man, just starting in life. Would you tell me what you would do if you were my age, what you, with your varied experiences consider the most worthwhile things in life?"

The old man thought a moment, and then he said, "If you will open the dresser drawer you will find a book—a book of poems, and if you will turn to page 72 you will find my answer to your question, given better than I could give it. You ask me what is worthwhile, what is worth striving for. Let the poet answer you, and imagine as you read it that I am speaking to you."

And this is what the young man read aloud while the old man wept:

"I am an alien to the faith my mother taught me;I am an alien to the God who heard my mother when she cried.I am a stranger to the comfort that 'Now I lay me' brought me;To the everlasting arms that held my father when he died.

"When this big world came and called me, I deserted all to follow;Never noting in my blindness I had slipped my hand from His;Never dreaming in my dazedness that the bubble, fame, is hollow;That the wealth of gold is tinsel as I since have learned it is.

"No! I spent a lifetime seeking things I spurned when I had found them,I have fought and been rewarded in many a winning cause;But I'd give them all—fame, fortune, and the pleasures that surround them—If I only had the faith that made my mother what she was."

The poor rich man died the following day.

I bring to you my own testimony—and hope you will take it to the MIA members everywhere—that things alone will not bring happiness nor peace; that real and lasting values are mental and spiritual; that faith in the gospel of the Lord, Jesus Christ, is life's richest treasure; God's greatest gift. Let us introduce our young people to the prophets and apostles of old and of modern times, to Abraham, Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Amos, Joel, and the other great prophets. Have them listen to Peter and John, Luke and Paul. Let them read the inspiring messages of these great men of old. Through them they will get an understanding of the Master Teacher, the one, incidentally, who had the best education of any man who ever lived for he was with God in the beginning, he was God and was the Creator of all that is.

Teach them to love him and to honor him by honoring themselves. Teach them to listen to their hearts for "as a man thinketh in his heart, so is he."

Let us all be responsive to what the poet has called the "invincible surmise," or what Jesus called faith. We shall need to have the kind of faith that led Moses, Lehi, and Brigham Young to their respective promised lands; the faith that made Nephi one of the greatest of the prophets; the faith that sustained Mosiah, Alma, and King Benjamin; that enabled Moroni to carry on alone after all about him had been slain.

Teach them that only they who endure to the end will be saved and enduring to the end involves improving oneself while he endures. Speaking of the "Invincible Surmise" I am reminded of what the poet said:

"Oh, world, thou choosest not the better part; It is not wisdom to be only wise, And on the inner vision close the eyes, But it is wisdom to believe the heart. Columbus found a world, and had no chart, Save that which faith deciphered in the skies. To trust the soul's invincible surmise, Was all his science and his only art. Our knowledge is as a torch of smoky pine, That lights our pathway but one step ahead, Across a void of mystery and dread. Bid then the eternal light of faith to shine, By which alone the human heart is led Unto the thinking of a thought divine."

(Santayana.)

Brethren and sisters, I bring to you a testimony concerning the Redeemer of the world, the Son of God, Jesus of Nazareth; a testimony of my own personal knowledge that he lives and that he is my Redeemer and my friend. I bring to you a challenge that you learn of him and follow him, emulate his life and apply in your lives the principles of his gospel, that you may achieve immortality and eternal life and eternal increase. When I speak of knowing him, I am reminded of another incident that occurred in New York recently when a great actor at the close of a performance one evening was greeted with thunderous and repeated applause, to which he responded again and again; and then, someone in the audience called him by name and said, "Would you read for us the 23rd Psalm?"

The actor was somewhat surprised, but he responded and said, "Yes, I know the words of the 23rd Psalm," and he repeated them. He read the Psalm as an actor would read a drama with gestures and proper emphasis, it was doubtless impressive but not very inspiring, but when he finished there was more applause. Then the actor, calling for silence, said, "Ladies and gentlemen, there is an elderly man sitting on the front row with whom I am acquainted. I am going to ask him, without notice, to come to the stage and really read the 23rd Psalm."

The old man, of course was frightened, but he made his way to the stage, and looking out over that sea of faces was almost panic-stricken until he closed his eyes, folded his hands, and prayerfully said:

"The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.

"He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters.

"He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake.

"Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

"Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.

"Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I will dwell in the house of the Lord forever."

When the old man sat down, there was impressive silence, there was no applause, but there was not a dry eye in the house. The actor, wiping his own eyes, stepped forward and said, "Ladies and gentlemen, I know the words of the 23rd Psalm, but this man knows the Shepherd."

God help us to know and emulate the Shepherd, and by gaining knowledge and wisdom and intelligence and developing courage and fortitude and faith qualify ourselves to feel at home in his divine presence, I humbly pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—MIA Conference, June 12, 1960.

Churches and the Church

When traveling in Europe, one is impressed by the number and beauty of the churches and cathedrals everywhere to be seen. There is hardly a village without its spire and chimes. In each country there is at least one famous shrine of historic architecture and thrilling history.

One is struck with awe and wonder as he visits St. Peter's in Rome; St. Mark's in Venice; the cathedrals of Pisa, Milan, Florence, Naples, Palermo, Notre Dame, Antwerp, Cologne; and in England, Westminster Abbey, Canterbury, Salisbury, York, Ely, St. Paul's, Exeter, Durham. But for what do they stand, these mighty sentinels of the past? What do they mean to this scientific and materialistic age? What is their significance to the present generation?

Are they valuable only because of their history, their architectural and artistic beauty, their irreplaceable windows and their sky-piercing spires; or do they also remind us of the inspiration which called forth such lavish expenditure and noble toil?

Is the Christianity which these great churches claim to teach still vital in the earth, or are they, as someone has suggested, merely "tombs in which lie buried the embalmed remains of a great religion"?

What of the vital faith and simple life of the One whose teachings inspired the builders of these grand cathedrals and the priceless works of art to be found therein? What of the doctrines and authority taught and exercised by his apostles for whom many of these are named? Is that ancient faith alive today, or must we forever look back over a dimly lighted interval to the beacons of apostolic days from which these builders caught their vision?

More important to the present generation than these "memories in stone" is the religion which allegedly was carried from the hills of Galilee into their cloistered walls. Is that religion being taught therein today, and if so, by what authority?

Has the Master so changed since he taught a simple faith on the hillsides and by the sea that he now requires this great display of wealth and pageantry to attest the faith of those who would be his followers?

With all true Christians, we express appreciation for the rich and gifted past which gave to us these noble structures. But from humble halls and by the wayside we declare again the simple story of the gospel of Christ, restored again in its simplicity. It is the gospel of a simple faith in God followed by true repentance and transformation of life; of water baptism where the repentant sinner may be "buried with him by baptism into death," that he also may walk in a newness of life; the gospel of the Son of God who promised the gift of the Holy Ghost to true believers.

The gospel is more than a book, more than an organization, more than a temple or cathedral; it is the power of God unto salvation. Without this power, our fine edifices will never accomplish the work and mission of the Church, i. e., to save the souls of men. It is that men might hear and embrace the truths of the gospel and learn how to apply its power that the restored Church of Christ enunciates its simple truths.

When the Apostle John, banished on the Isle of Patmos, was permitted to view the future of the world, he prophetically declared: "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,

"Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." (Rev. 14:6-7.)

The message of the angel was to go to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. This implies that none of them would have the gospel at that time, and so it was.

We testify that after a long night of spiritual darkness, this angel came and announced the dawn of a new day, a new dispensation; that again is heard, "The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight." (Matt. 3:1.)

The Apostle Paul, in his day, noted the beginning of the falling away from the gospel of the Master, and he said, "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel:

"Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ.

"But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. . . .

"But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man.

"For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ." (Gal. 1:6-8, 11-12.)

As we stand in these mighty cathedrals, listening to their great organs, inspired by their masterpieces of art, we are saddened by the knowledge that within their very walls may be heard the roar of cannon and the drone of death-dealing bombers with which Christians destroy one another. We are made aware again that the gospel of the Son of God was taken from the earth, and that the Prince of Peace is being crucified anew.

Oh, that we could carry to the millions the simple message of the restoration of the gospel of peace, the gospel of love, the gospel of goodwill. We feel to say with the apostle of old, "Woe is unto me if I preach not the gospel." In his words we declare to all who may read this message that they should "Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness;

"And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace;" (Eph. 6:14-15.)

"For the preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness; but unto us which are saved it is the power of God.

"For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent." (1 Cor. 1:18-19.) Surely the nations of the earth today should heed his warning message, "This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come."

For more than one hundred years this witness has gone forth to the nations. Let those whose hearts have been touched thereby seek to carry it to their neighbors that all may be warned of his coming.

Let us pray and work for the day to come when the world shall become his great cathedral where all may worship and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ—the King of Kings—the Prince of Peace.—Millennial Star, December 1939.

Life's Purpose

"He has achieved success who has lived well, laughed often, and loved much. Who has gained the respect of intelligent men and the love of little children. Who has filled his niche and accomplished his task, who has left the world better than he found it, whether by an improved poppy, a perfect poem, or a rescued soul. Who has never lacked appreciation of earth's beauties, nor failed to express it. Who has always looked for the best in others and given the best he had. Whose life is an inspiration, whose memory a benediction."—Robert Louis Stevenson.

Life has meaning; and to find its meaning is my meat and drink, says Browning. Doubtless to every mature person has come the question—why am I, what is the object of my being? Sages and philosophers have attempted to answer, but they give us a stone when we ask for bread. One says life is endless pain leading only to a painful end; says another, it is an adventure leading only to resignation and despair. Some see in life a great adventure in which good fortune and ill follow each other with bewildering variety; some say it is a game of chance without a chance of winning, that the fall of Adam resulted in man's earth life being altered to his detriment if indeed it did not thwart the plan of the Creator.

One gets a pessimistic outlook on life if he relies alone on the writings of philosophers. We need that vision and inspiration which come to and through "holy men of God who spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost" if we are to escape the mental down drag of these unhappy days.

Contrasted with the juiceless and dusty old straw which some philosophers would feed to the people, is the life-giving grain discovered and declared to the world by an ancient optimist and prophet, "Men are, that they might have joy."

What is your outlook on life today? Have you courage to face the future? Are you hopeful, contented, helpful, and optimistic? To whom do you look for your inspiration? Have you reserves of valor behind the front lines of your vision? Does your faith make you unafraid of that no man's land across which the general plan of campaign requires you to go?

A new day of Pentecost awaits the world and will renew its mighty powers among us and overcome the drought that the paganism of war seems wont to spread on Christendom. But such a Pentecost can come only when men again become converted to the truth as Christ taught it, and seek that upper room and be "all with one accord."

The gospel of Jesus Christ restored in our age beckons today as anciently, and promises joy to all who will yield obedience to its teachings; obedience—that word from which the timid flee and to which the valiant look for their deliverance. Obedience to the gospel is an integral part of the plan itself. Though we have a perfect plan, divinely inspired, if it is not accepted and obeyed, it will never be effective. It is not self-operating but requires intelligent application. The best-constructed automobile is of little value unless the laws governing its various parts are understood and observed, and put to work.

If we accept the gospel, we must comply with its ordinances, must perform the symbols which stand for its realities, must observe its laws and obligations. Thus the word obedience, which to some seems to whisper slavery, is seen to be the emblem of true liberty. It is an ingredient of the joy we seek.

Obedience, however, involves restraint and self-control. One may find temporary pleasure in the gratification of an appetite, in the indulgence of desire, but lasting joy comes only to the man who is willing to pay the price of self-denial to achieve self-realization. "Everything worthwhile in life must be bought and paid for by giving up some habits and indulgences which are irreconcilable to its possession."

The man who rightly answers the question, "Why am I?" will strive to increase his power of appreciation. Too many go through life with eyes closed, with ears stopped, with sense of feeling deadened or never awakened, and with the shutters closed to the windows of the soul; so absorbed in material things that they miss the beauty and the richness which lie about them. God's glory is intelligence, and we must climb the ladder of knowledge if we are ever to share that glory.

"Fools believe," says the philosopher, "that if they can only achieve wealth, their wishes will be completely gratified. A man of means is supposed to be a man with means for the fulfilment of every desire. A life devoted to the acquisition of wealth is useless unless one knows how to turn it into joy, and that is an art that requires culture and wisdom. A succession of sensual pursuits never satisfies for long. One must understand the ends of life as well as the art of acquiring means. Men are a thousand times more intent upon becoming rich than on acquiring culture, though it is quite certain that what a man is contributes more to his happiness than what he has; not wealth but wisdom is the way."

He who finds joy in life does not speak of its relationships as duties, obligations, and responsibilities. To him life is a privilege and an opportunity to serve. Service leads to love, and love, the fulfilment of the great commandment, leads to immortality and eternal progress. Here alone may joy be found.

The road to this desirable goal may lead through valleys of sorrow and pain and disappointment, but the prize is worth the price. Great souls in all ages have been willing to accept poverty, obscurity, and persecution rather than forsake the quest. They knew the joy of self-sacrificing service.

Yes, man is, that he might have joy—the joy of conquest over self; the joy of achievement; the joy of having fought the good fight; of having kept the faith; the joy of a peace that is earned; the joy of increase; the joy of living that more abundant life exemplified by the Master; the joy that comes from patient continuance in well-doing; the joy of comradeship; the joy of awareness and appreciation.

That joy which is the purpose of our being could not have been achieved without the refining fires of life's experience. If man had remained in that untried, innocent state of pre-existent infancy, he would have done no good, for he knew no evil, would have had no joy, for he knew so sorrow.

Man is, then, that he might have that joy which comes through understanding and obeying those eternal laws upon which all blessings are predicated.

"They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given—

"That by keeping the commandment they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power.

"And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true." (D&C 76:51-53.)—Millennial Star, November 1939.

Blessed Are the Peacemakers

"Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God." (Matt. 5:9.)

The Sermon on the Mount includes a unique classification of eight virtues essential to human happiness. Each beatitude begins with the word 'blessed' and is followed by a definite promise of reward. These blessings are predicated upon an enlightened sense of values and upon one's reaction to life's experiences; including adversity and persecution.

It is not surprising that the Master—himself the Prince of Peace—should have included peacemakers among those to be especially blessed. His birth was heralded by the angels singing "Peace on Earth," and his last earthly bequest to his followers was, "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you." (John 14:27.) And again he said, "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace." (Ibid., 16:33.)

The seventh of the Beatitudes, the one quoted above, requires a way of life which must be born and nourished in the soul and dedicated to the love and service of fellow men.

Peacemakers must be teachable as are the meek, must hunger and thirst after righteousness and develop a spirit of mercy and a desire to be pure in heart. Thus we see the logic of the Savior's classification.

Development of these virtues is as prerequisite to the peacemaker who is a teacher in the school of human relations as is preparation to the teacher in any other field. The peacemaker must overcome sin and achieve inner peace and tranquility. "Some may sin with safety but none with peace of soul." He must destroy the weeds of avarice, ambition, anger, envy, and pride and cultivate the spiritually nourishing "fruits of the Spirit" which the Apostle Paul lists as ". . . love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,

"Meekness and temperance. . . ." (Gal. 5:22-23.)

When one has found peace within himself, its radiance will pervade his home, his neighborhood, and, in an ever-widening circle, flavor and color every life he touches. But peace should never be purchased at the price of shame to one's own soul, the violation of his integrity, or of his allegiance to God.

The common people of all countries are longing, yearning, praying for peace, and in every country there are many men and women who are devoted to the cause of brotherhood.

There is one international hymn and prayer in the hearts, if not on the lips, of people in every land. Its title is the perfect word Peace and its heartfelt refrain is the same in all languages, namely, "Give us peace, oh, Lord." Peacemakers must not only sing that hymn but help to answer that prayer.

This universal longing for peace is a primary religious impulse and, like man's instinctive faith in immortality, is rooted in human nature. Its realization is essential to the dignity, freedom, and salvation of the individual.

Not only does the Savior promise specific blessings to the individual peacemaker but also guarantees one thousand years of peace during the millennium when, as Isaiah said, "The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them." (Isaiah 11:6.) "And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more." (Ibid., 2:4.)

Regarding this millennial peace, Dr. James E. Talmage has written: "Through the lurid gloom of smoke and fire in which the nations have been enshrouded, amidst the awful stench of blood that has sickened the world, mankind has had reason to rejoice in the enlightening beams of comforting assurance that an era of peace is to be established. And this shall be a peace that cannot be broken, for righteousness shall rule, and man's birthright to liberty shall be inviolate. Of necessity this blessed state shall be attained only after our preparation; for in the economy of God it would be as incongruous to force upon mankind an unappreciated and undesired boon as to arbitrarily afflict with an undeserved curse."

Among the leaders of democratic nations there are many men who, like President Eisenhower, though trained for war, are peace-loving men. Our Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, commended his predecessor in the following words. "At the close of the allied and Japanese conferences, Dean Acheson, chairman of the conference, concluded with a benediction which had never before been pronounced at such a gathering, but which was made appropriate by all that had gone before, 'I close this conference with words which in many languages, in many forms, in many religions have brought comfort and strength. May the peace of God which passeth all understanding be amongst us and remain with us always."

Yes, the peacemakers are properly listed with the meek, the merciful, the pure in heart and all those whom the Savior termed "blessed." Having dedicated their lives to the cause so close to his heart they are entitled to be known as "The Children of God."—The Instructor, 1956.

Hold a High Opinion of Thyself

To the Saints in Britain and to the readers of the Star everywhere, we send love and greetings. The invitation to write a short article for publication in the Millennial Star, which has been close to our hearts for more than fifty years, is greatly appreciated.

Inasmuch as most of the members of the Church in Britain are recent converts, it may be profitable to consider a subject which may not be as familiar to new members as are the subjects which were treated in the various lessons given by the missionaries.

Almost all informed people today have some knowledge of the Mormon doctrine of Deity, but perhaps our concept of the nature and destiny of man—hardly less important—is not generally understood.

As true religion basically has to do with the relationship that obtains between God and man, it is important that all members of the Church become familiar with the teachings of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints concerning man, who and whence he is, and his present and potential status in the scheme of things. The age-old question of the Psalmist, "What is man?" still challenges the thoughtful mind.

First we declare that man is co-eternal with God; secondly, that free agency is a part of his nature. He enjoyed it before he was born into this world; third, he is capable of eternal progression; and fourth, he, being a child of God, was innocent at birth.

When we speak of man being eternal, we mean eternal in both directions: not only that he will have no end but that he had no beginning, as an entity. It is obvious that that which had a beginning will surely have an end. Most Christians accept the scriptural doctrine that God is without beginning of days or end of years, or, as stated in many sectarian creeds, that he is uncreate. If this is so, and this we believe, it follows that man, being a son of God, of the same species, is endowed by him with his own characteristics, and therefore, as God is eternal, so man is eternal.

The scientists tell us that the elements of our universe are eternal and are characterized by change. In other words, they are uncreated in their essential essence. We believe these observations apply also to men.

We read in the Doctrine and Covenants:

"Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be. . . .

"For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy;" (D&C 93:29, 33.)

In this connection it will be remembered that God told Jeremiah that he knew him before he was born and ordained him a prophet to the nations. (Jer. 1:5.) And the Lord told Abraham he was among the great ones in the pre-existent world and was selected to be a leader among men. (Abr. 3:23.)

There is ample scriptural support for the belief that Jesus, the Savior, lived before he was born of the virgin Mary. He himself often referred to that pre-existent state. He said, I came down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me, and again in John he prayed:

"And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was." (John 17:5.)

If Christ lived before he was born into this mortal life, and if, as he assured us, we are his brothers and are the sons of God, then we too had a pre-mortal existence.

While the elements, the animals, and all things were created by him, man has the distinction of being a child of our Heavenly Father, spiritually begotten by him. The Apostle Paul understood this spiritual Fatherhood when he said:

"Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live?" (Heb. 12:9.)

While the scriptures state that all things were created by Christ, and that without him was not anything made that was made, the impossible feat of making something out of nothing is not implied. What really happened was, God organized the elements. He had something to work on, for those elements are eternal. Also he did not create our spirits out of nothing, but in the course of the progress of those spirits, he became the Father of spirit bodies.

In our modern scriptures we read,

"Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

"And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them: thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

"And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

"And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them:" (Abra. 3:22-25.)

The above scripture helps us to understand the scripture which has troubled Bible students throughout the ages, when God said to Job:

"Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me.

"Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding.

"Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it?

"Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof;

"When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" (Job 38:3-7.)

One purpose in making provision for our earthlife was that we, his children, might develop Godlike qualities, become partners with him in creation, exercise free agency, develop social and moral natures, and move toward eventual Godhood. The familiar law of "like begets like" must lead to this exalted conclusion.

Our earth-life then was planned and is purposeful. That plan provided for eternal spirits to be joined with eternal elements, that through obedience to law men might receive a fulness of joy.

"For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy;

"And when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy." (D&C 93:33-34.)

We teach the inspiring and biblical doctrine that salvation is something to be achieved, not at any given time, but through patient continuance in well doing and enduring to the end. Man's estrangement from God, excepting only the sons of perdition, is never complete or absolute. Repentance is an eternal principle—the first principle following faith, enunciated by John the Baptist, and later by Christ himself. True repentance follows when men become convinced that wickedness never leads to happiness.

"For each descent from fair truth's lofty way, For each gross error which delays the soul, By that soul's gloom and loneliness we pay And by the retarded journey to its goal."

Under the second heading, that man is intended to be free, we declare that freedom to choose lies at the heart of religion. It is fundamental to progress, is a part of our every nature and consists of the capacity or potential ability to determine the course of one's life. It was to preserve and guarantee this priceless blessing that the war in heaven was fought.

"And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels," (Rev. 12:7.)

Any person, group, church or government that attempts to rob men of their freedom is an enemy of God, for that freedom is essential to man's salvation and God's purpose is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man; therefore he who thwarts that purpose fights against God.

In connection with the doctrine of free agency, we renounce the idea of original sin, or inherited guilt. Such doctrine is contrary to the inspired teachings of the Hebrew prophets, as well as the explicit doctrines of Jesus the Christ. Human nature is not evil or guilty in its essential character.

Men will be justly praised or blamed only for what they do voluntarily, not for what they were born with. While we have a capacity for good and evil, we are born without virtue or vice, and before we are old enough to exercise personal will, there is nothing in us but what God has stored in us. Little children are innocent before God. In other words, we believe that men will be punished for their own sins and not for Adam's transgression.

"But little children are holy, being sanctified through the atonement of Jesus Christ; and this is what the scriptures mean." (D&C 74:7.)

Closely related to man's freedom of action, his potential Godlike status and his eternal nature is the doctrine of eternal progression, that is, going forward forever, progressively realizing our inherent possibilities. Faith, the moving cause of all action, impels us to reach out beyond our grasp, to seek the substance for which we hope, and proceed on the evidence of unseen things, trusting in a power transcendently greater than our own, "and we wrestle," as Paul said, to the Ephesian Saints:

". . . not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places." (Eph. 6:12.)

Other purposes of our earth-life are that we might gain knowledge, know joy and sorrow, see and appreciate beauty, understand and obey—or in other words, bring our lives into harmony with the laws of our universe—and, as Jesus said, live abundantly.

With faith in ourselves, in God and in the future, we will seek knowledge, which is prerequisite to progress in every area of activity. Salvation is not a goal to be attained at a given time or a commodity to be purchased on the bargain counter, but like education it is an ongoing process. Knowledge is the key, not only to power but to progress. As the poet says,

"Heaven is not gained by a single bound, We build the ladder by which we rise From the lowly earth to the vaulted skies, And mount its summit round by round."

The gaining of knowledge or overcoming of ignorance then is prerequisite to progress. Just as man cannot be saved in sin, so he cannot be saved in ignorance but may, by obedience to law, be saved from it. Knowledge which has saving power is more than the mere accumulation of facts. Proper use of knowledge denotes wisdom and intelligence. It follows then that the gaining of knowledge is a part of true religion. The challenge to love the Lord with all our minds indicates that worship should be rational and intelligent. Only thus may we become perfect, as Jesus enjoined, "even as our Father which is in heaven is perfect."

As we search the scriptures we are led to hold a high opinion of ourselves, for as John exclaimed:

"Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is." (1 John 3:2.)

"Know then thyself, presume not God to scan;

The proper study of mankind is man."—The Millennial Star, 1959.

The Garden of the Good Neighbor

In the midst of crises, of international suspicion and unrest, of tax burdens for armaments, in the midst of war and rumors of war, it is refreshing to contemplate the beneficial effects of a treaty signed by Great Britain and the United States of America in April 1817.

Shortly after the war of 1812, there was talk in both countries of fortifying the international boundary between Canada and the United States, and placing fleets of battleships on the Great Lakes which form part of that frontier.

The new world was faced by problems such as had vexed Europe for centuries, namely the maintaining at great cost and with ever-increasing danger of war, of expensive armaments, navies and armies to protect neighbors from one another.

The question was raised: Is it not possible for two neighbor nations to live in peace without taking any defensive action on either side, in the faith that neither would become an aggressor? The sceptic said it could not be done. They who believed in the fundamental honesty and good common sense of the Anglo-Saxon race thought otherwise.

Visions of Permanent Peace

Fortunately at this time there were two men in public life who had visions of permanent peace between their two countries, who believed peace to be something to work for and not just to talk about. Sir Charles Baggot was the British Minister at Washington, D. C., and Richard Rush, a Philadelphia lawyer, was the United States Ambassador at the Court of St. James.

Largely through the efforts of these two men the Rush-Baggot treaty was signed. It limited each country to four vessels on the Great Lakes with one eighteen pound gun each, and made provision for no forts or fortresses along the International Boundary.

The treaty could be amended or revoked on six months' notice by either side, but it stands today as originally drawn. It is impossible to measure its influence on the promotion of peace between these two peoples who have lived side by side without a single shot being fired for more than one hundred and twenty years.

A Frontier without a Fort

Since the United States and Canada shook hands across the border as neighbors, there have been peace and co-operation between the two countries. Not a warship has sailed the Great Lakes; there is no fort on that frontier.

There were times of stress in 1842, 1846, and 1904, but as neither nation had forts, fortresses, or navies on the boundary line, there was no glory to gain by going to war; differences were amicably settled; and the ties were stronger than ever between the two countries.

There is now no need for a new treaty of limitation of armaments on the Great Lakes, since the Rush-Baggot treaty has done its work, and there is a "will-to-peace" in both of these nations which is its best guarantee. It is not a difficult matter for governments to find a way to settle their differences if they have the will to do it.

A "Garden of the Good Neighbor" is being built by the two governments where the State of North Dakota borders on the Province of Manitoba. Twenty-two hundred acres in the Turtle Mountains have been dedicated to this purpose.

"We Will not Take Arms against Each Other"

It will be a great park, with lakes and roads and pathways, central buildings, a great amphitheatre and a cairn in the garden formed with glacial boulders, with the inscription, "To God and His Glory we two nations dedicate this garden and pledge ourselves that as long as men shall live we will not take arms against each other."

Surely this monument to peace should be an inspiration to all the nations of the world.

What has been done can be done. Other nations can settle their differences without resort to arms. We need more monuments to peace and fewer to war. We must stop glorifying war; we must honor the men who do most to maintain the peace of the world. Let us inspire in our youth a desire to emulate the leaders of peace movements rather than the heroes on the battlefield.

We must know the facts from every angle and be just if we would be effective advocates of peace. Let us visit our neighbors more often, stand upon their soil, in their shoes, and see through their eyes. Their claims may be just, their action justified. If not, they will hearken to our counsel if they know we are wellinformed neighbors seeking the good of all.

We Must Learn the Art of Peace

We must learn the art of peace. It requires action, skill, and courage. It is a cause to which men of goodwill should dedicate their lives if they would not break faith with those who died.

Thus do we think back through twenty years to 1918. We unite our prayers with those who then thanked God for peace. They who did not live to see Armed Forces day will not have died in vain if we profit by the lessons which the great war taught. Let us seize the torch which they from failing hands have thrown to us and with it illuminate the banners of world peace and carry them to the hilltops.

Let this light of peace so shine that others seeing its good effect will be led to glorify peace and learn war no more. When the "Garden of the Good Neighbor" becomes world-wide, it will become a new "Garden of Eden," and the Prince of Peace will be the Gardener.—Millennial Star, November 10, 1938.

Fit to Live

On this national Church of the Air, in the glorious month of June, we salute the youth of America. June belongs to youth. It is the month of graduation, of commencement exercises, of attaining goals and seeing visions of the future, the month of romance, of marriages and honeymoons, and of vital decisions.

We welcome you into a wonderful world, but it is a world of travail where forces long confined are being released, a world of marvelous scientific development and technology.

There will be available to your generation in this atomic age tremendous, terrifying, but potentially beneficent power, for the proper use of which you must be prepared.

It is a complex and dynamic world; a world divided and imperiled; divided between those who believe in the brotherhood of men under the Fatherhood of God, and those who deny God outright and look upon religion as an opiate to deaden the senses; a world imperiled by the fiendish ideologies of a large, wellorganized and vociferous section of world society, in which the innate freedom and dignity of man is denied, and the individual is enslaved and degraded for the glorification of the totalitarian state.

This abhorrent ideology is gaining new adherents at an alarming rate and will, if it continues, destroy our civilization and leave the world desolate. Unfortunately, our scientific discoveries have made available to unprincipled tyrants the power to unleash upon the world a nuclear war of annihilation. It is well, therefore, for us to take stock of our human assets and note and correct the softening and debilitating effects of our modern civilization.

Sometime ago the president of the United States appointed a "Council of Youth Fitness," composed of members of his cabinet. He also established an Advisory Committee on the fitness of American Youth.

In the preamble to the proclamation of National Fitness Week, the President said, ". . . in this challenging world, it is essential that our young people recognize their obligations to themselves, to their families, and to the Nation, to endeavor to keep themselves mentally, emotionally, spiritually, socially, and physically fit;. . . "

President David O. McKay, of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, commenting on this proclamation, said: "We are living in an age of gadgetry which threatens to produce a future generation of softness. Flabbiness of character more than flabbiness of muscles lies at the root of most of the problems facing American youth. The youth of yesterday are carrying the responsibilities and directing the affairs of the world today. The youth of today will contribute to the destiny of the world tomorrow."

I am indebted to a member of the President's Committee on Youth Fitness, Marion D. Hanks, for some statistics and observations, which I shall, with his permission, use and paraphrase.

An alarming report was recently published showing the results of the Kraus-Prudden tests which revealed that nearly 60 percent of the more than 4,000 American youngsters who participated failed a simple physical test which tried their back, abdominal, and upper leg muscles. In Europe a group of young people of comparable age passed the same test with only 8 percent failures.

There are many causes for the trend toward physical softness. Some of them are inherent in our blessings. Our steadily increasing urban population, which results in lack of opportunity to enjoy the mountains, woods, and fields, is affecting our youth negatively in their physical development. Much of the simple life is unavailable to the urbanite.

Mechanization has outmoded walking. Television, radio, movies, telephones, spectator sports, the absence or inadequacy of physical education programs in the schools, have all contributed to minimizing the kind of activity necessary to sound physical fitness in the individual.

The official objective of the President's Council and Committee is the development of the whole personality. A person's fitness is not measured by his physical powers alone, but by his capacity and willingness to employ them intelligently and maturely for good and uplifting purposes.

Time will not permit elaboration, but to epitomize:

Physical fitness contributes to all other aspects of personal development and makes for rich and radiant living, but strength of character goes deeper than muscular development. We all know there is interrelationship between physical and mental health. Goethe taught that the whole purpose of this world seems to be to provide a physical basis for the growth of the spirit.

To be mentally and emotionally fit one must be informed and growing, alert, aware, and in command of himself. A mind at peace and a soul undistressed are vital to the attainment of personal poise and power. Harry A. Overstreet defines man as "Mind on the way to knowing more than it has known before."

The socially fit are they who have achieved a healthy and responsible attitude toward others and who willingly participate in group activities. One's social value depends upon his spiritual quality, not on what he possesses, not upon his knowledge alone.

Spiritual fitness implies integration and adjustment of the total personality where there is stability, inner calm, and tranquility resulting from conviction, activity, prayer, devotion, and dedication. Trueblood wrote: "The more we identify our spirits with the rest of the natural order, the more we see matter and spirit as a mutually beneficent combination, and the more we are compelled in reason to posit the reality of a transcendent Creator of both."

Shortly before his death, President Calvin Coolidge wrote the following: "The whole foundation of enlightened civilization, in government, in society, and in business, rests on religion. For independent colleges and secondary schools to be neglectful of their responsibilities in this direction, is to turn their graduates loose with simply an increased capacity to prey upon each other. To turn back to the material and neglect the spiritual would be treason, not only to the cause for which they were founded, but to man and to God."

A concise statement of the Church's position on moral and spiritual fitness was given by Dr. James E. Talmage, "Honesty of purpose, integrity of soul, individual purity, freedom of conscience, willingness to do good to all men, even enemies, pure benevolence—these are some of the fruits by which the religion of Christ may be known far exceeding in importance and value the promulgation of dogmas and the enunciation of theories." Perhaps the greatest hazard we face today is the danger of losing faith in our ability to solve problems. We must have faith in ourselves, in our fellow men, faith in our country, and our way of life, and above all, faith in God, who alone assures the ultimate triumph of good over evil.

The family is the basic unit—more basic than the state, and it is against this citadel that the enemy is concentrating his attack, both by edict and by ideological infiltration. The home is the initial training ground of youth in all phases of personality. While the churches and the schools are auxiliaries to the home, neither they nor the government should attempt to supplant the home.

The question is, do we have the intelligence, spiritual insight, and moral stability to use our developing scientific strength for the blessing of mankind? While we seek to develop physical vigor and endurance, we must also recognize the absolute necessity of developing moral rectitude, integrity of character, aesthetic awareness and appreciation, social responsibility and activity, spiritual insight and understanding, if our lives are to be effective and abundant.

The question arises, what is fitness, and what do we want to be fit for? To be fit is to be competent, capable, prepared or ready, and we want to be increasingly more fit to live. "The object of life is more life," said William James, and the Savior, the only perfect man, declared, "I came that they might have life and have it more abundantly."

Man's knowledge, though it be encyclopedic, if not accompanied by self-mastery, will become pernicious. The world needs wisdom today as it has never needed it before. It enables us to have a unified view of ourselves, of others, of God and of the Universe. In the book of Proverbs we read:

"Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding." (Prov. 4:7.)

Man then is a physical, mental, social, moral, and spiritual entity and is only fully alive and capable of enjoying life if all aspects of his complex nature are kept healthy and growing. He must develop physical strength and agility, mental alertness and insight, social responsibility and activity, moral strength and stamina, aesthetic appreciation, and spiritual power. In short, man must develop and bring to full fruition those innate, embryonic, but potentially limitless powers or capacities with which his Father, God, has endowed him.

You, the youth of America, may achieve a Godlike status, for you are the sons of God. What you are to become, and what the present and future generations are to achieve will depend upon a united, determined, and continued effort to achieve fitness of the total man. Strive for the ideal, taught and exemplified by the Savior: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." And may God bless your effort—Church of the Air, CBS Radio, June 14, 1959.

Divine Prophecy and World Events

OLD TESTAMENT PROPHECIES

We have planned to give some of the reasons for the hope and assurance we have that Christ will come again to the earth. That hope and assurance are based primarily upon his promise to come. It is supported, if support were needed, by the predictions of the prophets through the ages, and they have been unanimous not only in announcing with assurance that he would come and reign personally upon the earth, but also in looking forward with hope to that glorious time, and wishing that they might have lived to see it.

The Church has declared, in one of its Articles of Faith, its belief in revelation from God—continuous revelation, for we say: "We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God."

Before we enter into a discussion of the prophecies directly bearing upon the second coming of Christ, it may be well for us to refresh our memories with relation to the prophecies of old, and discuss briefly the subject of prophecy in general.

The Apostle Paul, when he was enumerating the gifts of the Spirit, included as one of the choicest of them the gift of prophecy, and one of the functions of the prophetic spirit is the gift of foreknowledge, telling of events that are to come. Jesus, when he left his disciples and promised that the Holy Ghost should come to them, said that one of the things he would do for them would be to show them things to come. Joel tells us, speaking under the spirit of inspiration and prophecy that in the latter days, "your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions." Amos assures us that the Lord God will do nothing but he revealeth his secrets unto his servants the prophets.

God spoke to Adam, to Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Jacob, Moses, to David and to Solomon, to Isaiah, to Jeremiah, and to the other prophets. The birth of the Son of God was announced through the gift of prophecy; he himself was a prophet, and he declared that his forerunner, John, was among the greatest of them. His apostles were richly endowed with the gift of prophecy; and they foretold many great events, some of which are occurring today, and some of which we believe will come to pass in the near future.

We refer to Noah who was warned of the flood, to Abraham who was told of the future of his descendants in Egypt and their deliverance, to Lot who was warned to flee, to Joseph in Egypt foretelling the famine and preparing for it, to Joshua telling what would happen to any man who dared to rebuild Jericho, and we know what befell Hiel the Bethelite who disregarded the warning.

Perhaps one of the most comprehensive of all prophecies of the Old Testament is that one which is so well-known to all of us, yet which we do not hesitate to repeat though we have discussed it in many stakes and wards, and though it has been discussed by elders of the Church since its organization, and to them I give credit for the source of much of the material.

I wish to bring to you that marvelous declaration of Daniel as he interpreted the dream of Nebuchadnezzar. You remember reading of the great city of Babylon, that city which was fifteen miles square, surrounded by a wall approximately three hundred feet high, with streets running at right angles through it, and within the wall all the splendor of an ancient city, declared to be the greatest of its time; and by some, of all times. Since on each side of this wall there were twenty-five great brass gates with bars of iron, the city seemed to be impregnable.

Herein dwelt the great King Nebuchadnezzar, and he was ruling not only Babylon but also all the kingdoms of the earth. There came to him a dream which troubled his heart. Upon awaking he had forgotten the details. He called for his wise men and soothsayers, asking them to recall the dream and gave him the interpretation thereof. This they were unable to do, and finally there came before him Daniel, and the king asked Daniel if he could tell him what his dream was and what it meant.

"Daniel answered in the presence of the king and said: The secret which the King hath demanded cannot the wise men, and astrologers, the magicians and the soothsayers show unto the king;

"But there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets and maketh known to the King Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. Thy dream and the visions of thy head upon thy bed are these." (Dan. 2:27-28.)

Then Daniel told him that he had in the vision of the night seen a great image, terrible in its appearance, the image of a man with head of gold, shoulders and arms of silver, body of brass, legs of iron, and toes part iron and part miry clay. Daniel said:

"Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces.

"Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshing floors. . . . " (Ibid., 2:34-35.)

Then Daniel, after relating the details of the dream had this also to say to the king, and I call attention not only to his prophetic insight, but also the great courage which has been characteristic of prophets of God in all the ages. Let us read what he says:

"Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.

"And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine hand, and hath made thee ruler over them all. Thou art this head of gold.

"And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth.

"And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things: and as iron that breaketh all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise.

"And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters' clay, and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided; but there shall be in it of the strength of iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed with miry clay.

"And as the toes of the feet were part of iron and part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.

"And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.

"And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever." (Ibid., 2:37-44.)

Time will not permit an analysis of the historical events that followed the reign of Nebuchadnezzar; suffice it to say in the briefest possible way, that following his great rule over all the earth there came the Medo-Persian rule, when Babylon was taken by the Medes and the Persians, and they too ruled over all the earth, representing the shoulders and arms of silver. This world dominion was followed by that of the Greeks under Alexander represented by the body of brass. Alexander, conquered the world, and at the age of thirty-two he died, and this rule of brass came to an end. Then came the rule of iron, the great Roman Empire, represented by the legs of iron. If you will remember it was divided, an eastern and a western empire of Rome, and it was a rule of iron.

Then there came a time when no one nation ruled supreme in the earth, but there were many nations which did not cleave one unto another, but were divided, represented by the feet and toes of iron and of clay.

May I just remind you that Isaiah told with amazing detail who should conquer Babylon, named him by name, described him as a chosen servant of God though he was a pagan, and said Cyrus shall be led by the Almighty and he should break it in pieces and destroy these gates of brass and bars of iron. (See Isaiah 45.)

Following the prediction of Isaiah, 170 years after he spoke, Cyrus moved aganst Babylon, after having conquered the world, diverting the waters of the River Euphrates, marched his men under the walls, and found himself in possession of the city, while the great Belshazzar with his court was engaged in drunken revelry.

Brethren and sisters, if these men were able to foretell these great events; if Daniel was accurate in his forecast of approximately 2,500 years of world history, what think you of the possibility of the latter part of this prediction coming to pass:

". . . In the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, . . . (which) shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever." (Dan. 2:44.)

Do you think that the words of Daniel will be fulfilled? We bear witness that they are being fulfilled, and in future discourses we hope to bring you some evidence; we hope to tell you something of the other scriptures and the other predictions upon which we rely.

Humbly and in the name of him who inspired the prophets of old, I bear witness to you that the time is not far distant when the King of Kings, the Prince of Peace will reign personally upon the earth, and when that time shall come we will sing with even greater fervor than we sing here today:

"Our Father's God to thee Author of liberty, To thee we sing! Long may our land be bright With Freedom's holy light, Protect us by thy might, Great God our King."

—Tabernacle Address. First in Series. Deseret News Church Section, March 8, 1941.

PROPHECIES FULFILLED

Last week we read some prophecies from the Old Testament and presented some testimony from history to their literal fulfilment, this to form a background for our general theme, and to give a reason for the faith we have in the fulfilment of prophecies relating to our own future time.

Today I should like to read from the first chapter of the Second Epistle of Peter:

"We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts:

"Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.

"For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Pet. 1:19-21.)

You will note the apostle said: ". . . whereunto ye do well that ye take heed," referring to prophecy. His words are as applicable today as they were then. Students of prophecy and history find that, in general, people have not taken heed. It is particularly noticeable that the generations to whom prophecies of old had special application, that is to say, the people who lived in the days when the prophecies were being fulfilled, ordinarily were unmindful of that fact, unable to interpret the prophecies in the light of current events, or current event in the light of prophecy.

This was especially true when Jesus came, for he was rejected by the Jews, though they had known of the prophecies of scripture for centuries, had quoted them with approval, and had instructed their children to pray for the time when the Messiah would appear. Though the scriptures were replete with references to the coming of the Son of God, they were not prepared to receive him. They knew him not.

In Isaiah, Jeremiah, others of the prophets, we find specific references to so many of the events that occurred in the days of Jesus. For example:

"Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel." (Isa. 7:14.)

He shall be born in Bethlehem. He shall be known as a Nazarene. He shall come out of Egypt. He shall ride into Jerusalem on a colt. He will be a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief. As a sheep before his shearers is dumb, so he opens not his mouth. He shall be crucified. He will be numbered among the transgressors. He shall make his grave with the rich. They shall divide his raiment, and cast lots for his vesture. After three days he shall come forth again without seeing corruption.

The prophets of ancient times also foretold many of the events which were to transpire after the crucifixion of the Savior, as witness the following.

"The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinace, broken the everlasting covenant." (Isa. 24:5.)

"Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no Gods? but my people have changed their glory for that which doth not profit." (Jer. 2:11.)

"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord." (Amos 8:11.)

"And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you." (Matt. 24:4.)

"Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him.

"That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.

"Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition;

"Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God." (2 Thess. 2:1-4.)

"For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock." (Acts 20:29.)

"But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that brought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction." (2 Peter 2:1.)

"And they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast; and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him?" (Rev. 13:4.)

"This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come." (2 Tim. 3:1.)

I cite these hurriedly, merely to indicate how to us, looking back, it seems almost incredible that he should not have been recognized; and yet, whether or not we would have recognized him, had we lived then, may be determined largely by our attitudes now toward prophecies that are being fulfilled among us. Do we recognize the fulfilment of prophecy in current events? Luke indicated we would not, for he said:

"As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the coming of the Son of Man." (See Matt. 24:37, Luke 17:26.)

If the event toward which we are looking must be preceded by the happening of other great events as the prophets have said, we may in some measure determine how near we are to that event by finding out how many of those intermediate things have come to pass, and it behooves us to make this study.

I shall not take time to quote others. I simply say to you, my brethren and sisters, these make the prophetic record. These are some of the predictions made by prophets of God with respect to conditions that must come to pass before the coming of the Son of God.

After Jesus organized his church, called his twelve apostles, ordained and sent forth other seventy, gave his life for his work, his apostles carried on pursuant to his instructions, having been endued with power from the Holy Ghost. They called other seventy and elders, priests, teachers, and deacons, and sent them forth, and there was great activity in the church.

But there arose great persecutions. The Jews were the chief persecutors, to begin with although many of their number joined the Christians, they were fearful that this new Christianity might supplant Judaism. Also they knew that if this new sect should grow and become general, they themselves would be convicted of having crucified the Christ.

Nero, the Emperor, having set fire to the city of Rome, blamed it on the Christians, and they were subjected to such persecution as the world had not theretofore seen. They were tortured in the most inhuman and inconceivable manner; many of them were sewn in skins of wild animals and thrown to the fury of wild animals; others were covered with combustible material, set on fire and used as torches in the city of Rome.

The apostles were killed. James was put to the sword; Paul was beheaded; Peter crucified head down; John sent to the Isle of Patmos. They were all eliminated from the scene, and so far as we have record, with one exception none were ordained to take their places.

Following the persecutions of Nero, there was a series of nine other emperors of Rome, among them Domitian, Marcus Aurelius, Severus, Trajan, and the last Diocletian, who undertook what others had attempted, to totally obliterate and stamp out Christianity. They burned their books and their records. They signed decrees that were binding in all parts of the empire that wherever a Christian should refuse to offer sacrifice to heathen gods, he should be tortured, and if that failed, he should be put to death.

What think you, my brethren and sisters, of the possibility of the Church surviving such an ordeal as that? After the persecutions of Diocletian, there came to the throne one Constantine the Great who was friendly to the Christians. There is a difference of opinion among the historians as to why. There are those who claim that he saw a fiery cross in the heavens, with the words: "By this conquer." Others claim that it was purely a political move to gain power. But the fact remains that he made Christianity the state church. Emoluments, honors, and dignities were conferred until it became more desirable and profitable to be a bishop in the church than to be a general in the army.

Constantine, however, found that there was great division among the people, that they were not sure of their theology. Please bear in mind that Constantine was a pagan emperor. He did not join the church until a few years before his death, and yet was recognized virtually as the head of the church. It was he who made the appointments within the church.

Seeing that there was division among them, he called a convention, to define Christian theology.

The main point of contention was with respect to what was to be the Christian idea of God, the Godhead. From the Athanasian creed we get this statement: "God the Father is incomprehensible. God the Son is incomprehensible. The Holy Ghost is incomprehensible."

Now read the words of Jesus: "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) If God then is incomprehensible, and if it is life eternal to know him, then there can be no life eternal, for we cannot know the incomprehensible. I do not say this in a spirit of criticism of men's faith, but I cite it only as a historical fact, to indicate the trend of the times.

A question arose as to which was greater, the Bishop of Rome or the Bishop of Constantinople, the city named for Constantine. The discussion went on for some time.

Along about the sixth century, when Gregory the First was the Bishop of Rome, there came to the throne, as the emperor, a man who has been described by historians as a beast. His name was Phocas. This man came to the throne by putting to death Maurice, his predecessor in office, but before Phocas murdered Maurice, his five sons were slain before his eyes. And thus Phocas came to be the emperor of Rome, and Bishop Gregory the First sent him a letter of congratulation. Following Gregory the First, Boniface III was Bishop of Rome ten months, but during that time the question again came to the emperor: Who is supreme among the bishops? And this man, this murderer, the Emperor of Rome, gave the decision which recognized the Papacy as an established institution. That was in the year 607 A.D.

Incidentally I may cite, and we are indebted to Elder Sjodahl for calling our attention to the fact, that the Revelator John said the church should be driven into the wilderness for twelve hundred and sixty years. The years, as then figured were lunar years, shorter than our own, equal to twelve hundred and twenty-two and a fraction years, solar years.

This final decision came from Phocas in the year 607. If you add twelve hundred twenty-two and one half to six hundred seven and one-half you have the year 1830, and at that time, I bear witness to members and friends alike that the God of heaven restored the truth; that the Church came out of the wilderness; that there was established upon the earth again the Church and kingdom of God, according to the prophecies that had been uttered.

Conditions became so bad, after the sixth century, that even church writers, they who maintain that there had been an unbroken succession of authority, tell us that there was no vestige of truth left. I shall cite but one of them, the words of Dr. Milner, who said he wrote in order to modify what Mosheim and Gibbon and others had said, because he believed they had been overfrank in their statements.

"The famous analyst of the Roman Church," wrote Dr. Milner, referring to a former historian of the church, "whose partiality to the See of Rome is notorious, has, however, the candor to own that this, the tenth century, was an iron age, barren of all goodness, a leaden age, abounding in all wickedness, a dark age, remarkable above all other things for the scarcity of writers and men of learning. Christ was then, as it appears, in a very deep sleep, when the ship was covered with waves; and what seemed worse, when the Lord was asleep, there were no disciples who by their cries might wake him, being themselves fast asleep. . . .

"Infidel malice has with pleasure recorded the vice and the crimes of the popes of this century, nor is it my intention to attempt to palliate the account of their wickedness. It was as deep and atrocious as language can paint, nor can a reasonable man desire more authentic evidence of history than that which the records, both civil and ecclesiastical history, afford concerning the corruption of the whole church."

I quote this, not as a challenge, not as a criticism, but as a statement of historical fact. The prophecies to which I referred in the beginning said there should come a famine in the land, a famine for hearing the word of God, that there should be false Christs and false prophets. History says that has happened. History proves that following the persecutions of the Saints in early days there was a complete apostasy from the truth.

On later occasions we shall hope to bring to you something of what transpired immediately after these times, and in the meantime may I bear my witness to you that messengers have gone out into the world telling the people that God has begun a marvelous work and a wonder among his people, declaring the restoration of the gospel, and it is with a declaration of that truth that I hope to come to you at a later date. I bear witness that I know that God lives, and that his words, as proclaimed by the prophets of God, will all be fulfilled, which I do in the name of Jesus Christ Amen.—Tabernacle address, Second in Series, Deseret News Church Section, March 15, 1941.

THE NIGHT OF DARKNESS

Someone has said, "Prophecy is history reversed," and certainly history is prophecy fulfilled. The accuracy with which the prophets have foretold world events inspires confidence in their words, and gives us faith that what they have spoken with reference to our day and the future will come to pass. They tell us that Jesus of Nazareth will come again, the most hopeful message that could come to the world.

We are warned, however, that his coming must be preceded by certain important events, and we may, if we will, judge how near we are to that coming by acquainting ourselves with the history of events.

He who said, ". . . darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, . . . " (Isa. 62:2) also said it should be ". . . as with the people, so with the priest. . . . " (Ibid., 24:2) and indicated it should be universal. Others said, . . . "Having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof . . . " (2 Tim. 3:5); that the time would come when men "shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east . . . to seek for the word of the Lord and shall not find it." (Amos 8:12.)

We testified last week that these things came to pass, and reviewed some history to substantiate our statement. Our review indicated that following a very persistent series of persecutions there came a time when erstwhile pagan persecutors became literally the leaders of the church, resulting in a paganized form of Christianity, which was wholly unlike that which the Master brought.

The period from the tenth to the sixteenth centuries, needs no comment other than to give it the name by which it is universally known, that of the Dark Ages, a time which has been designated as the midnight of time, or which if we should use modern language, we might call the great blackout, a blackout in which not only the artificial lamps of men burned low, but also the celestial lights of God's inspiration were extinguished.

From the History of the Reformation we quote: "The vital doctrines of Christianity had almost entirely disappeared, and with them the light that constitutes the essences of the religion of God. The imperial strength of the Church was gone. It lay exhausted, enfeebled, and almost a lifeless body, extending over that part of the world which the Roman Empire had occupied."

It seems that they who pretended to follow the Master in leadership of the church missed entirely the genius of the gospel as he taught it, for while the burden of his whole message was love and humility, brotherly kindness and simplicity, we find the exact antithesis of all this in what they taught.

As an example of the attitude of the then leaders of the church, I give an excerpt from Sir John Steven's "Essay on Ecclesiastical Biography."

"It was the fourth day on which he (Henry the Fourth) had worn the humiliating garb of an affected penitent, and in that sordid raiment he drew near on his bare feet to the more than imperial majesty of the church, prostrated himself in more than servile deference before the diminutive and emaciated old man, from the terrible glance of whose countenance, we are told, the eye of every beholder recoiled as from lightning. Hunger, cold, nakedness and shame had for the moment crushed the gallant spirit of the sufferer. He wept and cried for mercy, again and again renewing his entreaties until he had reached the lowest level of abasement, to which his own enfeebled heart or the haughtiness of his great antagonist could depress him. Then and not till then did the Pope condescend to revoke the anathema of the Vatican."

This is not just an isolated case, for the review of the three hundred years following this event indicates that in place of the law of love there were arrogance and force. In place of conversion there was compulsion.

In contrast to this, note the Savior's attitude when the Samaritans rejected him and his devout but misguided followers asked him to allow them to call down fire from heaven and destroy their enemies. He rebuked them, telling them they knew not what spirit they were of. "The Son of Man is not come," he said, "to destroy men's lives, but to save them." (Luke 9:5.) And when Peter would have fought for him Jesus said: ". . . Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art an offense unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men." (Matt. 16:23.)

Later he said: ". . . My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews. . . ." (John 18:36.)

Popes and bishops had arisen, who had as their main objective the acquisition of power and authority and wealth. They claim to have succeeded the apostles and prophets, who ministered among the people as servants, and who were in the church "For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ;

"Until we all come to a unity of the faith. . . ." (Eph. 4:12-13.)

False prophets and teachers had arisen as predicted and darkness covered the earth. That we may have some assurance from the prophets that this night of darkness was not to prevail forever, I read scripture:

"And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him." (Dan. 7:27.)

"But unto you that fear my name shall the Son of righteousness arise with healing in his wings. . . ." (Mal. 4:2.)

"And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things." (Matt. 17:11.)

"And he shall send Jesus Christ, which was before preached unto you:

"Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:20-21.)

Frequently we find, in our examination of history and prophecy, that centuries of preparatory events are necessary to inaugurate a great epoch, and that though God moves in a mysterious way; he moves with order; and his work is integrated and deliberate. So the converging of these great events to which we refer gives hope and courage to those who read and understand.

After this age of darkness there came what has been known as the revival of learning. This was the first sign that midnight had passed. After the Crusades of the eleventh to the thirteenth century, which did much to break down the feudal system of land tenure, we find events occuring which prepared a soil for the seeds of freedom which would flower in the restoration of the gospel of Christ.

The invention of gunpowder, terrible as the consequences have been, in some respects, was a notable event, equalizing men's strength, master or peasant. The mariner's compass made navigation less hazardous. The discovery of a new way to India by way of the Cape of Good Hope, the discovery of America in 1492 by Columbus—these not only improved conditions economically, but there was also provided, under the inspiration of God, a place of asylum to which the people long borne down by oppression could come and find liberty and peace.

These things all led up to the reformation. The reformers, Huss and Jerome, in Prague, did not die in vain. Those thousands who were slain in France gave their lives for freedom. Martin Luther, in Germany, carried on his campaign against the sale of indulgences and other irregularities of the church. Prince John of Saxony had the courage to defy the Pope and to organize a church, though, as we think without authority, but certainly a step in the right direction in throwing off oppression.

And in England John Wycliffe translated the Bible into English, and made continuous attacks upon the power of the monks and the actions of the church, in which he found them to be out of harmony with the scripture. Though he was not a martyr, he did not rest in peace, for his bones were exhumed, burned, and scattered to the winds, by the very men who claimed to be the followers of the meek and lowly Nazarene.

Persecutions continued in England. Many fled to Holland, and from them came the Pilgrim Fathers who in the Mayflower sailed to America, a land dedicated to the principle that all governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed, and that men are equal in the sight of God, and are entitled to life, to liberty, and to happiness.

But there were terrific pangs preceding this birth of freedom. I need not call your attention to conditions in Spain during the Inquisition, when thousands were burned at the stake, and tens of thousands put to ignominious death. I quote the words of Isabella, the queen, who said:

"For the love of Christ and his maid-mother I have caused much misery. I have depopulated towns and districts, provinces and kingdoms."

And so the powers of darkness that fought against the light of truth were driven back. And from the heaven the light again begins to shine.

From this historic rostrum from which prophets of God in this age have spoken, I say to you and would say to all the world, that the Founder of Christianity based it upon the principles of freedom, political freedom, religious freedom. The promise that he made, to come again and set up his kingdom, is a promise of permanent freedom and peace.

They who now are attempting to rob the world of liberty and to build a kingdom upon force, must fail. There are occasions when there cannot be such a thing as honorable neutrality, and that time is when right and wrong are locked in conflict, when truth and error are at war, as was the case in the war in heaven.

I am not advocating participation in the conflict of nations or urging the use of force; rather I am preaching of a kingdom in which the only force shall be the force of truth and knowledge of it, and that knowledge shall come through long-suffering, brotherly kindness, through charity and love unfeigned, whereas the kingdoms of the world are built upon conquest relying upon swords and battleships and bombs for their security.

But we have the promise of a kingdom which will do away with all this, there shall be established, pursuant to the prophecy and promise of Daniel the kingdom of God, which shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms and stand forever.

We shall take a text from the Apostle John and attempt to show that God our Father is still ruling in the heavens.

John, banished to the Isle of Patmos, and shown things that should be thereafter, said these words:

"And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.

"Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." (Rev. 14: 6-7.)

This prediction is in course of fulfilment. The coming of Jesus of Nazareth is heralded by angels. Though presently to many of us it seems that truth is upon the altar and wrong upon the throne, still behind that altar standeth God, keeping watch upon his own.

There is hope then for the world. Victory is ahead, for his coming is at hand. May it be hastened and may we be prepared for it, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—Tabernacle Address Number 3. Deseret News Church Section, March 22, 1941.

THE PROPHESIED RESTORATION OCCURS

As a text I quote the words of the Lord through Isaiah:

"Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth; for the Lord hath spoken. . . " (Isa. 1:2.)

Oliver Wendell Holmes tells us, the usual fate of newborn truth, in this poem:

"The time is wracked with birth pangs. Every hour brings forth some gasping truth, And truth, new born, looks a misshapen, and untimely growth. The terror of the household, and its shame, A monster coiling in its nurse's lap, That some would strangle, some would only starve. But still it breathes, and passed from hand to hand, And suckled at a hundred half-clad breasts, Comes slowly to its stature and its form, Calms the rough ridges of its dragon scales, Changes to shining locks it snaky hair, And moves transfigured into angel guise, Welcomed by all who cursed its hour of birth And folded in the same encircling arms, That cast it like a serpent from their hold."

It is our pleasant duty to discuss newborn truth, truth which has had just such a reception as the poet mentions, for it was thought to be "a misshapen and an untimely growth, the terror of the district and its shame," yet it is coming to its stature and its form, and will move transfigured into angel guise; in fact, angels announced its coming and insure its triumph.

The somewhat melancholy history of the past seems to have been a necessary forerunner to those great events which we now proclaim. The passing of the sun beyond the meridian, after the crucifixion of Christ, was followed by the twilight and the sunset, and centuries of darkness. Then the signs of dawn, the heralding of the day.

How gloriously the Lord has kept his promise that in the latter days he would pour out his spirit upon all flesh! What a marvelous age is this in which we live! What tremendous advancement has been made within the last one hundred years! In the fields of communication and transportation alone we have made such strides as would cause our ancestors, if they could come and see us, to say that we were gods, as they might behold our vast cargoes sailing through the stratosphere at unbelievable speed; if they could know of radio, and the marvelous achievements of science, how men have harnessed electricity and other powers, by which they bring to servitude those great forces of nature, which, in their day men feared and were wont to worship!

But lest we are given to boasting of these great achievements, we should be reminded of how they are being used, and of what is happening in this world of ours by the very things which our civilization has created. Misery and woe and destruction seem to be spreading through the world, threatening the very civilization that has made these things possible. It may be that God's great plan included work for a wrecking crew, to tear down the old structure and make way for that which is to be. But let not those who are responsible for these things find comfort in this thought, for God has said:

"It is impossible but that offenses will come, but woe unto him through whom they come." (Luke 17:1.)

But are we to look for great advancement in these fields of human thought and activity alone, where the material seemingly is glorified and the spiritual forgotten? Or may we expect in fields of moral growth and spiritual enlightenment to find new truth and revelation from God? When he said he would pour out his spirit upon all flesh, I think he did not intend to limit his inspiration to those who were working with material things alone, for in the field of religion there is need for something new.

A professor in the School of Divinity of the University of Chicago has stated the case convincingly. I cite a paragraph from The Wrestle of Religion with Truth, by Dr. Wieman:

"Science has grown and prospered immensely during the last three centuries. It has had to transform its theories again and again. It has had to give up what it held to be true. Most basic truths which many scientists thought were fixed and settled, have been discarded, and yet with all this transformation and unsettlement of accepted truths science has gone on flourishing, and was never more triumphant than today, when the theory of relativity and the quantum theory are tearing out some of the deepest foundation stones of the structure of thought which it has raised.

"In contrast to this behold religion. Against every attack made against one of its deep-laid, accepted truths, it fights most bitterly, and when it is forced to discard what it had accepted as true, it becomes more discouraged and uncertain, more weak and sickly. The greatest foe to truth is tenacity in clinging to unjustified belief."

These words from an eminent professor of theology indicate something of present-day thinking along the lines of which I write, that the need is felt, in communities other than our own, and that leaders in both scientific and religious fields are calling for new light, is indicated by a sermon which was preached in England and published to the world by Dean Inge:

"How great is the need in Britain today for a man to arise among us to lead a mighty crusade for the revival of our religion. All our lifetime we have been waiting for that man, though, of course, one lifetime is not a great period in the lifetime of a nation. For years all Christendom has prayed that that revival might be near, and according as the need is great, so great is the opportunity. From end to end of the land, north and south and west and east, the feeling is arising that something more is required today than the advice, however good, of our statesmen, and the ability, however great, of our business men: that there are problems to be solved, more urgent and more fundamental than those of economics and elections.

"The organized churches—offer no solution to these problems, in view of thousands of our citizens. These men and women look for an interpreter of their emotions, for some one who will give expression to their spiritual convictions and beliefs, submerged too long in a materialistic age. The seed has been sown. It has sprung up under showers and sunshine. The grain is swollen inside the husk. Now the field lies golden and ready for the harvest. Where is the man who will go in and reap?"

We announce the appointment of that man, in fulfilment of the prophecies of old, and in preparation for the coming of the Son of Man as promised by his apostles.

You will remember when Peter and John went up to the temple at Jerusalem and came to the gate called Beautiful. The man who was sitting there, who had been lame from his birth, asked alms of them, and Peter, turning to him, said:

"Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have, give I thee. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk." (Acts 3:6.)

The scriptures tell us he was healed, and he leaped and shouted for joy at his deliverance. And then a crowd gathered in wonder and amazement, and Peter preached the gospel to them. He told them that what they had done was not of their own power or holiness, but it was done in the name of Jesus Christ. Then he said to the multitude:

"Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord;

"And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you;

"Whom the heaven must receive until the times of the restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Ibid., 3:19-21.)

And the Apostle Paul, speaking on a similar occasion, said that in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times he would gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are in earth, even in him.

You will remember, too, as the eleven stood with the Master, at the time of his ascension, and they saw him taken into heaven, that the men who stood by in white apparel said to those who were assembled:

". . . Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Ibid., 1:11.)

We refer again to that marvelous prediction of John, who, while banished on the Isle of Patmos, had a vision. That we may qualify—speaking in legal terms—that we may qualify John as a witness, let us refer to the record, John said:

"I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and heard behind me a great voice, as of a trumpet,

"Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, and, What thou seest, write in a book, and send it unto the seven churches which are in Asia. . . .

"And I turned to see the voice that spake with me. And being turned I saw seven golden candlesticks;

"And in the midst of the seven candlesticks one like unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt, about the paps with a golden girdle.

"His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire;

"And his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the sound of many waters.

"And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth went a sharp twoedged sword: and his countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength.

"And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and the last:

"I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive forevermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of death.

"Write the things which thou hast seen and the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter." (Rev. 1:10-19.)

Thus spake the Son of God to John, the apostle. Surely we can accept the testimony of one thus endowed.

In the spring of 1820, just over a hundred years ago, God our Father revealed himself to a young man, Joseph Smith. Our Father considered the occasion and the message of sufficient importance that he came personally from the heavens, and brought with him his Only Begotten Son, and together they spoke to this young man. And since that time others have come; other revelations have been given. The Angel Moroni and Moses and Elias came, Peter, James, and John, John the Baptist, Elijah, and others. They have spoken to men and commissioned them, and men are again in communion with God.

Now, I am not unmindful of the fact, as I have noted it in other nations, that such a declaration as this is met not only with incredulity and disbelief, but also with opposition and with hatred, and there have been employed against this truth the self-same weapons as the adversary has always used in his battle against the truth.

Here again was truth looked upon as a misshapen and untimely growth. And yet I ask our Christian friends who believe the Bible, if they doubt the words of Saul of Tarsus, who said that on his way to Damascus to persecute the Saints, he saw a light which blinded him, and he heard a voice, and he said: "Who art thou, Lord?" And the voice replied: "I am Jesus Christ, whom thou persecutest." (See Acts 9:5.)

I say Christians believe that record, and yet they say God cannot speak to men. They who believe the Bible accept the record which tells us of the appearance of Moses and Elias on the Mount of Transfiguration, and that Peter, James, and John were there and saw them, in the presence of the Master. Moses and Elias, mind you, had lived hundreds of years before that time, and yet men say: "Yes, we believe the Bible where it tells of that. It was done once, but it can't be done again."

I repeat: Why should men think it a thing incredible that God should speak to men? Has not that been his method throughout the ages? Do we not need him? Has our civilization and boasted learning made us independent of him?

My friends, our declaration to you today is but introductory, for though he came, and with him God the Father, and following them these others whom I have briefly mentioned, this, all of it, is introductory to what is yet to come.

Concerning his coming, let me just read this—the Lord is speaking:

"For I will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand." (D&C 29:11.)

This declaration that the Savior will come again is made to you, our friends and brethren and sisters, in the spirit and by the power which gave these truths to man, and in his name I declare to you that I know, as I know I live, that it is true. It is the most hopeful and the most glorious promise and announcement that has been made in all the history of the world, save only that which was made by the angels to the shepherds on the hills, when they sang: "Glory to God in the highest . . . " (Luke 2:14), and announced the birth of Christ.

I pray that we may be individually preparing ourselves to meet him when he comes, for come he will, and that much sooner than you think. Of which I testify in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen. Tabernacle Address. Number 4. Deseret News Church Section, March 29, 1941.

FREEDOM WILL SURVIVE

"Seek ye first the kingdom of God . . . " (Matt. 6:33), said Jesus of Nazareth, and when he prayed, "Thy kingdom come . . . " (Matt. 6:10), he visualized an ideal social order where the will of God shall be done on earth as it is in heaven.

Early in this series we referred to the dream of Nebuchadnezzar and to the interpretation thereof by Daniel, which was indeed a prophetic forecast of the political history of the world. We referred to the rise and fall of four great empires, world-wide empires—the Babylonian, the Medo-Persian, the Greek, and the Roman—symbolized by the gold, the silver, the brass, and the iron of the image of the dream. Daniel said that after this last empire of iron rule, which was to be divided into two kingdoms, there should be many kingdoms, symbolized by the feet and toes of iron and of clay, "And in the days of these kings," that is, when no one nation should have universal rule, "the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed." (Dan. 2:44.)

We live in the days of these kings, and we are looking forward to the coming of that kingdom. Christians everywhere are praying, "Thy kingdom come." The Savior, however, has told us that before his kingdom is set up certain great calamities shall come upon the earth. Perhaps it is necessary to tear down the old structure that a new and more enduring one might be erected. He said that there should be wars and rumors of wars; nation rising against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; that there should be pestilence, famine, and earthquakes. And then he said: "All these are the beginning of sorrows," (Matt. 24:8), and later, "This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come." (Ibid., 24:14.) The end, as I take it, of these kingdoms and the beginning of the kingdom of God.

War has been increasing not only in frequency, but also tremendously in scope. Seemingly world wars are inevitable because of the great advance we have made in scientific discoveries. We are told that in the last great war more men were killed than in all the wars since the beginning of the French Revolution in 1789. But terrible as was the cost in treasure and human lives, the pestilence which followed it was more devastating. Surely the signs of the times indicate that we stand in the latter days when Christ's kingdom is to be established.

For nearly 120 years now, even as in the days of Noah, the gospel of the kingdom has been preached, and the fact that the prophet of God has seen fit to call home the elders of the Church from their missionary labors in the nations abroad is significant, though I shall make no further comment than to quote the words

". . . Learn the parable of the fig-tree: When his branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye may know that summer is nigh." (Ibid., 24:32.)

We are told that after the preaching of the gospel, the Lord will send his angels to gather the elect from all parts of the earth and heaven. But this kingdom of which we speak, the kingdom of God, is not the same as the kingdom of heaven, though these terms are frequently used interchangeably. Nor should it be thought that the Church is the kingdom of God in its entirety, it is an important part thereof, and though it forms the nucleus around which the kingdom is to be established; still the Church can exist and has existed without the kingdom which is to exercise control in the nations. The Church has never assumed to exercise political control, but, mark you, the kingdom of God will not be established without the Church, for unto it have been committed the keys of the kingdom. I quote his words from the 65th section of the Doctrine and Covenants:

"The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth. . . .

"Call upon the Lord, that his kingdom may go forth upon the earth, that the inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days to come, in the which the Son of Man shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth.

"Wherefore, may the kingdom of God go forth, that the kingdom of heaven may come, that thou, O God, mayest be glorified in heaven so on earth, that thine enemies may be subdued; for thine is the honor, power and glory, forever and ever. Amen." (D&C 65:2, 5-6.)

There are those who have thought that the vision of Daniel with respect to the setting up of the kingdom referred to the days of Christ and his apostles. However, this is not the case, for the kingdom then established did not break in pieces or consume any kingdoms, nor did it have universal power but was itself warred against and overcome. The kingdom of which we speak was to be set up in the days of the kings of various nations which do not cleave one unto another, a kingdom which is to have universal power, a kingdom which is to be founded on justice rather than tyranny, where love will rule and overlap international boundaries, and where citizens of all the world may come and through the laws of adoption which Jesus taught be no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens with the Saints and of the household of God. That kingdom when established will sound the death knell of those groups in other lands who have world dominion as their objective.

We have spoken in this series of the visitation of the Son of God to a prophet in this age. That visit was not the second coming of the Son of God which is spoken of by so many of the prophets, for then his coming will be one of great glory accompanied by thousands of the Saints who lived anciently. Heavenly beings shall be with him, and the Saints who are righteous will be caught up to meet him in the clouds. Enoch saw that day and said as recorded in Jude, "The Lord cometh with ten thousand of his saints." (Jude 14.) The Apostle Paul wrote of it to the Thessalonians,

"For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voices of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first:

"Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord." (2 Thess. 4:16-17.)

Glorious indeed is this thought! Desirable would be that blessing which is promised to us that we may be among those who shall welcome him when he comes.

Even to those who put him to death, even to that great race who have not as yet been able to identify him, will he come, and then upon the Mount of Olives, which shall be cleft on his appearance, he shall speak to them with outstretched arms, and they, detecting the marks of crucifixion will ask him, "Whence these wounds?" and his reply, according to the prophets, will be, "Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends." (See Zech. 13:6.) Then shall the Jews recognize that Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of God, was the Messiah for whom they looked, but whom they did not recognize.

This kingdom of which we speak will be unlike any of the kingdoms of this world; the kingdoms of the world, man-made, have within them the seeds of death and disintegration. We believe and have so proclaimed that the God of heaven inspired the framers of the Constitution of the United States; that he is mindful of nations; is ruling in the heavens and overruling in the earth; that the affairs of men and of nations shall all assist in the consummation of his purposes. But this kingdom of God shall be a kingdom unique in all the history of the world.

In our lifetime we have seen nations rise and pass away. We have seen kingdoms disintegrate and new forms of government substituted; we have seen peoples subjugated; groups brought into slavery, and attempts made to exterminate races of men. Today there are nations whose leaders are attempting to graft upon the body politic, and I remind you that the word graft may have a double meaning—to graft upon the body politic an alien and foreign growth whose tentacles are being wrapped about the very taproots of freedom, and unless that power, which is now attempting to enslave men is defeated; unless that growth of which we speak is amputated, then the great advance of freedom since the signing of the Magna Charta will have been for naught.

That we are not unmindful as a people in these United States of the danger of that challenge, that we are not afraid to rise and meet it, is evidenced by the words of the President of the United States, speaking in the presence and with the applause and approval of that great patriot who opposed him at the polls, who with 22,000,000 backers lost the election, but who with undiluted patriotism has put his shoulder to the wheel even though his opponent was in the driver's seat; I say in the presence of this man and with his approval, and I believe with the backing of the majority of the 130,000,000 people of the United States, the President said among other things:

"The nation is calling for sacrifice of some of the privileges, but not to sacrifice the fundamental rights. That kind of sacrifice is for the common national protection and welfare, for our defense against the most ruthless brutality in all history, for an ultimate victory of the way of life now so violently menaced."

Then he said:

"There are 130,000,000 individuals over here; there are many more millions in Britain and elsewhere bravely shielding the great flame of democracy from the blackout of barbarism. It is not enough for us merely to trim the wick or polish the glass. The time has come when we must provide the fuel in ever-increasing amounts to keep the flame alive."

And now you ask what has that, pray, to do with the kingdom of God? Just this: That recognizing the signs of the times better perhaps than we do, the enemy of righteousness, even Beelzebub, has amassed the forces of evil in opposition to freedom and has decreed the downfall of democracies and an end to all human relationships which are based upon the gospel of Jesus Christ, hoping thereby to frustrate God's purpose to set up his kingdom. Hence this defiance of the great democracies, this unanimity of purpose and action.

Do you think that it was merely chance that Columbus discovered America? Do you think that God was unmindful of the establishment in this land of our great democratic form of government which guarantees the freedom and exalts the rights of the individual? Do you not rather think that it is a part of the plan of Almighty God that at this crucial hour there should be prepared a nation to stand against the forces of evil? If they should succeed, freedom would die, for the attack is not only upon a principle for which the hosts of heaven fought with God as their leader—the great principle of free agency—incorporated within the kingdom of God which he will set up, there will be many of the principles of democracy, for that kingdom will be founded upon personal liberty and freedom, and the principles for which Jesus died.

I bring you then the thought that it is incumbent on men and women everywhere to search their own souls, to ascertain whether or not they themselves are preparing by their thinking and their acts to become members—citizens if you will—of this great kingdom.

It seems as I travel both here and abroad that the world is ripe not only for the coming of that kingdom, but it is ripe for the destruction which must precede it. I am persuaded that eventually the things of the spirit will prevail over the shining steel of military might. I am persuaded that we stand on the very brink of the millennial reign of Christ, and because of that persuasion and in the same spirit which prompted men of old to warn their hearers, I sound a note of warning and would that I could sound it through the earth: "Repent, O ye people, for the kingdom of God is at hand." (See Matt. 3:2; 4:17.) There should not be fear and worry in our hearts today though we must endure sacrifice, and though the immediate future may look dark. The enemies are massed in countless numbers, and they will have success and victory, but this I say, they cannot win, and I say it because of what God has said through his prophets.

And so when he shall come, and when the wars have ended, and when they shall not hurt nor destroy in all his holy mountain, and when Jesus of Nazareth shall come again, then all things through which we may have passed or may have to pass will fade into insignificance in the presence of the glory of that day.

I quote his word again: "Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompense; and he will come and save you." (Isa. 35:1.) "Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me; and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple. . .

"But who may abide the day of his coming?. . . " (Mal. 3:1-2.)

I am indebted to Virginia Lindsay Thomander, the author, for these concluding lines:

"His words divine, they do not change, God has a perfect plan; So watch and do not be led astray By false ideas of man. "Keep step with faith and join the ranks Which stand for truth and right, Then when the skies grow dark We will know that just beyond is light."

May God bless us with faith in that promise, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—Tabernacle Address, Number 5. Deseret News Church Section, April 5, 1941.

Seeds of Peace

"And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying,

"Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men." (Luke 2:13-14.)

We recently made the statement, "In the soil of love the seeds of war must die." We now urge a worldwide cultivation of this soil of love, that the seed of peace planted by the Master may grow and thrive until, as in the case of the grain of mustard seed, a great tree shall appear in whose branches the birds may lodge, even the dove of peace.

Jesus told his followers that next to the commandment to love the Lord, the great commandment is to love one another. He placed infinite value upon the individual human soul and has given us rules of conduct which will result in individual happiness and peace.

"Love your enemies, do good to them which hate you,

"Bless them that curse you, pray for them that despitefully use you." (Luke 6:27-28.) These unusual requests have been tried in individual life and have been found to work. But can this "more than the Golden Rule" for individual conduct be made to apply to nations in their dealings with one another?

Certainly the state has a duty to protect its lawabiding citizens against external as well as internal wrongs. But the state is not exempt from the "Love thy neighbour" rule. The state, being a group of individuals, is under the same code of character and conduct as the individual himself. Certainly the subjects of a state will be affected by its example. A robber state, a lying state, a murderous state may not expect honest, truthful, and law-abiding subjects. The state must have a conscience and a sense of honor and be subject to the law of the Higher Life.

Would it not be a clear-sighted ideal for the state to advocate restraint, patience, reverence, peace-making, and love? Did not the Prince of Peace intend that his doctrines should apply to the social quarrels of nations?

Let us examine the rule which he gave to the individual who has been wronged by his brother and see whether it can be applied to the nations. Jesus said such a one shall go first to his brother alone and seek an understanding which, if reached, may be followed by the greater gain of winning the brother himself. Should he fail, let him call in one or two others and seek a settlement. If he again fails, he is to refer the matter to the congregation, and failing here, he may then invoke the common law. No man should execute judgment in his own cause.

So in questions in which nations are involved, the obligation rests upon the state to put forth every effort toward a peaceful settlement of international disputes. Here, also, there are neighbors, other states, which would act as arbitrators. There should also be a tribunal to which questions can be referred and there should be authority given to render final decisions. The difficulty in the past in connection with international disputes has been that each nation has wanted to execute judgment in its own cause. Hatred, envy, selfishness, and greed have prompted their actions, rather than the love of which Jesus spoke, or even a consideration of the rights of others. As the Son of Man, he is the judge of all the earth. All nations must appear before his throne.

If in our individual lives it were necessary to go about armed with swords and pistols in order to defend ourselves; to turn our homes into arsenals and spend most of our income on defensive weapons; and if, being armed, we should feel justified in committing acts of robbery, plunder, rapine, and murder; if we went about in constant fear of being on the receiving end of such barbarity, had no protection or redress; if in other words, the law of the tooth and the claw were applied in individual conduct, we should find ourselves back in the days of the bushman and barbarian. Such a condition once prevailed in some areas when only the fittest survived. But now we claim to be civilized. We have set up courts and tribunals and have accustomed ourselves as individuals to refer our difficulties to our neighbors and friends, our church or arbitration boards, and finally to the courts and have been willing or compelled to abide by their decision. In fact, we pay for the operation of courts and tribunals and for the maintenance of a police force to enforce their decisions and guarantee our protection. If this can be done by individuals within the state, then why cannot states living side by side as neighbors evolve some such system whereby the rule laid down in the eighteenth chapter of Matthew can be put into effect when nations disagree.

Surely an international court can be as impartial in its judgment as can any other court, so long as the members of such a court are not interested in the outcome of the dispute, and especially if the members of that tribunal are prompted by the spirit of the message that Christ gave to his followers, "Love one another."

We must get away from the idea that any one group of individuals is the favorite of the Lord or that any other group is entitled to his displeasure as a group. He is no respecter of persons. We must remember that as the Apostle Paul said, "God . . . hath made of one blood all nations of men," (Acts 17:26) and we must, in realizing this fact, come to realize that nations are but groups of men who are our brothers; we must realize that sometime, somewhere, we will be charged with the responsibility in some measure of being our brother's keeper.

There are those who have maintained that Christ did not make any pronouncement directly against war. It may be true that we have no record of Jesus having condemned or approved the wars of conquest waged by Israel or of the subjection of the Jews by the Romans. However, war in all its phases is so diametrically opposed to the "Love thy neighbour" rule that no one could with consistency maintain that he, in any sense, favored the resort to arms.

Before the churches can go far, however, in influencing political states to adopt the rule of love, they must themselves return to the teachings of Jesus Christ, else the nations may well say to the churches, "Put your own house in order." The schisms and divisions and contentions that exist in the Christian churches to-day, the class distinction that is everywhere apparent, the pride and pomp and ceremony that has come to be a part of church ritual, these things lay the churches open to the charge of having departed from the plain and simple teachings of the Master.

That such a condition exists in the world is but another evidence of the need of a restoration of the gospel. It is this restoration that we proclaim to the world, with the promise that when the world will accept what he taught and what we now by his command are teaching, permanent peace will be established. The Prince of Peace planted these tiny seeds of love and has nurtured them through the centuries.—Millennial Star, December 16, 1937.

Attributes to Cultivate

I should like to attempt a type of discourse which is known as the allegorical or the prolonged metaphor. Wise speakers avoid its pitfalls, but as I belong to a select group who rush in where angels fear to tread, I take the risk.

I select as a sort of text some ungrammatical but striking words of a country girl who came to a city high school. She said,

"I ain't what I oughta be; I ain't what I'm goin' to be; But anyway, I ain't what I was."

Today the astronauts are the heroes. We are hearing much about them, and they are doing much for science. I should like to consider each of you as an astronaut, one who was launched from another sphere and is temporarily on this little space island preparing to continue an endless flight. The fact that you are here at the "Y" indicates that you are not wholly satisfied with your present status. You are here to continue your education, your search for truth, to improve and qualify yourselves for what lies ahead. Each of you is, potentially at least, an architect, a sculptor, a scientist. But for the moment just let us think of you as an astronaut, an astronaut who has been carried to this phase of your endless journey, to this momentary stopping place, by a mother ship. You have been provided with a very miraculous space suit or capsule. Each of you has been given a divine spark, which will continue to ignite that super-fuel which we call truth and knowledge—and of this there is an inexhaustible supply. A constant refueling will enable you to continue this second stage of your journey. Then you will launch an indestructible missile, yourselves, and propel it into outer space. The amount of this fuel—knowledge—which you acquire and utilize will determine and in a sense delimit your flight.

Before this venture—and I warn you that it is crammed with risk—you will be provided with plans and specifications, rules and regulations, maps and compasses, a complete instrument panel. Best of all, there is available to you a Master Pilot, a perfect teacher. You should be reminded that time is limited, and that it is of supreme importance. In fact, the countdown on your next flight started when you landed here, and it will continue without interruption. Only the Counter knows which number will signal the take off, the launching. It may come at any time. BE PREPARED.

Your curriculum will be exacting and detailed. Your training will be rigorous but rewarding. You will be trusted with free agency, the right to choose your course and your conduct. But you should know that, like all other astronauts, strict obedience to undeviating law is absolutely prerequisite to successful flight. The conditions of your physical, mental, moral, and spiritual health will be checked and noted on your boarding pass, and constant self-discipline and self-mastery will keep you on your course. BE CLEAN.

You will receive and are now receiving preliminary training from other more experienced pilots and teachers. You should heed them. This training will continue until the time of your sudden and perhaps unexpected takeoff. You must be ready. The call may come at any time, and your pleas for extended time to correct mistakes will be unavailing. You are betting your life on the outcome. Remember, it is your life. BE VIGILANT.

The Master Pilot, the Scientist and Teacher, is always available to you. Contact may be maintained by a built-in radar, sometimes known as prayer. Following the course prescribed by him will insure continuing success, almost comparable to his own. His inspiring invitation to you is, "Follow me," with a promise of possible perfection. After long pre-flight preparation (or as the apostle said, "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered;") (Hebrews 5:8), he also came to this space island on a special mission. From it he launched a flight and a program that is destined to continue—not in orbit around one little planet, but over and under, through and above all the galaxies of stars and suns and planets in limitless space where there are worlds without number. His power and influence pervades them all. BE REVERENT.

By voluntary personal sacrifice he broke death's barrier and made it possible for all to be launched into eternity, into realms more wonderful and glorious than the minds or hearts of mortal men can imagine or comprehend. Except for his efforts in your behalf, you could not continue beyond this second stage of your flight. BE GRATEFUL.

On succeeding stages of your journey you will become acquainted with and, utilize various units of time and space. For a moment I shall paraphrase Dr. Henry Eyring. As of now you are content with such units as seconds and seasons, meters and miles. But later you will become concerned with the chemical world of molecules and atoms, where electrons complete their revolutions in one one hundred million millionths of a second (grasp that if you can), and where one inch measures one hundred million atoms. Your further research may be with the nucleus of the atom where events happen a million times faster still, and where distances are a thousand times smaller than in the atom. Then in outer space you will find the revolutions of planets measured in years rather than in fractions of a second. The unit of distance is the light year, which, as you know, is a one-year journey at the speed of light, 186,000 miles a second—perhaps about 10,000 million miles. Later you will penetrate the spiritual realm where time and space shall be no more, referred to only as eternities and limitless. Thus in thought, and later in reality, you will be able to see and comprehend the infinitesimally small and the infinitely large. BE HUMBLE.

Your stay, or stopover, on this island is for conditioning; it is a preparatory phase of your journey. You, of course, have known from the beginning that you must discard or jettison part of your equipment, en route; for beyond certain atmospheres you will need freedom from the down drag of mundane gravity and a lighter load for greater speed. By discarding temporarily this mortal shell, for brief reconditioning, you will be streamlined for eternity. How foolish and unrealistic it is to speak of this necessary metamorphosis as death or think of it as the end of the flight. On this subject I bring you word from the noted Dr. Wernher Von Braun, the noted space and missile scientist. He said:

"Many people seem to feel that science has somehow made 'religious ideas' untimely or old-fashioned. But I think science has a real surprise for the skeptics. Science, for instance, tells us that nothing in nature, not even the tiniest particle, can disappear without a trace. Nature does not know extinction. All it knows is transformation.

"Now if God applies this fundamental principle to the most minute and insignificant parts of his universe, doesn't it make sense to assume that He applies it also to the human soul? I think it does. And everything science has taught me—and continues to teach me—strengthens my belief in the continuity of our spiritual existence after death. Nothing disappears without a trace."

Now I ask you, do you think it is possible that in this universe, created and governed according to eternal law, the most intelligent creatures in it are here by chance? Is it possible that there was no plan or purpose or design? Did the Creator make a stairway leading to nowhere? Or did he plan a flight leading to a certain fatal crash? Your flight is to be eternal, and you are to be at the controls, with full responsibility and freedom to choose your course and your conduct—and to take the consequences. BE CAUTIOUS.

How tragically and unforgivably foolish it would be for a pilot to discard his oxygen mask, to leave the controls, and take a whiff of some exhilarating gas for a momentary thrill, or in some other way deliberately incapacitate himself, endanger the whole flight, and condemn himself to be eternally grounded.

Some have complained that the law of cause and effect is inequitable and lacks proportion. Some say that the consequences of their folly are unjust and extreme. But I want to tell you that in life, as with the missile, the slightest defect in a part or functioning, be it ever so small, may lead the missile or the life far from its goal and ultimately to its destruction. BE SENSIBLE.

While the principle of repentance is an eternal principle, imagine the futility of the man who deliberately jumps from a dizzy height starting to repent on the way down. He may repent all the way down, but his sorrow will not lessen the pull of gravity, nor will it cushion the impact. "There is no swift repentance can retrieve a violated principle, no crying 'I believe.' " No, we must wear them out by patient years.

"For each descent from fair truth's lofty way, For each gross error which delays the soul, By that soul's gloom and loneliness we pay, And by the retarded journey to its goal."

Your flight will lead to one of three great kingdoms called telestial, terrestrial, and celestial. One's knowledge, self-mastery, and intelligence will determine his destination. The rules of admittance into all these kingdoms are fixed and irrevocable, all their blessings are predicated upon the observance of law. BE OBEDIENT.

This is a flight toward immortality, eternal life, and eternal increase; increase of knowledge and the power that comes with it; increase of awareness and the joy that comes from understanding; understanding and awareness that enables one to savor and to relish the abundant life; increase of intelligence which is the glory of God and which will be the measure of your glory—increase, in fact, of all the things that go to make up Godhood.

Now let us leave the analogy for a moment and come back to reality. You students in these classrooms, the scientists in their laboratories, the explorers in distant places, the astronauts in outer space, and the prayerful man upon his knees—all are seeking for truth. With increased efficiency and accumulated knowledge, they are pursuing this quest.

Though at the moment the future looks dark and foreboding, though our world is divided and imperiled, though the forces of Christ and the anti-Christ have joined in awful conflict, I want to bring you a word of hope and courage and say to you that victory lies ahead for the cause which the Great Scientist has espoused. Whether it is victory for you or not will depend on you. In support of my encouraging and optimistic outlook, may I read to you the words of a prophet of God named John, who had a vision. Among other things he said,

"And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.

"And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years,

"And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years should be fulfilled: . . . " (Rev. 20:1-3.)

John's account of his vision continues:

"And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.

"And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.

"And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.

"And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away." (Ibid., 21:1-4.)

Yes, a hunger for truth and understanding gnaws at the mind and spirit of man. His flight through life is sustained by the power of his knowledge, and, may I add, the purity of his life. Cultivate a hunger for truth.

My young friends, it is part of my calling to bear witness of the Master Pilot. Of him I humbly tell you now. He lives. He is a reality. Even as Peter by the power of his priesthood said in answer to Christ's question, "Thou art the Christ, the son of the living God," and, as Christ told him, the source of that knowledge was not on earth but revelation from heaven: so from the same source, I declare to you, God is your Father, Jesus of Nazareth is your friend, your Elder Brother and your Redeemer. Your coming here was not accidental. You have undertaken an eternal flight. You must live with yourselves throughout eternity. You are at the controls. BE FAITHFUL.—B.Y.U. Student Body. May 17, 1961.

Retrospect. . . Today. . . Prospect

". . . But, Mousie, thou are no thy lane, In proving foresight may be in vaine: The best laid schemes o' mice an' men Gang aft a-gley, An' lea'e us nought but grief an' pain, For promis'd joy. "Still thou are blest, compar'd wi' me! The present only toucheth thee: But, Och! I backward cast my e'e On prospects drear! An' forward, tho' I canna see, I guess an' fear!"—Robert Burns

Few people live abundantly, joyously, fully, because they do not live today. Either gloomy memories or anxious anticipation are allowed to intrude upon the peace of the present. We must learn to forget, to let go, to bury the things which call up unpleasant memories, and not permit them to mar our happiness. We may remember the lessons of the past and profit by them, but time spent in useless regret is worse than lost. Thinking of what we might have done with those missed opportunities, punishing ourselves with darts of self-condemnation, is worse than merely killing time. It is subjecting it to a slow and lingering death.

If we fix our gaze upon the past, we will be unable to see the possibilities of the present. To spend time regretting the past is to add the folly of today to the mistakes of yesterday.

Conquer Your Environment

Present conditions may not be ideal, but we must learn to extract happiness from less than perfect surroundings. We must influence and dominate our environment, rather than submit to be its slave. Complete self-mastery includes the mastery of environment.

But how, says someone, can I get happiness out of my monotonous, humdrum life? Chained as I am by necessity, dependants, and duty, each day is the same as yesterday and each tomorrow is made unwelcome by the knowledge that it is to be only another today, or worse.

Is not the answer found in the question itself? The shadows of yesterday and tomorrow, if cast across today, will make it dark and dreary. These shadows must be excluded.

Whatever your surroundings, you can make today worthwhile by closing the door through which you came from yesterday and the window through which you fearfully look for tomorrow.

It is possible to create happiness out of today's work with all its demands, antagonisms, obstacles, disappointments. This requires a resolute heart, a fixed purpose, a mind in control of itself.

Today is the time to which you looked forward yesterday with such breathtaking anticipation or saddening apprehension. It is neither as good nor as bad as it looked in prospect. How it is to appear in retrospect will depend upon what you do with it. When you insist upon viewing today through the lens of either yesterday or tomorrow, you may be sure it will be out of focus, imperfect, untrue, and disappointing.

Jesus pointed the way when he said, "Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof." We must resolve to live one day at a time, and live that one day to the full. No matter what happens—if cherished hopes are shattered and we are rudely awakened to find that those blissful dreams of tomorrow were only dreams—still we must resolve that we will extract from every experience of this day something that will make us wiser, happier, more efficient.

The Present Is the Only Source of Real Happiness

Happiness must be taken as we go along or it will be lost. The manna with which the children of Israel were fed was gathered fresh each day. They who, lacking faith, tried to store it up for future use were sadly disappointed, for it spoiled. Neither yesterday's nor tomorrow's manna was intended for use today. Each day's supply of happiness, like manna, must be gathered anew and must be used while it is fresh.

"This day I begin to live anew," should be one's first comment to himself upon awakening. "Nothing shall mar my happiness. I will forget everything that caused me pain or sorrow. I shall not allow the shadows of the future, foreboding, dread, to rob me of what is rightfully mine—a joyous today.

"I shall establish a quarantine against all the enemies of my peace and poise. Those doleful thoughts trying to gain admission from the past will be returned to the dead past to which they belong, and any seeking admission for the future, no matter what their credentials, will be held incommunicado until they can get the stamp of today upon their passport."

"Let the dead past bury its dead. Act, act, in the living present Heart within and God o'erhead."

An Old Veteran Speaks

As the time for demobilization approaches, the veterans of the last war are greatly interested in the problems of readjustment which face the young manhood of the world. They know something of their hopes and aspirations, their conflicting eagerness and fear, their trembling on the brink of new adventure, the pause which comes with the realization that now at last they may reach out and grasp what, during these years of war, has seemed so far away, so like a dream of unattainable paradise.

And now for many it has come, and for all it is a promise of tomorrow. Going home to stay: no more watching of the calendar and clock, no more searching of the schedules of train and boat to avoid being AWOL while on leave or furlough, no more good-byes with forced smiles wrung from hearts which hurt as they hold back the cry that seeks release through tightened throats on both sides of the barrier at the station or the dock.

We older veterans are fully aware of the fact that the young men of this generation face a world quite different from the one we knew when we returned from the First World War and what has proved to be an unfinished job. And yet somehow we feel that the things we learned by the mistakes we made might become signposts or markers for you at the intersections. A good guide knows which road to avoid as well as which one to take, and if that knowledge was gained from sad experience, it may be even more impressive.

What then would the old veterans say to you who are to change from uniform to civvies? What would they desire from you their sons to whom they prayed this experience would never come? Perhaps their dimming eyes do not see as clearly as they did, but their memories are good. The lens of time gives perspective and experience teaches us to heed the red light and the green and the caution of the amber.

First, our men will want release from the routine and regimentation they have endured while they thought it was necessary for the time and place. We want them to make sure that the freedom for which they fought will not be abridged or taken from them by the more subtle methods of state control and unrepresentative government. Make sure that the years of your youth which were given to your country were invested in freedom for your sons and not merely dashed against walls of tyrants to fall back into the shadow of those walls.

These returning veterans will not feel that the world owes them a living for the service they have rendered. They are grateful for the lessons learned while serving. They know themselves and other men better than they did and can now do many useful things, are skilled and trained in many fields which before the war were reserved for experts only. They have also learned that there are some things which they cannot do as well as others, and thus they'll avoid the expense and embarrassment of the dead-end road.

They must have a chance to finish their education and to this end should not hesitate to take such government aid as may be available. The government, which is the people, advances this money as an investment in citizenship which is the best security on the market. But they will not ask the government to do for them what they can do for themselves. They value their selfrespect and independence. They do not wish to be obligated, or to be in debt or to rely on government jobs where they must take orders and be "pushed around" by little men in big places. They wish to choose and decide, to go and come without let or hindrance, to take an active part in community effort, in co-operative enterprise, and to feel that their military service has not segregated them or set them apart as different from their fellows.

They do not want the kind of charity which washes against the foundations of their self-respect and initiative. They ask only for a chance to work, to build a house and make a home, to contribute to the general good, and to help create the kind of world which we had hoped might be their heritage.

They want freedom within the law with the right to think without prompting and to speak without fear, good schools for their children and for all children regardless of the economic or social status of family lines. They want real democracy, the kind for which they fought, the kind which draws no line between races, creeds, or colors, where they can worship the God who "made of one blood all nations of men," worship without the fear of persecution or the blight of prejudice, where independence, initiative, and pluck will be rewarded with a ladder inviting them to climb and achieve success. They want a chance to make good without crawling, leaning, or whining, or paying tribute to self-appointed taskmasters.

They want to keep their consciences tuned to the rights and needs of others, and they will insist that all shall have their full share of the good things of this world if they are willing to pay the price of effort and enterprise. They want their country to have a conscience, too, and to be a good neighbor in a world where neighbor nations live closer together than ever before. They want the kind of fellowship that is not afraid of sacrifice—the kind they knew among their buddies, where they were anxious to share a crust, a drink, or to risk life to save another, where thoughts turned out instead of in and where oneself was considered only after one's friends were secure. They want a Christian world where creeds are written in the hearts of men and God is a reality—where love of fellow men will extend the vision beyond national boundaries, and no sick man or nation will be left to die alone on the road to Jericho.

They want a world in which beauty has real value and may not be crowded out of life to make room for mechanical efficiency. They want flowers as well as vegetables in their gardens, with the untrammeled right to cultivate them without fear of bureaucratic orders to plough them up and make room for cabbages. They want leisure time to spend in that neglected corner of the garden of life reserved for the cultivation of the aesthetic.

They want to live among their brothers, some of whom are citizens of foreign lands—which to them are no longer foreign. These men have had a chance to play outside their own back yard, and they like the neighbor children against whom they were warned by those who knew them not. These men want a world brotherhood where their children and their children's children may live in peace. To this end they want to have a voice in government and a seat at the council tables of the world, where experience and intelligence and understanding will join with faith and trust and fellowship to write and operate the world charters of the future.

They want a little of the earth's surface which they may call their own, upon which they may stamp the imprint of a coat-of-arms which they themselves have fashioned, a little home to which they may retire for the enjoyment of family life, a few good books, some music, and a radio. A place where they may shut out or bring in the outside world at will and where at night they may draw the curtains and invite the Prince of Peace to bring his benediction to a Christian family in a Christian country in a world where the principles of the Prince of Peace have replaced the mad attempts of would-be dictators to rule the world!

And thus do old men dream dreams while they pray the young men may see visions.—Millennial Star, July, 1945.
