Hugh B. Brown, Continuing the Quest ( 1961)

V

Holidays and Holy Days

Harvest Days

The Afterglow of Easter

An Easter Message

Gratitude, a Spiritual Attribute

Peace and Goodwill toward Men

"Behold, I Am Jesus Christ"

The Day Love Takes Command

Christmas and Peace

"The Year Is Dying in the Night"

Musings and Browsings

Harvest Days

Harvest Days are thoughtful days. The autumn is a time of reckoning and of judgment. We garner the crops and prepare for the winter. We see the fruits of our labors and realize the blessings of forethought, the reward of industry. Sometimes we think of what might have been and we make resolutions. We look forward to the Spring beyond the Winter and resolve to profit by the experiences of the year which is passing.

To most of us, Autumn is a time of thanksgiving, when we acknowledge the Source of our blessings and we kneel before him and give thanks. Our sincerity may not be gauged, wholly, by the words we use, the tone of our voice, or the regularity of our kneeling.

If someone does us a great favor, one which we cannot fully repay, we sometimes express the wish that some day we may have an opportunity to show our gratitude in some tangible way. What would our benefactor think of us—what would we think of ourselves—if such an opportunity should appear and we neglected or refused to embrace it? Suppose he should ask us to do some small favor for him, something but one-tenth as valuable as his service to us, would we refuse the favor or complain that it was too much or too difficult? If we did, we should expect all who knew the facts to count us among the worst ingrates.

Nevertheless, the gratitude which is worthy of us should not be prompted by a "lively sense of favors to come." It should be akin to the charity of which the apostle wrote which "seeketh not itself." Real gratitude is compounded of many virtues and is productive of others. It is to be found among those who were named by the Master as "blessed," the poor in spirit, the meek, the merciful, the pure in heart, the oppressed. Blessed is he who has a thankful heart and a contrite spirit. To him, the windows of heaven are opened until he is unable to contain his blessings. But, it requires more than words to open those windows.

In spite of our losses, our trials, our hardships, our bereavements, each one of us has reason to be thankful for the blessings of the past years. Our Great Benefactor has intimated that we may show our appreciation to him by returning, through the Church, onetenth of that which he has given us. Shall we hesitate and have the word insurance stamped upon our prayers?

While future need should not be the moving cause of our thanksgiving, and while we should be grateful to a benefactor even if we knew he could never again help us, still God himself has indicated that to obtain a blessing we must, not merely should, obey the law upon which it is predicated. The good husbandman knows he cannot reap if he does not sow. He saves seeds for next year's crop. Only the foolish fail to provide for the future. Read again the parable in Luke 12:16-21 and examine yourself before its mirror!

"And he spake a parable unto them saying: The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully: And he thought within himself saying, What shall I do because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? And he said, This will I do: I will pull down my barns and build greater; and there I will bestow all my fruits and goods. And I will say to my soul: Soul thou hast much good laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. But God said to him, thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee, then whose shall these things be which thou hast provided? So is he that layeth up treasure for himself and is not rich toward God." (Luke 12:16-21.)

There are times ahead which will require all our faith and fortitude, times which in some ways are even more sinister than those we have known. This is no time to "pull down our barns," but rather a time when, in deep humility, we should express and show our appreciation and pray for strength to meet the trials of the future. This is no time to "eat, drink and be merry" in the spirit of the man in the parable.

There is a warning as well as a promise in his challenge, "Try me and see." Tithing is not only a means of saying thank you, but an acknowledgment of our dependence and a humble plea for continued blessing. It is, in a sense, the seed for next year's crop. It helps to determine the size and quality of the crop for which we hope to prove worthy.

But this seed of tithing is somewhat magical in that it not only produces far in excess of the average crop, but that from it we derive an endless variety of blessings. The tithepayer has more faith in times of sickness, more courage in face of danger, more strength when tempted, better judgment for decisions, more love for God and his fellow men. It therefore leads him to the keeping of the greatest of the commandments and the blessings which come from obedience thereto.

One's worthiness to receive such blessings is not determined, wholly, by his record in the matter of tithes, but it is the history and experience of the Church during the past century that the honest tithepayer is also the faithful priesthood member, auxiliary worker, the loyal supporter of the authorities. He is, as a rule, one whose heart is not set upon the things of this world.

The Afterglow of Easter

As we are still enjoying the afterglow of Easter, the emphasis throughout this great conference has been on the divinity of Christ. From the profound and scholarly opening address of President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Saturday morning, through all the sessions of the conference, all have borne witness that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God. I cannot hope to add anything to what has been said unless, perhaps, emphasize by repetition.

Little is known of the details of the Master's sojourn on the earth except during those three transcendent years of his ministry, the most eventful years of history. If we are to get a proper concept of the moral and spiritual significance and splendor of his unique life—from Bethlehem to Bethany—we must view it in the light of eternity. He lived through life on this earth at the summit of time, and on the high point on that summit we see the light of the resurrection, the most glorious beacon in the universe, flashing hope and courage to a benighted world. Let us from that eminence look back—back beyond Eden, and there we shall find that Jesus the Christ was with God the Father in the beginning.

And that beginning must have antedated the beginning of which we read in Genesis when the earth was created, for the obvious reason that he was its Creator. Yes, he lived before time began as we understand time. There is ample scriptural evidence to support the belief that Christ had a pre-mortal existence. Time will not permit quoting or reading many of the passages of scripture, but I should like to refer to one or two.

John, in his inspired preface, said:

"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

"The same was in the beginning with God.

"All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made. . . .

"And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth." (John 1:1-3, 14.)

To this wonderful testimony Paul adds this corroboration:

"For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him:

"And he is before all things, and by him all things consist." (Col. 1:16-17.)

And the writer of Hebrews adds:

"God, who at sundry times spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets,

"Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds:" (Heb. 1:1-2.)

Jesus himself referred to his pre-existence many times. For instance he said:

"For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me." (John 6:38.)

And then in that greatest of all prayers we find the poignant message:

"And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was." (Ibid., 17:5.)

At another time he chidingly spoke to his uncomprehending followers and said:

". . . Doth this offend you?

"What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?" (Ibid., 6:61-62.)

These proofs of Christ's pre-existence confirm our faith in the immortality of the soul, for if the spirit had an existence before the body was created, so that spirit is capable of independent existence after the body dies.

The fact that he came forth from the tomb with spirit and body reunited—and this is the central fact in the teachings of the apostles—gives divine assurance that we too, through his atoning sacrifice, shall partake of the blessings of the resurrection. Hearken to his promise:

". . . I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:

"And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. . . ." (Ibid., 11:25-26.)

And let us read together the words of John, written while he was on the Isle of Patmos, as recorded in Revelation,

"Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: . . . " (Rev. 1:7.)

"And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and the last:

"I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, . . . " (Ibid., 1:17-18.)

John continues:

"And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia; Salvation, and glory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God:

"And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords." (Ibid., 19:1, 16.)

Furthermore:

"And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.

"And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.

"And he said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. . . ." (Ibid., 21:1-2, 6.)

Zechariah said that when the Master shall appear he will stand on the Mount of Olives, and the mount shall be cleft in twain, and they beholding the wounds in his hands shall ask whence these wounds, and he shall reply,

". . . Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends." (Zech. 13:6.)

"And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and there shall be a very great valley; and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south." (Ibid., 14:4.)

We proclaim the pre-existence and divine nature of Christ, the purpose of his life, the reality of his resurrection, and the certainty of his second coming as eternal and well-attested truths and prophetic promises. They have illuminating and inspiring significance for our troubled world. They are our heritage from the Judeo-Christian world, clarified and amplified by modern revelation.

They are relevant to our time and age, which, as Stevenson recently pointed out, "is a time of conflict of ideology, as a time of ferment in technology, a period of revolution in science, . . . an era when at last the means lie at hand to free mankind from the ancient shackles of pain and hunger. It is all these things, but the true crisis of our times lies at a deeper level. All this freedom and elbow room only thrusts onto us with more force the fundamental issues of the faith that is in us."

There must be a re-affirmation of the truths concerning the Fatherhood of God, the Godhood of Christ, and the brotherhood of man. Truths for which the Savior gave his life. Truth and brotherhood, love of God and fellow men, will make men free and establish peace in a world which is threatened with a devastating and final war.

The truculent and blasphemous attempts of communist ideologies to erase Christ from their literature and to expunge all memory of him from the hearts and minds of men, in order to degrade and enslave men must fail, for as God made man in his own image, so his image is indelibly stamped on the souls of men, and instinctively they know that they are the sons of God.

The challenge of evil with its inevitable confusion tends to make the relevance of Christ's life and message more apparent and the application of his divine teachings more urgent.

It would be cowardly almost to the point of treason to dilute, water down, and make insipid the soul-saving power of these glorious truths. Indeed, as Paul said:

"That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow,. . .

"And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father." (Phil. 2:10-11.)

We humbly but fearlessly add to the testimonies of the prophets and apostles of old our own witness that he lives, that he is a personal being, that he will come again with his resurrected, glorified body still bearing the marks of the crucifixion and that there is none other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved, to which I testify in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—General Conference, April 6, 1959.

An Easter Message

It is a privilege and an honor to bear witness to the greatest event in history. The most beautiful and significant story ever told is the story of the birth of the child Jesus in Bethlehem, no more tragic event was ever recorded than that of the crucifixion of the man Jesus of Nazareth, and the wonderful and inspiring story of the resurrection of Jesus Christ the Lord still moves countless hearts to tears. Let us read a brief account of that transcendent event as recorded in Luke: "Now upon the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they came unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared, and certain others with them. And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre. And they entered in, and found not the body of the Lord Jesus. And it came to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two men stood by them in shining garments: And as they were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth, they said unto them, Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen: remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee, Saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again. . . . It was Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and other women that were with them, which told these things unto the apostles. And their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not. Then arose Peter, and ran unto the sepulchre; and stooping down, he beheld the linen clothes laid by themselves, and departed, wondering in himself at that which was come to pass." (Luke 24:1-7, 10-12.)

The chapter then tells of the experience of the two men who were on their way to Emmaus when Jesus joined and journeyed with them. He expounded unto them the scripturs concerning himself and finally revealed himself to them.

Then as the eleven apostles were assembled together, discussing his reported resurrection, we read again in Luke, "And as they thus spake, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you. But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit. And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them his hands and his feet." (Ibid., 24:36-40.)

And later the Apostle Paul tells us that Jesus was seen of him and of more than five hundred of the brethren.

And now nearly two thousand years later men in all walks of life believe in his resurrection and attest his divinity. Dr. Aldrich, the American philosopher, was asked if Jesus and Plato should return to earth for just one hour and were scheduled to lecture on the same campus at the same time, which one would you go to hear? He replied, "Who would go to hear even so great a one as Plato talk on truth when he might listen to one who was the truth?" And Charles Lamb asks, "What would we do if Shakespeare came into this room? We would all rise to our feet. But what would we do if Jesus came into this room? We would all fall to our knees."

How fitting it is that the resurrection of the Lord should be commemorated in the springtime of the year when the beauty and miracle of nature's resurrection stirs the hearts of men.

We join with other Christians in celebrating this miraculous event. We believe in the scriptural account of his resurrection and with conviction in our own hearts, confirmed by the whisperings of the Holy Ghost; we humbly bear witness that Christ our Savior came forth from the tomb a resurrected being with his body now glorified and immortal, still bearing the marks of the nails and the spear; that he walked among and talked with men and finally, in the presence of witnesses, ascended into heaven. How inspiring and reassuring is the promise made by the angels who stood by on that occasion. ". . . this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1:11.)

We humbly proclaim not only the reality of his resurrection, but the certainty of his second advent. He will come again and rule and reign during one thousand years of universal peace. To this we testify in his holy name. Amen.—NBC Radio, April 6, 1958.

Gratitude, A Spiritual Attribute

How rich and radiant is the soul of a man who has a thankful heart. His gratitude increases with his unfolding awareness of himself, the universe, and his Creator. Appreciation, like love, enriches both giver and receiver, and, when spontaneously expressed in word or deed, reveals a depth and delicacy of fine-grain character. True gratitude is motivated by a recognition of favors received. Its counterfeit is fawning anticipation of favors to come.

Serious consideration of the mystery of life, its vastness and incalculability, gives depth to appreciation for blessings gratuitously bestowed. They who have eyes to see, ears to hear, understanding hearts, will see the bounteous love of God everywhere manifest and will be inclined to reverently remove their shoes and exclaim: "For the rock and for the river, The valley's fertile sod, For the strength of the hills we bless thee, Our God, our father's God."

We are also under infinite obligation to our forebears for our inheritance of modern conveniences, national advantages, cultural opportunities and spiritual blessings which were bought and paid for by their toil, self-denial, and sacrifice. If we are fully to enjoy our rich estate and pass it on to others, we must not allow it to depreciate for want of thankfulness expressed in joyful service.

He who has a thankful heart and cultivates the spirit of appreciation, will find much to be grateful for each hour of every day. The following analogy, written by Henry Ward Beecher, illustrates the point. "If one should give me a dish of sand and tell me there were particles of iron in it, I might look for them with my eyes, and search for them with my clumsy fingers, and be unable to detect them; but let me take a magnet and sweep through it, and how it would draw to itself the almost invisible particles by the mere power of attraction.—The unthankful heart, like my finger in the sand, discovers no mercies; but let the thankful heart sweep the day, and as the magnet finds the iron, so it will find, in every hour, some heavenly blessings, only the iron in God's sand is gold!"

We should make a necklace of the pearls of our many blessings and wear it constantly. Its beads, when gratefully counted, will gain luster and be magnified when seen through thankful eyes. This counting of blessings will discover and emphasize good fortune, ease life's yoke, lighten its burden. The spirit of thanksgiving will spread its contagion to all within reach of its radiation.

The value of the simple necessities of life is recognized when they suddenly become inaccessible. Then other things which had seemed to be indispensable are seen in true perspective. Eddie Rickenbacker was once asked what was the biggest lesson he had learned from drifting about with his companions in life rafts for twenty-one days, hopelessly lost in the Pacific. "The biggest lesson I learned from that experience," he said, "was that if you have all the fresh water you want to drink and all the food you want to eat, you ought never to complain about anything." Let us cultivate the habit of expressing appreciation for the everyday blessings which we so often take for granted.

They who show their gratitude to God by serving their fellow men will be entitled to hear his word: "Ye have done it unto me." Benjamin Franklin prayed, "Accept my kind offices to thy other children as the only return in my power for thy continual favors to me."

Sincere and heartfelt appreciation is a spiritual attribute often found among those who seemingly or by comparison have little to be grateful for. But they who possess this virtue are rich indeed as in meekness and modesty they express their gratitude by word and life and willing service, without any thought of possible returns; they thereby enrich the lives of others.

A truly thankful person need not be a profound thinker, an outstanding artist, an eminent scientist or be rich in worldly possessions, but his spirit of appreciation will enable him to live abundantly.

No one day should be observed exclusively as Thanksgiving day. Like prayer and worship, each day and hour should be enriched and gladdened by expressions of thanksgiving and by seeking opportunity to make partial payments on our debt to God and to our forebears. Cultivation of the habit of expressing thanks in word and deed helps to develop the virtues mentioned in the Beatitudes and to insure the promised blessings. The most delectable dishes, if seasoned with salt which has lost its savor, are flat and unpalatable; so our blessings, to be fully enjoyed, must have the seasoning of appreciation, with its spiritual savor which adds aroma, flavor and quality to life.

They who have thankful hearts may enjoy the beauty of green pastures, the calm of still waters, and the peace of a tranquil soul.—The Instructor, 1957.

Peace and Goodwill toward Men

"And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David, a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord." (Luke 2:10-11.)

Again we rejoice in the spirit of Christmas; again we remind our readers that Christ was born in the city of David and that at his birth a multitude of the heavenly host sang "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men."

The angels who announced his birth were not unmindful of the fact that a wicked Herod would seek his destruction and that forces of evil would oppose his mission and message until they nailed his body to the cross. The heavenly host sang "Glory to God" not only for the initial fact of his birth, but because they could see beyond Calvary through the centuries that were to follow—through the night of darkness and the reign of evil to that glorious day when the principles for which he lived and died would become universal in the earth, and he, who was to become the Prince of Peace, should rule.

We must not allow the unpleasant facts which are about us to blind us to all the beauty of the world. The ways of force are more precipitate than are the ways of love, but love is more enduring. The former, like the wind, may bring havoc and cause destruction, but the latter, like the sun, shines on long after the storm has spent itself. Love, like the sun, brings warmth and light and life to the world.

When Christ was born in Bethlehem, a new light dawned upon the world. And though a night of darkness has intervened and though the clouds of evil have at times obscured that light—and even now the storms are all about us—still they who have the vision, without which the people must perish, undauntedly proclaim to all men that the clouds of error must disappear and the light of his truth shine through; that when men are willing to forsake the ways of evil, they may realize the promise of peace on earth which heralded his coming.

Christmas, and that for which it stands, calls upon us to seek the faculty to propagate happiness in a world where the word "propaganda" is being so overworked by the forces of evil. Times like these call for thoroughbreds, and a thoroughbred never whimpers. He is larger than the things which tend to annoy him. Oh, the inexhaustible wealth of a cheerful, sunny soul. Let those of us who do not have things to give, scatter sunshine, which is one of the fruits of the gospel. The spirit of good cheer characterized his life from the manger to the cross. "Be not afraid" was his heartening injunction at times when men's hearts were failing them.

The tranquil stream of joy, whose refreshing waters gave buoyancy to his life, had it source in the eternal heights beyond the reach of men to either divert or poison, be they Herods, Pilates, Judases, or modern tyrants. He reminds us that these exhaustless springs are available to all men. He invites us to come and drink freely and promises a joy which "no man taketh from you."

If we could get his vision of life, we could rejoice and be exceeding glad that even though men revile and persecute and speak all manner of evil against us, at this darkened Yuletide, he brings this message, which, if heeded, will guarantee against a blackout of the spirit.

The world is still full of kindness, charity, helpfulness, love, honesty, sincerity, sympathy, and faith. These priceless gifts of the spirit may be ours on this Christmas day and throughout the coming year despite the efforts of all the modern Herods who would destroy them. But ours only on condition that we increase and share them.

Courageously we welcome Christmas. The Babe who was born on that first Christmas day will yet rule as Lord of Lords and King of Kings. The victory of truth is absolutely certain, but it can become universal only when men practise what he taught and, resisting the down drag of selfishness, realize the fundamental truth that love of God and love of fellow men are indispensable to lasting happiness.

Permanent and universal peace are promised to the world, but they can only come when men are prepared to pay the price and make themselves worthy of its blessings. Each one of us, no matter where we are, can cultivate our faculties to appreciate and enjoy the blessings that are about us. Unhappines and misery proclaim a neglected heart. He whose birth we celebrate this day, who has been called the man of sorrow, repeatedly said, "Be of good cheer." In unfortunate or discouraging circumstances, he did not lose his poise. Surely, with such a leader, we can, even in these troublesome times, join with the heavenly host and sing, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men."—Millennial Star, December 1939.

"Behold, I Am Jesus Christ"

There was born in Bethlehem of Judea, one Jesus, surnamed the Christ. The facts of his birth, life, and death are well attested, of record, and generally accepted as authentic. There are few who doubt the earthly existence of the Man known in literature as Jesus of Nazareth. Men are not so well-informed, however, on the question of his ante-mortal life.

The one Church which bears his name, declares him to be the Son of the Living God, the Redeemer of the world, the One of whom the ancient prophets wrote in hopeful expectation, the One, who while he lived, was by his followers esteemed as Christ, the Savior.

This Man, whose birth the Christian nations celebrate on December 25th, stands out as the most powerful personality in all history. In the excellence of his character, the simplicity and beauty of his life, the value of his teaching and example, he stands alone. Great leaders throughout the centuries, some of whom have doubted his divinity, unite in proclaiming him the greatest among them. His birth marked at once the end of one era and the beginning of another. His life is as a great watershed from which the streams of time flow in both directions.

Permitted to live only thirty-three years, engaged in active service a little longer than the average elder spends as a missionary in the field, brutally deprived of life when in his prime, known to but few while he lived, and crucified between thieves on Golgotha's lonely hill, this Jesus of Nazareth has affected the lives of men more potently than any other person who ever lived upon the earth.

Did this person, Jesus Christ, begin to be when his mother, Mary placed him in that manger in the obscure village in Bethlehem? No, his Spirit lived before that time. He was known in the councils of the Gods before the earth was made. This king of the Jews had been a factor in the history of the Israelites, was indeed the Jehovah of the Old Testament.

To evaluate properly the great event which was shrouded in obscurity, we must see in this Holy Babe of Bethlehem the incarnation of the Firstborn Son of God, chosen and ordained to be the Savior and Redeemer of the world which was then in contemplation. We must recognize in him the God of Adam and of Noah, of Abraham and Israel. We must see in him the one who is yet to be the King of Kings.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints proclaims the pre-existence and foreordination of Jesus of Nazareth, proclaims that before his birth, he was with God, the Father, in the creation of the world, that he was born in the flesh of the Virgin Mary, as other babes are born, with the single and notable exception that no earthly man was his Father, for he was the Son of God. The Church proclaims and accepts as sacred the records which tell of his birth, life, death, and physical resurrection. It declares that through his life and sacrifice, there was brought about the atonement, which, when made fully operative by obedience to the laws of the gospel, will bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. The Church proclaims the restoration in this age of the power by which he wrought his mighty miracles, and claims this to be the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times; and lastly, to a war-weary world it brings the hopeful tidings that he will return again to the earth in the near future with power and glory and will reign as Lord and King.

Let us then refer to the Law and Testimony and see if there is confirmation for these, to some, startling declarations. First, then, as to his pre-existence and foreordination. John the Revelator tells us that there was war in heaven between Michael and his angels on the one side and the dragon and his angels on the other. Lucifer, the Son of the Morning, was with his angels cast out of heaven. The Prophet Isaiah laments his fall in these words:

"How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!

"For thou has said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north:

"I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High.

"Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit." (Isaiah 14:12-15.)

We cite this scripture to indicate that the author of war and contention and rebellion is Satan, the dragon, Lucifer, the devil himself, and we affirm in passing that they who make wars, prompted by greed and the spirit of aggression, who persecute the weak and breed hatred in the earth, are in the service of this fallen angel, who because of unrighteous ambition and a desire to rob men of their agency, was cast out of heaven.

Jesus, the Son of God, was present and was on the Father's side when this great struggle took place. He offered himself as a sacrifice without asking for the glory. Also this same Jesus, under the direction of his Father, created the earth on which we live. Note the words of the Apostle John.

"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

"The same was in the beginning with God.

"All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made. . . .

"And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth." (John 1:1-3, 14.)

There can be no question that the Word mentioned by John was the Christ himself, for he was made flesh and dwelt among them. Paul refers to the purpose and grace of Jesus Christ before the world began. In 2 Tim. 1:9 and in 1 Peter 1:19, 20, we read these unambiguous words:

"But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot:

"Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you."

The Savior himself declared, "For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me." (John 6:38.) And again he said: "What and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before?" (Ibid., 6:2.) Hear him saying to the doubting Jews, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am." This could only have referred to a pre-existent state, for Abraham preceded Christ into earth life by nineteen centuries. Again he declares, "I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world; again, I leave the world, and go to the Father." Also, "I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was."

Many other scriptures could be quoted to verify the statement that Christ was in the beginning with the Father. The Book of Mormon is replete with such references. The Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price, modern revelations, affirm this same eternal truth.

One of the many evidences in the Book of Mormon can be found in Ether 3:13, 14, where the Lord, addressing an ancient prophet—the brother of Jared—says, "Because thou knowest these things ye are redeemed from the fall; therefore ye are brought back into my presence; therefore I show myself unto you.

"Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ."

We celebrate then, this Christmas day, not only the birth of a Babe in Bethlehem, but the advent in mortal tabernacle of the very Son of God himself, who took upon himself mortality, became subject unto death, that he might conquer it and become the first fruits of the resurrection. We celebrate the greatest single event in all history. Recognizing him for what he is, the Creator and Redeemer of the world, we declare the joyous message in the midst of chaos and of confusion, that victory is his, that truth will triumph, that Christmas is the celebration of an event, the full import of which will only be realized when he comes again to rule and reign, when peace shall be permanently established in the earth, and when he shall take his place as King of Kings. He will reign in a kingdom whose entire legal code will be compressed into the three simple words, "Thou shalt love." We, with the Apostle Peter, declare to all the world, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God."—Millennial Star, December 1939.

The Day Love Takes Command

Christmas time with its cargo of love is the greatest of all anniversaries for those who worship the God of love. It brings peace of mind to millions who, for one day at least, think more of others than of selves; more of giving than of getting.

This is the secret of the popularity of Christmas. It is the best day of the year, the most joyous because we seek the happiness of others rather than our own. It is the day when love takes command, and men, women, and children, by losing themselves, find joy and peace. For one day at least, Christendom tries Christianity.

If this formula for happiness—love one another—is effective for one day, may it not work at other times, at all times? If by giving we receive, and by dividing we increase, why not make happiness permanent by carrying the Christmas spirit throughout the year?

Each year closes its volume of history and experience, leaving memories of some joyous days; of some success; of some achievement. Also of some sorrowful, anxious days; days of fear and misgiving and doubt.

As we look back we see that much of our worry was needless, caused by fear of what might happen. We crossed bridges which existed only in imagination. We suffered in anticipation of troubles which did not come. Therefore, our unhappiness was of our own making. Fear made us falter and worry made us weak. As we remember our doubts, fears, and weaknesses we hear him again say, "O ye of little faith." (Matt. 6:30.)

In our individual and family lives during the past year we were confronted by problems, some of them grave and serious. We met reverses and some sorrow, but by his grace, our strength was sufficient.

May all members of the Church meet the new year with love in their hearts for all men, guided by the Holy Spirit, and accompanied by three companions: faith, hope, and courage.

We need stout hearts to meet the future, a future pregnant with unborn events, and big with possibilities. Fear and apprehension will but unfit us for the fray. They conjure up unrealities, magnify and distort the possible future fact until it looms so large that we see no escape and cringingly await the crack of doom.

The evil of tomorrow loses much of its size as we approach it. Our eyes are not fitted with telescopic lenses so we must await a close-up for a proper focus, and then we shall find ourselves equal to the task. Persistent climbing levels the hills and gives added strength to travel on.

Looking back we see the pattern of our lives, which sometimes seemed so baffling, has taken shape and meaning. We needed only faith to try, hope to inspire, and courage to endure.

Listen, then, to the voice of the angel of hope as she whispers, "The night passes; morning breaks, the day is dawning; it can be done; carry on!"

We look forward with calm assurance as we remember the Savior's oft-repeated admonitions: "Fear not"; (See Luke 5:10, 8:50, 12:7, 32; John 12:15.) "Be not troubled"; (See Matt. 24:6, Mark 13:7, John 14:1, 27.) "Peace be still." (See Mark 4:39.) Faith made his calmness majestic, courage made him Master of all. He never lost hope, for he knew God's love. He now bids us take his yoke upon us with a promise that our burdens will be light.

His guidebook for the pilgrim was the simple "Follow me."

May faith inspire hope and courage, and may love encompass all. With these companions, and with the help which he has promised, we will be greater than anything that can happen to us.—Millennial Star, December 1938.

Christmas and Peace

"Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace"—So sang the heavenly hosts when the Prince of Peace was born, and they added "Goodwill toward men." Those glorious and prophetic words have had little meaning to us during the last few years when his glory was obscured by man's hatred for his fellow men and war drums silenced the songs of praise.

But 1945 was a year of victory, and once again we have a quiet Christmas without the fear of bombs, the gloom of blackout, and the dread of official telegrams. In millions of homes this year families will sit by their yule log and sing "Holy Night" with a feeling born of sorrow and of deliverance. Millions of such homes are among the victor nations and other millions are among the vanquished. He whose birth we celebrate will surely weep as he beholds the havoc wrought by war, will doubtless join with us in asking, "Why cannot peace be permanent?" Timidly we pray that this might be attained while our great men haltingly approach the task of international agreements in the hope that men's hearts will rule their heads.

We fought for freedom, for liberty, and for justice while between us and our objective there stood the Axis powers. But while these enemies have now been defeated, no one will say we have reached our objective of lasting peace and universal goodwill. While they were arrayed against us we were prepared to pay whatever price was asked in service and in sacrifice. We were willing to fight on as long as seemed necessary and to co-operate with our neighbors and our allies in what we hoped would be the last great fight for freedom.

With bowed heads we give thanks for the victory so dearly bought; with poignant pride we think of those who gave their all. Chastened by these experiences we face a future which is pregnant with possibilities for good or ill, face it with misgivings as we remember other times when wars were won, and peace was lost. We remember how magnificently the allies planned and fought and won. But we cannot forget how ignominously they failed to consolidate their gains and make them permanent. If peace had been followed by goodwill there would not have been a second world war and unless we now can achieve goodwill there must needs be another and no doubt a final war. Peace without goodwill is never more than an armistice—a truce—the end of one phase of a continuing battle.

Peace, goodwill, liberty, freedom, these are positive words, not negative, active not passive, progressive not static. They like life, like salvation, denote a process, a growth where the new is perpetually crowding out the old. If they are to be maintained, they must be cultivated and renewed. Just as the blossom of today will be wilted by tomorrow and must fall on the next tomorrow to make room for the new bud which is to take its place, have its day, and make its contribution, so these living things of which we speak, for which we pray, must be kept up-to-date by adjustments, must be kept growing in favorable soil, cultivated, watered, fertilized, and pruned. Last year's flowers are but dry sticks in one's garden and are remembered best by the seeds they left. Even perennials must have constant care else they deteriorate, and make each succeeding crop less lovely than the last.

Greed, hatred, selfishness, domination, these too are living things which grow and multiply and flourish with the vitality and tenacity of the weeds they are. Sometimes we unwittingly encourage these and thereby help to destroy the life-saving fruit. Each individual is charged with the responsibility of cultivating his little corner of the garden of life, of keeping it free from the noxious tares of which the scriptures speak.

Sometimes in a spirit of self-righteousness we commend ourselves for our observance of the letter of the law and with the Pharisee thank God that we are not as other men. Sometimes a tithepayer, or one who observes the Word of Wisdom becomes uncharitable, quick to judge and condemn his brother, resentful of real or fancied wrongs, critical of the motives of another and with an "holier than thou" attitude seeks to be a judge and longs for vengeance. Multiply this spirit by one thousand, and you have an outpost for the forces of evil. Multiply it by one million, and you have another war. Sometimes the man who goes regularly to church and in other commendable ways proclaims himself a Christian becomes so self-satisfied that he does not notice the evil one who is sowing tares in that very part of the garden entrusted to his care. Tares which if he is not aware will become so sturdy that they threaten the very virtues of which this same enemy made him proud!

During the war we fought in armies, in task forces, and in squadrons in the air. It was group action, teamwork, under a trusted leader and with friends and allies in whom we had complete confidence, for whom we would have given our lives. Because of this united effort we won a victory. But already the evil one is at work amongst us creating ill will, suspicion, envy, and fostering strife. Unless we are vigilant and on guard, he will, as he did before, turn our victory into defeat.

Let each man examine his own heart as he gives thanks for the peace of this Christmas and try to discover his true feelings toward his fellow men, toward those who are his neighbors, his brothers in the church, his new friends of an allied country. Let him weed out vigorously all envy, jealousy, greed, and hatred and undertake to radiate the spirit of goodwill, of love of fellow men, not for the season only but throughout the year.

The family is a small group of individuals; the state, a larger group; the nation and the world are but groups of individuals like you and me. If each member of the group has love in his heart for his fellows, and if the groups which form the larger units are possessed of that spirit, then we shall be able to join the heavenly host and sing glory to God in the highest and on earth peace and goodwill toward men.—Millennial Star, December 1945.

The Christmas Spirit

For fifty-one weeks most men desire to wring personal profit, economic, social, or political, out of every situation, often without regard to the effect on the lives and happiness of others.

The Yuletide is to many people an annual sevenday Sabbath. It is a holy season when men rest from the agitating business of getting and relax into the serene joy of giving.

The spirit of Christmas creates interest in others, minimizes self-serving interests and activities, and searches for opportunities to make others happy. The spirit of Christmas illuminates the picture window of the soul, and we look out upon the world's busy life and become more interested in people than in things. We see people struggling and competing with each other and wish we could somehow touch their lives with the joy and gladness of Christmas. The spirit whispers, "They are your kinfolk and their happiness is your concern."

During this joyous week we apply the brakes to the driving power of self-interest and, like the propeller on an airplane when its blades are reversed, the pull is in the opposite direction. When speed and altitude are reduced, the details and beauty of life refresh the soul and inspire gratitude and a desire to serve and partially repay our debt to the giver of life.

And after the Christmas season has passed we discover an amazing paradox. We ourselves have experienced more joy while seeking to bring happiness to others than we have known during all the other weeks of the year when we were so selfishly seeking it. How strange it is that, despite this annual lesson men continue to try to find joy where it has never yet been found—in self-aggrandizement, the gratification of appetites, following after pride and vain ambition, or attempting to snatch some advantage from others. During this one week when we lose ourselves, we really find ourselves as the Savior promised, and in this discovery we find enduring satisfaction. We become servants, voluntary servants, and thereby find a joy we have not known through the balance of the year.

The compass of the spirit of Christmas points constantly toward others, never toward ourselves, except to beckon us into the realm of service and comradeship. The spirit of Christmas is ever buoyant, never earthbound or grounded by accumulated mundane things. It soars ever by the lifting wings of love and distils its blessings, even as the dews from heaven.

This richest of all seasons extends its joy into the New Year but is sobering and humbling; it causes introspection and self-analysis which result in resolutions for future conduct, especially toward other people.

To catch the real meaning of the "Spirit of Christmas" we need only to drop the last syllable of the word, and it becomes the "Spirit of Christ." It beckons us to follow him and become worthy of the blessedness which he promised to the most unlikely people—the poor in spirit, the sorrowful, the meek, the seekers after righteousness, the merciful, the pure in heart, the peacemakers, and even the persecuted and the oppressed.

Thus it is a blessed spirit available to all, not alone to the rich, the influential, the heralded or popular. It may pervade the humblest cottage or the palace of the king, but only when it is in the hearts of those who live there.—The Improvement Era, December 1961.

"The Year Is Dying in the Night"

"The year is dying in the night"—Tennyson.

Another annual eventide, and we sit in retrospection. We remember many things for which we are thankful. We have had blessings, some of them in spite of, rather than because of our actions. We remember, too, some mistakes which we made: remember them as a warning for the future.

But, ever hopefully, we turn our faces toward the dawn of a new year. What may it hold for us? Let us turn from reminiscence to prophecy; the kind that depends on us to make it come true. The coming year shall be sweetened by—

Gratitude—Let us be thankful for all blessings which come to us, and show our gratitude by living worthily. Let us be grateful for health, for friends who understand us and for the common comforts of life; for our heritage and the great work done by those who went before us. Let us conserve the best they left to us and build on that best. May our appraisal of their work and sacrifice result in—

Humility—Remembering the lessons which life has taught, we shall try to be ever mindful of our limitations, making sure that our feet are on the ground, though our eyes be fixed on the stars; willing to give credit to the Master for any success which may come to us and not esteem ourselves above our brother. With the spirit of "thy will" guiding us we shall go forward with—

Optimism—We shall be concerned only that our actions warrant his friendship. We'll not mortgage the future and pay interest on troubles which may never come. We'll pray for keener vision to pierce the clouds and see the sunshine. May we realize that too much sunshine made the desert and not ask for fair weather all the time. This optimism will give us—

Courage—Remembering how he gave us strength equal to the burdens of the past, we will not fear the future. We shall continue to believe that back of the design there is a designer; back of the created a Creator. We will trust that Creator, confident that his plan will succeed. We will be unafraid to travel. Though our torch may "light our pathway but one step ahead," we'll take that step and fear not. We'll keep a—

Sense of Humor—Knowing from experience that human contacts create friction, we'll carry the oil of humor and not allow old friendships to wear out for lack of lubrication. We'll go forward with a smile, believing in a happy and triumphant future. We'll enrich our lives with—

Temperance—We shall be moderate in all things and refrain from that which is forbidden. We'll gain health, happiness and liberty through self-mastery and obedience to the law; never condemning others for their weaknesses while we ourselves are imperfect, nor casting a stone until we can qualify under his divine rule "He that is without sin." Our temperance shall be combined with charity for those whose habits have weakened their will. And our observance of the law shall never be colored by the dye of "holier than thou." Then our temperance will lead to—

Patience—Remembering that God does not measure time by man's calendar, that he is not in a hurry, we'll abide his time with assurance that eventually right will prevail. We'll plant acorns of love and watch the slow-growing oaks until time shall prove again that the law of the harvest is inexorable. And to this patient faith we'll add—

Diligence—Faith without work is barren. The only thing he ever cursed was the barren fig tree. This is a challenge to us to be fruitful. No passive virtue ours, but charged with virility, valour added to our vision. We'll ask for blessings, but will first obey the laws upon which they are predicated. May we know the joy of work, have work to do and a will to do it. Observing the new commandment, we must—

Love—We'll show our love for God by the way we treat our fellow men, not loving only those who return our love, but enlarging the circle to include our enemies.

This New Year will find us grateful, humble, hopeful, fearless, happy, temperate, patient, diligent, charitable, and with the love of God and fellow men we shall have a more abundant life throughout the year.

May we all have health and the kind of prosperity which is real. May he who is responsible for our being, guide all of us, until, one year from now we sit again indulging in gentle reminiscence and earnest prophecy.

A Letter to New Zealand

As I cannot write to each of you personally, I am taking this method of greeting you through the pages of Te Karere.

Sister Brown and I have had many trips to foreign countries. In fact, we were in Europe this last year and since we were in your country have visited several others, but in all our travels none have been more satisfying and inspiring than our visit to New Zealand.

By the time this is published it will be Christmas time again. One of the most enjoyable Christmases ever spent by us was in New Zealand in 1956. It seemed to us then, and it seems now that the people of that great country carry the spirit of Christmas with them through the year better than any people we have met. Optimism and cheerfulness, faith and devotion, humility and courage are so blended in your lives as to achieve, it seems to me, the real Christmas spirit.

The spirit of Christmas is, after all, the Spirit of Christ and that Spirit is based on love of God and fellow men.

The building of the temple and the college there will be a challenge to all members of the Church to live up to the high ideals which are symbolized in these sturdy, lofty and sacred structures.

The gospel of Jesus Christ is a gospel of service, of love of fellow men, of devotion to high ideals, of purity of life and Christlike conduct.

One fundamental difference between the teachings of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and other churches is the emphasis we place on "Enduring to the end." Some churches teach their people that they are saved when they confess and accept Christ. We believe that is simply the beginning of the road to salvation. In the gospel of the Son of Man there is no stopping place. Each goal must be a starting place. We must never arrive at a point beyond which we feel we cannot go or where we feel no further effort is needed. Salvation is an eternal quest and while we are pilgrims traveling together, it is in essence an individual journey, a personal problem, where struggle and strength travel together, where we learn by the things we suffer.

Eternal life and eternal increase is our goal; eternal increase of power, of knowledge, of understanding, of intelligence, which is Godlike and God-given.

May our Heavenly Father bless, inspire, and direct all members of the Church in New Zealand that they may show their gratitude to him for his blessings in sending the gospel to them and eventually in establishing a temple among them, by the kind of lives they live and the service they render.

Musings and Browsings

From the cowardice that shrinks from new truth, From the laziness that is content with half truths, From the arrogance that thinks it knows all the truth, O God of truth, deliver us.

—Ancient Prayer

The cynic is one who knows the price of everything and the value of nothing.—Oscar Wilde

It's good to have money and the things that money can buy, but it's good too to check up once in a while and make sure you haven't lost the things that money can't buy.—H. Lorimer

Complete Commencement Address by Goethe

There are nine requisites for contented living; health enough to make work a pleasure; wealth enough to support your needs; strength to battle with difficulties and overcome them; grace enough to confess your sins and forsake them; patience enough to toil until some good is accomplished; charity enough to see some good in your neighbor; love enough to move you to be useful and helpful to others; faith enough to make real the things of God; hope enough to remove all anxious fears concerning the future.

Twelve Things to Remember

The value of time

The obligation of duty

Virtue of patience

Joy of originating

Pleasure of work

Worth of character

Power of kindness

Dignity of simplicity

Influence of example

Wisdom of economy

Improvement of talent

Success of perseverence.

TRIALS

Religion

Happiness at its deepest and its best is not the portion of a cushioned life which never struggled, overpassed obstacles, bore hardship or adventured in sacrifice for costly aims.

Noble characters do not alone bear trouble, they use it.

We may not be able to fully appreciate Paradise Lost but every man appreciates the blind Milton sitting down to write, "I argue not against heaven's hand or will, nor bate a jot of heart or hope: but still bear up and steer right onward."

The simplest demand on every man is that he be game.

Hardly an outstanding champion of faith who has left an indelible impress on man's spiritual life can anywhere be found who has not won his faith and confirmed it in the face of trouble.

Peter, Andrew, Philip, and Simon were crucified.

James and Paul were beheaded.

Bartholomew flayed alive.

Thomas was stabbed with a lance.

Matthew was slain with a bottle.

James the lesser was beaten to death.

Thaddeus was shot to death with arrows.

Did these men lie to uphold the most despised man of their time and die for that lie—it is contrary to all we know of human nature and experience.

Gratitude for benefits received is evidence of finegrained character. Benjamin Franklin said: "Accept my kind offices to thy children as the only return in my power for thy continual favors to me."

"Freely ye have received, freely give." Our most human relationships are a free gift. The first fact in our childhood was not service rendered but service received. We did not pay in advance for the motherhood that bore us and the love that nourished us: All this was poured out freely: We were the unconscious recipients of unselfish love that we had never earned. The man of fine quality regards himself as the recipient of countless blessings which exceed his capacity to pay: he feels that instead of the world owing him a living he owes the world a life.

"Lord thou didst suffer more for me than all the hosts of land or sea; so let me render back again this millionth of thy gift. Amen."

God's Day and Mine

There are two days in the week about which I never worry. Two Golden Days, kept sacredly free from fear and apprehension.

One of these days is Yesterday. Yesterday, with all its cares and frets and disappointments, with all its pains and sorrows, has passed forever beyond the power of my control, beyond the reach of my recall. I cannot undo an act that I wrought; I cannot recall a word that I said; I cannot calm a storm that raged, Yesterday. All that it holds of my life—of regret, of sorrow, or wrong—is in the hand of the mighty love that can bring oil out of the rock and sweet waters out of the bitter desert, the love that can make the wrong things right, and turn mourning into laughter. Save for the beautiful memories, sweet and tender, that linger like the perfume of dried roses in the heart of the day that is gone, I have nothing to do with Yesterday. It was mine; it is now God's.

The other day I do not worry about is Tomorrow. Tomorrow, with all its possible cares, its burdens, its sorrows, its perils, its boastful promises and poor performances, its good intentions and its bitter mistakes, is as far beyond my reach of mastership as its dead sister, Yesterday. Its sun may rise in roseate splendor, or behind a mass of weeping clouds, but it will rise. And it will be my day; it is now God's day. It will be mine. Save for the Star of Hope that gleams forever on its brow, shining with tender promise into the heart of Today, I have no possession of Tomorrow. All else is in the safekeeping of the same infinite love that holds the treasures of Yesterday. All that Tomorrow has for me I can trust to the Love that is wider than the skies, deeper than the seas, higher than the stars.

There is left for myself, then, nothing but Today. And any man can fight the battle of just one day. Any man can resist Today's temptations. This is the strength that makes the way of my pilgrimage joyous. I think and I do and I journey but one day at a time. That is the Easy Day; that is the Human Day. And while I do this, God the Almighty and the all-loving takes care of Yesterdays and Tomorrows which I could never do—Robert Jones Burdette.

Tomorrow

He was going to be all that a mortal should be, tomorrow. No one should be kinder or braver than he, tomorrow. A friend who was troubled and weary he knew, Who'd be glad of a lift and who needed it too. On him he would call and see what he could do, tomorrow. Each morning he stacked up the letters he'd write, tomorrow. And thought of the folks he would fill with delight, tomorrow. It was too bad, indeed, he was busy today And hadn't a minute to stop on his way. More time he would have to give others, he'd say, tomorrow The greatest of workers this man would have been, tomorrow. The world would have known him had he ever seen, tomorrow. But the fact is he died and he faded from view, And all that he left here when living was through Was a mountain of things he intended to do, tomorrow.

The Bravest Battle

The bravest battle that ever was fought, Shall I tell you where and when? On the maps of the world you will find it not, 'Twas fought by the Mothers of men. Nay, not with cannon or battle shot, With a sword, or a noble pen. Nay, not with eloquent words or thought From mouths of wonderful men. O ye, with banners and battle shot, And soldiers to shout and praise. I tell you the kingliest victories fought Were fought in those silent ways. O spotless woman in a world of shame, With splendid and silent scorn, Go back to God as white as you came, The kingliest warrior born. But deep in a walled-up woman's heart, Of a woman that would not yield, But bravely, silently bore her part, So there is that battlefield. No marshalling troops, no bivouac's song, No banner to gleam and wave, But, oh! these battles that last so long From babyhood to the grave.

My Friend

The following, we think, is one of the finest tributes to the charm and power of friendship that we have ever read. We don't know who wrote it; we wish we did!

I love you not only for what you are, but for what I am when I'm with you.

I love you not only for what you have made of yourself, but for what you are making of me.

I love you for the part of me that you bring out.

I love you for putting your hand into my heapedup heart and passing over all the foolish and frivolous and weak things that you can't help but dimly seeing there, and for drawing out into the light all of the beautiful radiant belongings that no one else had looked far enough to find.

I love you for ignoring the possibilities of the fool and the weakling in me, and for laying firm hold on the possibilities of the good in me.

I love you for closing your eyes to the discords in me, and for adding to the music in me by worshipful listening.

I love you because you are helping to make of the lumber of my life not a tavern, but a temple, and of the words of my every day not a reproach, but a song.

I love you because you have done more than any creed could have done to make me good, and more than any fate could have done to make me happy.

You have done it without a touch, without a word, without a sign. You have done it just by being yourself. Perhaps that is what being a friend means, after all.

A Gentleman

A man who is clean inside and outside Who neither looks up to the rich, nor down on the poor; Who can lose without squealing; Who can win without bragging; Who is considerate of women, children, and of people; Who is too sensible to loaf; Who takes his share of the world's goods and lets other people have theirs. This is the ideal conception of A True Gentleman!

Not One to Spare

"Which shall it be? Which shall it be?" I looked at John; John looked at me. (Dear patient John who loves me yet As well as when my locks were jet.) And when I found that I must speak, My voice seemed strangely low and weak. "Tell me again what Robert said!" And then listening, I bent my head. This is his letter: "I will give A house and land while you shall live, If in return from out your seven, One child to me for aye be given." I looked at John's old garments worn; I thought of all that John had borne Of poverty, and work, and care Which I, though willing, could not share; I thought of seven mouths to feed, Of seven little children's need And then of this. "Come, John," said I, "We'll choose among them as they lie asleep." So walking hand in hand, Dear John and I surveyed our band. First to Lillian, the baby slept, Her auburn curls like gold alight, A glory 'gainst the pillow white. Softly the father stooped to lay His rough hand down in a loving way, When dream or whisper made her stir. Huskily he said, "Not her, not her!" We stooped beside the trundle bed And one long ray of lamplight shed Athwart the boyish faces there, In sleep so pitiful and fair. I saw on Jamie's rough red cheek A tear, undried. Ere John could speak, "He's but a baby, too," said I And kissed him as we hurried by. Pale, patient Robbie's angel face Still in his sleep bore suffering's trace. "No, for a thousand crowns, not him," He whispered, while our eyes were dim. Poor Dick! Bad Dick! our wayward son, Turbulent, reckless, idle one. Could he be spared? Nay, He who gave Bids us befriend him to the grave. Only a Mother's heart can be Patient enough for such as he. "And so," said John, "I would not dare Send him from her bedside prayer."

"My Creed"

I do not choose to be a common man. It is my right to be uncommon—if I can. I seek opportunity—not security. I do not wish to be a kept citizen, humbled and dulled by having the State look after me. I want to take the calculated risk; to dream and to build, to fail and succeed. I refuse to barter incentive for a dole. I prefer the challenge of Life to the guaranteed existence; the thrill of fulfilment to the stale calm of Utopia. I WILL NOT TRADE FREEDOM FOR BENEFICENCE NOR MY DIGNITY FOR A HANDOUT. It is my heritage to think and act for myself, enjoy the benefit of my creations, and to face the world boldly and say, "THIS I HAVE DONE."—Dean Alfange.

Life's Purpose

He has achieved success who has lived well, laughed often, and loved much. Who has gained the respect of intelligent men and the love of little children. Who has filled his niche and accomplished his task, who has left the world better than he found it, whether by an improved poppy, a perfect poem, or a rescued soul. Who has never lacked appreciation of earth's beauties, nor failed to express it. Who has always looked for the best in others and given the best he had. Whose life is an inspiration, whose memory a benediction.—Robert Louis Stevenson.

Fish and visitors smell in three days.

None but the well bred knows how to confess a fault, or acknowledge himself in error.—Benjamin Franklin.

Three may keep a secret if two of them are dead.

Alcohol

I believe that alcohol, to a certain degree, demoralizes those who make it, those who sell it, and those who drink it.

I believe that from the time it issues from the coiled and poisonous worm of the distillery until it empties into the hell of crime, death, and dishonor, it demoralizes everybody who touches it.

I do not believe that anybody can contemplate the subject without becoming prejudiced against the liquid crime. All you have to do is to think of the wrecks upon either bank of the stream of death, of the distress of the little children tugging at faded dresses, of the suicides, of the ignorance, of weeping and despairing wives asking for bread, of the men of genius it has wrecked, of the millions who have struggled with imaginary serpents produced by this devilish thing.

And when you think of the jails, of the almshouses, of the prisons, and of the scaffolds upon either hand, I do not wonder that every thoughtful man is prejudiced against the damned stuff called alcohol.—Robert G. Ingersoll.

Alcohol Has No Equal

The usefulness of alcohol has been pointed out by an observing newspaper which said, "Alcohol will remove stains from summer clothes." It is correct.

It will also remove the summer clothes, the spring clothes, the winter clothes, and the fall clothes, not only from the back of the man who drinks it but from the back of the wife and children as well.

Alcohol will remove the furniture from the home, the rugs from the floors, food from the cupboard, lining from the stomach, kidneys from the back, liver from the side, hair from the head, and sight from the eyes.

Alcohol will remove a man's business, a man's friends, a happy look from children's faces, a prosperous man to a pauper's grave, a man from a respectable society to the penitentiary, a man from the highway to heaven to the road to hell; it will make a wildcat from an otherwise inoffensive citizen.

As a remover of things, alcohol has no equal.

Partners

Said the whiskey flask to the cigarette, "I'd like to make a good-sized bet, That I can get more scalps than you Although your victims aren't so few." Said the cigarette to the whiskey flask, "Well, that's as easy as I can ask, For I give the kids their downward start, Then you pitch in and do your part. They come to you with burning thirst, But I'm the fellow that sees them first, So most of them should count for me. I'll take that bet; it's a cinch, do'ya see?" Then the whiskey flask had this to say, "I never looked at things that way, But I must confess that you spoke the truth, 'Tis you who tackles the foolish youth. You fill his system with dopey smoke; I mold him into a first-class soak. We work together far too well to quarrel for even a spell." So the whiskey flask and the cigarette Shook hands and called off the bet. And away they sauntered side by side Hunting for victims far and wide. On every corner of the nation, Partners in crime and ruination. So here is my warning on the level, Shun them both as you would shun the devil.

Whoever furthers the refinement of his being, whoever seeks simplicity and integrity and shrinks from pretentiousness and pretence; whoever hungers for beauty and feels the offense of ugliness; whoever cherishes the just treatment of his fellows and suffers when injustice is committed to others; whoever gathers into his nature these sensibilities, and appreciations, and affections, follows after God.

Crossing the Bar

Sunset and evening star, And one clear call for me! And may there be no moaning of the bar, When I put out to sea. But such a tide as moving seems asleep, Too full for sound and foam, When that which drew from out the boundless deep Turns again home. Twilight and evening bell And after that the dark! And may there be no sadness of farewell, When I embark; For though from out our bourne of Time and Place The flood may bear me far, I hope to see my Pilot face to face When I have crost the bar.

—Alfred Lord Tennyson

The Bridge Builder

An old man going a lone highway, Came at the evening, cold and gray, To a chasm vast and deep and wide, The old man crossed in the twilight dim The sullen stream had no fears for him; But he turned when safe on the other side, And built a bridge to span the tide. "Old man," said a fellow pilgrim near, "You're wasting your strength with building here; Your journey will end with the ending day; You never again must pass this way; You have crossed the chasm, deep and wide— Why build you this bridge at the eventide?" The builder lifted his old gray head: "Good friend, in the path I have come," he said, "There followeth after me today A youth whose feet must pass this way. This chasm that has been as naught to me To that fair-haired youth may a pitfall be. He, too, must cross in the twilight dim; Good friend, I am building the bridge for him."

—Will Allen Dromgoole

All achieving characters have a sublime disregard of criticism.—Bruce Barton.

The achievement of serenity is an essential of every thoroughbred—Emily Post.

There are many echoes in the world, but few voices.—Goethe.

The forbearing use of power is a sure attribute of true greatness.—Haynes and Yaggy.

Towering genius disdains a beaten path.—Lincoln.

Strength and struggle travel together.—Anon.

Progress is an eternal struggle between wheels and brakes.—Anon.

Better be a diamond with a flaw than a pebble without one.—English Proverb.

Out of the lowest depth there is a path to the loftiest height.—Thomas Carlisle.

In each and every one of us lie the opportunities of an archangel; as the majestic oak lies enfolded in the acorn.—Lydia Maria Child.

If I am wrong in thinking the human soul is immortal, I am glad to be wrong, nor will I allow the thought which gives me so much pleasure to be wrested from me as long as I live. But if, when dead, as some insignificant philosophers think, I am to be without sensation, I am not afraid of the dead philosphers deriding my errors.—Socrates.

The House by the Side of the Road

There are hermit souls that live withdrawn, In a place of their self-content; There are souls, like stars, that dwell apart, In a fellowless firmament; There are pioneer souls that blaze their paths Where highways never ran,— But let me live by the side of the road And be a friend to man. Let me live in my house by the side of the road, Where the race of men go by— They are good, they are bad, they are weak, they are strong, Wise, foolish—so am I. Then why should I sit in the scorner's seat Or hurl the cynic's ban, Let me live in my house by the side of the road And be a friend to man.

—Sam Walter Foss

The Cowboy's Prayer

O Lord, I've never lived where churches grew; I love creation better as it stood the day you finished it so long ago; and looked upon your work and called it good. I know that others find you in the light that sifted down through tinted windowpanes; And yet I seem to feel you near tonight in the dim quiet starlight on the plains.

I thank you, Lord, that I am pleased so well, that you have made my freedom so complete; That I'm no slave to whistle, clock or bell; Or weak-eyed prisoner of wall and street. Just let me live my life as I've begun; And give me work that's open to the sky; Make me a partner of the wind and sun; And I won't ask a life that's soft or high.

Let me be easy on the man that's down, and make me square and generous with all. I'm careless sometimes, Lord, when I'm in town; But never let them say I'm mean or small. Make me as wide and open as the plains; As honest as the horse beneath my knees; Clean as the wind that blows behind the rains; Free as the hawk that circles down the breeze. Forgive me, Lord, when sometimes I forget; You know about the reasons that are hid; You know about the things that gall and fret; You know me better than my mother did. Just keep an eye on all that's done and said—Just right me sometimes when I turn aside; And guide me on the long dim train ahead; that stretches upward to the Great Divide.—Charles B. Clark, Jr.

Wise men talk because they have something to say; Fools because they have to say something.—Plato.

A love song is just a caress set to music.—Romberg.

When a man is wrapped up in himself he makes a pretty small package.—John Ruskin.

The trouble with the world is that the stupid are cocksure and the intelligent full of doubt.—Bertrand Russell.

When I was a boy I was told that anybody could become president; I'm beginning to believe it.—Clarence Darrow.

That man's silence is wonderful to listen to.—Thomas Hardy.

The best way out is through.—Robert Frost.

Don't take life too seriously; you'll never get out of it alive.—Oliver Herford.

The college graduate is given a sheepskin to cover his intellectual nakedness.—Robert M. Hutchins.

I'm a great believer in luck, and I find the harder I work the more I have of it.—Stephen Leacock.

Blessed are they who have nothing to say and who cannot be persuaded to say it.—Lowell.

He can compress the most words into the smallest ideas of any man I ever met.—Lincoln.

I have been driven many times to my knees by the overwhelming convictions that I had nowhere else to go. My own wisdom and that of all around me seemed insufficient for the day.—Lincoln.

Dear God, give us the strength to accept with serenity the things that cannot be changed. Give us courage to change the things that can and should be changed. And give us wisdom to distinguish one from the other.—Admiral Hart.

Soliloquy of Mary Magdalene

I said, "I beg you to come into my house," and it was all that was sod in me and all that was sky in me calling unto Him.

Then He looked at me, and the noontide of His eyes was upon me, and He said, "You have many lovers, and yet I alone love you. Other men love themselves in your nearness. I love you in yourself. Other men see a beauty in you that shall fade away sooner than their own years. But I see in you a beauty that shall not fade away, and in the autumn of your days that beauty shall not be offended. I alone love the unseen in you."

Then He stood up and looked at me, and He smiled—

On that day the sunset of His eyes slew the dragon in me, and I became a woman.—Kahlil Gibran in Jesus the Son of Man.

High Resolve

I'll hold my candle high, and then Perhaps I'll see the hearts of men Above the sordidness of life, Beyond misunderstandings, strife. Though many deeds that others do Seem foolishness and sinful too, Were I to take another's place, I could not fill it with such grace. And who am I to criticize What I perceive with my dull eyes? I'll hold my candle high, and then Perhaps I'll see the hearts of men.

—author unknown

The next year, the next decade, in all likelihood the next generation, will require more bravery and wisdom on our part than any period in our history.

John Kennedy

All I have seen teaches me to trust the Creator for all I have not seen.

—Ralph Waldo Emerson

. . . and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dew from heaven.

And the Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever.—D&C 121:45-46.

You

"Your task—to build a better world," God said. I answered, "How?" This world is such a large vast place, So complicated now: And I so small and useless am— There's nothing I can do!" But God, in all his wisdom said, "Just build a better you!"

—Dorothy R. Jones

Either this man (Jesus) was and is the Son of God, or else a mad man, or something worse. You can shut him up for a fool, you can spit on him and kill him as demon; or you fall full at his feet and call him Lord and God. But don't let us come with any patronizing nonsense about his being a great human teacher. He has not left that open to us. He didn't intend to.—C. S. Lewis.

And I say that life is indeed darkness save when there is urge. And all urge is blind save where there is knowledge. And all knowledge is vain save when there is work and all work is empty save where there is love. And when you work with love you bind yourself to yourself, and to one another, and to God.—Kahlil Gibran.—From The Prophet.

For even as love crowns you so shall he crucify you. Even as he is for your growth so is he for your pruning.

Even as he ascends to your height and caresses your tenderest branches that quiver in the sun.

So shall he descend to your roots and shake them in their clinging to the earth.

Like sheaves of corn he gathers you unto himself.

He threshes you to make you naked.

He sifts you to free you from your husks.

He grinds you to whiteness.

He kneads you until you are pliant; And then he assigns you to his sacred fire. That you may become sacred bread for God's sacred feast.—Kahlil Gabran—From The Prophet.

There is a tide in the affairs of men, which, taken at its flood leads on to fortune; omitted and all the balance of their lives is spent in shallows and in miseries.—Shakespeare.

There is a destiny which shapes our ends, rough hew them how we will.—Shakespeare.

The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars but in ourselves that we are underlings.—Shakespeare.

Thankfulness

Many favors which God gives us ravel out from want of hemming through our unthankfulness; for though prayer purchases blessings, giving praise keeps the quiet possession of them.—Fuller.

If one should give me a dish of sand and tell me there were particles of iron in it, I might look for them with my eyes, and search for them with my clumsy fingers, and be unable to detect them; but let me take a magnet and sweep through it, and how would it draw to itself the almost invisible particles by the mere power of attraction.—The unthankful heart, like my finger in the sand, discovers no mercies; but let the thankful heart sweep through the day, and as the magnet finds the iron, so it will find, in every hour, some heavenly blessings; only the iron in God's sand is gold!—Henry Ward Beecher.

A hog under a tree eating acorns never looks up to see where they come from.—Timo Dexter.

This day before dawn I ascended a hill and looked at the crowded heaven. And I said to my spirit, "When we became the enfolders of those orbs, and the pleasure and knowledge of everything in them shall we be filled and satisfied then?" And my spirit said, "No, we but level that lift to pass and continue beyond."

—Hudson

For it is provided in the essence of things that from any fruition of success, no matter what, shall come forth something to make a greater struggle necessary.—Walt Whitman.

He was shaking the bottle into which life had poured for him the wine of experience; shaking it to taste what else might be stirred by this oscillation.—Henry James.

There is something in gratitude which pours strength and self-respect back into souls.

I am constrained every moment to acknowledge a higher origin for events than the will I call mine.—Emerson.

Those who listened to Lord Chatham felt there was something finer in the man than anything which he said.

A Prayer Found in Chester Cathedral

Give me a good digestion, Lord, and also something to digest. Give me a healthy body, Lord, with sense to keep it at its best. Give me a healthy mind, Lord, to keep the good and pure in sight, which, seeing sin, is not appalled but finds a way to set it right. Give me a mind that is not bored, that does not whimper, whine, or sigh; don't let me worry overmuch about the fussy thing called I. Give me a sense of humor, Lord, give me the grace to see a joke, to get some happiness from life and pass it on to other folk.

Remember that the hardening process of military training need not extend to your soul. Your muscles must be toughened; your mind must be adjusted to the hard facts of modern warfare—and your soul must be strengthened too, but not made flinty.

The answer to the riddle of existence lies in the advent of a little child who came in poverty to a stable to show that wealth was nothing, lived in humility to show that power was nothing, died in shame to show that death was nothing—save a step through darkness to the light.—A. J. Cronin.

He who, from zone to zone guides through the boundless sky thy certain flight; in the long way that I must tread alone, will lead my steps aright.—William Cullen Bryant, "To a Waterfowl."

Of what worth is freedom from want, if our minds be on a lower intellectual level; or freedom from fear if we have a less cultured life to defend; or freedom of speech if we have poorer thoughts to express; or freedom of religion if we bring a less-enlightened faith to the worship of God.—President Charles Seymores, Yale University.

Because the road was steep and long and through a dark and lonely land,

God set upon my lips a song and put a lantern in my hand.

—Joyce Kilmer No life can be strong or thorough unless in that inner region, where motives are formed, the voice of conscience is always clearer than the voice of desire.

* * *

The finger of scorn never points toward heaven.

* * *

If I had two loaves of bread, I'd sell one and buy a sweet hyacinth to satisfy my hungry soul.

* * *

We all must die. That does not matter much but never to have lived is terrible.

* * *

I shall wear laughter on my lips Though in my heart is pain. God's sun is always brightest after rain. I shall go singing down my little way Though in my breast the dull ache grows. The song birds come again after the snows.

* * *

A halo has only to fall a few inches to become a noose.

* * *

Sail—sail thy best, ship. Of value is thy freight—'tis not the present only, the past is also stored in thee: Thou holdest not the venture of thyself alone—not of the Western continent alone. Earth's resume entire floats on thy keel, O ship—is steadied by thy spars; With thee time voyages in trust, the antecedent nations sink or swim with thee, With all their struggles, martyrs, heroes, epic wars, thou bearest the other continents. Theirs, theirs as much as thine, the destination port triumphant; Sail then with good strong hand and wary eye, O helmsman—Thou carriest great companions. Venerable, priestly Asia sails this day with thee, and Royal feudal Europe sails with thee— How can I pierce the impenetrable blank of the future? I feel thy ominous greatness, evil as well as good; I watch thee advancing, absorbing the present, transcending the past; I see thy light lighting and thy shadow shadowing as if the entire globe. But I do not undertake to define thee—hardly to comprehend thee.

—Walt Whitman

* * *

Religion then is no longer a peripheral or incidental subject but is seen to be the QUEEN of sciences; not because the church says so or because tradition or superstition have imposed it upon human credulity, but because of the nature of reality; for if there be a God at all he must be the ultimate and controlling reality and the truth concerning him as best man can apprehend it must be the KEYSTONE of the everincomplete arch of human knowledge.

* * *

God Left the Challenge in the Earth

When God made the Earth, He could have finished it. But He didn't. Instead, He left it as a raw material—to tease us, to tantalize us, to set us thinking and experimenting and risking and adventuring! And therein we find our supreme interest in living.

Have you ever noticed that small children in a nursery will ignore clever mechanical toys in order to build, with spools and strings and sticks and blocks, a world of their own imagination?

And so with grown-ups, too. God gave us a world unfinished, so that we might share in the joys and satisfactions of creation.

He left the oil in Trenton rock.

He left the electricity in the clouds.

He left the rivers unbridged—and the mountains un-trailed.

He left the forests unfelled and the cities un-built.

He left the laboratories unopened.

He left the diamonds uncut.

He gave us the challenge of raw materials, not the satisfaction of perfect, finished things.

He left the music unsung and the dramas unplayed.

He left the poetry undreamed, in order that men and women might not become bored, but engage in stimulating, exciting, creative activities that keep them thinking, working, experimenting, and experiencing all the joys and durable satisfactions of achievement.

Work, thought, creation, these give life its stimulus, its real satisfaction, its intriguing value.

Progress comes, not by some magic word and not by government edict, but from the thoughts, the toil, the triumphs of individuals who accept the challenge of raw material—and by the grace of God-given talents produce results which satisfy the needs of men.

—Dr. Allen Stockdale

* * *

Some have sinned with safety, but none with peace of soul.

* * *

In controversial moments, my perception's rather fine, I always see both points of view—the one that's wrong and mine.

* * *

Men love to wonder and that is the seed of our science—Ralph Waldo Emerson.

* * *

Every minute you are angry you lose sixty seconds of happiness.—Emerson.

Faith

O world, thou choosest not the better part! It is not wisdom to be only wise, And on the inner vision close the eyes, But it is wisdom to believe the heart. Columbus found a world, and had no chart Save one that faith deciphered in the skies; To trust the soul's invincible surmise Was all his science and his only art. Our knowledge is a torch of smoky pine That lights the pathway but one step ahead Across a void of mystery and dread. Bid, then, the tender light of faith to shine, By which alone the mortal heart is led Unto the thinking of the thought divine.

—Dr. George Santayana

Grief

Grief, should be like joy, Majestic, equable, sedate, confirming, cleansing, raising, Making free; strong to consume small troubles, To commend great thoughts, grave thoughts, Thoughts lasting to the end.

—Aubrey de Vere.

The man who has reached the age of thirty-six has just about achieved readiness to discard the illusions built on the false theories for which wrong instruction and youthful ignorance previously have made him an easy mark. He is just beginning to get down to business. If he is really worth while he has passed through a series of hard knocks by that time. The useful man never leads the easy, sheltered, knockless, unshocked life. At thirty-six he ought to be prepared to deal with realities and after about that period in his life, until he is sixty, he should be able to handle them with a steadily increasing efficiency, subsequently, if he has not injured his body by excess indulgence in any of the narcotics (and by this term I mean, here, liquor, tobacco, tea, and coffee), and if he has not eaten to excess, he very likely may contine to be achievingly efficient up to his eightieth birthday and in exceptional cases until ninety.—Thomas A. Edison, His Diary, p. 181.

The Creed of the Future will begin, "I Know," not "I believe."

And the creed will not be forced upon the people.

It will carry with it no coercion, no blackmail, no promise of an eternal life of idleness and ease if you accept it, and no threat of hell if you don't.

It will have no paid, professional priesthood, claiming honors, rebates and exemptions, nor will it hold estates free from taxation. It will not organize itself into a system, marry itself to the State, and call on the police for support.

It will be so reasonable, so in the line of self-preservation, that no sane man or woman will reject it, and when we really begin to live it we will cease to talk about it.—From the Note Book of Elbert Hubbard, p. 24.

The New Year

Father, I thank Thee for this New Book You have placed in my hands. Its pages are so white and spotless that, almost, I am afraid.

When the last page is written and the book is closed in the last hour, I am wondering what will its pages show!

I am not asking, Lord, for glaring headlines and a record of pomp and glory; I am not asking this New Year for opportunities to do big things; but I am asking that every page may be full of tracings so delicate that one fails to see the design, and catches only the significance of the deed.

I am asking that when the tracings are deciphered, they will reveal such common things as the reflection of a child's smile, the dropping of a tear, the giving of a cup of cold water, the visit to the needy, a kindly word I was not too busy to say, the letter I found time to write after a weary day, and the word of encouragement spoken.

Fill my pages with the little homely things of love, and in the last hour give me the satisfaction of a year spent in useful living.—Beulah G. Squires.

From the Gideon's Bible

The Bible contains the mind of God, the state of man, the way of salvation, the doom of sinners, and the happiness of believers. Its doctrines are holy, its precepts are binding, its histories are true, and its decisions are immutable. Read it to be wise, believe it to be safe, and practice it to be holy. It contains light to direct you, food to support you, and comfort to cheer you.

It is the traveller's map, the pilgrim's staff, the pilot's compass, the soldier's sword, and the Christian's charter. Here Paradise is restored, Heaven opened, and the gates of hell disclosed.

CHRIST is its grand subject, our good the design, and the glory of God its end.

It should fill the memory, rule the heart, and guide the feet. Read it slowly, frequently, and prayerfully. It is a mine of wealth, a paradise of glory, and a river of pleasure. It is given you in life, will be opened at the judgment, and be remembered forever. It involves the highest responsibility, will reward the greatest labour, and will condemn all who trifle with its sacred contents.

* * *

Today is the day in which to express your noblest qualities of mind and heart, to do at least one worthy thing which you have long postponed.—Grenville Kleiserer.

He who has learned to disagree without being disagreeable has discovered the most valuable secret of a diplomat.—Bert E. Estabrook.

It is a profound error to believe everything has been discovered; it is mistaking the horizon for the boundary of the world.—Lemierre.

Those who make wealth their all in all, cannot bear loss of money. Those who make distinction their all in all, cannot bear loss of fame. Those who affect power will not place authority in the hands of others. Anxious while holding, distressed if losing, yet never taking warning from the past and seeing the folly of their pursuit—such men are the accursed of God.—By Chuang-Tze, a Chinese sage of the third century B.C. (Ballou, Bible of the World, p. 532.)

When Nature Wants a Man

When Nature wants to drill a man, And thrill a man, And skill a man. When Nature wants to mold a man To play the noblest part; When she yearns with all her heart To create so great and bold a man That all the world shall praise— Watch her method, watch her ways! How she ruthlessly perfects Whom she royally elects; How she hammers him and hurts him, And with mighty blows converts him Into trial shapes of clay which only Nature understands— While his tortured heart is crying and he lifts beseeching hands! How she bends, but never breaks, When his good she undertakes. . . . How she uses whom she chooses And with every purpose fuses him, By every art induces him To try his splendour out— Nature knows what she is about. When Nature wants to take a man, And shake a man, And wake a man; When Nature wants to make a man To do the Future's will; Then she tries with all her skill And she yearns with all her soul To create him large and whole . . . With what cunning she prepares him! How she goads and never spares him, How she whets him, and she frets him, And in poverty begets him . . . How she often disappoints Whom she sacredly anoints, With what wisdom she will hide him, Never minding what betide him Though his genius sob with slighting and his pride may not forget! Bids him struggle harder yet. Makes him lonely So that only God's high messages shall reach him, So that she may surely teach him What the Hierarchy planned. Though he may not understand, Gives him passions to command. How remorselessly she spurs him With terrific ardour stirs him When she poignantly prefers him. When Nature wants to name a man And fame a man And tame a man; When Nature wants to shame a man To do his heavenly best . . . When she tries the highest test That she reckoning may bring When she wants a god or king! How she reins him and restrains him So his body scarce contains him While she fires him And inspires him! Keeps him yearning, ever burning for a tantalizing goal— Lures and lacerates his soul. Sets a challenge for his spirit, Draws it higher when he's near it— Makes a jungle, that he clear it, Makes a desert that he fear it And subdue it if he can— So doth Nature make a man. Then to test his spirit's wrath Hurls a mountain in his path— Puts a bitter choice before him And relentlessly stands o'er him. "Climb or perish!" so she says . . . Watch her purpose, watch her ways! Nature's plan is wondrous kind Could we understand her mind . . . Fools are they who call her blind. When his feet are torn and bleeding Yet his spirit mounts unheeding, All his higher powers speeding, Blazing newer paths and fine; When the force that is divine Leaps to challenge every failure and his ardour still is sweet And love and hope are burning in the presence of defeat . . . Lo, the crisis! Lo, the shout! That must call the leader out When the people need salvation Doth he come to lead the nation . . . Then doth Nature show her plan When the world has found . . . A MAN!

—By Angela Morgan

Courtesy De Voiss & Co.

My Get Up and Go Has Got Up and Went

How do I know that my youth's all spent? Well, my get up and go has got up and went. But in spite of it all, I am able to grin When I recall where my get up has been. Old age is golden, so I've heard it said, But sometimes I wonder, when I get into bed. My ears in a drawer and my teeth in a cup. My eyes on the table until I wake up. The sleep dims my eyes, I say to myself— "Is there anything else I should lay on the shelf?" And I am happy to say as I close my door, My friends are the same, perhaps even more. When I was young, my slippers were red, I could kick up my heels right over my head, When I grew older my slippers were blue, But still I could dance the whole night through. Now I am old my slippers are black. I walk to the store and puff my way back; The reason I know my youth is all spent, My get up and go has got up and went. But I really don't mind, when I think with a grin Of all the grand places my get up has been. Since I have retired from life's competition, I busy myself with complete repetition. I get up each morning, dust off my wits, Pick up my paper, and read the "Obits," If my name is missing, I know I'm not dead. So I eat a good breakfast, and go back to bed.

Prayer for the Middle-aged

Lord thou knowest better than I know myself that I am growing older and will someday be old. Keep me from the fatal habit of thinking that I must say something on every subject and on every occasion.

Release me from trying to straighten out everybody's affairs. Make me thoughtful but not moody, helpful but not bossy.

With my vast store of wisdom it seems a pity not to use it all, but thou knowest, Lord, that I want a few friends at the end.

Keep my mind free from the recital of endless details. Give me wings to get to the point. Seal my lips on my aches and pains, they are increasing, and love of hearing them is becoming sweeter as the years go by.

I dare not ask for grace enough to enjoy the tales of others' pains but help me to endure them with patience.

I do not ask for improved memory but for a growing humility and a lessening cocksureness when my memory seems to clash with the memories of others. Teach me the glorious lesson that occasionally I may be mistaken.

Keep me reasonably sweet. I do not want to be a saint, some of them are so hard to live with, but a sour old person is the crowning work of the devil.

Give me the ability to see good things in unexpected places and talents in unexpected people. Give me the grace to tell them so. Amen.

A Man Called Abe

I chanced to stand a while today within the tomb where sleeps the earthly part of the one whose soul has soared above. I thought of him because his life was good, and for his fellow man he fought and wept and prayed—and died.

They did not think when first he stood with an ax in hand, that—ere the maiden Death should wrap him in her arms, and cause his eyes to close—that this same man would break the bonds of fellow men and set them free, and light their eyes, and lift their loads.

He held the hand of Fate in his; and through a great but humble soul he looked with eager tenderness upon the misery of man—and pledged his life to giving back to all mankind some things called love, and life, and self-respect.

Nor did he live and love and die in vain. A few men saw the vision that he saw, and in his stead there came a steady stream of people, unafraid because they saw that through his death a man called Abe had found two things—two precious things—bequeathed by God above. He called them Life and Love!—William M. Huie.

If I Could

If I could know, when each day dies, I had brought joy to tired eyes; If I could know, when falls each night, I'd helped to make some child's life bright; If I could know, at set of sun, The Fruit of some good deed I'd done; I'd count my life of grander mold Than if I'd simply gathered gold.

—Edwin Carlile in "The New Age."

* * *

To the Latter-day Saint the ideal is God; it is therefore distinctly personal and concrete. Moreover, God Himself is reaching down to man to aid him in his upward reach.

Teach them to live on the balcony, to look up to the hills. Christ's life marks its different stages by great heights: The Mt. of Temptation, the Mt. of the Beautitudes, the Mt. of the Transfiguration, the Mt. of the Crucifixion, and then to the throne of God.

God releases their energy, we must help them to control and direct it. The scientist trembles as he releases the power of the atom. He wonders to what ends it will be used. But we are here dealing with greater power than atomic energy—we deal with the power of the human soul, a part of and related to the power of God. It is potentially more powerful than the atom and potentially more dangerous.

The Gold in Life

Every human life has within it more or less gold which usually is not readily apparent to the casual observer. Kindness is part of the gold of the spirit—that part which is known to others because it has lessened their burdens and made their pathways lovelier. But there is other gold which cannot be seen until the human life has been crushed by adversity, melted in the fires of fate. Then it is that, in the ashes that remain, the gold of true character glistens and inspires.

The man who has gold in his life is bigger than anything that can happen to him. He does not worry about defeats or obstacles or even sorrows, for he knows that these are but froth on the river of life, to last for but a brief time and then to be blown away. What matters is not the froth, but the strong, pulsating, ongoing current in the river, which is never disturbed by leaves floating upon the quiet eddies of the surface.

One day you may find that your house of life has collapsed, but in the wreckage you will find the gold which cannot be destroyed, not by the worst disaster. For the gold of life is imperishable, immortal. So, search for it in the wreckage, for out of it you can mint new coins. Out of defeats rises the gold of life.—By Leo Bennett, Windows toward the Dawn.

All who have meditated on the art of governing mankind have been convinced that the fate of empires depends on the education of youth.

Wicked men obey from fear; good men, from love.

The high-minded man must care more for the truth than for what people think.

I count him braver who overcomes his desires than him who conquers his enemies; for the hardest victory is the victory over self.

—Aristotle

* * *

If there exists a good and wise God, then there also exists a progress of mankind toward perfection.

All knowledge that is divorced from justice must be called cunning rather than wisdom.

The noblest of all studies is the study of what man is and of what life he should live.

—Plato

* * *

The way to gain a good reputation is to endeavor to be what you desire to appear.

—Socrates

* * *

There is only one good, that is knowledge; there is only one evil, that is ignorance.

—Socrates

* * *

After the event even a fool is wise.

—Homer

* * *

There is no witness so terrible, no accuser so powerful as conscience which dwells within us.

—Sophocles

* * *

Silence at the proper season is wisdom and better than any speech.

The richest soil, if uncultivated, produces the rankest weeds.

—Plutarch Blot out vain pomp; check impulse; quench appetite; keep reason under its own control.

The true worth of a man is to be measured by the objects he pursues.

—Marcus Aurelius

* * *

A thankful heart is not only the greatest virtue, but the parent of all other virtues.

A happy life consists in tranquility of mind.

—Cicero

* * *

Command large fields but cultivate small ones.

All bad fortune is to be conquered by endurance.

—Virgil

* * *

The brave and bold persist even against fortune; the timid and cowardly rush to despair through fear alone.

—Tacitus

* * *

Reason and calm judgment, these qualities specially belong to a leader.

—Tacitus

* * *

Falsely praising a person is lying.

Habits if not resisted soon become necessity.

He knows how to live well who knows how to pray well.

—St. Augustine

* * *

Four virtues characteristic of great man: humility, respect for superiors, graciousness toward dependents, and a sense of justice toward subordinates.

A man who lacks reliability is utterly useless.

Forget injuries; never forget kindnesses.

Better a diamond with a flaw than a pebble without.

A man who has committed a mistake and doesn't correct it is committing another mistake.

Ignorance is the night of the mind, but a night without moon or star.

Look at the means which a man employs, consider his motives, observe his pleasures. A man simply cannot conceal himself!

—Confucius

* * *

Truth is the highest thing that man can keep.

Idleness is the gate of all harms. An idle man is like a house that has no walls; the devils may enter on every side.

He that most courteously commands, him do men most obey.

What is better than gold? Jasper. What is better than jasper? Wisdom. And what is better than wisdom? Woman. And what is better than a good woman? Nothing.

—Chaucer

* * *

It is within the chamber of our thoughts that we should administer reproof to ourselves and deplore our failings, and not openly.

The Infinite Goodness has such wide arms that It takes whatever turns to It.

Oh, mortal men, be wary how you judge.

—Dante

* * *

He who loses wealth loses much; he who loses a friend loses more; but he that loses his courage loses all.

A proverb is a short sentence based on long experience.

Fortune turns round like a mill wheel, and he who was yesterday at the top, lies today at the bottom.

A stout heart breaks bad luck.

Among the attributes of God, although they are all equal, mercy shines with even more brilliancy than justice.

Three things too much, and three too little are pernicious to man: to speak much, and know little; to spend much, and have little; to presume much, and be worth little.

—Cervantes

* * *

Do not interfere when your opinion is not sought.

A wise lover values not so much the gift of the lover as the love of the giver.

When the day of judgment comes, we shall not be asked what we have read, but what we have done.

—Thomas A. Kempis

* * *

I ought, therefore I can.

The human heart refuses to believe in a universe without a purpose.

Freedom is that faculty which enlarges the usefulness of all other faculties

—Kant

* * *

Talents are best nurtured in solitude; character is best formed in the stormy billows of the world.

Ambition and love are the wings of great actions.

Fools and wise men are equally harmless. It is the half-fools and the half-wise that are dangerous.

Knowing is not enough; we must apply. Willing is not enough; we must do.

Life is the childhood of our immortality.

Each one sees what he carries in his heart.

Give me the benefit of your convictions, if you have any, but keep your doubts to yourself, for I have enough of my own.

—Goethe

* * *

By space the universe embraces me and swallows me up like an atom, by thought I embrace the universe.

The serene, silent beauty of a holy life is the most powerful influence in the world, next to the might of God.

—Pascal

* * *

The moment passed is no longer; the future may never be; the present is all of which man is the master.

—Rousseau

* * *

I care not so much what I am in the opinion of others as what I am in my own; I would be rich of myself and not by borrowing.

The most manifest sign of wisdom is continued cheerfulness.

The want of goods is easily repaired, but the poverty of the soul is irreparable.

—Montaigne

* * *

Content surpasses wealth.

It is strange that all great men should have some little grain of madness mingled with whatever genius they possess.

To live without loving is not really to live.

—Moliere

* * *

When anyone has offended me, I try to raise my soul so high that the offense cannot reach it.

Reading good books is like having a conversation with the highly worthy persons of the past who wrote them; indeed, it is like having a prepared conversation in which those persons disclose to us only their best thinking.

In order to improve the mind, we ought less to learn than to contemplate.

Our idea of God implies necessary and eternal existence; the manifest conclusion then is that God does exist.

—Descartes

* * *

If a clock proves the existence of a clockmaker and the world does not prove the existence of a Supreme Architect, then I consent to be called a fool.

To whatever side you turn, you are forced to acknowledge your own ignorance and the boundless power of the Creator.

A long dispute means that both parties are wrong.

—Voltaire

* * *

Right is invincible, and truth is immortal.

God took His softest clay and His purest colors, and made a fragile jewel, mysterious and caressing—the finger of woman; then He fell asleep. The devil awoke, and at the end of that rosy finger put—a nail!

A home has a soul.

Amnesty is in my opinion the most beautiful word in human speech.

Initiative is doing the right thing without being told.

The greatest happiness in life is the conviction that we are loved, loved for ourselves—say rather, loved in spite of ourselves.

—Victor Hugo A wise man is never less alone than when he is alone.

May you live all the days of your life.

—Jonathan Swift

* * *

A loving heart is the beginning of all knowledge.

All that mankind has done, thought, gained or been: it is lying as in magic preservation in the pages of books. They are the chosen possession of men.

Every new opinion, at its starting, is precisely in a minority of one.

The first duty of man is that of subduing fear.

Our grand business is, not to see what lies dimly at a distance, but to do what lies closely at hand.

—Thomas Carlyle

* * *

The actions of men are the best interpreters of their thoughts.

Parents wonder why the streams are bitter when they themselves have poisoned the fountain.

Education begins the gentleman, but reading, good company and reflection must finish him.

—John Locke

* * *

The first and fundamental law of nature is to seek peace and follow it.

Faith is a gift of God which man can neither give nor take away by promise of rewards or menaces of torture.

—Thomas Hobbs

* * *

Genius can only breathe freely in an atmosphere of freedom.

Whatever crushes individuality is despotism, by whatever name it may be called.

—John Stuart Mill What's gone and what's past help should be past grief.

Few love to hear the sins they love to act.

Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.

It is a great sin to swear unto a sin, but greater sin to keep a sinful oath.

It is better to be lowly born, and range with humble livers in content, than to be perched up in a glistering grief, and wear a golden sorrow.

Many strokes, though with a little axe, hew down and fell the hardest-timbered oak.

Malice bears down truth.

Condemn the fault, and not the actor of it.

Rather let my head stoop to the block, than these knees bow to any save to the God of heaven.

—William Shakespeare

* * *

We account the scriptures of God to be the most sublime philosophy.

No sciences are better attested than the religion of the Bible.

I do not know what I may appear to the world; but to myself I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the seashore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, while the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.

—Sir Isaac Newton

* * *

Unbelief is blind.

Truth is as impossible to be soiled by any outward touch as the sunbeam.

The more deeply we delve into the wondrous wisdom, the marvelous skill, and the astounding variety of its creation, which we cannot do without the aid of learning, the greater grows the wonder and awe we feel for its Creator and the louder the praises we offer Him.

The best apology against false accusers is silence, sufferance and honest deeds set against dishonest words.

The end of all learning is to know God, and out of that knowledge to love and imitate Him.

—John Milton

* * *

Men must know, that in this theatre of man's life it is reserved only for God and the angels to be lookers-on.

Libraries are as the shrines where all the relics of the ancient saints, full of true virtue, and that without delusion or imposture, are preserved and reposed.

In reading, we hold converse with the wise; in the business of life, generally with the foolish.

—Sir Francis Bacon

* * *

A man who uses a great many words to express his meaning is like a bad marksman who, instead of aiming a single stone at an object, takes up a handful and throws at it in hopes he may hit.

A desire of knowledge is the natural feeling of mankind; and every human being whose mind is not debauched will be willing to give all that he has to get knowledge.

Curiosity is, in great and generous minds, the first passion and the last.

A man has no more right to say an uncivil thing than to act one; no more right to say a rude thing to another than to knock him down.

Great works are performed not by strength but by perseverance.

A life that will bear the inspection of men and of God, is the only certificate of true religion.

—Samuel Johnson

* * *

One hour of life, crowded to the full with glorious action and filled with noble risks, is worth whole years of those mean observances of paltry decorum.

Teach self-denial, and make its practice pleasurable, and you can create for the world a destiny more sublime that ever issued from the brain of the wildest dreamer.

Affection can withstand very severe storms of vigor, but not a long polar frost of indifference.

—Sir Walter Scott

* * *

We are nobly born. Fortunate those who know it; blessed those who remember.

There is no duty we so much underrate as the duty of being happy.

Keep your fears to yourself but share your courage with others.

To be what we are, and to become what we are capable of becoming, is the only end of life.

Quiet minds cannot be perplexed or frightened, but go on in fortune or misfortune at their own private pace, like a clock during a thunderstorm.

You cannot run away from a weakness; you must sometime fight it out or perish; and if that be so, why not now, and where you stand?

To know what you prefer, instead of humbly saying Amen to what the world tells you you ought to prefer, is to have kept your soul alive.

There is so much good in the worst of us, and so much bad in the best of us, that it behooves all of us not to talk about the rest of us.

Anyone can carry his burden, however hard, until nightfall. Anyone can do his work, however hard, for one day. Anyone can live sweetly, patiently, lovingly, purely, till the sun goes down. This is all that life really means.

—Robert Louis Stevenson

* * *

Life is probation, and the earth no goal, but the starting point of man.

It is looking downward which makes one dizzy.

Ignorance is not innocence, but sin.

Take away love and our earth is a tomb.

Who hears music, feels his solitude peopled at once.

—Robert Browning

* * *

Two human loves make one divine.

Free men freely work: whoever fears God, fears to sit at ease.

Light tomorrow with today!

—Elizabeth Barrett Browning

* * *

Happiness quite unshared can scarcely be called happiness; it has no taste.

Prejudices, it is well known, are most difficult to eradicate from the heart whose soil has never been loosened or fertilized by education; they grow there, firm as weeds among rocks.

A memory without blot of contamination is an exquisite treasure.

—Patricia Bronte

I love wisdom more than she loves me.

He who will not reason is a bigot; he who cannot, is a fool; he who dares not, is a slave.

Hatred is the madness of the heart.

—Lord Byron

* * *

Nothing is finer for the purpose of great productions than a very gradual ripening of the intellectual powers.

I think poetry should surprise by a fine excess, and not by singularity; it should strike the reader as a wording of his own highest thoughts, and appear almost a remembrance.

—John Keats

* * *

All of us who are worth anything spend our manhood in unlearning the follies or expiating the mistakes of our youth.

Can man be free if woman be a slave?

Power, like a desolating pestilence, pollutes whatever it touches.

A man has a right to unrestricted liberty of discussion. Falsehood is a scorpion that will sting itself to death.

—Shelley

* * *

A loving heart is the truest wisdom.

Reflect upon your present blessings, of which every man has many; not on your past misfortunes, of which all men have some.

While there is infection in disease and sorrow, there is nothing in the world quite so irresistibly contagious as laughter and good humor.

No one is useless in this world who lightens the burdens of it to anyone else.

More things are wrought by prayer than this world dreams of.

The greater a man is, the greater the courtesy.

True humility: the highest virtue, mother of them all.

—Alfred Lord Tennyson

* * *

A man who dares to waste one hour of life has not discovered the value of life.

The highest possible stage in moral culture is when we recognize that we ought to control our thoughts.

Man scans with scrupulous care the character and pedigree of his horses, cattle and dogs before he matches them; but when he comes to his own marriage he rarely, or never, takes any such care.

—Charles Darwin

* * *

Nature has written a letter of credit upon some men's faces that is honored wherever presented. You cannot help trusting such men. Their very presence gives confidence. There is "promise to pay" in their faces which gives confidence, and you prefer it to another man's endorsement. Character is credit.

Good humor may be said to be one of the very best articles of dress one can wear in society.

What instruction is more effectual than self-instruction?

—William Makepeace Thackeray

* * *

Let us raise a standard to which the wise and honest can repair; the rest is in the hands of God.

—George Washington

* * *

Men give me some credit for genius. All the genius I have lies just in this: when I have a subject in hand, I study it profoundly. Day and night it is before me. I explore it in all its bearings. My mind becomes pervaded with it. Then the effort which I make the people are pleased to call the fruit of genius. It is the fruit of labor and thought.

—Alexander Hamilton

* * *

A man of virtue is an honor to his country, a glory to humanity, a satisfaction to himself, and a benefactor to the whole world; he is rich without oppression of dishonesty, charitable without ostentation, and brave without vice.

—Benjamin Franklin

* * *

I do the best I know, the very best I can, and I mean to keep right on doing so until the end. If the end brings me out all right, what is said against me won't amount to anything. If the end brings me out wrong, ten angels swearing I was right would make no difference.

—Abraham Lincoln

* * *

Duty is the sublimest word in the language; you can never do more than your duty; you should never wish to do less.

—Robert Edward Lee

* * *

Nothing has ever been decided by war that could not be decided without it; and if decided after war, why not before?

—Ulysses S. Grant

* * *

Have you learned lessons only of those who admired you, and were tender with you, and stood aside for you? Have you not also learned great lessons from those who rejected you, and braced themselves against you, or disputed the passage with you?

I do not pity the wounded person—I become the wounded person.

There is no greater fallacy on earth than the doctrine of force, as applied to government.

What do you suppose will satisfy the soul, except to walk free and own no superior?

—Walt Whitman

* * *

There's a man in the world who is never turned down, wherever he chances to stray; he gets the glad hand in the populous town, or out where the farmers make hay; he's greeted with pleasure on deserts of sand, and deep in the aisles of the woods; wherever he goes there's a welcoming hand—he's the man who delivers the goods.

When a great man dies, for years the light he leaves behind him lies on the paths of men.

In this world a man must either be anvil or hammer.

In character, in manners, in style, in all things, the supreme excellence is simplicity.

There is no death! What seems so is a transition.

The little I have seen of the world teaches me to look upon the errors of others in sorrow, not in anger. When I take the history of one poor heart that has sinned and suffered, and think of the struggles and temptations it has passed through, the brief pulsations of joy, the feverish inquietude of hope and fear, the pressure of want, the desertion of friends, I would fain leave the erring soul of my fellow man with Him from whose hands it came.

—Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

* * *

Our greatest glory consists not in never falling, but in rising every time we fall.

If you would lift me, you must be on a higher ground.

For every minute you are angry you lose sixty seconds of happiness.

Men love to wonder, and that is the seed of our science.

It is one of the most beautiful compensations of this life that no man can sincerely try to help another without helping himself.

All I have seen teaches me to trust the Creator for all I have not seen.

Do not tell me the books you have read; let me glean it from your conversation. Do not tell me of the people you associate with; let me observe it by your manners.

—Ralph Waldo Emerson

* * *

Difficulty is the nurse of greatness—a harsh nurse, who roughly rocks her foster children into strength and athletic proportion.

Eloquence is the poetry of prose.

—William Cullen Bryant

* * *

METAMORPHOSIS

Change alone is permanent, we're told, Change is predetermined and God-sent; Were present and future cast in static mould, Mortal men could not be heaven-bent. Our lives must change with new environment; To arrive, to stop, were permanently to die. To gain experience we to mortal life were sent; Change develops wings with which to fly. The butterflies emerge from out a lowly state; No one of them, once formed, would be a chrysalis again, Shell bound forever?—a hapless state; And yet each timid chrysalis would a chrysalis remain. The unborn babe if it could have its way, Would remain forever 'neath its mother's heart; Cramped and dependent it would prefer to stay Rather than—through birth—a new life start. The beauty of youth, so glorious in its time Becomes stale and withered where there is no growth; The beauty of age adds poetry to rhyme. And change eternal is an attribute of both. Man's body, like a chrysalis, is but a shell: No maturing soul, if it could have its way, Would choose forever in this mortal house to dwell; The night of death is a harbinger of day. Eternal increase is the crowning truth we teach; Stagnation, ennui, death, and anti-life Would be our lot without a "grasp-exceeding reach. . . " CHANGE adds eternal progress to eternal life. We fear the future and the change it brings, Because we do not understand the plan. When our thoughts have inspiration's wings, We'll name "eternal increase" God's greatest gift to man.

—Hugh B. Brown. Millennial Star, December 14, 1939.
