Neal A. Maxwell, Sermons Not Spoken ( 1985)

Sermon Number One

"Enlarged the Memory of This People"

(Alma 37:8)

So far as our Christian convictions are concerned, individuals are almost never more than one generation away from regression, dissension, or disaffection! The last-named can happen very quickly, as in this instance centuries ago.

And there arose another generation after them, which knew not the Lord, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel (Judges 2:10).

If parents will not commit fully, they cannot transmit fully; then the rising generation, all too soon, in the intriguing words of Nephi, becomes for themselves" (3 Nephi 1:29). Usually, therefore, spiritual impressions are most deeply made when the "tablets of memory are soft" . . . especially in a hardening, secular age such as this.

The transmitting is best done by a triad consisting of righteous parents, the Holy Ghost, and the holy scriptures. The scriptures constitute our collective memory without which so many have "suffered in ignorance" (Mosiah 1:3). Used effectively, the scriptures, as was done anciently, can actually enlarge "the memory of this people," emancipating them, in a sense, from the limitations of their own time (see Alma 37:8). The enlargement includes conveying the experiences of others which the current generation has not had, and in such a way as to Permit its members to conceptualize, appreciate, and learn from these experiences.

Even when the Holy Ghost teaches us, He too relies much on human memory. John Donne said that, "the Holy-Ghost takes the nearest way to bring a man to God, by awaking his memory," since "memory is oftener the Holy Ghosts Pulpit." (Janel M. Mueller, ed., Donne's Prebend Sermons [Harvard University Press, 1971], p. 33.)

In this matter of transmitting, spiritual history shows that after all we can do, we should not be surprised when responses to Christ's gospel vary.

Members of the same rising generation, as in earlier circumstances, may even receive "the same instruction and the same information" (Alma 47:36), yet some believe and others dissent. Clearly, each individual and each rising generation is left free to choose (see 2 Nephi 2:27; 10:23). But it should be an informed choice, informed especially in those three ways just described—conceptualization, appreciation, and learning.

Youth may even have gifts, including the gift of the Holy Ghost, and yet be like counterparts of old who "knew it not"(3 Nephi 9:20). Concerning the gospel message, they may be like busy and preoccupied Amulek: "I knew concerning these things, yet I would not know" (Alma 10:6).

Hence the urgency of our coming to know God and His scheme of things, and of also developing within ourselves, our children, and our grandchildren a sense of history, including what God has done for Israel. Such reminders of the past—and millennia of memories from the scriptures—will help us amid present challenges.

For instance, one religious and political leader, Shez, had the difficult assignment of beginning "to build up again a broken people" (Ether 10:1). To begin with, Shez remembered "the destruction of his fathers" and also "remembered what the Lord had done in bringing Jared and his brother across the deep." This sense of spiritual history helped him as he began to "build up a righteous kingdom" of people who, once again, learned to "walk in the ways of the Lord" (Ether 10:2).

This "memory or sense of history should reach back not just a few decades but to the very beginning—even way back to the stated purposes of the Lord with regard to this whole mortal experience. There are, for instance, certain scriptures which, as John Donne observed of certain "imperial psalms," "spread themselves over all occasions." Certain scriptures, such as the following, are so linked to the purposes of God's plan of salvation and this life that they "spread themselves over all occasions."

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them (Abraham 3:25; italics added).

For he will give unto the faithful line upon line, precept upon precept; and... try you and prove you herewith (D&C 98:12; italics added).

The word herewith means "in this way" or "in this manner." Such imperial scriptures give us a framework for better understanding mortality amid "all occasions."

Equipped with such a framework, along with a sense of history, we find that a great many things become clearer.

This sense of spiritual history will thus truly help Church members to stay the course, to hold out faithful, and to endure well (see D&C 6:13; D&C 121:8). And surely some such guide and stay is crucial to us for it will take both testimony and spiritual sophistication to ride out some of the challenges of our time and to avoid being diverted or discouraged.

Suppose, for instance, Church members today were to be asked to pass through a spiritual—not military—equivalent of the "Gideon Scenario." On that occasion 32,000 warriors were rejected in favor of only 300 to be led to victory by Gideon. Why? So that when they triumphed, Israel would know that the Lord—not they—had wrought the victory! Therefore, Israel could not "vaunt themselves." (See Judges 7:2, 7, 16-23.) Ease and self-sufficiency leave no room for meekness and spiritual submissiveness. Hence we too must come to know that events and circumstances may sometimes converge to teach us lessons which we must learn, lest we "vaunt" ourselves.

Not only do the scriptures constitute the moral memory of mankind, but in their precious pages the doctrines of the Church are carefully and deliberately balanced. These doctrines of the kingdom need each other much as the people of the Church need each other. Gospel principles are so powerful that it is not good for them to be alone, either. When "fitly framed" together, they produce conceptual and behavioral balance. But when one of them is isolated from the others, it may go either limp or wild.

It is not just mercy and justice which are to be balanced. In the ecology of God, all His truths and commandments are principles in perpetual partnership. Together, they can produce human happiness here and salvation and exaltation in the world to come.

As the scriptures thus enlarge our memory, they give us enhanced appreciation not only of the prophetic messages but also of the messengers themselves—their humanity, their triumphs, and their differing personalities—as in the following examples.

Once some earlier Church leaders spoke with an unadmired Galilean accent (see Mark 14:70). John the Baptist, than whom there was no greater prophet, had a diet that included locusts but not souffles, wild honey but not chocolate mousse. Peter and John were viewed by the sophisticates in Jerusalem's power structure as "unlearned and ignorant" (Acts 4:13).

Articulate and educated Paul, on the other hand, was chided because "much learning doth make thee mad" (Acts 26:24). It was further said of Paul, "His letters... are weighty and powerful, but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible" (2 Corinthians 10:10).

Throughout scriptural history, we thus see recurring efforts to demean prophets in order to dismiss them—to label them in order to diminish them. After all, the early Christians were merely "the sect of the Nazarenes' (Acts 24:5)!

Unsurprisingly, therefore, Joseph Smith reflected some of the anxieties and activities of his time and period. Yet a torrent of truth came through that brilliant, good, but imperfect conduit, almost more than Joseph could communicate:

It is my meditation all the day and more than my meat and drink to know how I shall make the saints of God to comprehend the visions that roll like an overflowing surge, before my mind (Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, comp., The Words of Joseph Smith [BYU Religious Studies Center, 1980], p. 196).

Just a few scant days before his martyrdom, Joseph affirmed:

I never told you I was perfect; but there is no error in the revelations which I have taught. Must I, then, be thrown away as a thing of naught? (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 368.)

There is no error in the revelations Joseph taught!

In addition to memory enlargement and increased appreciation for the prophets, another important reason for us to be deeply and constantly involved with the holy scriptures is to receive spiritual refreshment, lest, as feared by Paul, we might "be wearied and faint in [our] minds" (Hebrews 12:3).

We usually think of weariness as being physical, but there is also a weariness of mind. When we sing about knowing that our "Redeemer lives," each of us pleads that the Lord will "comfort me when faint." The Holy Ghost can comfort us and so can the holy scriptures.

By deriving nourishment from the scriptures, we can be freshened in our minds and hearts. If, as Alma urged, we are in the continuous process of personal verification of gospel principles, moving from a mere desire to believe, to belief, to faith, and even to spiritual knowledge . . . all this will keep us intellectually and spiritually vibrant (see Alma 32:34).

Brigham Young made the same promise as Alma:

Every principle God has revealed carries its own convictions of its truth to the human mind (Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 9:149).

Unsurprisingly, Jesus said the same thing:

If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself (John 7:17; italics added).

Ponder the fact that Jesus used the words "shall know."

Thus the interplay of scripture and memory freshens us, causing us to be intellectually honest with regard to spiritual knowledge previously obtained, a blessed combination of memory and honesty. Do we not sing as we thank God for a prophet that, as to our God, "We've proved Him in days that are past"?

One cannot study the scriptures long, then, without developing a special appreciation for those scriptures which "spread themselves over all occasions." These scriptures and their companions need to be pondered regularly because they are sobering reminders not only of the framework of this mortal experience—the purposes of life and the frame of reference within which we are to live out our lives—but also of its very center: Heavenly Father's plan of salvation, the atonement of His Son Jesus Christ, and the manner in which we should cope with the tutoring experience of mortal life.

Nevertheless the Lord seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith (Mosiah 23:21; see also James 1:3).

For the natural man... becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father (Mosiah 3:19).

And always the needed reassurance is there, as stated in another imperial scripture:

Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (Romans 8:35.)

Relative to those words of Paul's, just because the Lord who thus loves us chooses to protect the faithful for His purposes on one occasion, this does not necessarily mean He will on another. It is a matter of attuning our hearts to scriptures, such as the above. These pertain daily and directly to our trust in God to the point of spiritual submissiveness. If the test comes, we must be like the about-to-be-burned Abinadi, who desired to finish his message "and then it matters not" (Mosiah 13:9); or the three young men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who said it all in three brave and brief words:

If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O king.

But if not be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up. (Daniel 3:17, 18, italics added; see also Mosiah 13:9 for a comparable "it matters not" statement.)

The same spiritual submissiveness as in these faith-filled three words "but if not" was demonstrated by a young woman in response to an angelic messenger's tidings. The marvelous, spiritually submissive Mary likewise expressed it in few words. Though filled with wonderment about the miraculous impending birth of Jesus, she said, "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word" (Luke 1:38).

Her words can guide us when we too are puzzled by what is impending or unfolding in our lives. When we cannot explain all that is happening to us or around us, we can adopt Nephi's position:

I know that [God] loveth his children; nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things (1 Nephi 11:17).

As God enlarges our memories, so to speak, as we "give place" in our lives for the light and warmth of the holy scriptures, not only the periphery of our perspective but also the foundations of our faith are similarly enlarged. Nephi's trust in God was enlarged by Nephi's study of the scriptures—including the words of Isaiah, of which he had surely been aware even before obtaining the plates of Laban. Jesus Himself said, "Great are the words of Isaiah" (3 Nephi 23:1). Isaiah's faith was great, and it in turn enlarged the faith of Nephi, as reading of Nephi's faith can enlarge our faith.

The greater the circumference of our collective spirituality, the larger the pulpit of memory from which the Holy Ghost can stir us. We are far more likely to "come off conqueror" in our holy present if we are truly familiar with mankind's spiritual past.
