Neal A. Maxwell, Sermons Not Spoken ( 1985)

Sermon Number Two

The Cares of the World

(Luke 8:14)

We must never underestimate the erosive power of routine and repetition insofar as the cares of the world are concerned. There are, depending upon one's particular cluster of cares, different things to be guarded against. Regardless of role, the challenge is there for us all.

The businessman, with his understandable concern for "the bottom line," must ever be reminded that the economic bottom line is not really life's bottom line. But the competing nature of business and the striving of peers for ascendancy can blur the vision of even a good person. In fact, the demanding and consuming cares of the world can even come to endow selfishness with artificial legitimacy. Likewise, such cares bring their own brief satisfactions:

But if it be not built upon my gospel, and is built upon the works of men, or upon the works of the devil, verily I say unto you they have joy in their works for a season, and by and by the end cometh, and they are hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence there is no return (3 Nephi 27:11; italics added).

For the academician in his search for truth and in his efforts for its preservation or dissemination, the admiration and esteem of his peers is both useful and desirable. But these too can be easily corrupted into an inordinate desire for "the praise of men." Sophistry can come to be preferred to simplicity. The language of scholarship, necessary in its realm, can come to be preferred to the language of faith. Once again, even for the person of faith, the incessant requirements of such associations can come to cloud one's perspective.

For the person involved in government or politics, the constant striving for preeminence or the challenge over turf can get in the way of giving service to others. Some civil servants are barely civil. For some politicians, "getting even" is, somehow, seen as succeeding. Nor are "protective dog-in-the-manger" types likely to give place and priority to Him who was placed in a manger after His birth!

Though Pilate found no fault with Jesus, Pilate still yielded to the mob, and—of momentary significance—he apparently realized some political gain:

And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together: for before they were at enmity between themselves (Luke 23:12).

Victory at the polls, winning at a hearing, and dominating the news, even though only over some passing concern, can easily seem to constitute the whole of life. Moreover, reinforcement by the media (with their fascination with sensation and preference for information instead of wisdom) only intensifies the illusion. The world may, for instance, confer dazzling publicity upon those who swear falsely against the Lord's servants, but it lasts only for a season, after which such critics are "despised by those that flattered them" (D&C 121:20).

No wonder William Wordsworth, anchored in ample observations of his own, gave us those marvelous lines: "The world is too much with us: late and soon, / Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers." (John Bartlett, Bartlett's Familiar Quotations [London: Macmillan, 1968], p. 515.)

The challenge of such cares of the world was always real enough, even in the so-called Christian world in decades past. Today, though, these worldly cares comprise particularly profound challenges in a secular setting: they make no apologetic intrusion, but instead present themselves as if they were all of life itself.

For one reason, it is unfashionable to be spiritual. A genius possessed of religious faith is sometimes tolerated among colleagues in the business, academic, or political world. His bilingual ability to converse in the language of his professional realm and in the realm of faith is noted but not often applauded.

Unsurprisingly, when life is seen solely by the natural eye and not at all by the eye of faith, the framework for living is, at once, shifted markedly, if not irrevocably. And the natural eye is so naturally attuned for viewing the cares of the world.

It is useful at times, therefore, for the Christian beset with the cares of the world to be reminded of some of those good individuals who have lost that precious perspective of faith for a season.

What of that mess of pottage now, for which Esau was willing to sell his birthright? (See Genesis 25:29-34.) Not understanding his birthright, Esau "despised" it. Later he despised Jacob too, and thought to murder him when Jacob officially received the birthright blessing (see Genesis 27:26-41). But, my, how gracious Esau grew to be, as evidenced when his and Jacob's caravans met in the desert many years later!

And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy brother Esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men with him.

Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels, into two bands. (Genesis 32:6-7.)

As a present for Esau, Jacob sent on ahead several hundred of his domestic animals. Finally the two brothers met.

And [Esau] said, What meanest thou by all this drove which I met? And he said, These are to find grace in the sight of my lord.

And Esau said, I have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast unto thyself.

And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore I have seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of God, and thou was pleased with me. (Genesis 33:8-10.)

Where are those synagogues now in which it was once so desperately important for some to maintain their place rather than to confess publicly their belief in Jesus? (See John 12:42-43.) Later, some of those who hesitated may have acquired the necessary courage.

And the word of God increased; and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; and a great company of the priests were obedient to the faith (Acts 6:7).

The list of such bracing and reminding questions could be multiplied almost indefinitely.

If, over the decades, one could have been agelessly situated on a space platform and could have thus watched the recurring human drama from a distance, among the strongest impressions he would have acquired would be the dull repetitiveness of human folly. He would see the almost childish intensity with which each new set of players on this planet pursues the cares of the world.

The age-old drama goes on, with each group pursuing the cares of the world as if they were pioneers in the process instead of constituting just another legion of lemmings marching to the secular sea.

How does the adversary get away with it? Mostly by darkening the human mind. Who, after all, would purchase his wares in the bright light of day, when their shoddiness and pale imitativeness could be more clearly seen—to say nothing of the appalling consumer consequences flowing from use of his wares?

Among other things, the adversary also induces new jargon to describe old sins. He also provides new rationalizations to justify old vices. Mostly, however, he can count on new crops of greenies!

The adversary cleverly uses the tight time frame of mortality against morality to undercut the purposes of mortality. Thus he is able in a variety of ways to persuade many mortals to believe of this life, "This is it! This is all there is!" "Go for the praise and honor of men, because that is all there is!" "Seek sensations while they last, to verify that you are really alive."

By cleverly steering people away from the reality of immortality and accountability, he uses endless variations in the same, basic, recurring theme: "Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die" (2 Nephi 28:7, 8). Hence each new generation not only acts out the drama but does so with a prideful provincialism—as if there were nothing to be learned from the past. Moreover, if the permissive generation still prefers to believe at all in a God, they will believe in a permissive God.

The human appetites are thus pandered to—whether it be the desire for ascendancy, for pornography, for alcohol, or for drugs. Physical beauty is admired regardless of the lack of spiritual beauty in some such individuals. High cheek bones are desirable even if accompanied by low morals. "Conspicuous consumption" is fashionable, whether in things material or things sensual.

Indeed, though we may not comprehend this next reality fully, the adversary understands it well: "The spirit indeed is willing but the flesh is weak" (Matthew 26:41). He understands, far better than we, that when temptations come to us mortals, there actually is at least one way to escape or to bear:

There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it (1 Corinthians 10:13).

Unsurprisingly, the adversary neither encourages us to search for the ways to escape nor to outlast the challenge.

The more inaccessible or unused mankind's moral memory is—that is, the holy scriptures—the more provincial mortals become, and hence the more intense their participation in the recurring drama in which the cares of the world usually triumph.

Besides, are not the cares of the world so easy to care about?

The very repetitiveness of the cares of the world can thus make their claim on us predominant. Such cares can also create a self-serving rhythm to life, be it humdrum hedonism, humdrum humanism, or humdrum nihilism.

Once we are desensitized and dulled by the cares of the world, the routine of schedules and merely surviving becomes so consuming, so self-reinforcing, and so self-serving. Though we might be stirred to resist an outright political dictatorship, the dominating cares of the world keep us compliantly in our places. Thus, scarcely sensing what might have been, we are contented with what is.

So each generation is consumed with building sand castles which the tides of time soon wash away, clearing the beach just in time for the next "tourists" to start the whole process anew.

For the faithful, however, who see "things as they really are and. . . things as they really will be" (Jacob 4:13), there is a precious perspective in knowing which are the things of most worth, which are the "weightier matters" (Matthew 23:23). Similarly, it can be very helpful to know why this world was created (see Isaiah 45:18) and why we are here. When we truly know how caring of us God is, then we know what to care about.
