Neal A. Maxwell, Sermons Not Spoken ( 1985)

Sermon Number Three

Our Gracious and Merciful God

(Nehemiah 9:17)

It is one of the ironies of religious history that many mortals err in their understanding of the nature of God and end up rejecting not the real God but their own erroneous and stereotypical image of God. Frequently this is because they have thought of God solely in terms of thunderings at Sinai without pondering substance:

And the Lord descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the Lord.

And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, The Lord God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. (Exodus 34:5-6.)

At several points in the scriptures God is described as using a voice which was neither loud nor harsh. Third Nephi 11:3 is an example. Elsewhere we read of God's being gracious, merciful, and of great kindness:

... neither were [they] mindful of thy wonders that thou didst among them; but hardened their necks, and in their rebellion appointed a captain to return to their bondage; but thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and forsookest them not (Nehemiah 9:17).

Since we are to strive to become like the Father and the Son (see Matthew 5:48, 3 Nephi 12:48; 27:27), the adjectives which describe them are vital for us to note carefully and then to strive to emulate diligently. Therefore, all we can learn of God, His nature, and His attributes is essential to our faith and spiritual progress.

There is utility as well as beauty in developing each of these qualities:

The merciful man doeth good to his own soul: but he that is cruel troubleth his own flesh (Proverbs 11:17).

This further insight underlines another of the happy consequences of developing the cardinal virtues:

By mercy and truth iniquity is purged: and by the fear of the Lord men depart from evil (Proverbs 16:6).

Mercy can purge the soul of sin, making room for a fresh start. Truth is vital in order that we have an unvarying standard by which to determine what we are to be and to do and what we are to rid ourselves of.

All the cardinal virtues, therefore, carry their own intrinsic as well as outward reward. A merciful man does do good to his own soul.

It is interesting to compare certain thoughts our Savior declared, first as Jehovah and later as Jesus:

He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? (Micah 6:8.)

Wo unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone (Matthew 23:23).

We are even warned by the Apostle James about exercising judgment without mercy.

For he shall have judgment without mercy, that hath shewed no mercy; and mercy rejoiceth against judgment (James 2:13).

Surely we worship a God who is perfectly just and merciful, and these perfected attributes are reflected in His plans for us:

And now the plan of mercy could not be brought about except an atonement should be made; therefore God himself atoneth for the sins of the world, to bring about the plan of mercy, to appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also (Alma 42:15).

Our God does not indulge us, but He is merciful toward our weaknesses as He strives to tutor us:

But now I tell it unto you, and ye are blessed, not because of your iniquity, neither your hearts of unbelief; for verily some of you are guilty before me, but I will be merciful unto your weakness (D&C 38:14).

Our God is not careless, either, with regard to His divine standards. But given our human imperfections, His plan, by its very nature, has to be a plan of mercy or it could not redeem (see Alma 42:15).

Therefore, as we strive to become as the Father is and as Jesus is, we are to become more gracious and merciful, more kind and considerate. Even more, we are to do this in a world which does little to encourage such qualities of character.

In this harsh and Darwinistic world there are even those who argue that there is danger of one's being taken in or used if he or she is too gracious and merciful. This concept sparks the creation of "clever" catchphrases such as, "If the meek are going to inherit the earth, they must become more aggressive." But disciples would rather trust at the risk of being mistaken occasionally than live suspiciously or mistrustfully.

C. S. Lewis pointed out that some people are angry with God for His not existing, and others for His existing but for failing to do as mortals would have Him do. Instead of such childishness, we are urged to know God and to learn of His attributes.

In the Lectures on Faith, a course taught in the Kirtland period in the school of the prophets, one of the stipulated essentials to having real and true faith is to have a correct understanding of the character, personality, and perfections of God. Without such an understanding, people can become very confused. By misunderstanding the nature of God they will also misunderstand the purpose of life and of themselves as well.

Some mistakenly misread the mercy and graciousness of God. For instance, some partial believers are always scolding God, or disregarding Him, because of the observable and lamentable consequences of our misuse of God's gift to us of moral agency. It is as if a teenage son, given his first car, promptly had an accident with resulting pain, suffering, and expense, and the errant son then railed at his father for permitting the suffering resulting from the son's misuse of the gift of the automobile.

Granted, in defense of the analogy, mortal parents ought not to give youngsters automobiles too soon, and then only when they have provided wise counsel, driver training, and so on. But there still comes a time when, if they are ever to drive alone, trained teenagers must be left alone at the wheel. The principle is the same with us in the second estate.

It is one of the great ironies of human history that some mortals with incorrect understanding of God and life's purposes sometimes scold God because of the abundance of human misery and suffering—which, indeed, lies all about us. Such individuals almost dare God to demonstrate His existence by straightening things out—and at once!

But He is a much different kind of Father than that. Surely it is requisite to eternal life that we come to know God and Jesus Christ whom He has sent (see John 17:3).

The Father's meekness is seen in the timbre of His voice... not harsh and loud but small and piercing (see 3 Nephi 11:3). To come to know God and His will and voice is a vital achievement. Otherwise we can, instead, so easily be led by the adversary "at his will" because we have failed to hearken to the voice of God (see Moses 4:4).

This meekness is also seen in His gracious deference to His Son. Through a process of divine investiture, most of the words of our Heavenly Father have come to us through His only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ. Because there are only a few special circumstances in which we have the Father's words, certainly and directly, these are especially worthy of our pondering.

Among these rare moments are the words of the Father given at Jesus' baptism; on the Mount of Transfiguration; at Jerusalem; upon introducing the resurrected Jesus in the Americas; and, similarly, in Palmyra's Sacred Grove. Respectively, here are the scriptures recording those occasions:

And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased (Matthew 3:17).

While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him (Matthew 17:5).

Father, glorify thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again. (John 12:28.)

(Jesus said of this last instance [verse 30] that the audibility was "for your sakes, "that the people who were proximate might know.)

Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him (3 Nephi 11:7).

This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him! (Joseph Smith-History 1:17.)

Divine investiture is defined as that condition in which— in all His dealings with the human family Jesus the Son has represented and yet represents Elohim His Father in power and authority. ... Thus. .. Jesus Christ spoke and ministered and through the Father's name; and so far as power, authority, and Godship are concerned His words and acts were and are those of the Father. (James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith, pp. 470-71.)

There is, however, yet another remarkable episode in the Book of Mormon recorded for us by Nephi, who foresaw the baptism of Jesus centuries before it occurred:

And the Father said: Repent ye, repent ye, and be baptized in the name of my Beloved Son (2 Nephi 31:11).

Further Fatherly endorsement was reported by Nephi a few verses later:

And I heard a voice from the Father, saying: Yea, the words of my Beloved are true and faithful. He that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved. (2 Nephi 31:15.)

How rare! How precious! How endorsing of Jesus! How instructive to us as to the importance of enduring to the end!

It is striking that these rare words of endorsement and deference, directly from the Father, underscore certain things. First they testify of His approval of His Redeeming Son and of the Father's relationship to His Only Begotten. Second they urge us mortals to follow His Son by repenting and being baptized in the name of His Son. Third they certify that Jesus' words are true. Fourth, they exhort us to endure to the end.

Perhaps what these verses from the Book of Mormon thus give us is a more complete account of what the Father said at the baptism of Jesus than we have in the New Testament Gospels.

And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased (Matthew 3:17; see also Mark 1:11, Luke 3:22).

Or these words of the Father may have been heard and reported only by Nephi. Either way, the words of the Father are not only sparingly given but are strikingly simple. These Fatherly affirmations and exhortations cannot be safely ignored.

In the special setting in which the Father's words were heard, Nephi also heard the words of the Son:

And also, the voice of the Son came unto me, saying: He that is baptized in my name, to him will the Father give the Holy Ghost, like unto me; wherefore, follow me, and do the things which ye have seen me do (2 Nephi 31:12).

A Father, perfect not only in His power but also in His kindness and graciousness, so strikingly defers to His Son! It was this Son of whom certain villagers remarked on "the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth" (Luke 4:22).

Graciousness, kindness, and mercifulness. How worthy of emulation and how crucial of acquisition!

Nor should we overlook how summationally the gospel can be expressed:

Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and ye know the things that ye must go in my church; for the works which ye have seen me do that shall ye also do; for that which ye have seen me do even that shall ye do. (3 Nephi 27:20-21.)

When one comes to know God and His Son Jesus Christ through the scriptures, the Spirit, and personal revelation, it is impossible to feel anything other than overwhelmed by the attributes so perfectly developed in them and so tentatively and superficially developed in oneself. Even so, we are told to strive to become like them.

Moses, we read, was "very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth" (Numbers 12:3). Yet on at least one occasion he was not meek enough and did not follow the Lord's instructions. When the people of ancient Israel and their animals needed water, Moses was told to speak to the rock and bring forth water, but instead he struck the rock twice with his rod. In rashness, Moses said, "must we fetch you water," calling the people, "Ye rebels" (Numbers 20:7-12). This is noted concerning the remarkable and special man Moses simply to make the point that Jesus is the only person who has lived upon this planet who was perfect in His meekness. Yet a merciful God still tutored and readied Moses for later duties, such as the stunning episode on the Mount of Transfiguration.

Peter learned, too, about the Lord's reaction to rashness when he cut off the right ear of the high priest's servant; Jesus promptly reproved him for this and then restored the ear (see John 18: 10; Luke 22:50-51). Oh, how gracious and merciful is our God throughout all generations!

On the Mount, together, were Moses and Peter, and how much that tells us!

This is the Lord Jesus who chose Galilean fishermen; the Jehovah who chose a lad with a slingshot to face Goliath; the God who chose Enoch, who was slow of speech and hated by all the people. This pattern should convey to all of us a humbling sense of security, for our God is a God of love. He waits with open arms, and the unfolding of His merciful plan of salvation is not only therefore the mark of divine power but also the mark of God's relentless, redeeming love.

It is a point well worth pondering because, among other reasons, it will help us to understand better why God, through the prophets, denounces sin and corruption in such scalding terms. He loves all of us, His spirit sons and daughters, but hates our vices. His denunciation of those vices may, if we are not careful, seem to obscure the enormous and perfect love He has for us. John Donne put it well:

I do not love a man, except I hate his vices, because those vices are the enemies, and the destruction of that friend whom I love (Donne's Prebend Sermons, p. 177).

On a divine and perfect scale, that is how God regards our sins, but how also He regards us.

There is also the very real possibility that, in the justice of God, one of the reasons He uses the weak and the foolish of the world is so that no argument could be made later that certain people were advantaged in some unfair way by that which was unearned—either in the premortal life or here. Hence it seems prudent for us to realize that just because one is set apart or ordained to a certain calling or assignment he or she must not expect to be set apart from the stresses of life. There appear to be no immunities.

There are some obvious reasons for this. All of us must walk the same strait and narrow path, know the same kind of experiences as those we would seek to lead and to serve. There is not one strait and narrow path for the officers—the chosen—and another for the enlisted men. We are all to experience life "according to the flesh"; there is no other way, for it is the way to immortality and eternal life. Given the resplendent riches of the promised kingdom, why would anyone wish to walk another path than the one that leads us back to our gracious and merciful Father in Heaven?
