Neal A. Maxwell, Sermons Not Spoken ( 1985)

Sermon Number Four

"Distress of Nations, With Perplexity"

(Luke 21:25)

It is clear to all thoughtful souls that life on this planet is precariously perched as never before—except for the days of Noah and the deluge.

Given our twentieth-century level of development, this might appear paradoxical. Mankind has access to unparalleled technology. Average life spans have lengthened considerably. Communication is at an unprecedented peak. Crop yields can be dramatically increased.

Ours has all the potential for a golden age, yet instead it is an age of burgeoning anxiety and unsettlement. Thousands starve. An arms race threatens global terror. Drug traffic increases and even intertwines with governments. Pornography spreads as a multi-billion dollar business. Key problems elude solutions, and such solutions as are reached result frequently in merely fixing things which do not stay fixed. Indeed, a prophecy of the Savior is being filled even as we watch: the nations of the world are experiencing "the distress of nations, with perplexity" (Luke 21:25).

There are several other scriptures which speak of some unusual, specific, and composite conditions preceding the second coming of the Savior.

And in that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them, and they shall say that Christ delayeth his coming until the end of the earth (D&C 45:26).

And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people (D&C 88:91).

But when ye shall hear of wars and commotions, be not terrified: for these things must first come to pass; but the end is not by and by (Luke 21:9).

Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth: for the powers of heaven shall be shaken (Luke 21:26).

A response to these verses might cause one to miss the fact that the "whole earth shall be in commotion," contributing undoubtedly to a condition in which "men's hearts shall fail them" and in which fear "shall come upon all people."

Some of that fear will exist because of "those things which are coming." Much of this "commotion" may be geophysical, with earthquakes, seas heaving themselves beyond their bounds, and other cataclysmic events.

For after your testimony cometh the testimony of earthquakes, that shall cause groanings in the midst of her, and men shall fall upon the ground and shall not be able to stand (D&C 88:89).

But the basic unsettlement of "all things" may reflect the seismology of a sensual, secular society. The sense of being unanchored will be pervasive and will pertain to "all things," including the shifting relationships among nations, the overturning of traditional moral values, and the widespread political instability. All such events will finally center in the feelings inside individuals. The wars and multi-caused commotions will produce "distress of nations, with perplexity."

"Perplexity" refers to a confused mental state concerning the conditions of things, a sense of bewilderment. "Commotion" can be defined as a circumstance, individual or collective, of unrest, uncertainty, and upheaval.

Thus, while much of this confused condition will understandably and justifiably be attributable to wars and rumors of wars, to fear and anxiety over conflicts on the planet, it would be superficial to look only at those obvious causes without exploring and noting the underlying conditions which brought about those symptoms. The unsettled, unspiritual state of much of mankind, the confusion over moral values, the uncertainty over the purpose of life and the reality of Deity—these will all contribute mightily.

Though the ultimate and collective expressions of the world's malaise spring partly from political and military symptoms, the sense of commotion may therefore be rooted in spiritual causes rather than exclusively and solely in geophysical and political ones. This demonstrates how easy it is for galloping fear to turn into fatalism, bewilderment, or abandonment.

These circumstances will include that foreseen by Peter, in which, among other things, "truth shall be evil spoken of" (2 Peter 2:2).

No wonder the Lord, through Isaiah, spoke in special reproof of those who create upheaval in traditional and correct values.

Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter! (Isaiah 5:20; see also 2 Nephi 15:20.)

Once the light of Christ, which has been given to every man (D&C 84:46) is dimmed, if not extinguished, then the capacity people have to know good from evil is largely gone, and this creates ultimate confusion and ultimate darkness.

For behold, my brethren, it is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night.

For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God.

But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil; for after this manner doth the devil work, for he persuadeth no man to do good, no, not one; neither do his angels; neither do they who subject themselves unto him. (Moroni 7:15-17.)

Significantly, verse 17 notes that neither the devil nor his angels persuade people to do that which is good, and "neither do they who subject themselves unto him." Those who subject themselves to the adversary and do his work, about whom Isaiah spoke, have their modern counterparts who will condemn for evil that in which there is not evil (see D&C 64:16). Likewise with those who lift up their heel against the Lord's anointed to cry that the Lord's anointed have sinned, when they have not sinned (see D&C 121:16).

The malaise stems in large measure from a widespread disbelieving in God or from relegating Him to a minor role in the universe, causing an upheaval in the realm of traditional and true values.

All of this and much more creates the unrest and uncertainty and upheaval. The resultant commotion causes men's hearts to fail them. Hence the fear and anxiety and bewilderment within man—to say nothing of the external disorders in the natural world which will precede the second coming of the Son of Man.

Indeed, if wars are made in the hearts and minds of men, how much more disorder, how much more war and conflict, are made in the hearts and minds of despiritualized men and women in an environment in which "all things shall be in commotion"!

Given the commotions noted above, it will be likely that, for instance, in international relations things will not hold still.

In a time of "perplexity of nations," it will be difficult for nations (whether regarding their political or economic systems) to resolve anything and have it stay resolved. Even if accords are reached that aim at achieving long-term security—political, economic, or military—such will likely prove elusive of sustained implementation . . . "till there [is] no remedy" (2 Chronicles 36:16).

Thus, when systems cannot be counted upon to deliver, such is merely the collective and outward manifestation of individuals who can no longer be counted upon, because they themselves are confused.

Let us focus briefly, not comprehensively, on one vexing problem to illustrate the prophesied commotion, perplexity, and complexity. Merely outlining that complexity can be illustrative.

The prospect or at least the possibility of nuclear war overhangs us and our time. It is a unique condition and a challenge which has men and women almost vying for attention as they describe the awesome threat. The threat is surely real enough. Wars may be actually fought with nuclear weapons in the future. The overriding concern, though exploited by some for their own ancillary purposes, is clearly justified as possibilities such as an ensuing "nuclear winter" press upon us.

The whole matter presents a panorama of intriguing questions with which altogether too few have genuinely wrestled.

For instance, should governments, long ago, have acted in enforceable concert by insisting that their scientists be less free, thereby retarding if not preventing the discovery of atomic energy and the splitting of the atom? There are few who, upon reflection, would have had the world's scientists be less free. Moreover, such global, intergovernmental cooperation, for one reason or another, was not obtainable in the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s. Whether a deep and shared desire exists now to try to achieve such cooperation will, before long, be seen. Can there be an interval of peace based upon the mutual interests in arms reduction? Millions sincerely hope so.

Should there have been established for the sake of humanity the equivalent of a Pax Britannica, a single political state, to which all other nations would have ceded their sovereignty and which would have thereby an enforceable monopoly on nuclear weapons? There are not many of us mortals who would trust such a monopoly, regardless of any such benefits, including a Pax Americana. It was Churchill with his eloquence who marked a time of limited possession of nuclear weapons, when there were only two such national powers, but these "two atomic collossi [were] malevolently eyeing each other over a trembling world." "Malevolently eyeing" each other now are numerous nations possessing or soon to reach the capacity to make nuclear war. Besides, nationalism is on the rise.

The prickly questions continue:

Should some among the human family quickly and sincerely promote unilateral pacifism? Even if it appears unlikely to become universal?

In any event, would this be a pacifism without an accompanying righteousness? The contagious pacifism of which we read in the scriptures describes those who would not make war, even in self-defense, but instead trusted in the blessings of God (see Alma 24:17-27). Can we recommend unconditional pacifism or unilateral disarmament for any people who are not otherwise righteous and therefore are unable to rely on the Lord to bless them? Would the citizens of Sodom have been spared if they had been pacifists but otherwise unrighteous? Or does unilateral disarmament constitute undue reliance upon the arm of flesh and natural man?

Should we go on solely exhorting and blaming incumbent political leaders in nation after nation who fail to achieve disarmament, even if, comparatively, the internal pressures placed upon them to do so are grossly uneven?

It is a very complex challenge. If the will for peace is universal and deep, why then do so many political leaders get away with violating that will? The need to "renounce war and proclaim peace (D&C 98:16) is so obviously simple.

Are we not, therefore, now seeing a prophecy fulfilled—not only with regard to war, but also as to other challenges, such as international debt—when, on the earth, there will be "distress of nations, with perplexity"? [^1] (Luke 21:25; see also D&C 88:79.) Perplexity is defined as "complicated, confused, troubled and bewildered."

But surely, it is sincerely asserted, nations must see that they must try and must trust. They must at least make a start. To fail is absurd. The need to negotiate is so obvious. Self-interest alone makes clear the path to be pursued.

It is precisely at this point that something ominous becomes more clear: the terrible price we are paying for secularized man.

If man's brotherhood is biological only, temporary only; if the Fatherhood of God is no longer an operating moral imperative; if past and present treaties and international organizations have proven inadequate to the task; if this life is all there is—out of what reservoir of hope, goodness, and trust do we expect to draw sufficient, universal goodwill to underwrite such sorely needed negotiations?

Desperation is not inspiration. The requirements to be shared by all nations in order to achieve such peace are nothing short of breathtaking.

But, it will be quickly said, cannot those with religious faith cooperate fully with agnostics and atheists for common survival?

It would seem so. Then why is it not all happening? Do we really believe that a half-dozen leaders can frustrate a concern and a hope so deeply and universally held? It includes but is much more than "a communication problem."

Moreover, is it intellectually honest for some to extract and to invoke certain anticipatory and prophetic language from the scriptures, such as that from the Old Testament about beating our "swords into plowshares" and "spears into pruninghooks" (Isaiah 2:4), without noting how that condition is to be achieved? For it will happen with the coming of the Messiah. These promises rest on specific premises. They will occur in a setting in which the Messiah, Jesus Christ, will usher in a millennial reign during which there will be worldwide peace.

Furthermore, if the United Nations diagnosis of 1945 is correct and war begins in the hearts and minds of men, how hopeful for the future can we be if more and more families are failing and if our educational systems are too often bereft of moral content? These two are mainstay institutions which profoundly shape the hearts and minds of men.

Poverty and conspiracy combine to create more terrorists each year than we can produce peacemakers in a generation. In this regard, we have yet to plumb the depths of these verses with all their implications as to greed and envy:

But it is not given that one man should possess that which is above another, wherefore the world lieth in sin (D&C 49:20).

Neither shalt thou desire... any thing that is thy neighbour's (Deuteronomy 5:21).

With so many variables at work, can there be true concern over nuclear war, and over education concerning the dangers of nuclear war, if this concern is treated apart from all the other conditions incident to peace? Even if the major powers, for instance, achieve concord concerning nuclear weapons, will this prevent terrorists from bringing nuclear holocaust upon mankind anyway? Or the use of other, non-nuclear means of destruction, such as chemical or germ warfare, which may prove even more resistant to international accord and real control?

In other words, can the challenges attendant to avoiding nuclear war really be dealt with apart from the need for general righteousness on this planet?

If failure tragically results (see Zechariah 14:2; Malachi 4:1; 2 Nephi 27:2; 2 Nephi 6:15), will the various political systems bear the full guilt? Or will individuals? Or will both? (See JST Matthew 24:31.)

If, for instance, a person samples the Ten Commandments, he will be forced to conclude that we can scarcely expect genuine and widespread peace to prevail if people engage in stealing—whether land or goods. How much security can there be if people tell lies and bear false witness against each other? If people are guilty of covetousness, or if people engage in murder, there can be no real peace.

Today, those aggrieved can act out their vengeance in many ways and on an awesome scale. The urge for revenge, for instance, is as real as ever, only now what was once the adjoining village is all mankind!

Can there, in fact, be peace in the world if there is not peace in our homes as well as in our hearts? Can we, in fact, really expect to have peace in the world if the civil wars raging inside so many individuals do not subside? Or, if there is rampant and desensitizing sexual immorality, adultery, and all things "like unto it" tearing at the fabric of individual souls and families? Or, just when we especially need mortal minds at their best in order to deal with complexity, if enslaving and desensitizing drugs are more and more pervasive?

The vices of humanity are far more interactive than many people realize. In the societies of Sodom and Gomorrah there was rampant sexual immorality; there was also inordinate pride, idleness, and a neglect of the poor and the needy. (Ezekiel 16:48-50.) A haughty attitude towards God (who had given strict counsel on the need to care for the poor) led to the neglect of the poor and the needy. This is something those who would focus all of their attention on poverty, without any concern for adultery and homosexuality—and vice versa—would do well to ponder upon.

But some will quickly say that the requirements of generalized righteousness are too exacting and too unmanageable for mankind and, therefore, if we rely upon this ultimate solution, then nuclear war is inevitable. Something else, they say, must be done, even if the solution is secular. It is hoped for by many that treaties, for instance, may be negotiated which will rest upon shared fear; treaties which are verifiable, even if nations do not care for or trust each other.

Christians are often chided, sometimes rightly, because some of us do not do as we have been told to do: "renounce war and proclaim peace" (D&C 98:16). We would do well to look to our own posture with regard to peace and our responsibilities to be peacemakers.

At the same time, perhaps we cannot be fully blamed if we are not reflexively enthusiastic about the approach to peace which many would use, when it is so bereft of accompanying general spiritual content. Yes, there was repentant Nineveh. Yes, there have been intervals of peace in human history. But time and space have collapsed, and man's interdependence has never been as pronounced as now.

But what of man's dependence on God?

Surely, as Latter-day Saints we must avoid the Jonah reflex. Moreover, knowing of and believing in the prophecies does not relieve us of the responsibility to do all we can to avoid the conditions which, unchecked, will bring them to pass.

Jesus also prophesied that in the last days, because of iniquity, the love of many would wax cold (Matthew 24:12). Yet we must not regard iniquity or human hardening and coarsening with a sense of inevitability.

"Wise as serpents, and harmless as doves"? (Matthew 10:16.) Without wisdom and with too few genuine doves, there will be a mounting "distress of nations, with perplexity."

By the way, harmless denotes "without guile" that is, without duplicity, trickiness, deceitful cunning, and so on. To be guileless is to be innocent of such traits—even at the risk of appearing naive. (See Alma 18:22; D&C 111:11.)

Significantly, "to be without sin"—or innocent—is what is being conveyed, not an endorsement of niavete. It will be to and through those of integrity and innocence that the Lord's help can best be given in seeking to solve one of the most complex of human problems, the global expression of which cannot be fully addressed without also addressing the individual and personal requirements of peace.

James summed it up well:

From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members?

Ye lust, and have not: ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not. (James 4:1-2.)

Thus true peace is tied to human righteousness—irrevocably. Moreover, Church members are genuinely helping the cause of peace as we follow Jesus' injunction to "seek not the things of this world but seek ye first to build up the kingdom of God, and to establish his righteousness" (JST Matthew 6:38; italics added; see also KJV Matthew 6:33).

In a time of "distress of nations, with perplexity" Church members can help contribute significantly in other ways as well. For instance, an LDS scientist might help with the technology of deterrence, detection, or verification in a way which would advance the cause of negotiated peace. Others might assist in the relief of disease, famine, or other destabilizing conditions.

But what comes "first" is clear: The gospel seed fully flourishes only in certain soil, the same soil in which true peace can grow.
