Neal A. Maxwell, Sermons Not Spoken ( 1985)

Sermon Number Five

"Not Without Honour, Save in His Own Country, and in His Own House"

(Matthew 13:57)

In studying and pondering the early ministry and life of Jesus, as we learn more about His divine nature we learn much too about human nature. For instance there was the inability or unwillingness of many to receive saving truths from Someone who was in their midst. Because they had known that person, He seemed in some respects ordinary instead of ordained. Even though Jesus said and did objectively impressive things, which ought to have given an objective onlooker pause, the tendency to disregard or denigrate Him was strong: "Oh yes, I know all about him!"

The tendency to rely on too small a sample and to use the lazy shorthand way of assessing prophets is present today, as if driving repeatedly through a university campus were knowing a university. But that which is familiar is not necessarily always understood.

When He was but twelve, young Jesus astonished those with whom He discussed the scriptures in the temple at Jerusalem.

And it came to pass, that after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions.

And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers. (Luke 2:46-47.)

There was also the later time when He went—with what expectations or nostalgia we know not—back to "his own country," to Galilee's Nazareth and Capernaum. His neighbors heard Him read and comment upon the scriptures:

And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph's son? (Luke 4:22.)

They were truly impressed. Yet they asked, "Is not this Joseph's son?"

Mark's writings, too, indicate how impressed His own people were as Jesus spoke to them in their own country. They marveled at His wisdom and His works. No doubt they had heard of His miracles. (Mark 6:1-6.) Matthew says they were astonished at His "wisdom and these mighty works" (Matthew 13:53-58).

Yet all of this was discounted or dismissed by some because in their view, after all, "Jesus was Joseph the carpenter's son."

In His sermon in one synagogue, Jesus boldly declared His Lordship. He was rejected, and some of the people even tried to throw Him off the brow of a hill. And this after His miraculous feeding of the five thousand, word of which cannot have escaped the attention of those present.

Jesus' preachment in Capernaum was rejected because the son of Joseph, the carpenter, declared Himself to be the bread of life, sent down from heaven. (See John 6:35, 38.)

Out of these episodes of rejection came Jesus' lamentation that "a prophet is not without honour save in his own country, and in his own house." (Matthew 13:57.)

Familiarity got in the way of their recognizing Jesus' divinity.

Instead of truly assessing Him, they used labels—"the carpenter's son"—to classify Him. Past proximity caused townsfolk and kinsmen alike to regard Him with indifference.

In addition to the problems caused by familiarity and proximity, something else was present. Though subtle, this insight must not escape us. There was apparently no objection to Jesus' Sermon on the Mount. However, the Sermon at Capernaum caused a violent reaction. Why? Because in the sermon at Capernaum, Jesus declared His Lordship! The more declarative He was, the more restive His audience and the more attrition among His followers. The more specific His message, the more difficult He was to follow, hence:

From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him (John 6:66).

There was a clear lack not only of intellectual objectivity but also of ordinary curiosity which might have led some to assess and to evaluate Jesus instead of dismissing Him in such a peremptory way.

Though Jesus was perfect and Joseph Smith was not, the same pattern is seen in responses to the latter's message and mission. Had Joseph not brought forth additional scriptures but instead contented himself with being another itinerant, charismatic preacher, stirred by a preceding spiritual experience, the reaction of the world to him would have been otherwise too.

But it was Joseph's declarativeness, under the tutoring of the resurrected Jesus, which unsettled so many. Hence the rush, even today, to seek demeaning or easy explanations for Joseph Smith, such as those to be found in his environment or in the activities of his father and family. Some will do anything to avoid paying attention to the astonishing truths Joseph taught.

Back, however, to Galilee. Living in Nazareth and Capernaum were some of Jesus' relatives and kinsman. How did these individuals respond? They said, "Go away":

His brethren therefore said unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judaea, that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest (John 7:3).

Why? "For neither did his brethren believe in him" (John 7:5). To a degree not known fully to us, Jesus was, alas, "without honour in his own house."

Ironically, this was the only instance in human history when townsmen had a chance to keep the first and second commandments simultaneously: to love a Neighbor and a God at the same time!

Shortly after these episodes in His own country, Jesus went to Jerusalem's Feast of the Tabernacles. Once again, He was vastly impressive.

And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having never learned? (John 7:15.)

In spite of being so impressed, however, as soon as Jesus waxed declarative about whose doctrine He preached—God's—their reactions changed. Furthermore, as He reproved the people for not keeping the law of Moses, He was accused of being a devil and of being paranoid: "Who goeth about to kill thee?" (John 7:20).

There was as much provincialism in urbane Jerusalem as in Capernaum.

It all forms a pattern, the significance of which must not be lost upon us. Human nature has not changed, including the ways in which many people respond to prophets. Insularity often leads to indifference, even insolence. Thus Jesus encountered not only erroneous expectations about the Messiah, but intellectual laziness as well.

Why does this happen? Because, living daily among us, a prophet is seen as being merely one of us. How, therefore, can he be more than us?

The perversity of human nature is busily at work too, as in the familiar imagery of lobsters trying unsuccessfully to crawl out of a barrel; no lobster is allowed to ascend to the top, because his neighbors soon reach up and pull him back down. Not only misery but commonality too likes company.

In the calling of David seven of Jesse's sons had passed in review, but the unsatisfied seer asked if these were all.

The Lord said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart (1 Samuel 16:7).

Then, almost as an afterthought, David, the youngest, was mentioned. But he was out keeping the sheep. Surely it wouldn't be he who would be called!

Paul, in his epistles, indicated at least one reaction to his outward appearance and to his personality. Some people regarded his letters as powerful and weighty, but his bodily presence as weak (see 2 Corinthians 10:10). His speech was regarded as rude, or contemptible (see 2 Corinthians 11:6).

In the Revised Standard Version of the New Testament, 2 Corinthians 10:10 is rendered thusly: "For they say, His letters are weighty and strong, but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech of no account."

Paul is portrayed as saying, "Even if I am unskilled in speaking, I am not in knowledge; in every way we have made this plain to you in all things. "(2 Corinthians 11:6, Revised Standard Version.)

Moffatt renders 2 Corinthians 10:10 as follows: "My opponent says, Paul's letters are weighty in telling, but his personality is weak and his delivery was beneath contempt." In 2 Corinthians 11:6 in that version Paul declares, "I am no speaker, perhaps, but knowledge I do possess; I have never failed to make myself intelligible to you."

Thus the absence of a commanding physical presence—or, in modern political terms, the absence of charisma—can cause people to disregard or dismiss one actually sent of God, even though the substance of the individual or his message is exceedingly important.

A pseudo-sophisticated society is especially likely to dismiss someone who does not have impeccable educational credentials. Impressive as Peter and John were, they were still labeled:

Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled; and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus (Acts 4:13).

As always, the adversary manages to have it both ways. Educated and articulate Paul, learned by worldly standards, gave a great discourse before King Agrippa, yet Agrippa turned Paul's learning against that prophet by saying, "Much learning doth make thee mad" (Acts 26:24).

Prophets can be dismissed or discounted in many ways. If their faults can be focused upon, their message can be dismissed. Or, if they can be labeled, they need not be listened to (winebibber, Sabbath breaker, unlearned, ignorant, and so forth). Or, if they can be denigrated in some other way, their message can be discounted.

It is humbling to observe what prophets themselves have said about their faults. Moroni, for example:

And if there be faults they be the faults of a man. But behold, we know no fault; nevertheless God knoweth all things (Mormon 8:17).

Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my father, because of his imperfection, neither them who have written before him; but rather give thanks unto God that he hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been (Mormon 9:31).

Since the Church is for the perfecting of the Saints, obviously we will experience each others' faults; and we are to understand this and to help influence others in doing likewise:

Turn to the Lord with all your mind, might, and strength; that ye lead away the hearts of no more to do wickedly; but rather return unto them, and acknowledge your faults and that wrong which ye have done (Alma 39:13).

Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted (Galatians 6:1).

Surely among the "burdens" we bear are each other's failings in a second estate in which the process of spiritual growth involves so much proving, reproving, and thereby improving.

Any member of the church of Christ transgressing, or being overtaken in a fault, shall be dealt with as the scriptures direct (D&C 20:80).

Admonish him in his faults, and also receive admonition of him. Be patient; be sober; be temperate; have patience, faith, hope and charity. (D&C 6:19.)

Cease to be idle; cease to be unclean; cease to find fault one with another (D&C 88:124).

Additionally, even more rigorous requirements are laid upon us:

For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God (1 Peter 2:20).

And it came to pass that he said unto them: Behold, here are the waters of Mormon (for thus were they called) and now, as ye are desirous to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they be light;

Yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even until death, that ye may be redeemed of God, and be numbered with those of the first resurrection, that ye may have eternal life. (Mosiah 18:8-9.)

Not only are each others' faults clearly among the burdens we bear. We are even given help in terms of how we are to manage certain circumstances in which we feel each other's faults and see each other's shortcomings:

Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother (Matthew 18:15).

Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much. (James 5:16.)

The prophets were, and are, human enough to feel rejection, especially from family. Nevertheless the afore cited lamentation over the failure to accord the prophet the honor due him is not simply to plead for sympathy concerning a prophet's feelings of rejection. On the contrary, the real concern is that the hearers fail to receive the message. Prophets want to be heard for the latter reason; they are only marginally concerned about the acceptance of themselves. After all, they can carry on in the midst of rejection—as did Ether, from the rising of the sun to its setting—even when their success is minimal (see Ether 12:3).

In modern times Joseph Smith's mission, then and now, proves to be no exception to Jesus' utterance about the lack of familial honour accorded prophets (see Matthew 13:57). He was blessed by steady Hyrum but vexed by well-meaning but mercurial William.

The Prophet Joseph, on April 7, 1844, on a Sunday afternoon occupying the Nauvoo temple stand, said, "We are looked upon by God as though we were in eternity." The Prophet noted that we must remember that God dwells in eternity and that He does not see things as we do (see The Words of Joseph Smith, p. 346). This perspective, no doubt, aided Joseph in coping with what was heaped upon him. This great and restoring prophet, just a month before his martyrdom, also observed that "God will always protect me until my mission is fulfilled" (p. 367), because Joseph was involved in laying "a foundation that will revolutionize the whole world" (p. 367).

Interesting, isn't it, that he would use that word revolutionize? The Prophet's grandfather, Asael Smith, observed years before that one of his posterity would, in fact, "revolutionize" the world of religious thought. Three separate memories of Asael's words follow:

My grandfather, Asael Smith, long ago predicted that there would be a prophet raised up in his family, and my grandmother was fully satisfied that it was fulfilled in me. My grandfather Asael died in East Stockholm, St. Lawrence county, New York, after having received the Book of Mormon, and read it nearly through; and he declared that I was the very Prophet that he had long known would come in his family. (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 2:443.)

My grandfather, Asael Smith, heard of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and he said it was true, for he knew that something would turn up in his family that would revolutionize the world (George A. Smith, Journal of Discourses 5:102).

Among the snow-clad hills which rise above the Canadian boundary, in the state of New York, is today a lone and simple grave of a meek and humble man. The winds and the storms of eighty-six winters have defaced the mound, and the ravages of time have beaten bare the tombstone which once bore his name. But there, under the sod and dew, rest the mortal remains of an aged patriarch who, in the course of his life, made the wonderful prediction that out of his posterity would arise one who would be sent of God to bring joy and peace to the souls of men; whose mission would be to bring new light and truth into a night of darkness; and who would revolutionize the world of religious thought. (Joseph Smith Fish, "A Grandfather's Prediction" [Improvement Era, January 1917], p. 207.)

"It has been borne in upon my soul that one of my descendants will promulgate a work to revolutionize the world of religious faith." (Asael Smith, quoted in E. Cecil McGavin, The Family of Joseph Smith [Bookcraft, 1963], p. 1.)

For instance, even the ancestors of Joseph Smith were prepared beforehand.

It was decreed in the counsels of eternity, long before the foundations of the earth were laid, that he, Joseph Smith, should be the man, in the last dispensation of this world, to bring forth [he word of God to the people, and receive the fulness of the keys and power of the Priesthood of the Son of God. The Lord had his eyes upon him, and upon his father, and upon his father's father, and upon their progenitors clear back to Abraham, and from Abraham to the flood, from the flood to Enoch, and from Enoch to Adam. He has watched that family and that blood as it has circulated from its fountain to the birth of that man. He was foreordained in eternity to preside over this last dispensation. (John A. Widtsoe, comp., Discourses of Brigham Young [Deseret Book Company, 1946], p. 108.)

As an example of this, there was the brave Reverend Lathrop. Born at Etton, England, and christened in the little church there, Lathrop later broke with the there dominant church because of its lack of apostolic authority. He established one of the first Congregational churches in the London area, for which he was put in jail. His wife and children suffered in his absence, and finally his wife died. Released from prison, Reverend Lathrop brought his family and flock to America and settled in the Barnstable, Massachusetts, area.

Lathrop was Joseph Smith's fifth great-grandfather, one of the preeminent ancestors to whom Brigham Young referred.

Our perfect God prepares the lineage of His prophets beforehand and honors them in their ministries. Meanwhile, imperfect mortals usually pass them by and notice them not, let alone honor them.

The failure to search the scriptures with intellectual meekness is one cause of the failure to notice.

Jesus' having grown up in Nazareth apparently confused Jewish scholars. Because the Messiah was to be born in Bethlehem and because of lost scripture, they evidently assumed that He would be reared there also (see Matthew 2:23; John 7:42). So it is that among the many questions put to Jesus in His mortal ministry, there is no record of anyone's having asked Jesus where He was born! The obscurity factor again.

As to the historicity of Jesus and other great spiritual leaders, critics would do well to not overreact to the seeming silence of the secular record.

There are, after all, those imponderables which proceed from imperfect and inadequate information. There is the general silence of the secular record that proceeds from the discounting of things spiritual. There is also the comparative silence which proceeds from the press of the cares of the day, because of which spiritual things are little, if at all, noticed. Incomplete data, therefore, yield incomplete conclusions. Silence is not automatic refutation.

Caution is particularly appropriate for yet another reason. Even in modern history, such as the events surrounding the December 1941 Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor (where there are an abundance of data and still living witnesses), there are now conflicting conclusions and conflicting views about the degree to which American leaders were aware that such an attack was coming. If there can be conflicting conclusions concerning things so recent, in the face of abundant data, how much more careful we should be regarding conclusions in a setting of sparse data and of antiquity!

Moreover, some treat the pieces of information which comprise history as if they were the fragments in a kaleidoscope—with the facts rearranging themselves at the mere shake of the next viewer. Hence, we get revisions of revisions of revisions.

This is not to say that the effort to create authentic and accurate history should not be undertaken. Rather, it is to say that caution and intellectual meekness should be the order of the day. Meanwhile, Sir Winston Churchill's caution about the limitation of history is worth heeding: "History with its flickering lamp stumbles along the trail of the past, trying to reconstruct its scenes, to revive its echoes, and kindle with pale gleams the passion of former days" (Churchill Speaks: Collected Speeches in Peace and War, Robert Rhodes James, ed. [Windward, 1981], p. 734).

Meanwhile, wise historians will be the first to forgive those nonhistorians who, while interested, prefer to be patient until the perfect day. Then all will be known, and we will see, but not through glass darkly!

Finally, prophets, like all of us, are accountable to God. He is their final judge, not we.

So often, when there is a rush to judgment, there is a rash judgment—a most unwise circumstance in view of the fact that all of us will one day kneel and our tongues will confess that Jesus is the Christ. Further more, we will likewise acknowledge openly that all God's judgments are just!

But this cannot be; we must come forth and stand before him in his glory, and in his power, and in his might, majesty, and dominion, and acknowledge to our everlasting shame that all his judgments are just; that he is just in all his works, and that he is merciful unto the children of men, and that he has all power to save every man that believeth on his name and bringeth forth fruit meet for repentance (Alma 12:15; italics added).

In view of this reality we should be more concerned with how we, individually, will fare at that critical moment. We will then be supplicants, not wearers of the robes of a judge—least of all to judge the prophets of God! Meanwhile, if we and ours would be blessed, let us honor God's prophets in our families and neighborhoods and countries. The lessons of history are clear as to the esteem due the Lord's anointed.
