Neal A. Maxwell, Sermons Not Spoken ( 1985)

Sermon Number Six

"Wicked and Adulterous Generation"

(Matthew 16:4)

All serious readers of the scriptures are familiar with the instances in which Jesus juxtaposed particular adjectives, which was more than accidental.

Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying, Master, we would see a sign from thee.

But he answered and said unto them, An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; band there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas. (Matthew 12:38-39; italics added.)

A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas. And he left them, and departed. (Matthew 16:4; italics added.)

Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels (Mark 8:38).

Why that particular juxtaposition? Why not "wicked and merciless generation"? Or "wicked and proud generation"? Such words might have been equally and descriptively accurate. But the linkage with sexual immorality is too deliberate to ignore.

Sexual sin leads to a loss of faith, and sometimes to a craving for signs, as this episode recounted by the Prophet Joseph illustrates.

When I was preaching in Philadelphia, a Quaker called out for a sign. I told him to be still. After the sermon, he again asked for a sign. I told the congregation the man was an adulterer; that a wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and that the Lord had said to me in a revelation, that any man who wanted a sign was an adulterous person. "It is true, cried one, "for I caught him in the very act," which the man afterwards confessed when he was baptized. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 277-78.)

As is so often the case, there are multiple levels of meaning in the inspired words of scripture. Moreover, Jesus' scalding generalization clearly fits more than the generation to whom it was originally given.

First, a few illustrative episodes concerning the quest for signs and demonstrative miracles.

And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,

When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, Shew a miracle for you: then thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast it before Pharaoh, and it shall become a serpent.

And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so as the Lord had commanded: and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it became a serpent.

Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the magicians of Egypt, they also did in like manner with their enchantments.

For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents: but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods. (Exodus 7:8-12.)

In spite of the above extraordinary events, so far as the record indicates there were no "converts" in Pharaoh's court. Divine power was demonstrated and opportunities for the softening of hearts were there, but there were no lasting spiritual gains.

Nor is the craving for signs confined to pagan unbelievers.

Then answered the Jews and said unto him, What sign shewest thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these things? (John 2:18.)

Then said Jesus unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe (John 4:48).

But true faith cannot be developed by or depend upon a perpetual "Star Wars" of signs and wonders. Yet the quests and demands for such have been in evidence throughout all time:

And it came to pass that he said unto me: Show me a sign by this power of the Holy Ghost, in the which ye know so much (Jacob 7:13).

And now Korihor said unto Alma: If thou wilt show me a sign, that I may be convinced that there is a God, yea, show unto me that he hath power, and then will I be convinced of the truth of thy words (Alma 30:43).

Yea, there are many who do say: If thou wilt show unto us a sign from heaven, then we shall know of a surety; then we shall believe (Alma 32:17).

Usually, even when a sign is given to an unbeliever, any ensuing appreciation or humility does not last, because such people are too dependent upon compulsion or intimidation. (See also Alma 32:13.)

Besides, true subjects do not dictate terms to their King.

And others, tempting him, sought of him a sign from heaven (Luke 11:16).

Nor is it merely the unlettered who so quest; curiosity reaches the highest levels, as it did with adulterous Herod (see Mark 6:17, 18):

And when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad: for he was desirous to see him of a long season, because he had heard many things of him; and he hoped to have seen some miracle done by him (Luke 23:8).

Sign-seeking shaped responses to Christ and His message not only during His mortal ministry but long after His crucifixion and atonement:

For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom (1 Corinthians 1:22).

So signs there may be, but for unbelievers such usually produce no spiritual betterment.

And he that seeketh signs shall see signs, but not unto salvation (D&C 63:7).

It cannot be otherwise if mortality is to be a true test of faith:

And now, I, Moroni, would speak somewhat concerning these things; I would show unto the world that faith is things which are hoped for and not seen. . . for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith (Ether 12:6).

It is much the same with the principle of hope:

For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for?

But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it. (Romans 8:24-25.)

In the foregoing context, the significance of the juxtaposition of those particular adjectives, wicked and adulterous, may now be further examined.

First of all, the people of the world cannot presume to command God to provide them with signs. A person can neither be a disciple and command the Master nor can he require "perpetual renewal of absolute proof." Some behave, however, as if they would set forth the conditions under which they will believe—complete with specifications; they then invite God to "bid" on their specifications!

Furthermore, as noted, the constant provision of validating signs would violate the intrinsic and vital role of faith in the second estate (see Ether 12:6). President Brigham Young said, "There is no saving faith merely upon acknowledging a fact" (Journal of Discourses, 7:55).

Sign seekers, like adulterers, often do have a clear preference for repeated sensation. Those who do not understand why adultery is intrinsically wrong will also fail to understand why faith is a justified requirement laid upon us by God. We are to walk by faith and to overcome by faith (see D&C 76:53).

Those who will not humble themselves "because of the word" (see Alma 32:14-16) are no different than the magicians of Pharaoh's court. Those men must have been impressed by the miracles which came from the Lord through Moses. But their proximate reactions made no ultimate difference! The magicians merely be came hardened again, as if to say, "What has the Lord shown us lately?"

By contrast, the faithful, who are intellectually honest but are confronted with new and present challenges, sing of the Lord, "We've proved Him in days that are past."

How long would the Sanhedrin have remained interested in Jesus Christ even if He had appeared to them after His resurrection? Or Pilate? The remarkable visions enjoyed by Sidney Rigdon were not, in fact, able to keep him humble "because of the word." A little time away from the Saints was enough to reignite his vanity. But to continue the analysis:

Those who are adulterous have also a strong preference for "now" rather than for eternity. Impatience and incontinence, quite naturally, team up.

Such erring individuals or generations also have a strong preference for meeting the needs of "me" over attending to others, a lifestyle which speeds selfishness on its endless, empty journey.

By making demands of God, the proud would attach conditions to their discipleship. But discipleship requires of us unconditional surrender to the Lord. Hence the proud neither understand nor really love God. Therefore they violate the first commandment by seeing God as a sign provider upon request; as a function, not a tutoring Father.

Is this not precisely how some regard their sexual partners, as something to be used and then dismissed or discarded?

But God will not be used:

Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts (James 4:3).

Yet God is ever ready to respond when a request is right.

Ask not, that ye may consume it on your lusts, but ask with a firmness unshaken, that ye will yield to no temptation, but that ye will serve the true and living God (Mormon 9:28; see also 3 Nephi 18:20).

Nor does God, who is perfect in mercy, require perfection of us before He responds. If we are seeking and striving, it is a beginning which is welcomed and rewarded with gifts:

For verily I say unto you, they are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do; that all may be benefited that seek or that ask of me, that ask and not for a sign that they may consume it upon their lusts (D&C 46:9; italics added).

Clearly, in examining Jesus' words wicked and adulterous generation we are dealing, therefore, not only with the true nature of faith but with the true nature of real love as well—whether love of God or of man.

Henry Fairlie, in his excellent book The Seven Deadly Sins Today, contrasts lust and love:

Lust is not interested in its partners, but only in the gratification of its own craving, not in the satisfaction of our whole natures, but only in the appeasement of an appetite that we are unable to subdue. ... Lust dies at the next dawn, and when it returns in the evening, to search where it may, it is with its own past erased. ...

Some of the evils to which theology says that Lust will give rise are: blindness of intellect in respect of divine things; precipitancy in acting without judgment; want of regard for what befits one's state or person; inconstancy in good; hatred of God as an Avenger of such sins; love of this world and its pleasures; inordinate fear of death. Even if we set aside those that are directly concerned with our relationship with God, we are still left with the fact that Lust, no less than the other sins, affects our conduct and attitudes to life in ways beyond its own immediate interests.

The lustful person will usually be found to have a terrible hollowness at the center of his life, and he is agitated to fill it, not daring to desist, lest he should have to confront the desert he has made of himself and his life. He has no spiritual resource to which to turn. (Henry Fairlie, The Seven Deadly Sins Today [Washington, D.C.: New Republic Books, 1978], pp. 175, 185, 187.)

Thus we see that the first commandment and the seventh commandment are intrinsically tied together . . . as are wickedness and adulterous interactive.

Sensual individuals are users, not builders; they are takers, not givers; demanders, not producers. They are carnal, not spiritual. They are often the victims of self-deception, as was Korihor. His self-deception reached such enormous proportions because it was "pleasing unto the carnal mind" (Alma 30:53).

From this analysis a caution emerges for Church members today: as wickedness and adultery (and things like unto it) increase in the world, there will be made of disciples even more strident demands for signs. Likewise, because iniquity is increasing in the world, the love of many will wax cold (see Matthew 24:12; D&C 45:27). (Not only more demands, but less mercy and compassion.)

Therefore, in a sensual, secular society, we should expect more mocking when proof is not supplied upon demand.

Disciples will be restrained as always, however, from urging the giving of such signs, because these come only from the Lord and on the conditions He determines (see D&C 24:13). Hence there will inevitably be more criticism and more cynicism as people seek, and even demand, signs, but "not unto salvation."

As in the days of Noah, people will also be preoccupied with the cares and the pleasures of the world (see Matthew 24:37). Ironically, most therefore will even miss such signs as God gives pertaining to Jesus' glorious second coming. Instead, the desensitized and unnoticing in self-dissuasion will say (just as prophesied in the scriptures), "All things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation" (2 Peter 3:3-4). Humdrum hedonism camouflages much critical data. By diminishing our capacity to feel, it also diminishes our capacity to serve others. Despair robs us of hope, and immorality of faith and love. What, then, of faith, hope, and charity?

There is an increasing test especially intriguing in a desensitized, secular society which can be applied to almost any circumstance in order to demonstrate the importance of our knowing about the gospel's plan of salvation. If one can really be persuaded that he is not only watched over by the Lord but is also compassed about by a great cloud of past witnesses and preceding kinsmen, will he not behave differently? In this sense it is really ludicrous, therefore, to speak in terms of a private morality, or even of a private moment. This is hard doctrine, however, in a society of sign seekers.

The notion that private immorality is somehow acceptable rests on the notion that certain behavior is "safe" because it is confined. Just as there can be no private smallpox or cholera, at least one other individual is usually affected by our sin, and usually more, whether immediately or eventually.

Likewise the diminished self whom the immoral person becomes deprives his associates of the privilege of associating with one who is more whole and serene and helpful. Since sin is a war against our very nature, we err if we think that this war can be safely confined.

Civil wars have a way of spreading ever so subtly and are the most vicious of all wars.

The false notion of private morality is inflated in our time because celebrated sinners often get so much sanctioning attention by the media. Ignored is their representation of raw selfishness and raw appetite. In fact, such people are sometimes touted as being bold, even brave, and as worthy of envy. Yet their "good time" does not last even in this life, for illness and loneliness finally claim their own. Even the enemies of the Church who receive the "praise of the world" often find that "they themselves shall be despised by those that flattered them" (D&C 121:20).

The truth is, however, that their conduct is often so grossly wrong as to be anything but praiseworthy. Would we applaud someone who is being consumed by maggots? Or award a marksman medal to someone who has just shot himself in his foot? Our compassion should be given to those thus self-distressed and self-conflicted. But our praise? Never!

Chances are very good that if a person can accept this reality of being watched over, he or she will behave differently. We really are, even when we seem to be alone, part of a loving heavenly family who would have us behave so as to be happy.

Once persuaded that life is a continuum, and likewise that one will never cease to exist, and further that the wrongs we do must be painfully undone and any missteps retraced—once so persuaded, how careful we then are concerning what we do and what we think and what we become!

This macro and spiritual view is, of course, in stark contrast to those who urge, "Eat, drink, and be merry, because "you only live once!" The gospel response to that assertion is "Yes, we only live once, but that once is forever!" How constant the contest between the spiritual and the sensual, and how different the consequences, as Jesus' prophecy foretold.

As the foregoing attempts to illustrate, divine deliberateness was at work when the Lord juxtaposed two words so directly as He has done with "wicked and adulterous generation." There is a wealth of meaning and relevancy to be derived from the scriptures, if we are serious students of them.

Yes, searching the scriptures is labor, but it can come to be a labor of love and a journey of discovery.
