Neal A. Maxwell, Sermons Not Spoken ( 1985)

Sermon Number Seven

"Search the Scriptures"

(John 5:39)

Among the things we Latter-day Saints need to do is to increase our sophistication in the use of the scriptures.

John Donne speaks about "dilating" the scriptures, enlarging them so that we might see their true spiritual scope and significance.

The prophetic, God-given power to declare doctrine was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Otherwise, what John Donne said is true: "The best men are Problematicall, Onely the Holy Ghost is Dogmaticall" (Donne, 5 Prebend Sermons, p. 12). So we had best study carefully the doctrines revealed through prophets as contained in holy writ.

For instance, we should recognize that certain scriptures commingle prophecies which bear upon different time periods. The classic example is chapter 24 of Matthew, in which Jesus prophesying both about events which were to happen soon and events then quite distant.

The destruction of the temple (see Matthew 24:1-12) occurred within a few decades, but the foreseen calamities preceding the Second Coming (see, for instance, Matthew 24:21, 22) were still centuries away.

The same time duality is found in section 87 of the Doctrine and Covenants (see D&C 87:1-6). The section contains revelation given on Christmas Day, 1832, and deals most directly with the prophecy that the rebellion and the resultant Civil War in the United States would begin at South Carolina, even though the firing on Fort Sumter was then about three decades away.

Significantly, that prophesy warns of "the death and misery of many souls." The Civil War was, indeed, a bloody war, resulting in about 204,000 battle casualties plus another 225,000 military personnel who died of disease. This number actually well exceeds the American battle deaths (128,000) in World War I. In World War II, there were 396,637 battle deaths.

In one two-day Civil War battle alone, Chickamauga, 35,000 were killed or wounded out of 128,000 soldiers. The Americans killed in the Viet Nam war, a war which stretched over ten years and which jarred American life profoundly in many ways, totaled around 60,000.

Section 87 also speaks of "wars" (verse 1), suggesting not one war but a continuum of conflict. Thus, like chapter 24 of Matthew, this scripture covered things both imminent and distant.

Furthermore, verse 4 speaks of a time . . . "after many days'... . when slaves would rise against their masters. True, some slaves fought in the Civil War, but these words may suggest something of far greater portent.

So too with verse 5, which speaks about "the remnants" on the land, the seed of Jacob who will rise up to "vex the Gentiles"; an intriguing and sobering prophecy, obviously involving developments far beyond the events of the American Civil War.

As to the "wars" being a continuum (see verse 1), World War I was terribly bloody, costing 7 1/2 million battle casualties (dead, wounded, missing, etc.), plus millions of civilian deaths from flu and other diseases. Books have been written to show the profound impact of World War I on Western civilization—an impact far beyond battle casualties.

The idea of endless war as an inevitable condition of modern life would seem to have become seriously available to the imagination around 1916. Events, never far behindhand in fleshing out the nightmares of imagination, obliged with the Spanish War, the Second World War, the Greek War, the Korean War, the Arab-Israeli War, and the Vietnam War. It was not long after the second World War, says Alfred Kazin, that even most liberal intellectuals abandoned the hope that that war had really put an end to something. (Paul Fussell, The Great War and Modern Memory [New York: Oxford University Press, 1975], p. 74.)

Another wrote, .... . War is the continued experience of the Twentieth century man."

Of course, in our own time, we could add the war in Afghanistan, Iran and Iraq, civil wars in Central America, Lebanon, the British-Argentine conflict, etc. These are sobering comments, especially when placed in this scriptural context:

For I am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion (D&C 1:35).

And in that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them, and they shall say that Christ delayeth his coming until the end of the earth (D&C 45:26).

Given the reported tragedy of unnecessary war, one might even wonder aloud as in Cowper's lines:

"But war's a game, which, were their subjects wise, Kings would not play at." ("The Winter Morning Walk").

As we search the scriptures, it should be part of our sophistication too to be able to see relationships between scriptural truths and the human condition.

One scripture, for example, portrays people in the latter days as wandering or running to and fro in search of the truth and not finding it (see Amos 8:11-12). Such words do not, however, describe all of mankind, by any means. [^1]

As in centuries past, therefore, many mortals are disinterested in real religion, because they have been enveloped in irreligious secularism or have been disappointed or desolated by false religion. Many have simply become too busy in the work of the world.

In Isaiah's remarkable prophesy contained in the first part of chapter 24 of his book, we read that the "haughty people of the earth do languish" (Isaiah 24:5). One rendering of the words "haughty people" is the "upper class." Languish connotes a drooping, a spiritlessness, a loss of animation. Significantly, Nephi also used the word droop in addressing his soul—"No longer droop in sin." (2 Nephi 4:28.)

Granted, the seekers add up to "many" (D&C 123:12).' But most mortals are preoccupied with the cares and anxieties of the world.

In the above context one thinks, for instance, of the upper class such as was portrayed in the Public Broadcasting System's Brideshead Revisited. At least some of the upper class of England were, in fact, a spent people. For them, life had lost its meaning; even their frivolity showed their boredom and their sense of emptiness.

Just how, over decades of time, the upper classes—the opinion molders, the influence makers—have interacted with and affected others in various societies would require the analysis of a gifted psychologist-historian. However, these reflections of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn about the "first whiff of secularism" in his native land and about the growing disbelief of the upper class in earlier Russia are one illustration:

Different parts of the world have followed different paths, but today they are all approaching the threshold of a common ruin.

In its past, Russia did know a time when the social ideal was not fame, or riches, or material success, but a pious way of life. ... Faith was the shaping and unifying force of the nation. But in the seventeenth century. . . Russia felt the first whiff of secularism; its subtle poisons permeated the educated classes in the course of the nineteenth century. ... By the time of the Revolution, faith had virtually disappeared in Russian educated circles; among the uneducated, too, faith had declined. (Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, "Men Have Forgotten God," National Review, July 22, 1983, p. 374.)

Secularism, the setting in which most Christians will live out their lives, is both a diversion from and a perversion of life's true purpose. Hence the disappointment in the secular search for the meaning of life. Hence the drooping of the human spirit in which the conscience can come to be regarded as an intruder. Indeed, ennui, boredom, and humdrum hedonism are descriptive of those thus afflicted, as this lamentation indicates:

Are all men's lives... broken, tumultuous, agonized and unromantic, punctuated by screams, imbecilities, agonies and death? Who knows?... I don't know. ... Why can't people have what they want? The things were all there to content everybody, yet everybody got the wrong thing. I don't know. It's beyond me. It's all darkness. (Public Broadcasting System production of "The Good Soldier," presented in early 1983.)

Thus, while we usually think of apostasy solely in terms of theological deviation, we often fail to see its connections to the everyday, human condition in which the consequences of that deviation are enormous.

To continue the suggestion about connecting up the scriptures and the human condition, the words of Isaiah indicate that the dwellers of the earth will be "desolate" (Isaiah 24:6). "Desolate" connotes joylessness or a grief-stricken condition—a state kindred to the spiritlessness which the word languish connotes.

Why did all this happen? Because, said Isaiah, the people had "transgressed the laws, changed the ordinances, broken the everlasting covenant" (Isaiah 24:5). When such basic breakdowns happen, then sweeping and sad consequences follow.

We see still other symptoms in our own time. As prophesied by the Savior, "because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold" (Matthew 24:12). The capacity of human beings to love—whether it is love of God, of life, or of others—shrinks in a climate of iniquity.

As life thus loses its meaning and purpose for those so afflicted, despair replaces joy. Anomie or drift drive out purpose. When people mock God's messengers and despise His words, deterioration sets in "till there [is] no remedy" (see 2 Chronicles 36:16).

No remedy but One!

The remedy, the redemption, of course, is to be found in Jesus and His encompassing and emancipating message. He is the centerpiece of human history, the validation and verification of the meaning of life. He is the Executor of Our Father's glorious and redemptive "plan of happiness" (Alma 42:8). And it is He about whom the scriptures testify so abundantly:

Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me (John 5:39).

Peter foresaw that heresies and apostasies would have at their center the ultimate deviation: to denigrate and to "deny the Lord that bought them" (2 Peter 2:1). For those so mistaken, the denial of Jesus and of His purchasing atonement dissolves the meaning and purpose of life. With this denial, for those so deluded, any assurance of immortality and individuality and personal accountability exit also (see 1 Corinthians 6:20). Men are then left to try to find their own ways:

In those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes (Judges 17:6; see also Judges 21:25).

They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall (D&C 1:16).

What we often fall to add, however, in our declarations about the Restoration, is the glorious perspective which the restoration and the full gospel give to us about the meaning of life on this planet and the unfoldingness of God's plan of salvation. It is this, too, which can give meaning to life and which can remedy those conditions in which people languish and droop and are desolate. An aristocracy of Saints is what is needed, since finally no other aristocracy can really lead the way—certainly not any like the "haughty people" Isaiah saw.

In a great many ways we are therefore bearers of a message of far greater and deeper significance than we can now possibly imagine.

The restored gospel is thus a gospel of hope and meaning: not a vague, generalized hope but a message of specific and justified hope for which myriad mortals hunger and which all mortals need.

One major example is the verification of the reality of the resurrection. This came initially with the theophany of the First Vision. Later, too, with the visitations of other resurrected beings. Also with the witness of additional scriptures.

Verification of the resurrection came too in still other ways, such as modern visions. On Sunday morning, April 16, 1843, on the temple stand at Nauvoo, the Prophet Joseph spoke. As recorded by Willard Richards, Joseph spoke of a vision (about which, alas, we apparently do not have any other information) concerning "those who have died in Jesus Christ." The vision was so plain that "I actually saw men, before they ascended from the tomb, as though they were getting up slowly, they took each other by the hand and it was my father and my son, my mother and my daughter, my brother and my sister" (The Words of Joseph Smith, p. 195). Quite humanly, the Prophet indicated "more painful to me the thought of annihilation than death."

It is that very sense of impending annihilation and nothingness which bothers a great many mortals today and enshrouds their lives in despair. The Prophet also noted how "the expectation of seeing my friends in the morning of the resurrection cheers my soul," and helped him to "bear up against the evils of life" (p. 196).

The Prophet rejoiced in the clarity of this vision and sought to prepare his people for the storms which were ready "to burst upon you like peals of thunder" but "all your losses will be made up to you in the resurrection provided you continue faithful" (p. 196). He then declared, "By the vision of the Almighty, I have seen it."

Joseph then further affirmed that "God has revealed His Son from the heavens. And the doctrine of the resurrection also."

No wonder the Prophet further observed, "It is my meditation all day and more than my meat and drink to know how I shall make the saints of God to comprehend the visions that roll like an overflowing surge, before my mind" (p. 196).

The Prophet reflected and then exclaimed, Alma-like, "Hosanna. Hosanna. Hosanna, to Almighty God that rays of light begin to burst forth upon us even now. ... O that I had the language of the archangel to express my feeling.....(P. 196; see also Alma 29:1.)

The "good news" of the Restoration is for those marvelous mortals of all races, creeds, and cultures who already believe in God and His purposes but who can now have added reason to believe.

It is for those who partially believe but who need convincing cause to become true believers.

It is for those especially noted herein for whom life seems empty and who are filled with despair but who do still, in fact, wander or run to and fro in search of the truth... but do not know where to find it.

How vital the restoration of modern revelation—both institutional and personal! For as the Prophet also observed, "Could you gaze in heaven five minutes you would know more than you possibly can know by reading all that ever was written on the subject" (The Words of Joseph Smith, p. 254).

Thus the holy scriptures are relevance themselves if we will but search and apply them "for our profit and learning" (1 Nephi 19:23).

In further demonstration of the verity, beauty, and diversity of the scriptures, a comparison of the Ten Commandments as set forth in the twentieth chapter of Exodus and the fifth chapter of Deuteronomy and in the tenth chapter of Mark is interesting (see Mark 10:17-22). For the rich, righteous young man, Jesus apparently did not mention the requirement of avoiding profanity and keeping the Sabbath day holy. For what reason we know not. Perhaps comment was not required. The Savior did substitute "defraud not" for the requirement of avoiding covetousness. But he omitted the Sabbath day and profanity, as he did the commandment concerning idolatry. Whether those mentioned were what Jesus wished to stress to that young man or to the particular audience, we simply do not know. Certainly Jesus was no less interested in the keeping of the Sabbath day and the other commandments he did not mention on this occasion.

This incident suggests how, with propriety, spiritual emphasis may be given one time which differs from a previous or a later emphasis. Such, for instance, was the case in Joseph Smith's recitations of the First Vision, with differing emphases appropriate to differing audiences.

Not only are there intriguing truths only partially disclosed' in holy scriptures, in terms of their implications, but there are also some individuals about whom we would especially desire to know more and about whom one day we shall. Gamaliel the Pharisee was such an individual; he was a much-respected doctor of the law (see Acts 5:34). Paul had been one of his pupils (see Acts 22:3). Gamaliel used his influence on one occasion in the Sanhedrin to give appropriate counsel which benefited the work of the Lord.

Then stood there up one in the council, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, had in reputation among all the people, and commanded to put the apostles forth a little space;

And said unto them, Ye men of Israel, take heed to yourselves what ye intend to do as touching these men.

For before these days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves: who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered, and brought to nought.

After this man rose up Judas of Galilee in the days of the taxing, and drew away much people after him: he also perished; and all, even as many as obeyed him, were dispersed.

And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone: for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought:

But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply ye be found even to fight against God.

And to him they agreed: and when they had called the apostles, and beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go. (Acts 5:34-40.)

Did Gamaliel have any spiritual promptings which caused him to call for fair play for the Apostles? Did he later affiliate with the Church of Jesus Christ? We do not now know. But the wisdom of Gamaliel was surely significant: "Refrain from these men, and let them alone: for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought: but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply ye be found even to fight against God."

Significantly, Gamaliel named two other leaders. Theudas had had about four hundred followers and was slain. Theudas's followers were scattered and "brought to nought." There was apparently a "Judas of Galilee" who drew many people away after him. He also perished and his followers were dispersed. Jesus' followers were scattered "like sheep" after he was slain (see Mark 14:27). But instead of being "brought to nought" Jesus' work grew, just as Gamaliel had indicated it would do "if it be of God."

Just as there were men like Theudas and Judas of Galilee who made it more difficult in a way for some to recognize who Jesus of Nazareth really was, so there were others in the time of Joseph Smith whose religious movements, by and large, came to naught.

Often in the history of God's work individuals who had a sense of fair play have been most helpful, whether Colonel Kane or Gamaliel or the intriguing town clerk of Ephesus (see Acts 19:23-41). Apparently in that last-named circumstance, the worshipers of Diana raised a tumult against Paul, chanting for the space of two hours saying, "Great is Diana of the Ephesians."

An unnamed town clerk stepped forward to appease the people, urging them "to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly." The silver makers, who feared for the future of their craft, since they made silver shrines for Diana, had a vested interest. It was the town clerk, however, who pointed out that Paul and his followers "are neither robbers of churches, nor yet blasphemers of your goddess." Therefore, reasoned the town clerk, if Demetrius, a leader among the silversmiths, had "a matter against any man, the law is open, and there are deputies; let them implead one another." The town clerk urged all to let matters "be determined in the lawful assembly" but not by a mob, warning that they were "in danger to be called in question for this day's uproar, there being no cause whereby we may give an account of this concourse. And when he had thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly" (Acts 19:37-41).

The Home Secretary in Britain assisted missionaries of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints when there were members of Parliament who would have prohibited them from proselyting. At least seven times (in 1910 and 1911) there were exchanges in Parliament when some urged steps to prevent meetings of Church members in Britain, so they could not "spread their views in this country." A very young Home Secretary—the youngest, in fact, to serve since Peel—parried pressing parliamentarians. His name was Winston Churchill. He said, "I have no power to prevent the holding of such meetings as long as they are held in conformity with the law."

It was a time of serious social unrest and there was violence in the mines. Churchill was even being accused of making prison life too uncomfortable. Though perhaps a reluctant and disapproving protector, Churchill stood his ground because "there is very wide divergence of opinion in this country... and Churchill had not "so far discovered any ground for legislative action" in the Mormon matter. In late 1911, he became the First Lord of the Admiralty. His successor in the Home Office wrote a letter in 1914 confirming that "extensive enquiries... did not reveal any grounds for legislative action. "(Arthur L. Beeley, A Summary Statement of the Investigation Made by the British Government of the "Mormon" Question in England, p. 13.)

As to their salvational or developmental worth, there is no democracy among the verses of holy writ. Some verses are useful, while others are supernal.

Moroni's abridgement of the writings of Ether, for instance, gives us lineage history such as in this verse, compressing five generations:

And he begat Heth, and Heth lived in captivity all his days. And Heth begat Aaron, and Aaron dwelt in captivity all his days; and he begat Amnigaddah, and Amnigaddah also dwelt in captivity all his days; and he begat Coriantum, and Coriantum dwelt in captivity all his days; and he begat Com. (Ether 10:31.)

However, the Book of Ether in addition to some such data on succession provides us with much inspiration, including these stern but realistic lines concerning our personal development:

And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness—that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. (Ether 12:27.)

Moreover, the scriptures remind us that our time in the mortal schoolhouse is so fleeting, "The time passed away with us, and also our lives passed away like as it were unto us a dream..." (Jacob 7:28). How well we use the precious time allotted to us makes all the difference, because this life is "a time to prepare to meet God" (Alma 12:24).

There is also to be found and appreciated in the searching of the scriptures the several levels of meaning that can be uncovered in certain verses:

O, then, my beloved brethren, come unto the Lord, the Holy One. Remember that his paths are righteous. Behold, the way for man is narrow, but it lieth in a straight course before him, and the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate; for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name. (2 Nephi 9:41.)

Additionally, in the Joseph Smith Translation the serious searcher will discover heretofore hidden meaning in certain verses:

And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two other tables of stone, like unto the first, and I will write upon them also, the words of the law, according as they were written at the first on the tables which thou brakest; but it shall not be according to the first, for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst, lest I destroy them (JST Exodus 34:1).

Clearly, temple-related blessings were among the things not given to ancient Israel when God's people were given a lesser law and lesser blessings.

Another example of scriptures which are foretelling (but more in an intriguing than in a delineating way) is this verse:

That the kingdoms of this world may be constrained to acknowledge that the kingdom of Zion is in very deed the kingdom of our God and his Christ; therefore, let us become subject unto her laws (D&C 105:32).

This verse suggests a time when there will be some public acknowledgment concerning the Kingdom of Zion. Some will apparently be willing to become subject to the laws of Zion and to acknowledge that Zion represents "the kingdom of our God and his Christ." This intriguing verse stands alone, much as does an intriguing verse in Zechariah:

And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. (Zechariah 13:6.)

In the case of this verse in Zechariah, however, we have amplifying modern revelation:

And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?

Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king. (D&C 45:51-53.)

But what of the verse in section 105 of the Doctrine and Covenants?

As well as that in D&C 45:67-69, we have this interesting comment from John Taylor:

Those who will not take up their sword to fight against their neighbor must needs flee to Zion for safety. And they will come, saying, We do not know anything of the principles of your religion, but we perceive that you are an honest community; you administer justice and righteousness, and we want to live with you and receive the protection of your laws, but as for your religion we will talk about that some other time. Will we protect such people? Yes, all honorable men. (Journal of Discourses 21:8.)

This is a prophecy of a remarkable circumstance yet to come to pass, whether it is millennial or premillennial. In either case it is an example of another one of those foretelling jewels which lie imbedded in the books of scripture for those who have eyes to see. The later point of transition will finally be reached, in any event, as John the Revelator declared.

And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever (Revelation 11:15).

A parallel and confirming revelation has come in our time:

And thus, with the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations (D&C 87:6).

We understand, of course, that there will be many nonmembers of the Church living during the Millennium, but there will be a clear willingness by all the good and decent men and women of all the races, creeds, and cultures to abide by a terrestrial law.

In the millennium men will have the privilege of being Presbyterians, Methodists or Infidels, but they will not have the privilege of treating the name and character of Deity as they have done heretofore (Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 12:274)

Some members of the Church have an erroneous idea that when the millennium comes all of the people are going to be swept off the earth except righteous members of the Church. That is not so. There will be millions of people, Catholics, Protestants, agnostics, Mohammedans, people of all classes, and of all beliefs, still permitted to remain upon the face of the earth, but they will be those who have lived clean lives, those who have been free from wickedness and corruption. All who belong, by virtue of their good lives, to the terrestrial order, as well as those who have kept the celestial law, will remain upon the face of the earth during the millennium. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation [Bookcraft, 1954] 1:86.)

Thus, as we search the scriptures and the words of living prophets, not only do we see how the scriptures testify of Christ. Also in this searching we very often find episodes and parallels to give us precious perspective in these days which are our days and also glimpses of a glorious future.
