Neal A. Maxwell, Sermons Not Spoken ( 1985)

Sermon Number Nine

"A Peculiar People"

(1 Peter 2:9)

Though this book seeks to encourage God's chosen people—that is, those who have chosen to become so—ever to be remembered is the fact that God is "no respecter of persons" (see Acts 10:34; 17:26; Romans 2:11; 1 Nephi 17:35; D&C 1:35). He is the Father of us all. But just as through His Beloved Son all mankind will be resurrected, so also by chosen peoples God seeks further to redeem all other people, whose present or past unawareness of His work matters little in this respect. After all, long ago the bounds of the various nations and habitations were fixed by God (see Acts 17:26; Deuteronomy 32:8).

God's plan of salvation took into account in advance all that a perfect plan would require.

Moreover, given God's deep commitment to human agency, the Lord, without approving of it, allows for human stupidity. Mortal shortfalls were taken into account in God's unfolding plan of salvation. For instance, the provincial, Ptolemaic view of the earth prevailed for centuries until overturned by the Copernican view when the earth was no longer mistakenly thought to be the center of the universe.

Now, in our age of seeming enlightenment we too must be careful about our own forms of provincialism. For example, the atoning mission of Jesus on this planet may affect others elsewhere (see D&C 88: 46-61; 76:24).

Yet as important as the Lord's chosen people have been, in the secular sweep of history—except for an occasional and acknowledging nod from and occasional brushes with world class figures (Sheba, Cyrus, Nebuchadnezzar, and so on)—the Lord's people throughout the centuries have gone quietly about their tasks content with their seeming obscurity.

Yes, Winston Churchill once courageously defended Britain's religious tolerance on the floor of Parliament, so that the Mormon missionaries might continue their work.

Yes, General George S. Patton had some favorable comments to make about one of the Twelve whom he met in Mexico: "Very interesting and educated." Yet with a candor confirming the wisdom of his choice of a military career over that of a diplomatic career, Patton also wrote: "It seems strange that such a smart man could be a leader in such a fool religion" (p. 360, The Patton Papers 1885-1940, Martin Blumenson). Patton later went on to his great battles. Like the ancient Greeks as they viewed Christianity, Patton saw the expression of Latter-day Christianity as "foolishness" (1 Corinthians 1:18-23). Patton's mind had apparently been adversely influenced by a 1903 anti-Church book of fiction.

President Van Buren may have had a few uncomfortable moments with the Prophet Joseph, whose cause he described as just but for whom he said he could do nothing. Like Pilate with his eyes on Rome, Van Buren had his own Missouri.

Nevertheless God's work has gone on quietly and obscurely. After all, the resurrected Jesus did not triumphantly visit the Sanhedrin, Caiaphas, Herod, or Pilate. Rather, His resurrected Presence blessed bands of believers in obscure Bethany and, later, in Bountiful.

Christian verity issues from obscurity. It is the truth, not its host turf, that matters!

Peter, as a fisherman, was in an excellent position to give this caveat to those who are chosen of God, for he wrote that converts are "newborn babes [in Christ]... disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious" (1 Peter 2:1-4). Surely Peter knew what it was to be "disallowed indeed of men." Those "in the know" in his time regarded him as unlearned and "ignorant" (Acts 4:13). It was Peter who boldly characterized those whom God had chosen.

But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light (1 Peter 2:9).

Peculiar, of course, in the Greek rendition should denote not eccentricity but "purchased, preserved, treasured, rare." "Purchased" denotes being "bought" and freed by Jesus' atonement.

Centuries before, the Lord remarked of His covenant people that He had "chosen [them] to be a special people" (Deuteronomy 7:6).

But any exclusivity is quickly pervaded and overwhelmed by a sense of sobering duty. Even so, the Lord said to ancient Israel, "You only have I known of all the families of the earth" (Amos 3:2).

Furthermore, where "much is given much is required" (D&C 82:3). Note that the word is not expected but required. For any people favored of God (see 2 Nephi 1:19), it is obligatory for them to favor God's way of life and to keep His stern but sweet commandments. Thus they can then be a much-needed "light unto the Gentiles" (D&C 86:11). Ways in which they are to be peculiar will include their purity (see D&C 100:16), as this quality, too, comprises a standard for other people (see D&C 115:5).

It is through those who have such extra blessings that "all families of the earth [will] be blessed" (Genesis 12:3). The chosen people are to be much less caught up in the cares of the world as they seek "first to build up the kingdom of God, and to establish his righteousness" (JST Matthew 6:38).

The Lord's chosen are also not to be barren but are to "bring forth fruit" (John 15:16); not only in terms of missionary work but also the visible fruits of gospel living. This is to be achieved even though the persons and the people thus chosen are to live amid perverse nations as wheat among the tares. (Philippians 2:15.) Such Saints are to eschew secular power and instead are to be "armed with righteousness" (1 Nephi 14:14). They are, likewise, to "bring to pass the gathering of mine elect" (D&C 29:7).

Again, "of him unto whom much is given much is required" (D&C 82:3), including the requirement that "Zion must increase in beauty, and in holiness" (D&C 82:14).

One cannot review scriptures such as the foregoing without a duality of feelings: feelings of responsibility toward God and feelings regarding His generosity extended to us.

Clearly, in this respect the dispensation of the fulness of times is different from all the others. The stone cut out of the mountain without hands, as foreseen by Daniel (Daniel 2:34, 44), is to grow until one day it will the wilderness and out of obscurity (see D&C 1:30; 5:14). Thus with the ending of obscurity and the simultaneous increase in visibility, disciples in the last days will experience both special opportunities and special challenges.

Faithful Latter-day disciples, however, were—men and women alike—carefully chosen and prepared long, long ago:

And this is the manner after which they were ordained—being called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and good works; in the first place being left to choose good or evil; therefore they having chosen good, and exercising exceeding great faith, are called with a holy calling, yea, with that holy calling which was prepared with, and according to, a preparatory redemption for such (Alma 13:3).

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born. (Abraham 3:22, 23.)

According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love (Ephesians 1:4).

Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied (1 Peter 1:2).

The Prophet Joseph Smith, and my father, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and other choice spirits who were reserved to come forth in the fulness of times to take part in laying the foundations of the great latter-day work,

Including the building of the temples and the performance of ordinances therein for the redemption of the dead, were also in the spirit world.

I observed that they were also among the noble and great ones who were chosen in the beginning to be rulers in the Church of God.

Even before they were born, they, with many others, received their first lessons in the world of spirits and were prepared to come forth in the due time of the Lord to labor in his vineyard for the salvation of the souls of men. (D&C 138:53-56.)

Pondering such verses as these evokes humble gratitude but also wonderment. They can freshen and stiffen one's determination to rise to his or her moment in history and to be in the world but not of it.

Words like "chosen" and "prepared" and "received their first lessons in the world of spirits" brace us as we are now being further prepared and are now receiving our second lessons in the second estate.

As the human scene attests, there is ample need for the contributions to mankind of all who are "chosen to be a special people." Their meekness will drain off the considerations of ego. Their love can enclose the absolute truths they bear and would share with their fellowmen. The eloquence of their example will compensate for any slowness of speech.

The only aristocracy the world has nothing to fear from is an aristocracy of Saints, for their access to the powers of heaven is predicated upon their personal righteousness. And their imperfections are eroded, albeit slowly, in their striving to become like their King.
