THE PEOPLE EAGER TO HEAR US--WE RENT "THE COCK PIT" TO PREACH
IN--OBTAIN LICENSES TO PREACH--CONTINUED SUCCESS.

About this time, Brother Snider returned from the north, where he had been laboring in company with Brother Russell. He stated that they had met with considerable opposition while preaching the gospel, but that some had obeyed the truth and that others were investigating.

After spending a few days with us, he and Brother Goodson took their leave of us and started for Liverpool about the first of October, on their way to America, having business of importance which called them home.

Although we were deprived of the labors of these brethren, the work of the Lord continued to roll forth with great power. The news of our arrival in that city, spread both far and wide, and calls from all quarters, to go and preach, were constantly sounding in our ears. We labored both night and day, that we might satisfy the people, who manifested such a desire for the truth as I never saw before.

We had to speak in small houses, to very large congregations, or else, to large assemblies in the open air; consequently, our lungs were very sore and our bodies considerably worn down with fatigue.

Soon after this, we obtained a large and commodious place to preach in, called "The Cock Pit," which had formerly been used by the people to witness cocks fight and kill one another, and where hundreds of spectators had shouted in honor of the barbarous sport which was once the pride of Britains. And now, instead of the huzzas of the wicked and profane, the gospel of Christ and the voice of praise and thanksgiving was heard there. The building had also been used for a temperance hall.

We had to pay seven shillings sterling per week for the use of it, and two shillings per week for the lighting, it being beautifully lit up with gas. It is situated in the center of the town, and about twenty rods from the "old church," probably the oldest in Lancashire. This church has twelve bells which are rung at every service, the noise of which was so great that we were unable to proceed in our services until they had done ringing them.

Our meeting was once disturbed by some ministers belonging to the Methodist church; however we got our place licensed and two gentlemen, who were constables, proffered their services to keep the peace and protect us from any further disturbances, which they continued to do, as long as we stayed in that land.

The effect of the gospel of Jesus Christ now began to be apparent, not only in the hearts of believers, but likewise in the conduct of those who rejected it and many began to threaten us with prosecution for preaching without having a license from the authorities of the nation.

This idea of obtaining a license from the secular authorities was somewhat novel to us, but after consulting our friends, among whom was Mr. Richards' son, (the minister of whom I have made mention) an attorney, practicing in that neighborhood, we found that it was according to the laws of the land.

Brother Hyde and I then made application to the quarter sessions for licenses and, by the assistance of Mr. Richards, obtained them.

Having now obeyed the requisitions of the law, we felt ourselves tolerably safe, knowing that our enemies now could not lawfully make us afraid or harm us.

Although we had many persecutors, who would have rejoiced at our destruction and who felt a determination to overthrow the work of the Lord, there were many who were very friendly, who would have stood by us under all circumstances, and would not have been afraid to hazard their lives in our behalf.

After we had labored for some time in Preston, and had baptized a number into the kingdom of God, Brother Hyde and I went about ten miles into the country to preach, agreeably to an invitation we had received. We preached twice to very numerous congregations, who paid great attention to our word, and who marveled at the things we proclaimed. We soon returned to Preston after which I paid a visit to the church at Walker Fold, that being the name of the place where the Rev. Mr. Richards resided. I found the church prospering, and after laboring a few days, several more were added. From that place I went to Bashe Lees, where I preached, and baptized two persons. I continued my journey thence to Ribchester, situated on the river Ribble, where I preached to a very large congregation, and then returned to Preston.

Having had some very pressing calls to go to some villages south of Preston, I accordingly started to visit those places, in company with Brother F. Moon, who had been baptized a short time previous. On arriving at our destination we gave out an appointment to preach, and, at the time appointed, the people flocked in crowds to hear me. Among the number were five preachers, who listened with great interest to my discourse, and who, with the greater part of the congregation, believed the doctrines I advanced.

The next day I went to a village called Askin, and preached in the evening; and the following day went to Eccleston, where I had the privilege of preaching in a Methodist chapel. The last three times I preached I baptized ten individuals, of whom two were preachers belonging to the Association Methodists.

After spending several days in that neighborhood I returned to Preston, where the church had now become numerous, and with the assistance of Elders Hyde and Fielding, proceeded to organize them. We divided the church into several branches, and appointed proper officers to preside over them.

Thursday evenings were appointed for prayer meetings to be held in different parts, and Sundays for the whole church to assemble in the Cock Pit, where the sacrament was administered, and such instructions given as were thought necessary for their spiritual prosperity and advantage.

While attending to this, the greatest harmony and love prevailed; and if ever any persons received the kingdom of heaven like little children it was those brethren.

After having attended to this duty, I again went into the country, where I spent the principal part of my time, occasionally visiting Preston.

During my labors, I was greatly assisted by the Spirit of the Lord, and my soul was comforted exceedingly. Churches were raised up in different directions, and many who had previously sat in darkness, upon them the true light shined, and before its benign and enlightening rays, the mists of darkness, the clouds of error and superstition fled; while "those who murmured learned doctrine, and those who erred in spirit came to understanding."

I was instrumental in building up churches in Eccleston, Wrightington, Askin, Exton, Daubers Lane, Chorly, Whittle and Laland Moss, after laboring about four weeks, and baptized upwards of one hundred persons, which caused me to rejoice exceedingly in the God and Rock of my salvation, that I had not to labor in vain, or spend my strength for nought. More loving and affectionate Saints I never saw before, and they were patterns of humility.

All the here-mentioned villages are within a very short distance of each other, and adjacent to Preston.

After my return from those places, I took a tour to the north-east of Preston in company with Elder Fielding, where we labored together a short time with considerable success, and raised up churches in Ribchester, Thomly, Soney Gate Lane and at Clitheroe, a very large market town, containing several thousand inhabitants.

At the latter place I baptized a preacher and six members of the Methodist church, immediately after I had preached the first time. We likewise baptized several in the town of Waddington and Downham.

The day after we preached in Downham, we received a very pressing invitation to preach in Chatburn, but having given out an appointment to preach in Clitheroe that evening, I informed those who had invited me that I would not be able to comply with their request. This did not satisfy them, and they continued to solicit me with the greatest importunity, until I was obliged to consent to go with them, after requesting Elder Fielding to attend to the other appointment.

On my arrival at the village I was cordially received by the inhabitants, who turned out in large numbers to hear me preach. I commenced my address to them in my usual manner, and the spirit of the Lord seemed to carry the word to the hearts of the congregation, who listened with great attention, and received the ingrafted word, which was able to make them wise unto salvation.

Being satisfied in my mind, from the witness of the spirit, that numbers were believing, I gave an opportunity to those who wished to obey the gospel to do so, and immediately repaired to the water, although it was late in the evening. Before I was done I baptized twenty-five for the remission of their sins, and was engaged in this pleasing duty until one o'clock, the next morning.

After being absent from Preston about seven days, in which time we had added eighty-three souls to the Church, we returned, praising God for all His mercies, and for visiting our labors with such abundant success.

  "No harvest joy can equal theirs
  Who see the fruit of all their cares."
