OUR LODGINGS--WANTS SUPPLIED BY LIBERALITY OF SAINTS--JOURNEY
TO LIVERPOOL--CONTRAST BETWEEN ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE--RETURN
VOYAGE--MEETING WITH ELDERS AND SAINTS AT NEW YORK--ARRIVAL AT KIRTLAND.

During our stay in Preston, we made our home at the house of Sister Dawson, in Pole Street. We purchased our provisions, and she cooked them for us, which is quite customary in that country. For our room, lodging and cooking and a good coal fire, we each paid the sum of two shillings sterling per week, which is but little more than half the usual charge. Sister Dawson was very kind to us. Indeed the hearts of all the Saints were open to liberality, and according to their circumstances they contributed liberally of their substance, and many blessings of a temporal nature we received from them, for which I pray that my Heavenly Father may reward them a hundred fold in this world, and in the world to come with life everlasting.

During the time we labored in England, we made no public contributions except for the poor. When we were about taking our departure, the Church, knowing that we had no means to carry us to our native land, with a liberality characteristic of them, contributed to our necessities and provided us with means to take us as far as Kirtland, Ohio. The next day, being the ninth of April, we engaged our passage to Liverpool in a coach, which was to start at twelve o'clock the same day. At the time appointed we were at the place of starting, and were soon surrounded with the brethren, who felt determined to see us leave, many of whose countenances clearly showed their sorrow at our departure. However, we had to bid them farewell, and were soon out of sight. Their eyes followed us as long as they could see us.

Notwithstanding the variegated scenery of the country, which in England is very beautiful, my mind reverted back to the time when I first arrived in that country, and the peculiar feelings I had when I traveled from Liverpool to Preston some months before. Then I was a stranger in a strange land, and had nothing to rely upon but the kindness and mercy of that God who had sent me there. While I mused on these things my soul was humbled within me, and I had to exclaim, "Surely this is the Lord's doings, and marvelous in my eyes!" for then I had hundreds of brethren to whom I was united in bonds the most endearing and sacred, and who loved me as their own souls, and whose prayers would be continually offered up for my welfare and prosperity.

After a ride of about four hours, we arrived at Liverpool and ascertained that the ship in which we intended to sail would not leave that port as early as we expected, in consequence of a great storm which had taken place, in which several vessels had been wrecked and a number of lives lost. We took lodgings a few days until the vessels should depart.

While in Liverpool, we were waited upon by Elders Fielding and Richards, who, feeling desirous to obtain all the information they could procure respecting the government of the church, thought that it would be a favorable time to do so, as our opportunities of instruction had been but limited while in Preston, and it being almost impossible to have much private intercourse, there being so many who wished to converse with us on the subject of the gospel, etc. But in this thing they were disappointed, for as soon as it was known in Preston and regions round about that our departure was delayed, numbers of the brethren came from thence to visit us in Liverpool before we left their shores.

On the 20th, we went on board the ship Garrick (the same ship in which we came), bound for New York, and the same day got under way. Soon after we left Liverpool a great storm came on, with a head wind, and continued without cessation for several days, which did considerable damage to the vessel. The bowsprit was broken twice by the force of the wind with only the gib sail set. The boom likewise came down with great force near the place where the captain was standing, but he fortunately escaped without injury. Several other parts of the rigging were much torn and injured. During the time the storm lasted, Brothers Hyde and Russell were very sick. After this we had more favorable weather.

When we had been on the water two weeks, I asked permission of the captain for one of us to preach, which request was cheerfully complied with, and the second cabin was prepared for the occasion. Brother Russell preached, after which Brother Hyde made some observations. The discourses were listened to with great attention, and the congregation appeared very much satisfied.

The Lord gave us favor in the eyes of the captain and the passengers, who treated us with respect and kindness. Those who were in the same cabin with ourselves, and with whom we had more frequent opportunities of conversing, treated us like brothers, and took pleasure in administering to our wants, and told us if they had anything we needed it was at our service. I hardly ever remembered traveling with more agreeable or kind-hearted people, and I pray that the Lord may bless them abundantly and reward them a hundred fold for all the kindness shown to His servants.

Nothing very particular occurred during the remainder of the passage. The weather for the most part was favorable. On the twelfth day of May we came in sight of New York, and in the evening we secured a landing, after a passage of twenty-two and one-half days. The ship New England, which left Liverpool on the same day we did, came in about one hour afterwards.

The sight of my native land filled my soul with gladness. We then went into the city with several of the passengers, who purchased some refreshments, and after we returned bade us partake with them, and we rejoiced together. We then bowed before the Lord and offered up the gratitude of our hearts for all His mercies, in prospering us in our mission and bringing us safely across the mighty deep, to behold once more the land of our nativity, and the prospect of soon embracing our families and friends.

The next morning we went in search of Brother Fordham, whom we found after some trouble. He was rejoiced to see us and immediately took us to the house of Brother Mace, where we were glad to see our beloved Brother Orson Pratt, who was then laboring in that city, and who with Elder Parley P. Pratt, his brother, had been instrumental in bringing many into the kingdom in that city, which intelligence gave us great joy, for when we left New York for England, there was only one belonging to the church in that city.

It being Sunday, we accompanied the Brothers Pratt to the house where the Saints were accustomed to assemble for worship. On entering the house we found about eighty persons assembled, all of whom had recently joined the Church. After singing and prayer, I was requested to give an account of our mission to England. I accordingly arose and told them the things which had happened to us since our departure, and the great and glorious work which our Heavenly Father had commenced on the islands of the sea, and the great desire of the English to hear the things which the Lord had brought to pass on this continent, and their ready reception of the truth of the gospel.

The information gave great joy to the Saints, and they united with us in praising the name of the Lord for His wonderful works for the children of men.

In the evening Elders Russell and Hyde preached, and a great effect was produced, and some came forward and offered themselves as candidates for baptism.

The short time we were in New York was spent very agreeably with the Saints, who were indeed a kind and affectionate people. The next day we bade adieu to the brethren and commenced our journey to Kirtland by steamboat and railroad, and arrived there on the twenty-second day of May, A. D 1838, having been absent eleven months and nine days.
