FAR WEST BESIEGED--JOSEPH SMITH AND BRETHREN BETRAYED BY
APOSTATES--ATROCITIES OF MOB--CONVERSATION WITH W. E.
M'LELLIN--EXTERMINATION SPEECH OF GENERAL CLARK.

Before I proceed farther with my narrative, it may perhaps be as well to revert to some other things that transpired in Missouri:

After witnessing the death of D. W. Patten, I took Dr. Avard with me to Far West, a distance of three miles, to Elder Rigdon's house, where we found Brother Patrick O'Banion, who was shot in nearly the same place as Brother Patten (he was a member of Zion's Camp in 1834). He also died in a short time, firm and steadfast in the faith, was perfectly calm and composed, and bore a strong testimony to the truth of "Mormonism."

Gideon Carter, who was also a faithful Saint, was shot in the head and left dead on the ground, so defaced that the brethren did not at first know him.

This was a gloomy time!

On the 30th of October, 1838, we discovered several thousand of the mob coming to Far West, under pretense of being government troops. They passed through our corn and wheat fields, making a complete desolation of every thing in their way.

Brother Brigham Young and I were appointed captains of fifty, in a hurry, and commanded to take our position right in the thoroughfare on which the mob were seen advancing to the city, momentarily anticipating the awful tragedy of a bloody massacre. Joseph was with us, giving counsel.

The army came up to good rifle shot distance and halted. Seeing our temporary fortifications, which we had thrown up the night previous, by pulling down some of our houses, and fixing up our wagon, they dared not approach nearer, but retreated back to Goose Creek, about three-fourths of a mile, screaming, hallooing and screeching. The mob afterwards declared there were fifteen hundred of us stationed there to prevent their approach, but to my certain knowledge there were only about one hundred and fifty in that line.

The word came that Joseph Smith and several others were to be given up; otherwise the mob would massacre every man, woman and child.

In order to prevent the execution of this threat, Joseph gave himself up, with Elders Sidney Rigdon, P. P. Pratt, Lyman Wight and George W. Robinson, they having been betrayed into the camp by Col. George M. Hinkle and other apostates.

On the 1st of November, the mob, professing to be the regular militia of the State of Missouri, numbering about seven thousand, surrounded Far West. Our men were all taken prisoners and then marched a short distance into a hollow, where Col. Lucas had previously pointed his cannon in full range, so that if we failed to lay down our arms, he could easily sweep us into eternity, which was his design. We were then formed into a hollow square and commanded by Col. Lucas to ground arms and deliver up our weapons of war, although they were our own private property. After being marched back a short distance, on the public square, we were again formed into a hollow square, near the house of Widow Beeman.

The mob commenced plundering the citizens of their bedding, money, wearing apparel and everything of value they could lay their hands upon. Much property was destroyed by the burning of houses, logs, rails, corn cribs, boards, etc., the using of corn and hay, the killing of cattle, sheep and hogs, etc., and all this without regard to owners, or asking leave of any one. In the meantime, men were abused, and women insulted, and treated with violence by the troops, while the men were kept prisoners.

We were compelled at the point of the bayonet to sign a deed of trust for the purpose of making our individual property liable, as they said, to pay all the debts of persons belonging to the Church, and also for all damages the old inhabitants of Daviess County might have sustained in consequence of the late difficulties in that County.

When General Clark arrived, the first important move made by him, was collecting our men together on the square, and selecting about fifty of them, whom he immediately marched into a house and confined closely. This was done without the aid of the sheriff or any legal process.

The next day, forty-six of those taken, with the Prophet Joseph, were driven, like a parcel of menial slaves, off to Richmond, not knowing why they were taken.

When these troops surrounded us, and we were brought into a hollow square, the first persons that I knew, were men who had once professed to be our brethren. They were the men who piloted the mob into our city, namely: William E. McLellin and Lyman E. Johnson, two of the Twelve; John Whitmer and David Whitmer, two of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon; William W. Phelps, and scores of others, "hail fellows, well met."

A portion of the troops were painted like Indians, and looked horrible. They were led by Niel Gillum, who styled himself "the Delaware chief," who, with many others, cocked his gun upon us and swore he would blow our brains out, although we were disarmed and helpless.

William E. McLellin inquired where Heber C. Kimball was, and some one pointed me out to him. I was sitting on the ground. When he came up to me, he said, "Brother Heber, what do you think of Joseph Smith, the fallen prophet, now? Has he not led you blindfolded long enough? Look and see yourself poor, your family stripped and robbed, and your brethren in the same fix. Are you not satisfied with Joseph?"

I replied, "Yes, I am more satisfied a hundred fold than I was before; for I see you in the very position that he foretold you would be in--a Judas to betray your brethren, if you did not forsake your adultery, fornication, lying and abominations. Where are you? What are you about--you, and Hinkle, and scores of others? Have you not betrayed Joseph and his brethren into the hands of the mob, as Judas did Jesus? Yes, verily, you have! I tell you 'Mormonism' is true, and Joseph is a true Prophet of the living God, and you with all others that turn therefrom will be damned and go to hell, and Judas will rule over you!"

Soon after this, when things began to be a little more quiet, I desired to go to my home to get something to eat, many of us not having eaten any food for twenty-four hours. I asked some of the mob standing near if I could have the privilege of going to my house, a little distance off. They referred me to their captain, who was Bogart, the Methodist preacher. I went to him and told him what I wanted. He first spoke of sending some one with me, as I would be liable to be shot if found alone. In a short time, however, he said, "I will go with you."

He went down to my house, and my wife got some dinner and he ate with me; then we returned, and I again took my seat on the ground with my brethren who were under guard.

The next day I was permitted to return to my home, but told that I need not try to leave the city as it was surrounded with a strong guard to prohibit any one leaving the place. The mob were engaged taking every man a prisoner who seemed to have any influence, and putting him in chains to await a trial.

It was rumored that all the men who were in the Crooked River battle would be taken prisoners; therefore, many of them fled to the north before the guards were placed around the city.

The 6th of November, General Clark delivered his noted extermination speech, and read over the names of fifty-six brethren who were made prisoners, to await a trial for something they knew not what.

In order that the tyrant may not be forgotten, I insert a portion of his speech:

"GENTLEMEN:--You whose names are not attached to this list of names, will now have the privilege of going to your fields, and of providing corn, wood, etc., for your families. Those who are now taken will go from this to prison, be tried and receive the due demerit of their crimes; but you, (except such as charges may hereafter be preferred against,) are at liberty, as soon as the troops are removed that now guard the place, which I shall cause to be done immediately. It now devolves upon you to fulfil a treaty that you have entered into, the leading items of which I shall now lay before you. The first requires that your leading men be given up to be tried according to law; this you already have complied with. The second is, that you deliver up your arms; this has been attended to. The third stipulation is that you sign over your properties to defray the expenses of the war. This you have also done. Another article yet remains for you to comply with--and that is, that you leave the State forth with. And whatever may be your feelings concerning this, or whatever your innocence, it is nothing to me. General Lucas (whose military rank is equal with mine,) has made this treaty with you; I approve of it. I should have done the same had I been here. I am therefore determined to see it executed. The character of this State has suffered almost beyond redemption, from the character, conduct and influence that you have exerted; and we deem it an act of justice to restore her character to its former standing among the States by every proper means. The orders of the governor to me were, that you should be exterminated, and not allowed to remain in the State. And had not your leaders been given up, and the terms of the treaty complied with, before this time you and your families would have been destroyed, and your houses in ashes. There is a discretionary power vested in my hands, which, considering your circumstances, I shall exercise for a season. You are indebted to me for this clemency. I do not say that you shall go now, but you must not think of staying here another season or of putting in crops; for the moment you do this the citizens will be upon you; and if I am called here again in case of non-compliance of a treaty made, do not think that I shall do as I have done now. You need not expect any mercy, but extermination, for I am determined the governor's order shall be executed. As for your leaders, do not think, do not imagine for a moment, do not let it enter into your minds, that they will be delivered and restored to you again, for their fate is fixed, their die is cast, their doom is sealed. I am sorry, gentlemen, to see so many apparently intelligent men found in the situation that you are; and oh! if I could invoke that Great Spirit, THE UNKNOWN GOD, to rest upon and deliver you from that awful chain of superstition, and liberate you from those fetters of fanaticism with which you are bound--that you no longer do homage to a man. I would advise you to scatter abroad, and never again organize yourselves with Bishops, Presidents, etc., lest you excite the jealousies of the people and subject yourselves to the same calamities that have now come upon you. You have always been the aggressors--you have brought upon yourselves these difficulties, by being disaffected, and not being subject to rule. And my advice is, that you become as other citizens, least by a recurrence of these events you bring upon yourselves irretrievable ruin."

He also said, "You must not be seen as many as five together; if you are, the citizens will be upon you and destroy you, but you should flee immediately out of the State. There is no alternative for you but to flee; you need not expect any redress; there is none for you."

I was present when that speech was delivered, and I can truly say that he is a liar and the truth is not in him, for not one of us had made any such agreement with Lucas, or any other person. What we did was by compulsion in every sense of the word; and as for General Clark and his unknown god, they had nothing to do with our deliverance; but it was our Father in heaven, the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob, in whom we trust, who liveth and dwelleth in the heavens; and the day will come when our God will hold him in derision, with all of his coadjutors.
