PERILS OF THE PEOPLE--CHEERFULNESS OF THE SAINTS AMIDST THEIR
TROUBLES--VISIT OUR BRETHREN IN PRISON--APOSTLES ORDAINED--MOCK
DISTRIBUTION OF STATE APPROPRIATION--LETTER FROM JOSEPH SMITH
AND BRETHREN IN PRISON--INDIFFERENCE OF STATE OFFICIALS TO OUR
APPEALS--WORD OF THE LORD TO ME.

One afternoon, I sent my son William a short distance on an errand, when, on his return, one of the guards drew up his rifle and threatened to blow out his brains if he stepped one inch further towards the house. Through the agency of some of my brethren, I was notified of it. I went to the man and spoke to him in a friendly manner, and conversed with him about the beautiful country, it being more beautiful than England and the nations I had been traveling in.

He became very much interested, and in a short time I pointed out my son William, who had stood still for some time after being warned not to approach, and was cold, as it was then dusk and the weather severe. Said I, "That is my son."

"Oh!" he said, "if that is one of your sons, he may pass; he may go home."

Afterwards the man left his post and came to my house and spent the evening and several times afterwards, and became very friendly, and told me he wished I would leave the "Mormons," as he liked me, and could not bear the thought of my following them with my family, for we were too good for them.

I merely mention this to show the perils we were in, men, women and children, with death and destruction waiting on us, and this spirit aroused by apostates.

The murders, house burnings, robberies, rapes, drivings, whippings, imprisonments, chainings and other sufferings and cruelties inflicted upon the people of God under illegal orders of Missouri's executive, have been only in part laid before the world, and form a page in history unparalleled in the records of religious persecution. This historic page alone can credit Lilburn W. Boggs and his minions with feeding the ministers of the proscribed religion on the flesh of their murdered brethren, the odium of which crime is shared fully by the professed ministers of different denominations who participated in these vile atrocities! If hell can furnish a parallel, where is it?

For me to undertake to write what I saw, and felt and realized, I should utterly fail for lack of ability; I must let eternity reveal the scenes of those days. I can say before God, angels, heaven and earth, that I am innocent of violating any law of the State of Missouri, and I can say that my brethren are as pure and clean as I am, innocent and virtuous, true to their God and their country. With the measure they meted to the Latter-day Saints, it shall be measured to them again, or upon all those who had a hand in our persecution and expulsion, and those who consented to it, four fold, full, pressed down, and running over shall be their portion; and as the Lord God Almighty liveth, I shall live to see it come to pass. [A]

When we walked up to sign the deeds of trust to pay these assassins for murdering our brethren and sisters and their children, ravishing some of our sisters to death, robbing us of our lands and possessions and all we had on earth, and other such services, they expected to see us cast down and sorrowful; but I testify as an eye-witness that the brethren rejoiced and praised the Lord and kicked up their heels, and thanked God, taking joyfully the despoiling of their goods. There were judges, magistrates and Methodist, Presbyterian, Campbellite and other sectarian priests who stood by and saw all this going on, exulting over us, and it seemed to make them more angry that we bore our misfortunes so cheerfully. Judge Cameron said, with an oath, "See them creatures laugh and kick up their heels! They are whipped but not conquered."

I have no doubt that I would have been taken a prisoner had the mob known me, but I had not been there but three weeks when the mobbing commenced, and was only known by the brethren, and many of them I had not seen during my brief residence there. The mob had not become acquainted with Brother Brigham, either, as he lived three or four miles from the city on Mill Creek.

After the mob departed, I accompanied Brother Brigham to Richmond jail to see our brethren. We found Joseph, Hyrum, Sidney and others chained together in one room, and others confined in other places among the worst demons living out of hell. We scarcely had the privilege of speaking to our brethren more than to say, "How do you do?" every eye being upon us with suspicion. We put up at a public house for the night, and I bear testimony, from our feelings and the spirit manifested in that house, that there were legions of devils present. I do not think that either of us slept any that night.

On the 13th of December, Elder Brigham Young and I reorganized the High Council at Far West, when we expressed our fellowship with all those who desired to do right, and filled the vacancies occasioned by those brethren who had to flee from Missouri to save their lives.

On the 19th of December, 1838, Brother Brigham and I ordained Elders John Taylor and John E. Page Apostles.

The legislature of the State of Missouri appropriated two thousand dollars, to be distributed among the people of Daviess and Caldwell Counties, the "Mormons" not excepted. Judge Cameron, Mr. McHenry and others attended to the distribution. Judge Cameron drove in the hogs belonging to the brethren (many of which were identified), shot them down in the street, and without further bleeding, they were half dressed, cut up and distributed by Mr. McHenry to the poor, at the rate of four and five cents per pound, which, together with a few pieces of refuse calicoes at double and treble prices, soon consumed the appropriation.

I received the following letter from the Prophet and his brethren while they were in prison.

"LIBERTY,

"Jan. 16th, 1839.

"BROTHERS H. C. KIMBALL AND B. YOUNG:

"Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith, prisoners for Jesus' sake, send greeting:--In obedience to your request in your letter, we say to you as follows: It is not wisdom for you to go out of Caldwell with your families yet for a little season; until we are out of prison; after which you may act at your pleasure; but though you take your families out of the State, it will be necessary for you to return, and leave as before designed, on the 26th of April.

"Inasmuch as we are in prison, for a little season, if need be, the management of the affairs of the Church devolves on you, that is the Twelve.

"The gathering of necessity is stopped; but the conversion of the world need not stop, but under wise management can go on more rapidly than ever.

"Where churches are built, let them continue where they are, until a door is open to do otherwise, and let every Elder occupy his own ground, and when he builds a church, let him preside over it, and let not others run in to trouble him; and thus let every man prove himself unto God, that he is worthy. If we live, we live; and if we die for the testimony of Jesus, we die; but whether we live or die, let the work of God go on.

"Let the churches in England continue there till further orders--till a door can be opened for them, except they choose to come to America, and take their chance with the Saints here. If they will do that, let them come; and if they choose to come, they would do well to send their wise men before them, and buy out Kirtland, and the regions round about, or they may settle where they can till things may alter.

"It will be necessary for you to get the Twelve together, ordain such as have not been ordained, or at least such of them as you can get, and proceed to regulate the Elders as the Lord may give you wisdom. We nominate George A. Smith and Lyman Sherman to take the places of Orson Hyde and Thomas B. Marsh.

"Brethren, fear not, but be strong in the Lord and in the power of His might. What is man that the servant of God should fear him, or the son of man, that he should tremble at him. Neither think it strange concerning the fiery trials with which we are tried, as though some strange thing had happened unto us. Remember that all have been partakers of like afflictions. Therefore, rejoice in our afflictions, by which you are perfected and through which the Captain of our Salvation was perfected also. Let your hearts and the hearts of all the Saints be comforted with you, and let them rejoice exceedingly, for great is our reward in heaven, for so the wicked persecuted the prophets which were before us. America will be a Zion to all that choose to come to it; and if the churches in foreign countries wish to come, let them do so. Say to brother P. P. Pratt that our feelings accord with his; he is as we are, and we as he. May peace rest upon him in life and in death.

"Brethren, pray for us, and cease not till our deliverance comes, which we hope may come. We hope, we say, for our families' sake.

"Let the Elders preach nothing but the first principles of the gospel, and let them publish our afflictions--the injustice and cruelty thereof, upon the house tops. Let them write it and publish it in all the papers where they go. Charge them particularly on this point.

"Brethren we remain yours in hope of eternal life,

"SIDNEY RIGDON.

"JOSEPH SMITH JR.

"HYRUM SMITH.

"N. B. Appoint the oldest of those of the Twelve, who were first appointed, to be the president of your quorum.

"J. S.

"S. R.

"H. S."

On the 7th of February, 1839, I accompanied Brother Brigham to Liberty, to visit Joseph and the brethren in prison. We had the privilege of going in to see and converse with them. We stayed at Liberty over night, and the next morning we were permitted to visit the prisoners again, while they were at breakfast. We returned during the day to Far West.

When we left there, Lyman Sherman was somewhat unwell, and in a few days after our return he died. We did not notify him of his appointment.

I fitted up a small wagon, procured a span of ponies, and sent my wife and three children out of the State in company with Brother Brigham Young and his family, and several others, who left Far West February 14th. Everything my family took with them out of Missouri, could have been packed on the backs of two horses; the mob took all the rest.

Being a stranger in Missouri, I was requested by Joseph, Brigham and others to tarry and assist the committee in getting the brethren and families out of the State, and in waiting upon those brethren who were confined in prison.

On the 12th of March, I wrote to Joseph Fielding, Liverpool, England, saying: "I have only received two letters from you since I have come here. If you knew the feelings I have for the welfare of that people, your pen would not be so idle. May God stir you up to diligence to feed the sheep of God; for they are children of my begetting through the gospel. Think it not strange that I speak thus; for you know the feelings that a father has for his children.

"Now, brethren, be faithful and visit the churches, and exhort the Saints to be faithful in all things, and not lay down their watch for a moment; for there is great danger of falling beneath the powers of darkness. Don't think hard of me, brethren, for my plainness, for I am a plain man, and God requires it of me, and the same of you. Don't keep the Saints in ignorance of those things I have made you acquainted with--that is, our sufferings, for they will know them when I come, and they will have to pass through similar scenes. Don't be selfish; for it will not impoverish you to tell them all that I tell you.

"Your sister Mary left here about eight weeks ago, also the rest of the wives of the prisoners, thinking that they would be out in a few days. There are ten in prison; they are all well and in good spirits. I am going to see them to-morrow if the Lord will.

"Mobs are common in this country; it is getting so that there is no safety anywhere in this land. Prepare yourselves for trouble wherever you go, for it awaits you and all others that love the Lord and keep His commandments.

"Brethren, I want you to go to the north where Brother Russell labored, and see what situation the Saints are in, for I have some fears about them. Go and strengthen them in the name of the Lord. * * * * * *

"Brethren, I can truly say that I have never seen the Church in a better state since I have been a member of it. What there are left are firm and steadfast, full of love and good works. They have lost all their earthly goods, and are now ready to go and preach the gospel to a dying world. We have ordained about one hundred Elders into the Seventies. There are about one hundred and fifty who have gone into the vineyard this winter to preach the gospel, and many more will go in the spring, and several will come to England with me in the summer or fall. Elder Rigdon was bailed out of prison, and has left Missouri. About ten thousand had gathered to this State. By the 1st of May next there will not be one left who has any faith. Not one-fourth part had any teams to move with, and we had two hundred miles to travel before we could get out of the State. I think their deliverance is a great miracle."

About this time, Orson Hyde came to me, feeling very sorrowful for the course he had pursued the past few months. He said it was because of fear, and that he lamented his folly, and he asked me what he should do. I told him to give up his school, remove his family and gather with the Church. He wanted to know if I thought the brethren would forgive him. I said, "Yes."

He then asked, "Will you defend my case?" and I promised him I would.

On the 15th, the Prophet Joseph and others petitioned Judge Tompkins, or either of the supreme judges of the State of Missouri, for a States writ of habeas corpus, that he and his brethren might be brought before either of those judges, that justice might be administered. I was requested by Joseph to go to Jefferson and present the petition.

Theodore Turley accompanied me. We took copies of the papers by which the prisoners were held, with the petition to the supreme judges, and immediately started a distance of three hundred miles. We visited the judges, and laid the whole matter before them individually, according to our best ability. Neither of them would take any action in the case, although they appeared friendly and acknowledged that they were illegally imprisoned. We also presented a petition to the secretary of state, the governor being absent. He appeared very kind, but like the other officers, he had no power to do good.

We immediately returned to Liberty, where we arrived on the 3rd, and made Joseph and the prisoners acquainted with the result of our mission--through the gate of the dungeon, as we were not permitted to enter the prison.

Joseph told us to be of good cheer, for the Lord would deliver him and his brethren in due time. He also told us to advise the brethren to keep up their spirits, and get all the Saints away as fast as possible.

In company with Brother Turley, I visited Judge Austin A. King, who was vexed at us for presenting his illegal papers to the supreme judges. He treated us very roughly.

I returned to Far West April 5th, and remained a few days. My family having been gone about two months (during which time I heard nothing from them), our brethren being in prison, and death and destruction following us wherever we went, I felt very sorrowful and lonely. While in this condition, the following words came to my mind, and the Spirit said unto me, "write." I obeyed by taking a piece of paper and writing on my knee, as follows:

"FAR WEST,

"April 6, 1839.

"A Word from the Spirit of the Lord to My Servant Heber C. Kimball:

"Verily, I say unto my servant Heber, thou art my son in whom I am well pleased; for thou art careful to hearken to my words, and not transgress my law nor rebel against my servant Joseph Smith; for thou hast a respect to the words of mine anointed, even from the least to the greatest of them; therefore, thy name is written in heaven, no more to be blotted out forever, because of these things; and this spirit and blessing shall rest down upon thy posterity forever and ever; for they shall be called after thy name, for thou shalt have many more sons and daughters, for thy seed shall be as numerous as the sands upon the sea shore. Therefore, my servant Heber, be faithful; go forth in my name and I will go with you, and be on your right hand and on your left, and my angels shall go before you and raise you up when you are cast down and afflicted. Remember that I am always with you, even to the end; therefore, be of good cheer, my son, and my Spirit shall be in your heart, to teach you the peaceable things of the kingdom. Trouble not thyself about thy family, for they are in my hands; I will feed them and clothe them and make unto them friends. They never shall want for food nor raiment, houses nor lands, fathers nor mothers, brothers nor sisters; and peace shall rest upon them forever, if thou wilt be faithful and go forth and preach my gospel to the nations of the earth; for thou shalt be blessed in this thing. Thy tongue shall be loosed to such a degree that has not entered into thy heart as yet, and the children of men shall believe thy words, and flock to the water, even as they did to my servant John; for thou shalt be great in winning souls to me, for this is thy gift and calling. And there shall be no gift withheld from thee, if thou art faithful; therefore, be faithful, and I will give thee favor in the eyes of the people. Be humble and kind, and thou shalt obtain kindness; be merciful, and thou shalt obtain mercy; and I will be with thee even unto the end. Amen."
