Brent A. Barlow, Just for Newlyweds ( 1992)

Acknowledgments

Many people contribute to publishing a book, and I wish to acknowledge and deeply thank those who have made this one a reality.

First, I would like to thank the numerous newlyweds at Brigham Young University who have been my students and shared with me their dreams and anxieties about marriage. These experiences stimulated my initial interest in writing Just for Newlyweds.

Second, my special thanks to Anne Pulley, Doug Moon, Tammi Hosman, and Carl Schreck, my teaching assistants at Brigham Young University during the past year, who have made insightful suggestions and assisted in proofreading the original manuscript. Thanks also to Chanalin Smith, receptionist in the Department of Family Sciences, for valuable suggestions. I also appreciate the support from Dr. Terrance Olson, Department Chairman, for his interest, encouragement, and friendship.

Third, I would like to thank the members of the BYU 33rd Ward, where I served as bishop during the writing and publication of this book. Most of them are newlyweds, and sharing with them their beginning years of marriage has been a wonderful experience. Ward members have made many valuable insights that have proven useful in my writing and teaching.

Fourth, special thanks to the staff at Deseret Book Company who have worked on this book. I appreciate very much the skills and talent of Richard Tice, the editor for this book. Thanks also to Sheri Dew, Director of Publishing, and Ronald Millett, President of Deseret Book Company. I am indebted to the Deseret Book team who pitched in to produce Just for Newlyweds: Bronwyn Boyd, Richard Erickson, Craig Geertsen, Linda Nimori, Richard Peterson, Anne Sheffield, Patti Taylor, and Emily Watts.

Fifth, thanks to my children at home, who noticed and tolerated the fact that dad was somewhat detached while this book was being written.

And finally, to Susan, my wife, with whom I have awaited the sea gulls while fighting the crickets for twenty-seven years—to you I give special thanks and appreciation. Thank you for allowing me to write about a few of our experiences during our early years of marriage. Thank you for your patience while I worked on yet another book. If marriages are to succeed, indeed, "some must push, and some must pull." Thank you for doing both . . . and more than your share. May we continue to push and pull our load together for the remainder of the adventurous marital journey that lies ahead.
