Brent A. Barlow, Just for Newlyweds ( 1992)

Chapter 1

Introduction

Suppose for a moment that you and your new husband or wife are planning to take a canoe trip. The trip will last several days, and you will cover about sixty miles. This canoe trip has been designed "just for newlyweds," and several hundred couples have signed up for the venture.

You meet in a large auditorium with the other couples to receive instructions on what to expect on your journey. You are excited. You hold hands as the guide begins his instructions.

The guide assures you that the journey is worthwhile. The canoes are sturdy. The currents in the river vary. The scenery will be beautiful in places and bland in others. Sometimes in the river you can just drift and still make progress. But there will also be rapids—white water—that can overturn your canoe. During these times you both must paddle with all your energy to keep your canoe from capsizing. More important during these turbulent times, both of you will have to learn to paddle together.

There is only one major problem with your canoe trip. The rapids and white water are very challenging during the first few miles, right after you have begun. As inexperienced river runners, you will immediately experience difficult times. In fact, your guide states that he wants to give you the success and failure rates of those who have begun the trip before.

* More than half who have recently begun the sixty-mile journey together did not finish. With the new spring runoff that has added to the rapids, as many as two-thirds may not finish on this particular expedition.

* Of those who do not finish, 54 percent will quit during the first five miles when they are least experienced and the rapids are very swift.

The guide stops and reiterates the challenges and difficulties that await you at the beginning of the journey. (Surely, you think, these trends and statistics apply to everyone else. But not to you. The two of you will be among those who make it. You give your partner's hand a gentle squeeze.) Your guide reassures you that the trip is worthwhile, but he wants you to know what to expect. He asks you to go home and discuss what he has told you. What equipment are you going to take? Do you both know how to paddle a canoe? What skills do each of you have in managing a canoe in rapids? Will you be able to row together when necessary during difficult times? Or, will each of you be paddling in different directions? And now that you both know something of the danger right at the beginning, what will you do differently from what you had planned? What new plans will you make? What precautions will you take before you begin? And if you do tip over, will you give up? Or will you get back in your canoe and continue the journey?

Marriage and canoe trips—is there an analogy? Could we compare sixty years of marriage to a sixty-mile canoe trip?

Launching Ourselves into Space

Let's make one other comparison. Almost all of us have watched at some time the astronauts circling the earth in their spacecraft. Through television and video cameras within the spacecraft, we have been able to watch them work and play in space. We have watched in awe at the seemingly effortless ease with which they walked in space and, years ago, even landed and walked on the moon.

Few of us are aware, however, of the long hours of preparation that astronauts make for their space flights. Furthermore, many of us do not often think of or realize the eminent danger that faces the astronauts as they are launched from earth. Truly, the most dangerous part of the space mission is during the first few minutes when astronauts are strapped into their seats, gases are ignited, lift-off begins, and the craft is thrust into space. The immediate danger of such missions was vividly demonstrated on January 26, 1986, when the spacecraft Challenger blasted off from Cape Kennedy in Florida. With the whole world watching by television, we joyfully applauded as the spacecraft left the earth. But, in just a few minutes when it was barely into orbit, the spacecraft exploded, and the entire crew was consumed in a giant fireball.

A wedding ceremony and reception are also joyful occasions. Family, neighbors, friends, and photographers gather to witness the launching and celebrate the wedding of the couple. There are even photographs in the newspaper. But what begins as a joyful and happy occasion can end up as a disaster. There is especially great danger during the first few years of marriage, right at the beginning, during lift-off.

Young couples need to prepare better and need more help during the initial phase of their marriage. With this in mind, I have written Just for Newlyweds. Perhaps this book can serve as a travel guide for those who have recently married or who are about to do so. Let me be your guide and point out both the beautiful scenery and the rapids that lie ahead. I will share with you some of the experiences Susan and I had during our early years of marriage as we learned (and are still learning!) to paddle our canoe. We too hit the rapids and white water fairly early in our marital journey.

I hope young couples who read this book will commit or recommit to the journey, make the necessary preparations, strap on their life jackets, and enjoy the scenery along the way. Even though the initial rapids are dangerous, they can also be exhilarating and exciting. Modern revelation declares, "If ye are prepared ye shall not fear." (D&C 38:30.) So, prepare . . . and enjoy the journey. You can learn to paddle together in the rapids and white water of marriage . . . no matter how many miles you have traveled.

In Deuteronomy 24:5 we read: "When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war, neither shall he be charged with any business: but he shall be free at home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken." Why was a young husband in ancient Israel not required to perform military duty during the first year of his marriage? Why was he cautioned not to become excessively involved with business or other pursuits during that important first year? Why was he admonished to stay home and be with his new wife during that time? What did the ancients know about the early years of marriage that we may not have yet learned, or perhaps failed to recognize? And finally, is the wisdom of the ancients still relevant today?

Marriage Trends for the 1990s

Few things are more exciting or uplifting than a wedding ceremony and reception for a young couple. For many, the wedding is a time of reunion as family members and friends gather together to wish the newlyweds well. Tears frequently flow as the bride and groom exchange wedding vows of commitment and loyalty. At the reception later that afternoon or evening, the new bride and groom are warmly embraced as those attending offer congratulations. The proud parents, the bridesmaids, and the groom's attendants all stand in the reception line to greet the guests. Many give gifts to help the newly married couple become established in life. After the guests are received, there is usually the traditional "getaway" as the bride and groom leave the assembled crowd to commence their life together. This wedding-day scenario, or something very similar, is repeated more than two million times each year in the United States. (In 1988, there were 2,400,000 marriages in the U.S. In Utah, there were 16,759 marriages in 1987, the last year for which statistics are available.) But what happens to these couples as they embark on their precarious journeys in life? What do many of these young men and women experience shortly after they have made serious vows and commitments to be and stay together?

Early in 1990, I was asked to address the Association of Mormon Counselors and Psychotherapists (AMCAP) at their spring convention in Salt Lake City. The title of my speech was "Strengthening Marriage: Current Status and Expectations for the Decade of the 1990s." In preparing for my talk, I reviewed some of the current trends that likely will continue into the future.

Regarding marriage, it appears that over 93 percent of the population in the United States will marry. The median age for first marriages is about 23.6 for women and 26.7 for men. Marriage continues to be one of the most popular voluntary endeavors in the United States today. No one has to marry, but just about everyone does. Getting married and having children tend to be dominant life goals in the U.S. regardless of race, religion, or ethnic identity. Even among those who divorce, 67 percent of the women and 75 percent of the men eventually remarry. In the LDS Church, marriage is understandably even more popular. Approximately 97 percent of Latter-day Saints eventually marry.

At the AMCAP meeting, I also talked about some divorce trends in the United States. Among those couples who married in the 1940s, about 24 percent are expected to divorce. Men and women marrying in the 1950s and 60s can expect a divorce rate of about 36 percent. But a pronounced shift in divorce occurred among those who have married since 1970. The majority, 53-56 percent of these couples, are now expected to legally terminate their marriage, making separation the rule rather than the exception. (See Arthur J. Norton and Jeanne E. Moorman, "Current Trends in Marriage and Divorce among American Women," Journal of Marriage and the Family 49 [February 1987]: 3-14.)

Dr. Tim Heaton, sociologist at Brigham Young University, has noted:

What the latest statistics do show is that two-thirds of the couples who married in the United States for the first time in the 1980s can expect to divorce. For many, this seems unbelievably high. What this figure takes into account is the divorce statistics for the 1980s. The figure currently tossed around is a 50 percent chance of divorce—much lower than the two-thirds rate. But what people don't know is that the statistic is based on data compiled up to 1979. It does not take the '80s into account. . . .

For LDS couples the total rate of divorce is approximately 20 percent below the national average. In the mid 1980s, when the last survey was taken, it was estimated that 35 percent of all LDS marriages would end in divorce. [The BYU demographer suspects this has risen and probably now lies somewhere between 40 to 50 percent for the LDS Church as a whole.] LDS Temple marriages are one-fifth as likely to end in divorce as nontemple marriages, although this too has probably risen since the last survey was completed in 1981. (In Carri P. Jenkins, "The Changing Family," BYU Today, March 1990, pp. 26-31; italics added. For additional information on LDS divorce trends prior to 1981, see Tim B. Heaton and Kristen L. Goodman, "LDS Church Members in the U.S. and Canada: A Demographic Profile," AMCAP Journal 12, no. 1 [1986]: 88-107; and Church News, Nov. 6, 1983.)

Remember, divorces rates of 50-67 percent for some age groups during the decade ahead are just projections and estimates. But what if they turn out to be accurate? As I suggested at the AMCAP convention, forget the exact figures. Simply stated, a large number of married couples in the United States today, perhaps the majority, will become divorced.

I also reviewed some of the trends of divorce in Utah. In 1990, there were 8,950 divorces, up from 8,110 in 1989. Apparently many divorces occur in the early years of marriage. A careful examination of divorces in Utah by duration of marriage during the years 1980-87 reveals some alarming trends:

DURATION OF MARRIAGE % OF DIVORCES* CUMULATIVE %

Less than 1 year 7.3 7.3

1st year 11.0 18.3

2nd year 11.0 29.3

3rd year 9.2 38.5

4th year 8.0 46.5

5th year 7.0 53.5

6th-l0th years 20.5 74.0

llth-15th years 10.5 84.5

16th-19th years 4.8 89.3

20th-24th years 3.9 93.2

25th-29th years 2.0 95.2

30th-34th years 1.1 96.3

35th-39th years 1.0 97.3

40 years plus .4 97.7

Not stated 2.3 100.0

*Includes annulments

(Utah's Vital Statistics, Technical Report No. 146, February 1992, and 1988 Annual Report, Bureau of Vital Records and Health Statistics, Utah Department of Health, Salt Lake City, Utah.)

From these statistics the following five points are worth noting:

One other interesting trend is evident from the statistical reports. People in the western and southern areas of the United States appear to divorce earlier than in other areas. Couples in the U.S. divorce at a median of about seven years of marriage. But the statistics vary according to geographical areas, with residents of some states divorcing earlier.

Couples in the eastern part of the United States (Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Connecticut, and Vermont) apparently wait longer, a seven to eight year median, to divorce. Other states, however (Alaska, Alabama, Wyoming, Kansas, Utah, Georgia, Idaho, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Montana), have a median of five to six years to divorce. In 1979, Utah and Wyoming led the nation in the shortest duration of marriage until divorce, each with a median of 4.8 years!

I wonder why couples in the Intermountain West opt for divorces some two years earlier than those living in the eastern part of the United States. Are they less patient? Less committed? Do they give up too early, comparatively speaking, when trying to make their marriages work?

At the conclusion of my talk at the AMCAP Convention, I suggested that during the decade of the 90s in the United States, we would likely continue to see (1) the vast majority of people getting married, (2) over half getting divorced, and (3) most of the divorces occurring within the first few years of married life. What impact these current trends will have on LDS marriages, both temple and nontemple, remains to be seen.

One of the proposals I made was that we needed to give greater aid and support to newlyweds and couples in the early years of marriage. We can help stabilize these marriages, which in the beginning stages are apparently so vulnerable to disruption. By so doing, we might also reverse some of the monumental divorce trends projected for the next decade. This book, Just for Newlyweds, is a contribution to my own proposal.
