Brent A. Barlow, Just for Newlyweds ( 1992)

Chapter 3

Sing and Dance Together

As noted in the introduction, ancient wisdom encouraged newlyweds not to get involved in so many day-to-day affairs that their married life was disrupted. (See Deut. 24:5.) The insight is also good for those married a few years as well.

Overloading Your Marriage

In his book Love for a Lifetime: Building a Marriage That Will Go The Distance, Dr. James C. Dobson, a Christian psychologist, responded to the question, What are the major "marriage killers" in contemporary marriage? His answer should be of particular interest to those recently married. He wrote:

Overcommitment and physical exhaustion. Beware of this danger. It is especially insidious for young couples who are trying to get started in a profession or in school. Do not try to go to college, work full-time, have a baby, manage a toddler, fix up a house and start a business at the same time. It sounds ridiculous, but many young couples do just that and are then surprised when their marriage falls apart. Why wouldn't it? The only time they see each other is when they are worn out! It is especially dangerous to have the husband vastly overcommitted and the wife staying home with a preschooler. Her profound loneliness builds discontent and depression, and we all know where that leads. You must reserve time for one another if you want to keep your love alive. (Portland, Oregon: Multnomah Press, 1987, p. 107.)

What are some of the stresses and strains taking heavy tolls on contemporary society? A few years ago, writer and researcher Delores Curran surveyed over six hundred people to find out. In her book Stress and the Healthy Family (Minneapolis: Winston Press, Inc., 1985), she reported that married women indicated the following ten items as top stresses, in order of priority:

Likewise, what were the top ten stresses, again in order of priority, for husbands?

Dr. Dobson's observation of the # 1 marriage killer and Delores Curran's research findings strongly suggest that being involved in too many things or projects, with the fatigue and exhaustion that follow, is a major factor in marital disruption today.

Note also that in the two lists above, the stresses for wives are not always the same as the stresses for husbands. A husband and wife may share the same house, the same children, and the same daily routines yet experience all of them quite differently. Because of these differences, husbands and wives should become aware of each other's concerns and problems. Couples can then more fully accomplish their responsibility to "bear one another's burdens" and "comfort those that stand in need of comfort." (Mosiah 18:8-9.)

Relieving the Overload

Married couples who bear burdens and stresses well, according to Dolores Curran, do the following:

3 . The healthy couple develops conflict-resolution skills and creative coping skills.

As newlyweds, what will you do when the stress and strains of life come? What will you do when your canoe hits the white water in the rapids? Almost all married couples have experiences that, in one form or another, test their marriages. What will you do when they occur for you?

A key to success is to learn not to "run faster or labor more than you have strength and means." (D&C 10:4.) How are you going to learn to conserve your strength and energy? How are you going to judge what you can and cannot handle in life?

What people do to relax and enjoy life varies from person to person and from time to time. Some like to participate in various sports. Others enjoy theater, concerts, or plays. Crafts and hobbies, reading, deep-breathing exercises, working in the yard or garden—these have all helped some people unwind. Some like writing letters or writing in journals and diaries. Hot tubs, saunas, or Jacuzzis help others relax, while walks in the park or scenic trips to the woods, mountains, or desert help others. Some like to play musical instruments, while others enjoy naps or sunbathing at the beach. Prayer, scripture reading, or meditation help some re-create, while movies or quiet music are helpful to others. Some like to play with young children. Others enjoy the company of animals. And yes, others like to sing and dance.

An insight on this is found in the Doctrine and Covenants. On January 14, 1847, the Lord gave his word and will through President Brigham Young for the massive movement of the Saints westward. This revelation was recorded as section 136. The journey appeared to be a difficult one. They were to organize into companies numbering ten, fifty, and one hundred, with a captain of each. (See v. 3.) They were all to share equally in assisting the widows and the fatherless. (See v. 8.) They were to keep their pledges with each other and not covet what they did not have. (See v. 20.) They were commanded to not contend with one another or speak evil of each other, to cease drunkenness, to return what they had borrowed, and to search diligently for what might be lost. (See vv. 23-26.)

Finally, in verse twenty-eight, they were commanded to praise the Lord with singing and dancing on the journey. Now the key question: Why did the Lord command the early Saints to sing and dance during the arduous journey westward?

Put yourself in their place. You have been driving a team of oxen or mules all day in the hot weather. Or perhaps you have been riding in the back of a jostling, stuffy wagon, tending little children for ten or twelve hours. Perhaps either you or your spouse has walked much of the distance that day, maybe twenty miles or more. It is now nighttime. All in the family are tired and hungry. After the evening meal—which is almost the same as all the meals you've had for several weeks—you are ready for bed. While you are thinking of the much needed rest that awaits you, you hear someone tuning up a fiddle near the central campfire. "Oh, no," you think to yourself. "Not that again." Yes, it is that time. The evening dance is about to begin!

I have often wondered why the Lord commanded the Saints to sing and dance while they were crossing the plains. One would imagine that he would say, "Conserve your strength," or "Get as much rest as you can." But no, come evening or when any other opportunity arose, they were to sing and dance. Why?

Maybe this tells us something about the importance of balance in life. Maybe it has to do with the fact that recreation is often a form of re-creation. In his discourse at the temple, King Benjamin noted that "it is not requisite that a man should run faster than he has strength." (Mosiah 4:27.) In the latter days, the Prophet Joseph Smith had a great work to perform that required great physical and emotional strength. The Lord gave Joseph the same counsel that Benjamin gave his people. (See D&C 10:4.) Apparently Joseph learned how to relax and unwind as the need arose. One associate noted:

At that time Joseph was studying Greek and Latin, and when he got tired studying he would go and play with the children in their games about the house, to give himself exercise. Then he would go back to his studies as before.

He was preaching once, and he said it tried some of the pious folks to see him play ball with the boys. He then related a story of a certain prophet who was sitting under the shade of a tree amusing himself in some way, when a hunter came along with his bow and arrow, and reproved him. The prophet asked him if he kept his bow strung up all the time. The hunter answered that he did not. The prophet asked why, and he said it would lose its elasticity if he did. The prophet said it was just so with his mind, he did not want it strung up all the time. ("Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27 (1892): 302, 472.)

Note also that in June 1850, just three years after the pioneers arrived in Utah, the first theatrical play was performed in the Bowery on Temple Square. Why do you think President Brigham Young placed such emphasis on drama, literature, and the arts and, yes, continued to emphasize singing and dancing during those early and often difficult years of conquering the Western deserts? Two of his daughters later quoted their father as saying:

Life is best enjoyed when time periods are evenly divided between labour, sleep and recreation. All men, women and children should labour; all must sleep; and if mental and physical balance is to be maintained, all people should spend one-third of their time in recreation, which is rebuilding, voluntary activity—never idleness. 'Eight hours work, eight hours sleep, and eight hours recreation' was Brigham Young's motto. Re-creation is indeed the meaning of recreation. (Susa Young Gates and Leah D. Widtsoe, The Life Story of Brigham Young [New York: The MacMillan Company, 1931], p. 251.)

The author Robert Fulghum gives this observation a contemporary setting. He claims dancing is essential to a well-grounded life:

When I get down and my life is logjammed and I need some affirmative action, I go where people dance. I don't mean joints where people go to get crocked and then wobble around on the floor to music. I mean places where people who really like to dance go to do that. I like dancers. Never met a serious dancer who wasn't a pretty fine human being. And I enjoy the never-ending pleasure of being surprised by just who dancers are. . . . All this reminds me of something I heard about the Hopi Indians. They don't think there is much difference between praying and dancing—that both are necessary for a long life. . . . They say that to be a useful Hopi is to be one who has a quiet heart and takes part in all the dances. (It Was on Fire When I Lay Down on It [New York: Villard Books, 1990], pp. 46, 49.)

As newlyweds, it really does not matter if you don't like to sing and dance. What is important is that you find some ways to relax, to re-create in your own unique ways, both as a young couple and as individuals. Hopefully, you will learn early in your marriage not to overcommit to too many activities. Hugh Nibley has noted that "the challenge of Latter-day Saints is not only to choose between good and evil; we also have to learn to choose between good and good." There are just too many good causes to champion in life. We can burn up all our strength and energy with too many good ones as well as a few bad ones. The goal is not to become so committed to so many things in life that we don't have the time or energy for loving, caring relationships. Newlyweds would do well to follow the admonitions of an anonymous Irish poet who wrote

Take time for work. It is the price of success.

Take time to think. It is the source of power.

Take time to play. It is the secret of youth.

Take time to read. It is the foundation of wisdom.

Take time to be friendly. It is the road to happiness.

Take time to dream. It is hitching your wagon to a star.

Take time to love. It is the highest joy in life.

Take time to laugh. It is the music of the soul.

And I would add:

Take time to pray. It is the pathway to eternity.

There should be balance in our lives: "To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven: . . . a time to laugh . . . and a time to dance." (Eccl. 3:1, 3.)
