Brent A. Barlow, Just for Newlyweds ( 1992)

Chapter 4

Marriage Myths

In one class I taught on the early years of marriage, a young coed observed in her term paper, "Everyone looks for the perfect marriage partner, and while looking, they get married." It is true that everyone would like to have a perfect marriage. And that would necessitate having a perfect marriage partner and being perfect ourselves. While many of us believe ourselves to be the personification of perfection itself during our dating years, romantic love, especially when fueled by sexual passion, tricks us into thinking that the perfect marriage is in the making. After marriage we find that this is not so, that both partners are mere mortals. Not long ago another student had this insight: "We need idealism tempered with realism in marriage."

Susan and I like to go to movies. For us, it is an escape from the hectic pressures of home and life. I've noted an interesting phenomenon with respect to movie-going. A new movie is released with the usual hype and advertising. We believe the hoopla and go. But often after we see the movie, I feel somewhat let down. The movie is usually entertaining, but sometimes the expectation is so great that there is a let-down after viewing the film.

There is a word for this phenomenon. It is called cognitive dissonance. It is simply the difference between what we expect and what we experience. Sometimes if the expectations are excessively high, there is great dissonance, or disappointment, no matter how high the level of experience or performance.

Myths about Marriage

Most marriage and family counselors and educators believe that there are many myths about marriage. In other words, society harbors many excessive or unrealistic expectations about marriage. This is particularly significant since people usually act on what they believe to be true. More than thirty marriage myths have been identified by various researchers and educators.

Dr. David Olson from the University of Minnesota has discussed several. He observes, "One of the reasons that the marriage institution does not live up to its expectations is because of the many myths and unrealistic expectations that individuals bring to marriage." ("Marriage of the Future: Revolutionary or Evolutionary Change?" The Family Coordinator 12 [1972]: 385-86.) Dr. Olson then lists what he thinks are some common marriage myths:

Myth 1: If a sexual relationship is not good, it will spontaneously improve with time.

Myth 2: Marriage will always change or reform a person.

Myth 3: Marriage is easy; the difficulty is finding the right person.

Myth 4: Who you marry is more important than when you marry.

Myth 5: Your marriage partner will be able to satisfy all your needs.

Myth 6: The more time spent and activities shared together, the better the marriage relationship.

Myth 7: Patterns of behavior and interaction that develop in marriage are easy to change.

Myth 8: A quarrel or disagreement can only be detrimental to a marriage.

Myth 9: It is always best not to express negative feelings about one's spouse.

Myth 10: If a married couple loves each other, they will intuitively know what each other is feeling or wanting.

Myth 11. A good sexual relationship in marriage will be automatic and easy to develop.

Myth 12: If there is a good sexual relationship in marriage, other problems will take care of themselves.

Myth 13: Sexual adjustment in marriage will result more from proper techniques than from proper attitudes.

In 1990, Dr. Melvyn Kinder and Dr. Connell Cowan wrote in Husbands and Wives: Exploding Marital Myths, Deepening Love and Desire that one of the reasons half the married couples in the United States eventually divorce is because of what people initially or later come to expect from the marital relationship. In their chapter "Letting Go of Marital Myths," they write about how we come to believe myths and what some of those myths are:

Most of us learn about marriage firsthand through an often frustrating, sometimes painful process of trial and error, occasionally hurting ourselves and our mates. We haven't been taught in any systematic fashion what we might expect or what might be expected of us. Instead, we pick up bits and pieces of information along the way from parents, early romantic adventures, and the media. Some of it is accurate and helpful, but unfortunately much of it is inaccurate and distorted.

You will notice that some of these myths are old and traditional in the sense that couples have always believed them to be true and they have always created dissention in marriage. A number of the other myths, however, are new, unfortunate by-products of the "me generation" and the excessive psychologizing of marriage to the point where anything seems possible and reasonable if only you just talk about it and negotiate it long enough. (New York: Penguin Books USA, Inc., 1990, pp. 30-32.)

Here, according to Dr. Kinder and Dr. Cowan, are some common current beliefs about marriage:

Myth 14: Marriage will always make you feel complete and whole.

Myth 15: Your mate should change for you if he or she really loves you.

Myth 16: If you truly love each other, romance should continue to flourish.

Myth 17: Differences in need should always be negotiated.

Myth 18: In a good marriage, the partners always have identical dreams and goals.

Myth 19: The more open you are with your mate, the more satisfying the marriage.

Myth 20: Sexual disinterest is inevitable in marriage.

Myth 21: If you're not feeling fulfilled, your marriage must be at fault.

Myth 22: Being a full-time wife and mother is a waste of potential.

Myth 23: A woman or man can be devoted fully to work, family, and marriage.

Myth 24: If you have to "work" on a marriage, something is wrong.

The two California marriage counselors concluded, "Those who cling tenaciously to these myths fail to understand a fundamental truth about change in marriage: there must be a void created for any new patterns to be established. And releasing one's mate from the burden of having to meet unrealistic expectations allows him or her to perceive you in a new way and to think about being different on his or her own terms." (P. 73.)

In their book written especially for newlyweds, Kathleen and Thomas Hart also have a chapter on expectations. In The First Two Years of Marriage: Foundation for a Life Together, they note:

Probably most couples expect more of marriage than it can deliver, and have to undergo a painful disillusionment. We need our dreams, or we might settle for less than we could have. But in the area of romantic love especially, an unreality can creep into our dreaming, setting us up for acute disappointment. . . . All of us want more intensity and excitement in life, and more love. . . . Perhaps if we look at some of the most common unrealistic expectations for marriage, and revise them, we will feel better about what we actually have in marriage and see more possibilities in it. (New York/Ramsey, New Jersey: Paulist Press, 1983, p. 7.)

According to the Harts, here are some additional marriage myths:

Myth 25: We will do everything together.

Myth 26: We will always feel the same way about things.

Myth 27: You will always be intensely interested in me, and I in you.

Myth 28: There will be a lot of sex and warm physical closeness.

Myth 29: You will meet all my deeper needs, and I yours.

Myth 30: The character defects I now see in you will disappear under the influence of my love.

Myth 31: The details of our living will fall naturally into place.

Myth 32: We will probably never fight.

Myth 33: We enter this marriage with pretty much the same expectations.

Myth 34: Our marriage will be different from all the bad ones we have seen. (See pp. 7-12.)

As newlyweds, you and your spouse may enter marriage with some unrealistic views of what it may be like. Since every marriage is a unique blend of two individuals, this uniqueness consequently creates marriages that are all different in some way. In spite of the differences, most young couples want some things in common, such as feeling both vulnerable and comfortable at the same time, respecting oneself and one's partner, having a healthy and satisfying sexual relationship, desiring to help and support each other, and enhancing the ability to grow together.

Like the canoe-trip analogy in the introduction, life will sometimes present challenges that have no apparent solutions or answers. Even so, your marital relationship will grow and develop with time, if you work toward your common goals one day at a time. The unity in your marriage will strengthen as you balance your own attitudes, needs, and priorities against those of the husband or wife you have recently married.

To live with or reconcile differences in your marriage, you need to ask yourself, What are my expectations of marriage and my marriage partner? Are they realistic? Are they excessively high? Are they too low? How do my expectations compare with those of my marriage partner? Much of a couple's happiness in marriage depends on the expectations of both.

Most of the newlyweds I teach at Brigham Young University seem to be functioning quite well . . . above average, if there is such a measurement. But numerous newlyweds at BYU and elsewhere in the Church seem to be unhappy or disenchanted because, I believe, they have excessive or unrealistic expectations of themselves, their marriage partners, and even the relationship of marriage right from the day of the wedding.

Mortal Aspects of an Eternal Relationship

Some Latter-day Saints may wonder if some couples put too much emphasis on mortality and thereby ignore the eternal nature of marriage. Maybe so. Perhaps in some cases the opposite may also be true. We may put so much emphasis on eternity that we ignore the realities of mortal life. When we marry in the temple, we marry for both time (this life) and eternity (the next life). If we don't make it through mortality together in marriage, is there any guarantee that our relationships will continue in the eternities? Someone once said that we should not become so heavenly minded that we are of no earthly good.

Susan and I, along with all other Latter-day Saints, cherish the concept that the marital relationship can continue in the next life. (See D&C 132:19.) It is one of the most endearing and appealing aspects of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. But we also know that we must make it through mortality in order to enjoy the blessings of eternity. That is the challenge for all.

I have often wondered if our concepts of eternity and perfection in some ways inhibit marriage during mortality. Do we expect too much too soon from our marriages, our spouses, and ourselves? Do we give up too soon? Do we marry too young? Do we inadequately prepare for marriage? Do we do too much comparing with others? Do we want instant perfection and lack the patience to strive for perfection over an entire lifetime?

We would do well to remember the insight that "we are not mortal beings having spiritual experiences, but spiritual beings having mortal experiences." As such, we should allow more time for ourselves and our spouses to develop and mature during our marriages. Maybe we need to go back to the basics and start practicing the first quality of love mentioned by both Paul and Mormon. It simply is "charity suffereth long." (1 Cor. 13:4; Moro. 7:45.)
