Brent A. Barlow, Just for Newlyweds ( 1992)

Chapter 5

Surviving the First Year

From my first month of marriage, I would like to share with newlyweds an incident that illustrates the fragile nature of wedded bliss. The first three weeks were nothing short of bubbly happiness. Susan and I got along just fine. Just like in the movies, or so we thought.

The last Saturday of that first month proved to be an interesting day . . . and evening. My parents were coming to our apartment for breakfast on their way through town, so we got up early to prepare the meal. My first mistake that day was not being very sensitive about my new bride's anxiety in fixing her first meal for her in-laws. My dad is somewhat of an expert when it comes to frying eggs, but we thought we could do well enough to pass inspection.

The Broken Egg Yolk

About 9:00 A.M. our phone rang. My dad was calling from a local gas station. He said they had just arrived and would be to our apartment in about ten minutes. I hung up the phone and told Susan that my folks were on their way. She put the frying pan on the stove, warmed it up, put in a little butter, cracked an egg, and dropped it in the frying pan. But when the egg hit the frying pan, she started to cry.

I asked her why she was crying, and Susan replied, "The yolk broke!" I can't remember the exact words I said, but it was something like "A broken egg yolk isn't worth crying over." Whatever I said was not the right thing to say at the moment. Susan bristled and cried even harder. She said she simply wanted the fried eggs to be "just right" for my parents, and now, of all things, the yolk had broken on one of the eggs.

In hindsight, I should have been more sensitive to her feelings about wanting to make a good breakfast for my parents. But I mumbled something about bawling over broken egg yolks and not understanding what all the fuss was about. Susan got upset that I couldn't understand her feelings. I got even more upset about her getting more upset—all over a broken egg yolk.

A few minutes later, right on schedule, my folks arrived, and my wife and I temporarily set aside our egg yolk/crying discussion long enough to fry some new eggs, fix the rest of the breakfast, and spend a pleasant hour visiting with them before they left to continue their trip. Later that morning I asked Susan if we could talk about the broken-egg-yolk incident that happened earlier. That was a mistake. We talked and talked, and the discussion got deeper and deeper. For nearly one month of marriage, whatever feelings we had of dissatisfaction or discontentment with each other or our marriage had been held back or concealed. But when they came out, they came out all at once.

What happened that Saturday afternoon was that our bubble burst. By evening the broken egg yolk had been long forgotten. We allowed ourselves to go on and on, talking about what now seem like minor and trivial dissatisfactions. By eleven o'clock, we were asking questions like "Should we have really married each other?" and "Was our marriage prematurely doomed for failure?" and "Are we really going to make it in marriage?"

The next morning we went to Church. We were still downcast. Our plight was not helped when, in fast-and-testimony meeting, an elderly gentleman stood up and said he and his wife had been married for nearly fifty years and had "never had an argument." That was hard for us to take. They had gone for nearly fifty years (supposedly) without any argument or misunderstandings, and we had been able to make it only three weeks! We felt awful as we left church. We didn't think our marriage had a chance.

My sister, Jane, called on the phone that afternoon to chat for a few moments and see how we were doing. She and her husband, Lee, had been married for six years. I tried to conceal my hurts, but Jane could tell something was wrong. Finally I asked, "Jane, have you and Lee ever had an argument or disagreement?" "Of course we have," she assured me. I then related what the elderly church member had said. Jane told me that (1) the old gentleman was probably lying; (2) if not lying, he was probably forgetful; and (3) even if it were true, they would have had fifty years of a terribly boring and uneventful marriage.

Believing that there was still hope for our marriage, Susan and I began talking more that afternoon. I finally admitted that I should have been more sensitive to her feelings, and she finally admitted that a broken egg yolk just may be a questionable reason for crying. By nightfall, the incident was mostly behind us, and we recommitted ourselves to each other and our relationship.

Looking back at the incident, we now think it was rather humorous. I have told it often to singles and newlyweds because I think there is a lesson to be learned. Things that are terribly upsetting to us at the moment can later be recalled and even laughed at with a certain amount of levity.

In other ways, the incident was rather scary. Newlyweds of less than one month, we allowed ourselves to have a serious discussion on whether "we were meant for each other."

Every newly married couple will likely have their own egg-yolk incident. Such incidents take us through a transition from the ideal, the life of fantasy and make-believe, into the world of reality. Susan and I advise newly married couples not to take these first few incidents too seriously. It is like jerking a seedling out of the ground to see if the roots have begun to grow. What little plants need is nurturance for growth. Fortunately, Susan and I made the transition successfully during the weeks that followed.

Surviving the First Year of Marriage

A former student at BYU stopped by my office not long ago. He said he had been married a few weeks and was a little apprehensive. "I've got a few minutes before my next class," he said, "so tell me how to survive the first year of marriage." I had heard of short-term counseling, but this seemed to be a little extreme.

I said I didn't have a magic list of what "to do," but I did have four suggestions of what "not to do" during the first year of marriage.

Those who marry in the '90s may not be aware that they have a good chance of celebrating a golden wedding anniversary if they just make it through the first few years. This period is merely the beginning—the starting blocks. I suggested that the student and his new wife just get to know each other better during the first year of marriage. Allow a year or two to establish a track record before making any judgments about the relationship.

I recalled a family friend many years ago who used a fine team of horses on his farm. He continuously admonished his farm hands not to work a good team to death. We frequently do that with marriage, overworking it without letting the relationship "rest." Marriage has the potential to be a fulfilling, satisfying relationship. But if excessive expectations are placed upon it, marriage, like the team of fine horses, becomes overburdened.

If not our parents' marriage, we try to emulate other older couples, such as married brothers or sisters and their spouses, aunts and uncles, neighbors and their spouses, or perhaps religious leaders and their partners. I suggested to the young man that he allow their own marital lifestyle to emerge without trying to make it like someone else's, or more important, like everyone else's.

There are at least three reasons why spouses must continuously adapt in marriage: (1) Some things about spouses can be known only after marriage. During courtship, individuals may hide part of themselves, or some may not be as perceptive as they should because of the romantic and physical attraction of the engagement period. But after marriage, the facades come down, and partners become known for what they are. (2) Many aspects of married life are difficult to anticipate or understand until they are experienced. Such things as mutual money management, in-laws, and idiosyncrasies of habit must be reconciled accordingly. (3) Individuals will change during marriage. Few people remain exactly as they are when they marry, even though their spouses may try to hold them to the behavior and personality characteristics that were initially attractive. This individual change requires the partner to adapt.

The bell rang, and my young friend thanked me for the quick advice and left. Such is short-term counseling. After a few minutes, I glanced up at the bulletin board above my desk. There was a three-step strategy for surviving married life if all else fails:

Step 1: Go around your house, gather up all the glass marbles, and put them in a jar.

Step 2: Every time your husband or wife does something to upset or annoy you, go to the jar, get a marble, and throw it out the window.

Step 3: Follow this sequence until all the marbles are gone.

Theory: Once you have lost all your marbles, your husband or wife won't bother you anymore.

Perhaps I should have given my former student that list as well.

Fences or Ambulances?

What could you do right at the beginning of your marriage to help you and your spouse stay in love and help prevent problems? You might start by building a few fences.

During a recent Education Week at BYU, I suggested that every LDS couple and family should take greater precautions in preventing marriage and family problems from happening. I then quoted a poem titled "A Fence or an Ambulance," based on the adage "An ounce of prevention is better than a pound of cure." It was written by an Englishman, Joseph Matins, several years ago.

'Twas a dangerous cliff, as they freely confessed, Though to walk near its crest was so pleasant; But over its terrible edge there had slipped A duke and full many a peasant. So the people said something would have to be done, But their projects did not at all tally; Some said, "Put a fence around the edge of the cliff," Some, "An ambulance down in the valley." But the cry for the ambulance carried the day, For it spread through the neighboring city; A fence may be useful or not, it is true, But each heart became brimful of pity For those who slipped over that dangerous cliff; And the dwellers in highway and alley Gave pounds or gave pence, not to put up a fence, But an ambulance down in the valley. "For the cliff is all right, if you're careful," they said, "And, if folks even slip or are dropping, It isn't the slipping that hurts them so much, As the shock down below when they're stopping." So day after day, as these mishaps occurred, Quick forth would these rescuers sally To pick up the victims who fell off the cliff, With their ambulance down in the valley. Then an old sage remarked: "It's a marvel to me That people give far more attention To repairing results than to stopping the cause, When they'd much better aim at prevention. Let us stop at its source all this mischief," cried he, "Come, neighbors and friends, let us rally; If the cliff we will fence we might almost dispense With the ambulance down in the valley." "Oh, he's a fanatic," the others rejoined, "Dispense with the ambulance? Never! He'd dispense with all charities, too, if he could; No! No! We'll support them forever. Aren't we picking up folks just as fast as they fall? And shall this man dictate to us? Shall he? Why should people of sense stop to put up a fence, While the ambulance works in the valley?" But a sensible few, who are practical too, Will not bear with such nonsense much longer; They believe that prevention is better than cure, And their party will soon be the stronger. Encourage them then, with your purse, voice, and pen, And while other philanthropists dally, They will scorn all pretense and put up a stout fence On a cliff that hangs over the valley. Better guide well the young than reclaim them when old, For the voice of true wisdom is calling, "To rescue the fallen is good, but 'tis best To prevent other people from falling." Better close up the source of temptation and crime Than deliver from dungeon and galley; Better put a strong fence round the top of the cliff Than an ambulance down in the valley. (The Best Loved Poems of the American People [New York: Doubleday, 1936], pp. 273-74.)

Many government, educational, and religious programs attempt to assist married couples and family members. The majority of these programs, however, focus on "cure" rather than "prevention." Though the medical profession has made great progress in the past four decades with preventing disease, organizations concerned with marriage and family have made limited progress in prevention, and that only in the past decade. The need for ambulances remains strong in our society. But one wonders if we could not reduce the fleet if more fences—better or more preventive measures—were installed.

We can move more quickly, however, in putting up personal fences than societal ones. We can look at ourselves and our marriages and put up railings around the danger areas. Don't let ourselves get too close to the cliff of immorality, for instance, by putting up fences that keep us from the questionable hype of media. Don't let us fall into the pit of greed by installing guardrails around the use of our money. The easiest problems to solve are the ones that don't happen.
