Brent A. Barlow, Just for Newlyweds ( 1992)

Chapter 7

Managing Your Money

As a Latter-day Saint marriage counselor and educator, I am obviously interested in anything that disrupts marriages. As noted in the introduction, nearly two-thirds of couples who marry at the present time in the United States are expected to divorce. Whether LDS couples will participate in this trend to the same degree is not yet known. But I am convinced of one thing. How we as married couples manage our money has a great deal to do with marriage stability, for if we fail to learn how to manage our money, it surely will manage us!

How married couples earn and manage (or mismanage) their money is a major factor in marital stability or disruption. Wage earners spend an estimated 80 percent of their waking hours earning, spending, or worrying about money! Where we spend our money is also a good measurement of what we value in life. "For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also." (Matt. 6:21.) Not surprisingly, husbands and wives often value different things.

Money management requires communication, mutual decision making, and problem-solving skills. Unresolved financial problems and the subsequent frustration and anger can also be detrimental to the sexual relationship as well as to other areas of a marriage.

In the decade of the 1990s, we will face new situations and problems with money acquisition and money management: (1) With more than half of the wives in the U. S. gainfully employed, many couples now have access to a much larger income. (2) Due to extreme competition between lending companies, consumer credit is now much easier to obtain than in previous years. (3) As a result of increased income and easy-to-obtain credit, consumer debt is at an all-time high. (4) Bankruptcy is more common because of high debt and the inability to manage money. (5) With more disposable income, and more debt, financial get-rich-quick schemes seem to abound. Never has this proverb been truer: "A fool and his money are soon parted."

Money Management

Almost every poll or study done on problem areas in marriage indicates that money management is either number one or high on the list. Why is this so?

In the United States we are socialized to want to acquire things. This starts extremely early in childhood as we watch thousands of television commercials encouraging us to buy certain cereals and snacks, to obtain not only one but several toy vehicles and dolls. We supposedly will be unpopular if we do not purchase the right toothpaste or body deodorant or wear the most modern fashions in clothing. We consequently believe, or are led to believe, that we are not successfully married until we acquire certain things in life. If we are not cautious, we develop high expectations of what is essential in housing, transportation, furniture, appliances, tableware, and home entertainment. In acquiring these "necessities" of life, we often feel that just anything will not do. We want better things—better homes, better cars, better furniture, and better quality in everything we purchase.

There is nothing wrong in wanting excellent value for our dollars. But it isn't limited to just desiring excellent value. There is always more to acquire—a feeling that what we have is not sufficient because there is something "better." Furthermore, through a multibillion-dollar advertising industry, we are led to think that the things we own represent our position or station in life and even who we are. And the more we own, the higher our position and status supposedly are, and the more worthwhile we supposedly become.

We often build traps for ourselves in believing that the main measure of our self-worth is the extent to which we receive the esteem of others. Possessing a large sum of money or the things that it can buy may seem to bring the desired acceptance and esteem.

This quest to acquire things continues from childhood into our single years of adult life. Then we marry and find that the very nature of marriage sometimes drains off much of the money we would otherwise like to spend on ourselves. We invest heavily in homes, children, insurance, cars, education, and whatever is necessary to operate and maintain a home. Stress begins to mount over differences and disagreements on how the money should be spent. Couples often become easily offended and even outraged at the seemingly unwarranted expenditures of each other, and purchases that tax a couple's resources can impose unfair deprivations on a spouse.

Fights over money do not necessarily concern dollar bills. The problems that money creates in marriage can stem from the symbolic meaning that dollar bills represent to the individuals involved. The disagreement over money may actually be a disagreement about both the symbol and its worth in life.

The management of money, therefore, becomes a test of the couple's identity in marriage. It is a way to measure the "we feeling," the sense of togetherness couples establish through common goals and values. Problems may arise over the inability to talk about money or to decide jointly what "we" want to do with "our" money. This consensus is usually attained only when the couple can share their hopes and fears. They also eventually learn to show their trust and caring and to give each other understanding and support.

Only after they have learned to do these things can they wisely manage their money. This is because fights over money management usually are interpreted as "You don't trust me," "You don't understand me," or "You don't love me." Unfortunately, many couples faced with such problems proceed with divorce, the meaning and management of money being the root cause.

But other newlyweds are more fortunate. They realize that the financial situation they face in their marriage is not caused by their lack of love for each other. (They usually care deeply about each other!) They simply need some help in learning how to manage their money based on a philosophy where both share the responsibility for planning and both share the responsibility for the dispersement or allocation of resources. Therefore: Money management is important in a marriage because of the symbols money represents and the differing values these symbols often have. (See David R. Mace, "Areas of Adjustment in Marriage," in Close Companions [New York: Continuum Publishers Company, 1982], p. 113 for elaboration on the topic of money management in marriage.)

Having a successful marriage requires that a couple first agree on what they value, individually and jointly: How and where do we want to spend our money? The allocation of money is a fairly accurate measurement of what we value in life. Simply examining last year's canceled checks, for example, can give us some enlightening insights into what we have valued in the past.

The second requirement is that we participate in allocating our financial resources. This requires some planning and forethought before the money comes in, rather than jointly commiserating at the end of the month when the money is gone.

Most newlyweds should realize that more money will not solve their problems. We often assume that if we had just a few thousand dollars more each year, our financial troubles would vanish. Many are surprised to find that couples earning two hundred thousand dollars or more are sometimes among those who have the greatest money problems, simply because they haven't yet learned to manage their income. No amount of money will suffice if husband and wife have an inadequate means of handling it. Successful couples of lesser means are those who have learned to manage what they do have—and they are much happier than those who have or earn vast amounts of money and yet are inept managers.

Another crucial concept to consider is this: Expenditures always rise to meet the income. This simply means that no matter how much you earn, you will always find something else to buy with the additional money. Because of the varied interests and wants of two individuals in a marriage, couples have no difficulty spending all the money that is available. Couples can even spend more than what they have through the credit so readily available today. At some point in the marriage, and it might as well be at the beginning, a husband and wife have to discuss and agree on what they will do with the money they have in their possession. For many couples today, that amount over a lifetime may well exceed a million dollars! If a couple married in their twenties and maintained an income of thirty thousand dollars for fifty years of marriage, they would have managed one million five hundred thousand dollars. Maybe the problem some couples have with money management today is not having too little, but actually having too much. This is the irony in the statement that "no married couple ever has enough money."

In the traditional marriages of the past, husbands earned almost all the money and frequently had the only say in where the money went or how it was spent. Many wives did not know how much money their husbands earned, nor were they aware how it was being spent. All they were aware of, if they had any involvement in family finances, was the amount given them each month for food, housekeeping, and perhaps personal use. There are situations today in which a husband dies, and the wife does not even know where the checkbook is kept or how to write a check if she does find it.

Today nearly 60 percent of wives are employed and earn nearly 25 percent of the family income. It is anticipated that, by the turn of the century, 80 percent of wives will be employed part- or full-time and earn 40 percent of the family money. With these trends in mind, husbands need to realize that contemporary wives should have more say in money management than in the past. Decades ago, families operated under a one-vote system, with the husband having the only vote. That philosophy will no longer work, and couples must carefully examine the decision-making structure in their marriages.

Two Checkbooks

Most married couples probably operate out of one checkbook managed by either the husband or wife. One manages the checking account because the other is disinterested or doesn't have the time to do it or because one happens to be better at budgeting than the other. According to some financial experts, however, there are several good reasons why husbands and wives should maintain individual checking accounts. (See James P. Christensen and Clint Combs with George Durrant, Rich on Any Income: The Easy Budgeting System That Fits in Your Checkbook [Salt Lake City: Shadow Mountain, 1987].) In this case, husbands and wives put their allocated monthly income into two separate checking accounts, and each spouse has a financial stewardship over his or her account. The amount of money and the type of expenses each is accountable for are negotiated each month. Here are four advantages of two checking accounts:

Any effort made to manage financial resources better will yield rich rewards in a marriage relationship. Couples who stabilize marriage through effective money management make giant strides toward successful marriages.

The Lord's Tenth

No matter how you choose to manage your money as newlyweds, no matter how much money you as a couple earn or how you manage it, I am sure of one thing. I do not believe you will prosper in either physical or spiritual matters if you do not learn and adhere to the concept of tithing, or paying one-tenth of your annual increase to the Lord.

As a result of the financial chaos that seems prevalent, LDS couples may, in fact, struggle more today with tithing and financial offerings than ever before. With the stress of high debts, Church members may feel that they "can't afford to pay tithing" at the very time they need to pay it the most. President Heber J. Grant said this about tithing:

The law of financial prosperity to the Latter-day Saints, under covenant with God, is to be an honest tithepayer, and not to rob the Lord in tithes and offerings. Prosperity comes to those who observe the law of tithing; and when I say prosperity I am not thinking of it in terms of dollars and cents alone, although as a rule the Latter-day Saints who are the best tithepayers are the most prosperous men, financially; but what I count as real prosperity, as the one thing of all others that is of great value to every man and woman living, is the growth in a knowledge of God, and in a testimony, and in the power to live the gospel and to inspire our families to do the same. That is prosperity of the truest kind. (Conference Report, April 4, 1925, p. 10.)

Many Latter-day Saints may pay tithing to avoid being burned at the Second Coming of the Lord (see D&C 64:23) or to avoid robbing God (see Mal. 3:8). While these are worthwhile motives, there are other, more positive motives for paying tithing. Tithing is the Lord's plan and base for family financial stability in this dispensation as in others. Following are two solid reasons that the Lord has given to keep his financial law.

By this principle (tithing) the loyalty of the people of this Church shall be put to the test. By this principle it shall be known who is for the kingdom of God and who is against it. By this principle it shall be seen whose hearts are set on doing the will of God and keeping his commandments, thereby sanctifying the land of Zion unto God, and who are opposed to this principle and have cut themselves off from the blessings of Zion. There is a great deal of importance connected with this principle, for by it shall be known whether we are faithful or unfaithful. In this respect it is as essential as faith in God, as repentance of sin, as baptism for the remission of sin, or as the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. . . . Tithing is a test by which the people as individuals shall be proved. Any man who fails to observe this principle shall be known as a man who is indifferent to the welfare of Zion, who neglects his duty as a member of the Church. . . . He neglects to do that which would entitle him to receive the blessings and ordinances of the gospel. (Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1977], pp. 225-26.)

Paying tithes and offerings identifies us as being for the kingdom of God. It involves us in "the welfare of Zion." And by keeping this commandment, we set in motion a process whereby the Lord can protect us from the destroyer. (See Mal. 3:10-11.)

We received our first paycheck from my father shortly after we were married. At the time I was managing his service station in Centerfield, Utah. Susan was adamant that we pay tithing immediately. I countered that it really didn't matter as long as we paid it within the year. The discussion continued for several weeks with other paychecks.

A few months later we returned to BYU for my senior year of college. Susan had a job teaching first grade at Cherry Hill Elementary School in Orem. During November, some friends called and said they were going to purchase half a beef. They wanted to know if we wanted to buy the other half for $160. (That was 1965!) We didn't have enough money right then outside of the tithing we were planning to pay that Sunday. I suggested to Susan that we buy the beef and pay double tithing the following month when I received my check from the National Guard. We discussed it back and forth for a few hours that night, and I finally persuaded her that we should buy the beef and postpone paying our tithing to the following month. So we took our tithing money and the additional amount we needed and bought the beef.

But do you think Susan would let me enjoy it during the months that followed? She would cook a roast or fry some steaks and then call, "Here, Brent, come and eat the Lord's beef!" Somehow I didn't enjoy it as much as I thought I would. She was correct in her assessment of paying tithing. If I had studied the scriptures carefully, I would have found earlier that she was right! In ancient times the Lord commanded the people to bring in the "firstfruits" of their labors and to give the "firstlings" of the flocks, which required great faith since neither the total harvest nor the increase in animals would be known at the time. (See Ex. 23:19; Lev. 23:10; 27:26; Mosiah 2:3.)

Financial Offerings: A Blessing or Burden?

Just a few years later, Susan and I learned a valuable lesson about financial offerings to the Lord. I am thankful we learned it early in our marriage so the principle could help guide our lives as a couple.

We were graduate students at Florida State University, and I was serving as branch president for about forty undergraduate students. One evening the district and branch leaders met for a special meeting with President Malone Peddie, president of the Tallahassee, Florida, District. President Peddie reported that the Church was going to build a temple in Washington, D.C., and all Latter-day Saints in the eastern and southern part of the United States were invited to contribute. President Peddie asked if the student branch could donate one thousand dollars to the construction of the temple.

I hesitated before I gave my response, and when I did, I reminded President Peddie that the student branch had only forty members, most of whom were living on limited incomes. President Peddie still asked that we see what we could do.

To be honest, I didn't feel right about asking the small student branch to help raise one thousand dollars. Maybe two or three hundred but not one thousand. So at our next sacrament meeting, I told the students in the branch about the Washington, D.C., Temple and stated that their contributions to the construction of the temple would be welcomed. The branch presidency said nothing about the one thousand dollars we had been asked to raise.

The weeks went by, and we did raise about two hundred dollars. With just four weeks left, it didn't look like much more would be donated. Late one night I was in my office in the LDS chapel in Tallahassee. President Peddie was also there in his office. He stopped in to ask me, "Brent, how is the student branch doing on the money for the Washington Temple?"

Once again I reminded President Peddie of the student status of most of the branch. I said that I didn't feel comfortable asking them for more than the few hundred dollars they had contributed thus far. Then came the lesson.

"Brent," said President Peddie, "do you view financial offerings to the Lord as a burden or blessing?"

I hesitated to answer because I had truly perceived the contribution as a burden upon the students.

In his pleasant southern drawl, President Peddie said, "When you get to heaven, Brent, you may have to stand before the Lord and be accountable to him for withholding blessings to those in your branch."

"Withholding blessings? What do you mean?" I asked.

President Peddie explained that most people perceived financial offerings to the Lord as a burden. He reassured me that attendant blessings, both temporal and spiritual, come to those who make their financial offerings. He bid me good night and left.

I sat at my desk, dumbfounded. Was it possible that I was withholding blessings from those in my branch by not inviting them more earnestly to contribute to the building of the Washington, D. C., Temple?

The following Sunday I related the incident with President Peddie to the student branch. I told them for the first time of the one thousand dollars that was needed from our branch. I asked how many of them viewed financial offerings as a burden and shared with them President Peddie's testimony of the blessings that come to those who give.

We had only three weeks to go. I will never forget what happened. The students sacrificed and sold some of their books. Some went to work at part-time jobs to earn a few extra dollars to donate to the Washington, D.C., Temple fund. Others went without a few things that they had thought were necessities. During the following three weeks, the Tallahassee, Florida, student branch raised more than eight hundred dollars. There is no question that we would have raised the full amount had I learned earlier a simple but profound truth: Financial offerings to the Lord are truly a blessing . . . and not a burden.

Financial management for Latter-day Saints is based not only on principles of sound financial planning, but also on principles of righteousness. If we wish to invite the Lord to help us manage our money and alleviate our debts, we must keep our promises to him.
