Brent A. Barlow, Just for Newlyweds ( 1992)

Chapter 8

Continuing The Communication

You have likely learned as newlyweds to communicate fairly well on one particular matter: the decision to marry! Recall the many long discussions you had about the potential marriage. There may have been moments of indecision and differences of opinions, such as when and where to marry. Whom should you invite to the wedding? Who should be the best man? The bridesmaids? How did you decide on the honeymoon plans and the other associated details, all requiring considerable communication? You are to be congratulated on your ability to communicate on something very important. The challenge now comes for both of you to continue the communication patterns you have developed thus far. How can you continue to talk to each other, often for extended periods of time, on matters of mutual interest and concern? And in what ways can your communication as newlyweds be improved?

One of the statements often heard from married couples a few years after marriage is "We just can't communicate." But it is not a true statement. It is impossible not to communicate. What couples often mean is that they have difficulty communicating on certain matters or topics. The fact is, they may be communicating very well on less-troublesome aspects of their marriage. Many couples may find that they need some insights, skills, and encouragement on how to communicate more effectively on particular areas of mutual concern and interest.

If asked to describe important skills in effective communication, some would say, "Use eye-to-eye contact," "Be a good listener," "Send clear messages," "Don't interrupt the other when he or she is speaking," and so on. All of these are important. But in my opinion, the one most important skill in effective communication is caring. The simple truth is that people will usually try to communicate if they feel the other person cares about them. Therefore, if spouses feel no care or consideration from their partners, they will not communicate well, if at all, no matter how many of the other skills are acquired.

For a moment, think back on your own life. Who do you feel cared about you? It might have been your parents or brother or sister. It could have been a trusted friend, coach, or teacher. If you remember, you will recall many pleasant conversations that you had with these individuals without a lot of worry about "how to communicate." Because they cared, you probably talked—frequently and deeply—on topics of mutual concern and interest.

Learning to care about another individual—and effectively conveying that care—is probably the single most important thing you can learn to do to become more skilled in communication. That is why building on the love you now have is critical to improving your communication skills. When your marriage partner feels that you care, he or she will usually make efforts to communicate with you. This is another major reason why becoming a loving, caring person in marriage is so important.

What, then, is effective communication? How might it be defined? Effective communication in a marital relationship is the ability to share information, thoughts, or feelings that are easily understood by each other.

Measured Honesty

Before we begin discussing the ways to communicate understandably, let's discuss another important issue in marital communication. The question often arises whether we should be totally open and honest with each other in marriage. Should we be able to express any thought, idea, or emotion that we feel? Should I always express exactly how I feel? Some would say yes. Others question that assumption.

If being "totally open and honest" means to not blatantly lie, cheat, or do anything that will be deceitful or cause mistrust in a marriage, then yes, it is good to be "totally open and honest." But another dimension in communication concerning honesty needs to be considered. A few years ago, many, including some of the experts, would have said, "Yes, let it all hang out. If you feel it, say it." Today, we question that philosophy. Rather than letting it "all hang out," we now advocate measured openness and honesty in marital communication.

Measured honesty in communication might best be explained this way. Stop for a moment and think of one of your very best friends of the same sex. Recall some of the past experiences you have had with that person. Do you appreciate having such a friend? What have you done in the past to protect or enhance the friendship?

In your conversation with that person, did you express every little petty concern that arose between you as friends? Under what circumstances was a criticism or concern discussed? Good friends usually disclose only those things to each other that are necessary to sustain and strengthen the relationship.

If a husband-wife relationship is compared to a good friendship, which it should be, we would have the same concern. What would we say, or not say, to protect the relationship? Would we air every minor concern, or would some things be best left unsaid?

Recent research has suggested that vented hostility usually generates more hostility and that repeated gripes do little to reduce the frequency or intensity of undesirable behavior. If, however, we carefully control what we say—if we measure the impact of what we share with a valued friend or spouse—the relationship will likely prosper.

With measured honesty, the question logically arises as to when to convey a concern and when to practice tolerance and restraint. If the problem continues over an extended period of time and disrupts daily routines such as sleeping, eating, and working, it should be discussed so it can be resolved. This is particularly true if the problem is becoming more and more serious. On the other hand, many of our concerns can be dealt with effectively by increasing our own level of tolerance rather than constantly demanding or expecting a marriage partner to change to meet our expectations.

Before discussing a concern, measured honesty requires that we ask these questions: Will discussing this matter improve our relationship? Will we be better off because of the disclosure? What will the impact be of what I want to say to my partner? If your relationship will benefit, then perhaps it should be discussed. If you feel your relationship will be damaged by bringing up the concern, then it's only logical not to mention it.

A successful marriage is not based on complete frankness. It is based more on sensitivity and caring, which includes a sense of when to speak up and when to practice patience and let an issue slide by.

Four Levels of Communication

Communication in marriage usually occurs on one of four levels: (1) things, (2) people, (3) ideas, and (4) feelings. Levels 1 and 2, things and people, usually deal with the daily routines of life. These include conversation about the weather, the ball game, children, neighbors, picking up the laundry, and topics of this nature. We can usually talk about such things in a casual and sometimes chaotic atmosphere. These are "safe" areas and require less investment of time and emotion from husbands and wives. Still, we should practice sending clear and accurate messages when conversing casually and when merely sharing information.

Levels 3 and 4, ideas and feelings, necessitate a little more preparation and planning. Expressing one's innermost thoughts when little Johnny is demanding attention or in between constant phone conversations is difficult. Often the situation must be conducive to the successful communication of ideas and feelings. The people involved in such communication must focus more carefully on what is being said.

Some men often feel more comfortable communicating on levels 1 and 2: things and people. Most women, on the other hand, like to talk on levels 3 and 4: ideas and feelings. Perhaps that is one reason why some wives often state, "We can't communicate." They may be trying to communicate ideas and feelings while their husbands are talking about things and people. With some patience, time, and skills, however, both husband and wife can learn to be more sensitive to and skilled in all of the levels.

Effective communication in marriage, especially on levels 3 and 4, has at least two important dimensions: sending clear messages and being effective listeners. Let's examine both in more detail.

Sending Clear Messages

When we send a message, we should first consider the two concepts of caring and measured honesty. Is your partner aware that you care about him or her? Next, measure the impact of what you are about to say. With measured honesty, you will determine if the relationship will benefit or improve because of the discussion.

When trying to send clear messages about ideas and feelings, consider the setting of your conversation, which would include both time and place. Both are equally as important as the content of the message you wish to send. It should be obvious to most couples that certain times are more appropriate than others to discuss important matters. If a husband is irritated or annoyed and wishes to discuss the problem with his wife, he will accomplish little by trying to talk about it while she is frantically trying to get ready to go somewhere. Such conversations would be better kept for times other than when preparing income tax forms, when Aunt Tillie has come for her annual two-week visit, or when someone is suffering from fatigue, hunger, illness, sickness, exams, or other stress-creating situations. If you are tired, a few hours of sleep may help you talk more rationally and calmly.

The place you choose to have conversations on matters of major concern is important. You will need privacy, where no phone calls or knocks on the door can distract you. This can often be arranged right in your own home. But, if necessary, get away for a few hours. Go for a walk or a ride. You may want to consider going to one of your favorite restaurants for an extended conversation. Remember, try to arrange your conversations on important matters in a private, relaxed atmosphere.

In sending clear messages, think carefully about what you want to say. Just because you love each other, don't assume that the other person will automatically know your thoughts and feelings. In addition, use the word I rather than you. Learn to speak for yourself. Use phrases such as "I think . . . " or "It is my opinion . . . " In sending clear messages, don't always lay down the law of what you have to have. Appeal to the other person's sense of fairness. And if you wish to change something about your relationship, talk about what you would like in the future rather than what you don't want to continue from the past. Rather than accuse or directly confront your husband or wife on an issue, be tentative in bringing up the topic. Express your concern by beginning with the words "Is it possible that. . . " or "Could it be that . . . "

Finally, in sending clear messages, keep trying. You may have to repeat your message more than one time. The ultimate test of whether or not you have sent a clear message or messages is simply to ask your partner to repeat back what you have said. You should ask for their response before they give any comments. If the message is still unclear to them after being sent once, repeat it a second and even third time if necessary. Just remember this one principle: The message sent is not always the message received.

Learning to communicate understandably is well worth the effort. Successful communication requires that messages be accurately and clearly sent. And to do so takes time, thought, effort, and skill.

Being an Effective Listener

The second important skill in effective communication is being a good listener. Of the four basic communication skills, reading, writing, speaking, and listening, research indicates that we spend 46 percent of our time listening, 30 percent of our time speaking, 15 percent of our time reading, and only 9 percent of our time writing. Yet we receive the least amount of training in the area of listening. Here, then, are nine specific techniques you can use to help you become a better listener in your marriage:

Probing. When your husband or wife is speaking, seek more information. Try to dig deeper into what your spouse is trying to say. Keep any comments you may have until later. Ask for more information by using the words why, when, how, where, and what. Try to get the other person to disclose as much as possible. Use phrases like "Tell me more," or "How did that happen?"

Clarifying. Ask your spouse to explain in more detail what he or she is trying to say. You could use phrases like "I'm not sure I understand," "Could you explain a little more about . . . ," or "Did you say . . . " Perhaps you could ask your partner to restate the position or express the concept he or she is trying to convey.

Summarizing. After your husband or wife has conveyed a particular thought or idea, summarize what you have received by saying, "What you're saying is . . . ," "What you're trying to tell me is . . . ," or "We have decided that . . . " If your summary is incomplete or inaccurate, go back to clarifying and ask your spouse to restate the point of view one more time.

Supporting. Make it clear when you agree with or at least support a spouse's statement or proposal. For instance, if a wife indicates that she needs more time alone, you might discuss it for a few minutes and then be supportive by stating, "If that's what you really need, then I think we ought to make arrangements for you to have it."

Affirming. When you feel you understand the message your spouse is making, you could indicate that by a nonverbal gesture such as nodding your head or with statements like "I agree," "That makes a lot of sense," "That's true," or "Sure."

Restating. Repeat back what has just been said. This lets your partner know what you have received and gives him or her a chance to check the clarity of the message. For example, a wife may tell her husband about a difficult moment she had that morning with their teenage daughter. The husband could say, "So you told Janet she could not go to the movie until her algebra homework was finished?" Summarizing is useful for longer messages, while restating is good for shorter messages.

Reflecting. After an exchange of information or ideas, analyze what has been said. Reflect on a few ideas that may add insight to the conversation. For example, a husband may express his desire to purchase some new fishing equipment. His wife could say, "Maybe that will help you relax and unwind a little more this summer." Perhaps she questions the proposed purchase. Rather than just fight him on the issue, she could say, "What does that mean about the money I wanted for a new lamp and chair?"

Bouncing. This listening technique involves making a statement or quoting someone else and asking your spouse to react to the statement. For example, you might say, "Kris thinks we should go camping as a family next summer. What do you think?" Or, "Our neighbor, Bob, thinks we should have all the trees in our area sprayed for insects. How do you feel about that?"

Confronting. On occasion, you may wish to use the listening technique of confronting. Ask, in a gentle way, for a spouse to reconcile inconsistent remarks. Use phrases such as "Didn't you say before . . . " or "How do you reconcile that statement with what you said earlier?" For example, a husband may indicate the need to go out more often with his wife. When she suggests that they go to a movie that evening, he states that he is too tired. The wife may then confront him, comparing his earlier statement of the need to go out with his last statement that he is too tired to do so. Be careful with confronting that you do not provoke defensive behavior in your marriage partner.

Good listeners focus on the speakers. They turn their heads, and perhaps their chairs, in their partners' direction and look at them during the conversation. They don't stand or sit either too close or too far away. An arm's length seems to be a comfortable distance for most. They lean slightly forward in their chairs, indicating that they are listening intently. Leaning back and slouching may suggest that they are disinterested or bored.

They also listen more than they talk. Good listeners hold their own comments in reserve and encourage their partners to speak more often by using some of the techniques we have just reviewed. On occasion, they use intentional silence when they or their partners need to collect their thoughts. And finally, they use their spouses' names often without becoming overbearing or repetitious. This adds a touch of warmth since most people enjoy hearing their names used, and the use of names helps develop a sense of closeness between the people engaging in conversation. (See John W. Zehring, "Are You a Good Listener?" Marriage and Family Living 68, no. 3 [March 1986]: 22-25.)

Nonverbal Messages

Not all communication occurs verbally. One of the important ways we relate to others is through nonverbal messages. A touch on the shoulder may suggest concern, for instance. A slam of the door tells everyone that the person is mad. A frown shows displeasure, or concentration, or confusion, or other feelings. Sometimes the messages we send are unintentional. Following are several ways people can communicate nonverbally: voice intonation or inflection, the pace or rate of the speech, facial expressions, body posture, eye fixation or wandering, the presence or absence of touch, and, to some degree, dress and personal hygiene.

Because nonverbal messages can easily be misunderstood, couples need to exercise caution that their actions do not convey wrong messages and that they do not misread actions. If the content of a nonverbal message is critical, it can be checked out with a verbal response. For example, a husband may be explaining something of significance to his wife, but she keeps yawning. He could interpret her yawns as indications of indifference or noncaring. In reality, she could simply be tired from lack of sleep or from a particularly fatiguing day. To check the meaning of her actions, the husband may make a nonthreatening inquiry. This could begin with phrases like "I get the feeling . . . that. . . ," "Is it possible that. . . ," "Could it be . . . ," or "You say . . . but I receive the impression that . . . "

Nonverbal cues can be an excellent way to gain insight and information into what someone else is thinking or feeling. They can also be an excellent way to reinforce messages, convey feelings, or respond to your spouse. However, always ask or "check out" your interpretation before you assume any definite meaning.

The Three T's Exercise

One of the most effective exercises I have ever recommended to newlyweds in my classes at BYU has been the Three Ts Exercise. The three Ts simply stand for time, talk, and touch. I recommend that two or three times a week a couple reserve a small amount of time to talk to and touch each other. Usually it's a twenty-minute block of time in which one talks for ten minutes while the other listens and then listens while the other talks for ten minutes. This way a couple can get back in contact with each other after a hectic day. Many newly wedded couples at BYU state that they find it hard to do while in school. I suggest that if they find it difficult now, it will be even more difficult after children arrive. Truly, "as the twig is bent, the tree is inclined."

Turn off the television, put down the newspaper, put the children to bed (if you have them), and, if necessary, take the phone off the hook or turn on your answering machine. Spend the time talking about areas of mutual concern and interest. While you are talking to each other, touch each other. Hold hands or put your arms around each other in a way that demonstrates care and concern. Even twenty-minute periods with no distraction only two or three times a week help newlyweds maintain interest in their marriage. Remember, care and concern lay the foundation on which effective communication is built.
