Brent A. Barlow, Just for Newlyweds ( 1992)

Chapter 9

Family and Friends

When you marry, you marry the family. This simple truth is one concept I have constantly taught in my marriage classes. Not many students pay attention when I teach the idea, particularly the single students. They think they will just meet someone on campus, marry, and ride on into the sunset. As they drive off, however, they should check their rearview mirror. Because right behind them, somewhere in the dust, their family members will be following.

Many wedding ceremonies have a "giving away" part where the father of the bride or someone else "gives the bride away." That part of the ceremony is only a symbolic gesture and somewhat misleading because no parent ever totally gives a grown son or daughter away to anyone. There remains an attachment throughout life.

Some time ago I addressed a rather large LDS group on parent-child relations. During my remarks I talked about when children leave home during the late teens and how, after several vigorous years of rearing children, my wife and I were looking forward to that in many ways. After I finished, an elderly man came up and in half jest said, "For someone with a Ph.D., you have something yet to learn about families. Children never leave home. They may move several miles away, even to another country, but they are always with you in thought no matter where they go." He said that there is another dimension of parent-child relationships after the teen years are over.

Two Commandments: Honoring Parents And Leaving Parents

I remember when I received my patriarchal blessing at the age of sixteen. In my blessing, the patriarch, Charles S. Hansen, admonished that I should always seek the advice of my parents. When my blessing was finished, he commented, "Brent, you noted that the Lord told you to always seek the advice of your parents." I said that I understood. I intended to that for the next few years until I was old enough to leave home.

"That is not what your blessing meant," he cautioned. "The Lord meant for you to seek the advice of your parents even after you leave home." For several months after that, I pondered over my blessing. Why should adult children seek the advice of parents once they have left home? At that point I began to better understand one of the Ten Commandments: "Honour thy father and thy mother." (Ex. 20:12.)

Adult sons and daughters can learn a great deal from parents even after leaving home. I learned this shortly after we were married. A man came to our home one evening with a "once in a lifetime" investment opportunity in some questionable stocks. The only catch was that we had to invest several thousand dollars (which we didn't have) within forty-eight hours in order to take advantage of the "opportunity." It sounded too good to be true, which we have since learned is a tip-off against investments. He wanted us to borrow the money and sign the contract the next day. We were tempted.

He said he'd call back the following afternoon for our answer and, he hoped, our money. I couldn't sleep that night. Should we borrow the money and invest? What if we missed a true opportunity, as the man had suggested we might? But how much risk was involved in the investment? What should we do?

The next morning, following the counsel in my patriarchal blessing many years earlier, I called Dad on the phone. He listened for a few minutes and said that he couldn't tell me what to do (which is a good strategy for in-laws and family) but that he would be careful if he were in my place. First, he said, I should be cautious about borrowing money to invest unless I could afford to lose it all. We couldn't afford it. Then, he said, anytime anyone puts a time clause on a sale, such as "you must act within so many hours," you had better be cautious. "If the offer isn't good a week from now, it isn't all that good now."

The advice of my father that day helped me decide not to invest and subsequently not to lose several thousand dollars, which is what happened to the man and many other investors who decided to "act now." Because parents have had many more experiences in life, they can often teach young adults what they have learned, protecting their children even after they are grown. Perhaps that is what the blessing for honoring one's parents refers to: "That thy days may be long upon the land." (Ex. 20:12.)

Obviously, young married couples are under no obligation to follow their parents' counsel or even to listen. But occasionally seeking the advice of parents, especially as untried newly married couples just starting out, is one way we can both honor them and benefit.

The scriptures also teach that we should "leave" father and mother. (Gen. 2:24.) Is it possible to do both: honor one's parents and leave them? I think so. And doing both may well be the key to stable family and in-law relationships once we have married and left home. I have known many young people who have left home and yet do not honor their parents. Some haven't talked to their parents or seen them for years. Still others continue to honor father and mother after marriage but in a real sense do not leave them.

I know a marriage-and-family counselor who lived in Utah for several years and who was not a Latter-day Saint. During his time in Utah, he counseled many LDS families. When he decided to leave our area, I asked him what observations he had about working with Latter-day Saints. He was very complimentary but said that he had observed one peculiarity. Many LDS families are so close-knit in the name of family solidarity that they have a difficult time letting go of their children once they grow up and leave home. Some LDS children are unable to cope well with life once they leave home because they never, in a sense, leave father and mother. He suggested that this was not in the best interest of either the child or the parent. He said that he had often performed a "parentectomy," or a removal of the parent from the child, right in his office during therapy.

Once children leave father and mother, they are free to return for the needed continued relationship. I have often suggested to many young people that they leave home as a child and then return as a friend. I don't know of a better relationship for a couple to have with their parents once they are married than being good friends.

One of the keys for a stable relationship with parents and in-laws during the early years of marriage is to observe the simple principle of the Golden Mean: Not too much and not too little. For a couple after marriage trying to establish a proper relationship with parents, it means not too much and not too little involvement. We have so much invested in family relationships prior to marriage that we continue to need and to want the relationships to continue after marriage. The key is to strike a balance in how much involvement to have. If we have too little involvement with parents and siblings, we alienate them and contribute to unneeded friction and to hurt feelings. If we have too much involvement, we can experience dissension in our own marital relationship.

Late one night a young man called on the phone and got me out of bed. He said that he had been married just a few months but was upset because his wife was going home to visit her mother and father for two weeks. I asked him why that bothered him, and he said that daughters shouldn't have to return home once they are married. Upon further questioning, I found that the young bride hadn't been to see her parents since the wedding.

"And besides," the young groom said, "how can she stand to be away from me for two weeks?" The more he talked, the more I understood how she could stand it. She needed to get away! I finally convinced the anxious young husband that time spent away from each other need not be disruptive to a marriage. Much of it depends on the motive for leaving and the amount of time spent away from each other. In fact, time wisely invested in relationships with family members and friends can be a boost to the marriage.

An important step to striking the balance is to talk about the situation with one's spouse. How does he or she feel about family/in-law interaction? Is it too much? Too little? Is there a need for more or less involvement? If a young husband and wife keep each other first in priority in all aspects of life, including relationships with family and friends, yet establish proper priorities for extended family ties, the marriage has a good chance of prospering.

Contrary to popular opinion, many young married couples have very good relationships with their family members and in-laws. In fact, some spouses get along better with in-laws than with their own parents. My estimates over the years have been that about half of the married couples get along reasonably well with in-laws. But the other half have problems ranging anywhere from minimal to severe. By themselves, some young couples often get along well, only to find that one of their parents is a "smother" or a "bother" rather than a mother or a father. Leaving home then becomes more of a process than an event. But this adjustment, like most others we encounter in marriage, usually works out in time if both husband and wife conscientiously try to resolve it. In fact, many young couples perceive parents and in-laws to be a stabilizing influence and a blessing in their lives rather than the stereotypes promoted in the media and in print.

Unlike the image perpetuated in jokes, comic strips, and other media, in-law adjustments are usually between the new bride and her mother-in-law rather than between the groom and his mother-in-law. A mother generally tends to be a little closer to her children than the father is and sometimes has a more difficult time letting go. Young brides should be wary about taking this problem personally since any other young woman who married the son would likely be undergoing similar adjustment. Just remember. Every girl marries some mother's son. And someday, in turn, that girl will probably see a young girl marry one of her sons as well. At that later time, she may have a better understanding of the difficulty of a mother letting go of a son or daughter.

There are also some stressful moments during the engagement and first few months of marriage in trying to figure out how to address one's in-laws. Do you call them "Mom and Dad"? Some do. Others can't because they believe that Mom and Dad designate specific people. They may experiment with "Mr. and Mrs.," "Brother and Sister," first names, or nicknames. Others are so confused that they don't know how to address in-laws, so they just wait until they are looking in their direction and start talking (the "Hey, you" phenomenon). This problem is alleviated somewhat after the first child is born and they are simply called Grandpa or Grandma.

As we get older, our parents will need us in special ways. First, they just want to be part of our lives and know that they did an adequate job in rearing us. This is a rather simple task for married children to accomplish. Just reassure both sets of parents that you appreciate what they have done for you thus far in life. To in-laws, you can express appreciation to them for having provided you with a fine husband or wife. Some young couples, either before or shortly after the marriage, write a letter of appreciation to in-laws stating such sentiments. Later in life, a few parents may need financial assistance in meeting the heavy medical bills and other obligations that come with aging. Finally, as mortality draws to a close, they will need you, as you will also need others when you become feeble and approach death.

Friendships after Marriage

Mutual friends can be a great source of support after we are married. But do we both enjoy the same people as friends? How much time should we spend with them? How much say-so do spouses have with their partner's involvement with friends? When do we invite them over to our home? Who decides? How much involvement, if any, should we have with former boyfriends or girlfriends? Should we even allow ourselves to think about them?

About one year after Susan and I were married, Susan said halfway through dinner that she had something to tell me. I asked her what it was. She replied that, on occasion, she still thought about former boyfriends.

You may think that I became furious. I did not. In fact, it was somewhat of a relief. Because I had something I had been wanting to tell my new wife but somehow didn't know how to—I had sometimes thought about former girlfriends too.

We had a good laugh about it that evening because both of us had experienced it but didn't know how to tell the other. And in hindsight, I don't know if we should have even tried to discuss it prior to that point. I don't know if either of us would have been mature enough to handle it during the first few precarious months of marriage.

I'm not recommending that young husbands and wives sit down and discuss how they felt or still may feel about former relationships. One of the vows in many marriage ceremonies is that we "forsake all others." This forsaking is social, physical, and mental. Our marriage vows imply that we will focus our time, attention, and energies on each other and not on former relationships or on relationships that may develop after we are married.

So much for the ideal. The reality is that, like Susan and myself, most married couples come into marriage having had a variety of dating relationships. I don't know how accurate the figure is, but I have often guessed that as many as 80 percent of the people who marry do not marry the first person they fall in love with. If that statistic is even close, it means that the great majority of couples face the sensitive issue of discussing or even mentioning former boyfriends or girlfriends.

A few years ago Susan gave me one of the nicest gifts I have ever received for Christmas. She had gotten out all the pictures my father and mother had given us of my years at home. Then Susan organized them into two scrapbooks by category and year. It was sort of a "This Is Your Life, Brent Barlow."

I was overwhelmed with the gift and very pleased. As I looked through it that Christmas morning, I came to one section titled "Girl Friends." I glanced through the pages that followed and found a wide array of pictures of young women I had dated in high school and college. I asked Susan if that section was difficult to put together. She said something that morning that impressed me. She said, "No, as I was putting your scrapbook together, I realized that your dating years were an important part of your life. I didn't want to leave them out."

I squirmed a bit. I didn't know if I could have been mature enough to have done the same thing for her. Then she said, "Besides, these young women helped you grow up and learn about life . . . and love. They helped prepare you for me." What a nice thing for a wife to say to her husband! Remember, this was some twenty years after we were married. I wonder if I could give Susan a gift like that even now. I am somewhat more jealous. Susan had a lot of boyfriends during high school and college. (I suspect, in fact, that at one time she had a 1-800 telephone number for dating.)

A few years ago, while speaking to an LDS group in another state, I saw in the audience a woman I had dated during my college days. In fact, we had become quite serious, but obviously the relationship had not led to marriage. Now, some fifteen years later, we met again, both having married other people, and this was the first time we had seen each other since that time.

I lost my concentration in my speech but somehow got through it. When it was over, she came up to the podium and introduced herself and her husband whom I had never met. We went through the small talk, and then she said something that I appreciated very much, "I think I am a better person for having dated you in college." What a wonderful compliment! I realized too that I was a better person because of the relationship. That incident, I think, reflects something that is true for most of us. Former serious relationships that do not lead to marriage are usually not lost causes. We learn. We grow. We mature. And life continues. Perhaps we all should be thankful to the young men or women who previously dated our spouses and helped them learn about love and life.

Susan and I apparently are not the only couple who have had to deal with former boyfriends and girlfriends. When I was writing my weekly column for the Deseret News I received a letter in the mail from a young LDS wife. She wrote:

Dear Dr. Barlow,

My husband and I have been married for about two years, and everything has been going fine expect for one thing. I keep thinking about a fellow to whom I was engaged before I met my husband. I find myself thinking about him from time to time and even dream about him on occasion. Is this normal, or is there something wrong with me? Does it mean anything about my present relationship with my husband? Could it be disruptive to my marriage?

Here is my answer:

You are quite normal, and your situation is fairly common since the vast majority of us usually become involved in one or two romantic relationships that do not lead to marriage. The impact of a former relationship on marriage, other than divorce, is one of the most neglected areas in marriage and family studies.

I have seen some young people become so devastated from breaking off an engagement that they take months to recover. Some never recover at all and choose to remain single the rest of their lives rather than risk the pain of separation again. After breaking up, some will quickly get into another relationship to show themselves, friends and family, or their former boy- or girlfriend that they are capable of loving and being loved again. Some of these off-the-rebound relationships lead to marriage and often end up with disastrous consequences. While divorce therapy has become more prominent during the past few years, we have not given enough attention to helping people get out of relationships before marriage.

A few husbands and wives find themselves attracted to other men and women after marriage. Whatever the reasons, they feel that if they remain attracted to other people than their spouses, they are not now in love and should terminate their marriages. Some have naÃ¯vely done so, only to find after another marriage that they continue to be attracted to others. Rather than chase butterflies and seek happiness elsewhere, many of us should examine our situation, learn to be content, and seek happiness in our present marriage.

Some married women, and I suppose married men, retain mementos from former boyfriends and girlfriends. And if they do not retain the mementos, they retain the memories. Some keep old love letters, pictures, rings, or gifts for sentimental reasons. When the present relationship becomes shaky, out come the items as a means of solace and a reminder that someone once loved them, and perhaps still does.

While retaining pleasant thoughts of a former relationship may be somewhat normal, we should be careful not to let them interfere with our marriage. The thoughts are usually harmless unless one chooses to dwell on them often or for extended periods. This phenomenon, known as psychic infidelity or mental wanderlust, can be highly disruptive to a marriage, especially if one wonders how a marriage to the person may have been if things had worked out otherwise.

You need not try to totally forget your former boyfriend, nor need you feel guilty or ashamed because of him. The time you spent together was not wasted even though you did not marry. You both matured and contributed to each other's lives at that particular time.

But since you did not marry each other, you should reexamine your present commitment to your husband and remember your wedding vows. The total efforts of both husband and wife are needed in contemporary marriage to meet the daily demands of life. All the time and energy invested in others only serve to undermine your present marital relationship.

If necessary, burn some of your old love letters from him if you still have them. Perhaps gifts and other mementos should also be discarded if they are interfering with your marriage.

Be careful not to fan the spark of an old flame. While fire may provide warmth and comfort, it can also be consuming.

Thanks for your letter.

Sincerely,

Brent A. Barlow
