Brent A. Barlow, Just for Newlyweds ( 1992)

Chapter 10

When Change Is Necessary

The bliss and romance newlyweds enjoy usually continue well into the first year of marriage. In my marriage classes at BYU, I can look out over the students and tell who has been married for the shortest period of time. They will be sitting close to each other, hugging each other, kissing each other "hello" or "good bye" as the class begins or ends. And their comments in class usually indicate that they have a very rosy picture of what lies ahead of them in marriage.

The couples who are past their first year of marriage, however, know that things are not quite the same as they were at the time of the wedding or the period shortly after. In fact, there are some indications that the first six months of marriage is the idyllic period. During the last six months of the first year, newlyweds begin to realize that things are not quite as they used to be or were expected to be. Also about this time, young couples begin to think that some changes need to be made.

Change is a somewhat threatening aspect of marriage for many husbands and wives. This is particularly so for many LDS couples. I have often wondered why. For one thing, we choose someone for marriage because of certain traits or characteristics they possess. And we don't want them to change because of the very things that attracted us to them. Some husbands, for instance, do not want wives to change their hairstyle or manner of dress. They want them to look and dress the way they did when they were first married. Consequently, some wives keep hairstyles and clothing that are outdated. Some wives, on the other hand, do not want husbands to develop new hobbies, relationships with male friends, or other interests outside the home because such things may take them away from the home and marriage.

There are numerous other reasons why husbands and wives are hesitant to experience change in their marriages. And some concern is warranted. We would not want a spouse to change in a way that may be inconsistent with gospel principles or may, in fact, be against the law. These changes, however, are the exception rather than the rule. The changes I am talking about are changes in such things as clothing preferences, hairstyle, occupational or educational pursuits, or other areas affected by aging.

Resisting the Change

I have also come to realize that there are some interesting religious factors for Latter-day Saints that may inhibit change. One is the concept about deity, stated in the scriptures, that the Lord is "the same yesterday, to-day, and forever." (1 Ne. 10:18; see also 2 Ne. 27:23; 29:9; Alma 31:17.) In efforts to become more Christlike or Godlike, some LDS couples interpret this to mean that since the Lord is unchanging, they should be likewise. The only problem is that God is at a state of perfection, where change is unnecessary. As imperfect mortals, however, married couples should be willing to make appropriate changes and adjustments to preserve and strengthen marriage and family relationships. Eternal progression and repentance also necessitate some changes.

Another aspect of change is reflected in one of our Church hymns. In a church service not long ago, as the congregation was singing "Abide with Me," a particular phrase caught my attention. "Earth's joys grow dim; its glories pass away. Change and decay in all around I see; O thou who changest not, abide with me." (Hymns, 1985, no. 166.) Henry F. Lyte, who wrote the words to "Abide with Me," equated change with decay in this hymn. His thinking may have reflected his times and suggests that things were better during a former period. Situations and people supposedly become worse after changes occur.

The tendency to idealize the past—the way things have been—was not peculiar to Henry F. Lyte. Nor was it restricted to religious thought. There is a tendency to do the same with marriage and family life. It is what they call "the western family of nostalgia."

We tend to look to the past and long for previous times. Family life was supposedly best many years ago, during pioneer times and up through the postdepression era. Popular television programs in the past like "The Waltons" and "Little House on the Prairie" have emphasized these beliefs by portraying close, loving families from earlier periods. Some people still believe that marriage and family life were best then, and any change from that era has supposedly only brought about disorganization and chaos, even decay. Once again, any change or departure from the past is only thought to be for the worse.

If we had to choose, would many of us actually return to the past and live then? Must marriage and family life be exactly as it was in the past? Can change be for the better? I believe it can. The environment and society do not necessarily determine family life. The principles, not the times, create close, loving relationships. Conscientious choice and effort make change positive no matter the time and place.

Perhaps another reason we are afraid of change is because we do not want to risk anything. We do not want to upset the status quo, even if the status quo is less than desirable. In trying to change, we may lose something we have. In being willing to risk, however, we may gain something we don't have.

The necessity of risk and change in life is noted in these few lines by an unknown author:

To laugh is to risk appearing the fool, To weep is to risk appearing sentimental, To reach out for another is to risk involvement, To expose feeling is to risk exposing your true self, To place your ideas, your dreams before the crowd is to risk their loss, To love is to risk not being loved in return, To live is to risk dying, To hope is to risk despair, To try is to risk failure; But risk must be taken, because the greatest hazard in life is to risk nothing. The person who risks nothing does nothing, has nothing, and is nothing. He may avoid suffering and sorrow, but he simply cannot learn, feel, change, grow, love, live. Chained by his certitudes, he is a slave, he has forfeited freedom. Only a person who risks—is free.

And may I add, only the person who risks can grow . . . and change.

Can't, Won't and Don't

There are three words that I hear often from husbands and wives who are describing their marital relationship: can't, won't, and don't. Wives will often say something like "My husband can't communicate," or "He won't help around the house." Husbands may say things like "She just won't be affectionate," or "Wives can't understand certain things about men." The three words surface in countless other sentences of husbands and wives. This may seem trivial to others, but I think that the ways these three words are used are very important.

For instance, suppose a wife feels that her husband is inattentive to her emotional needs. She tries to express herself to him, but there is no reciprocation. She could say any of the following to her husband:

"You can't help me with my emotional needs."

"You won't help me with my emotional needs."

"You do not help me with my emotional needs."

The statement "You can't . . . " suggests that the husband neither has nor will ever develop the skills necessary to relate to her emotional needs. It is as if he does not have the capability to do it. Using "You can't . . . " statements is a judgment or an assessment of what an individual can and can not do.

The statement "You won't . . . " is an evaluation of stubbornness, indicating an unwillingness to do something that one is capable of doing. It is an accusation that the other has made a conscious decision not to do something.

The statement "You don't . . . " again is an evaluation, but one that can be based on more empirical evaluation. A phrase such as "You don't help enough with the housework" can more easily be verified and documented than the accusation "You won't help with housework."

As husbands and wives, we need to be careful how we use these three words. Remember: can't suggests the lack of skills, won't suggests unwillingness or stubbornness, and don't observes a lack of activity that can be verified. In relating concerns about your marriage, be careful in distinguishing between (1) inability, (2) unwillingness, and (3) infrequency.

If you seldom or infrequently go out as a couple, let that be the issue rather than cloud the point by bringing up inability or unwillingness. If you would like to share more frequent or more caring intimate moments in your marriage, discuss that rather than bring in the issue of the other person's supposed inability or stubbornness to do so.

I believe that most husbands and wives have the skills and capability to live in stable and satisfying marital relationships. One problem is that they often do not apply or use the skills and resources they already have. Can't, won't, and don't—three important words in contemporary marriage. Be careful how you use them in yours.

Changing Oneself Is Difficult for Many

I'm absolutely amazed at how resistant many are to change even when they know it would be in their best interests. They will say things like "You can't teach old dogs new tricks," or "You can't change the spots on a leopard's back." And in some ways these statements are true because they refer to someone trying to change someone else. It is becoming more and more evident that one person cannot change another. Manipulation, force, or coercion can bring about momentary change. There is a saying that reflects the depth of such change: ''A person convinced against his will is of the same opinion still." Yet many continue to try changing their partners rather than themselves.

Even though it is difficult, if not impossible, for one person to change another, the vital truth is that people can change themselves. In fact, when they choose to do so, many individuals have made remarkable changes in their lives.

In counseling sessions, people often argue, sometimes rather heatedly, about why they can't change. They will cite reasons such as their childhood, family background, or previous painful relationships in life. They give arguments about their birth order, convinced that because they are a second or third child, they are authorized to act in a certain way even if it is detrimental to the relationship. Some note that they were born under a certain sign, like Taurus or Gemini, and believe that such signs govern their actions. They check their horoscope each day in the newspaper to see how they are going to behave. Others have even visited palm readers or will relate a certain mystic or religious experience that implies that they are to be or act a certain way.

A few will ascribe their inability to change to certain physical or medical impairments. In a number of these cases, there is some validity to the claims. Even so, I believe that such individuals must accept some responsibility, not so much for the physical impairment, but for their response or reaction to it.

Before we decide we "can't" or "won't" change something in our marriage, we should remember the story about a scorpion and a frog.

They met on a river bank one day, and both needed to cross the river. The scorpion said, "Let me get on your back, and you can give me a ride to the other side."

"But if I did," said the frog, "you would sting me, and I would die."

"But if I sting you," replied the scorpion, "I will drown with you."

After some thought the frog said, "You're right. Get on my back, and I'll take you across the river."

The scorpion got on the frog's back, but halfway across the river, the scorpion stung the frog on the neck. The frog became paralyzed, and they both began to sink. The frog gasped, "Why did you do that?"

Just before they both drowned in the river, the scorpion replied, "I had to. It's just my nature."

In order to change a marriage, married couples must first believe that change is possible. Otherwise, they just continue in the punitive, unsatisfying behavior that may even be paralyzing the relationship. And eventually they too emotionally sink and drown.

Sometimes the resistance to change is so pronounced that troubled young couples continue to punish and hurt each other even though they know that change is vital and in their best interest. They think they have to continue to inflict pain and hurt each other. These couples foolishly believe that they just can't change. It's not their nature.

Five Scriptures That Can Change Your Marriage

Think for a moment of ways your marriage might be changed for the good. I will now outline five scriptures that are guaranteed to help you change if you apply them as suggested. They are guaranteed because the Lord has given them and promises that they will work. I have lectured often on these five scriptures and have heard some interesting reports of their impact on contemporary living.

Scripture #1: Matthew 7:12. The Law of the Boomerang.

Most people know Matthew 7:12 as the Golden Rule: "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them." (See also Luke 6:31.) Do to others as you would have them do to you; treat others as you would like to be treated. Such conduct will allow a person to get along in life with most people.

There is another principle, however, contained in Matthew 7:12 that I call the law of the boomerang. The lesson is this: Think how you would like to be treated, treat another that way first, and eventually the behavior will be returned to you by others, as will a well-thrown boomerang. When I was a freshman enrolled at BYU, I remember a returned missionary from Australia who took us out to the field north of Helaman Halls late one afternoon and demonstrated how to throw boomerangs. He had large ones and small ones. But each boomerang thrown, regardless of size, would go out in some sort of irregular pattern and then return to our position nearly every time.

The principle in human relationships is that you, and not the other person in the relationship, have to start the process of desirable change. You have to be willing to exert some effort in order to bring about the kind of relationship you desire. Other scriptures contain similar thoughts. Jesus declared, "With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again." (Matt. 7:2.) In the book of Luke, we read, "Give, and it shall be given unto you." (6:38.) The writer of Ecclesiastes wrote, "Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after many days." (11:1.) Alma likewise declared to his son Corianton, "For that which ye do send out shall return unto you again." (Alma 41:15.)

Scripture #2: Matthew 7:3-5. The Change-First Principle.

For some reason, a great many people will wait for someone else to change first. "I will change after he/she changes" is a comment often heard in marriage counseling where couples come to confess each other's sins. In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus asked, "Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's [or spouse's] eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy brother [or husband or wife], Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye?" (Matt. 7:3-4.) By trade, Jesus was a carpenter and used a carpenter's analogy of a mote (a speck) and a beam to describe the degree of inaccuracy with which we see inadequacies in ourselves and in others. He then charged: "Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye." (Matt. 7:5.)

Jesus simply acknowledged the common human tendency of waiting for the other person to initiate the change. He admonished that, rather than wait, we not only initiate the change, but also start by working on our own imperfections. Then our perception of other people's weaknesses will be dramatically altered.

Not long ago I was speaking to a rather large group about marriage. On the front row was an elderly couple who were having a hard time hearing, so I tried to speak a little louder than normal. During the speech I talked about the change-first principle as an important part of marital relationships. At the end of my speech, the older couple came up to the rostrum. The man shook my hand and said, "Dr. Barlow, you have just solved a major problem we have had for years in our marriage." He then turned to his wife and said rather sternly, "Did you hear Dr. Barlow, dear? If we want a better marriage, you have to be willing to change first!"

As long as husbands and wives focus on and emphasize each other's faults and imperfections, they will make no real progress in changing their relationships. The almost universal reaction is that when a relationship is impaired, each spouse thinks the other is at fault. We can nag, complain, hint, bribe, insult, or even try to physically force the other to change. But as we soon learn, it is to no avail.

The only real, genuine, lasting change that occurs in a marriage, or any other relationship for that matter, is that which is self-instigated. Change from within. You can, as a marriage partner, invite (not demand) the other to change. But even in that case, you must be willing to change first. If you want a better relationship with your spouse, or with anyone else for that matter, you have to initiate the desired changes by working on yourself first. If you are going to reform your marriage, let the reformation begin with you! Get a mirror rather than a magnifying glass.

Scripture #3: Galatians 6:7. The Law of the Harvest.

Another simple but somewhat controversial biblical passage says, "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Gal. 6:1.) It means that whatever you do in life will yield something.

The controversial part of the scripture is that things often happen to individuals that have nothing to do with previous effort or the lack of it. Sometimes bad things happen to good people, problems for which they are not responsible. The scripture, however, does not say that everything a man experiences is a result of something he does, but rather what a man does has consequences that return.

Some women at my BYU Education Week lectures have become upset when we read the law of the harvest and apply it to marriage. They will later argue that they are in difficult marriages right now for which they do not feel responsible. And I can understand their feelings. I have suggested to those experiencing difficulties that, even if they have not sown the seeds of disharmony or discontent in their marriages, they at least have nurtured the process once it is underway. When they react, their reaction will inevitably yield something they reap. The bad news of the law of the harvest is that the results of our actions can be negative: "For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind." (Hosea 8:7.)

The good news is that if we want to reap more harmony and satisfaction out of the relationship, we have to sow the seeds that will bring that harvest about. And the promise is that eventually we will reap, in a positive way, what we take the time to sow. Many married couples today, as well as parents, are hesitant to do good to another person (plant the seeds) when difficulties arise. We are not sure "good will be returned for good," nor do we believe that anything positive will result if we display love and kindness when it seemingly is not warranted by another. Latter-day revelation urges, "Fear not to do good, . . . for whatsoever ye sow, that shall ye also reap; therefore, if ye sow good ye shall also reap good for your reward. Therefore, fear not, little flock; do good." (D&C 6:33-34.)

Scripture #4: James 1:4. The Patience Principle.

James urges that we "let patience have her perfect work." (James 1:4.) Not everything worthwhile we do in life will have immediate rewards or a prompt impact. During the long hot days of summer, for example, I will often walk through our garden and say to myself, "No growth . . . no growth." Later that evening, we will have a family home evening. The kids may not listen attentively to the lesson or may even appear uninterested. As we conclude, I may likewise say to myself, "No growth . . . no growth." Yet Susan and I know the growth process is under way both in our garden and with our children, even though the growth may seem slow and is not readily discernible. We have had to learn the patience principle in both gardening and parenting.

In the intermountain area, we are accustomed to short growing seasons of just a few months. We plant in the spring and reap in the fall of the same year. But both the law of the harvest and the patience principle suggest that we may have to plant and then water and weed for an extended period of time before the harvest will occur. It is true in gardening and is also true in some aspects of marriage and family relationships.

When Susan and I were in Hawaii recently, we wanted to visit a macadamia nut farm. We drove to one and saw a big sign that read, "We are sorry, but we are out of macadamia nuts. It takes seven years from the time you plant until you reap a harvest. We are now in our sixth year. Come back next year, and we will have macadamia nuts."

While we were in Hawaii, we also learned that it takes eighteen months to reap the first crop of pineapples and thirty months to reap the second. The planting, nurturing, and harvest season for pineapples lasts nearly three years. I also understand it takes twenty years before the first crop of olives can be picked, and forty years before the olive trees fully mature.

If we want to reap a reward in this life or the next, we must understand the growth process and learn to be patient with ourselves and our loved ones. Between the planting and the harvest, we will continue to nurture, water, and weed whether growing olives . . . or rearing children . . . or being married. We will continue to have faith in the growth process, however long it takes.

Scripture #5: Doctrine and Covenants 1:10. The Divine Promise.

Some people with whom I have shared these five principles and scriptures wonder if the processes implied really work. I assure them that they will and that they always have . . . when properly applied. But if we are afraid to initiate the effort, change first, plant the seeds of harmony, and nurture them with patience, we should examine the Lord's promises of rewards, justice, and mercy. He declared, speaking of the last days, "Unto the day when the Lord shall come to recompense unto every man according to his work, and measure to every man according to the measure which he has measured to his fellow man." (D&C l:l.)

If we are kind, patient, considerate, and loving toward others, and they do not respond favorably at all, even during this lifetime, our efforts are not wasted or in vain. The Lord has said that he will treat us and ultimately judge us by the same standard we have accorded others. The boomerang will return, and we will ultimately reap a harvest. It is a divine promise.

The Principles in Action

One time when I was in Denver, Colorado, I shared these five scriptures and concepts with an LDS audience. At the conclusion of the meeting, a father in his midforties came up to the podium.

He tearfully shared with me a rather unpleasant experience he had had with his teenage son that very day. It was just one of many difficult experiences during the previous three years. The son had left home more than once and had done many things inconsistent with LDS values. The father was so exasperated that Saturday morning that he had decided to hear my lecture that evening. Then he would go home and, I quote, "lay down the law" to his son. He had even written several items on a 3" x 5" card that he would insist his son do in order to remain at home. "The main thing I want from my son, Dr. Barlow," he said, "is for him to respect and value my opinions."

He continued. "As you reviewed those five principles tonight, the law of the boomerang, the change-first principle, the law of the harvest, the patience principle, and the divine promise, I paid attention. For the first time I realized that I could expect nothing from my son that I was not willing to do . . . first. If I want him to respect and value my opinions, then I will have to first respect and value his opinions."

During my speech that night, he had written ideas on the other side of the 3" x 5" card. He said that he was going to go home and tell his son what he, the father, was willing to do to change the relationship. He would explain that he was willing to change first. In addition, he wanted to test the law of the harvest, be patient, and hope for the divine promise.

I don't know what happened that night when the father returned home. I do know, however, that the son was not forced out prematurely. And the father was willing to work on himself first for improvements in his relationship with his wayward son.

One of the most dramatic applications of these five scriptures I've heard about was by an older LDS sister and her husband. I had given a lecture in her stake during an Education Weekend in which I shared the five scriptures and principles.

At the end of the series, she came up and gave me a hug. She said she appreciated my comments but was not sure about the change-first principle. They had been married more than fifty years, and she said she couldn't remember the last time her husband had told her he loved her. (Why some LDS men do not, or cannot, or will not say, "I love you," to their wives is one of the great mysteries of life.)

She told me that she had tried everything possible she knew of to get him to tell her he loved her. But she had gotten no results. And she said, "Dr. Barlow, I had decided that I would not tell him I love him until he told me first!"

She then commented on what we had discussed that evening. According to the principles, if she wanted her husband to tell her he loved her, she would have to be willing to tell him . . . first. She said she didn't think it would work but would go home and try. Then she would write and let me know what happened.

About a year later I received a letter from the woman. She wrote that she had gone home that night and told her husband that she loved him. His only response was "Thanks." The next morning at breakfast, she also conveyed the same sentiment, and he simply said, "OK." She indicated in her letter that she got out paper and a pen right then to write and tell me that the law of the boomerang and change-first principle didn't work. Then she remembered the patience principle and decided to try it several more times during the next few weeks before she gave up.

A few days later her husband had a heart attack. He had not been in good health for several months. Every day she went to the intensive care unit at the local hospital to visit him. He was awake and could talk but was in critical condition. Every time she went to the hospital to see her ailing husband, she told him she loved him. He thanked her each time but said nothing in return.

One night she was sitting in his room in the hospital. He was becoming weaker by the hour. That night he motioned for her to come over to his side. He took her hand and called her by name, then said, "I want you to know . . . at this time . . . that I love you." She said that they both knew what "at this time" meant. He acknowledged that he had heard her declarations of love during those previous few weeks. But for some reason, he had a hard time telling her that he also loved her. Nevertheless, he knew that he needed to tell her so that evening.

In the final paragraph of her letter, the woman noted that her husband died just a few hours later. But she was grateful that, before he died, she had heard from his own lips that he loved her. And she thanked me once again for sharing with her a few scriptural principles that helped bring it about.

Newlyweds need not wait till they are older to start applying the five principles. They can learn to exchange words of endearment and give gifts such as flowers to their husbands or wives while they are still alive. They can incorporate changes in themselves to bring about greater caring, harmony, peace, and joy. If they sow good seeds early, there will be time not only to experience early fruit, but also to savor the later fruit.
