Brent A. Barlow, Just for Newlyweds ( 1992)

Chapter 11

The Highs and Lows of Married Life

During the years that I have been teaching Family Science 301, "Preparation for Marriage," at BYU, some genuinely humorous things have happened. One incident in particular comes to mind.

Each semester I tell my students that there is an important biblical verse regarding preparation for marriage called the parable of the tower, found in Luke 14:28-30. It teaches that we should evaluate the amount of energy, time, and "costs" of major projects before we undertake them.

One day in class I asked for a volunteer to read this particular scripture and try to relate it to contemporary marriage. One young coed volunteered, but instead of turning to Luke 14, the young woman mistakenly turned to Luke 13. She then began reading verse 28, which states, "There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth"! We had a good laugh about the biblical "insight" on contemporary marriage.

On another occasion my phone rang late at night. This time one of my former students was on the other end of the line. "Can we talk for a few minutes, Dr. Barlow?" she asked.

I glanced at my watch and said yes.

"Marriage is nothing like I thought it would be," she started. She cried as she documented her disappointment with her husband and their relationship. She said that he was not like he was when they were first married. He now left his clothes lying around and was less attentive. And they were rapidly running out of money. Finally I stopped her long enough to ask, "Just how long have you been married anyway?"

"Two weeks!" she sobbed.

I told her not to give up because her marriage would likely get better day by day. What my young student was experiencing is fairly common to most married couples. There are usually some highs and some lows in married life. Her first low came rather early.

Almost all of us can recall some difficult moments we have had during our years of marriage. And perhaps we, as did my student, despair on occasion during those times. But the difficult times do not necessarily indicate that we love each other less. They could just as easily indicate that we've had better times before and likely will experience better times again.

Dwelling too much on the lows is dangerous and harmful. The more we worry about what is wrong with our relationship, the lower we seem to sink; and the more we remind ourselves how bad things are or have been, the more likely we are to begin to gauge our entire marriage by the lows—even the lows of the lows.

One of the peculiar dynamics of a couple's relationship when they are contemplating divorce is that they're usually preoccupied with what is wrong with their marriage. Each person can document the times and places that the marriage began to suffer. But they seldom stop to remember and relive together the highs—the good times, the happy moments, the experiences that increased their love for each other.

Relatively few of us can continuously maintain a happily-ever-after type of marriage. President Spencer W. Kimball once noted:

Two people coming from different backgrounds soon learn after the ceremony is performed that stark reality must be faced. There is no longer a life of fantasy or of make-believe; we must come out of the clouds and put our feet firmly on the earth. Responsibility must be assumed and new duties must be accepted. Some personal freedoms must be relinquished and many adjustments, unselfish adjustments, must be made.

One comes to realize very soon after marriage that the spouse has weaknesses not previously revealed or discovered. The virtues that were constantly magnified during courtship now grow relatively smaller, and the weaknesses that seemed so small and insignificant during courtship now grow to sizeable proportions. The hour has come for understanding hearts, for self-appraisal, and for good common sense, reasoning, and planning. (Marriage and Divorce [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976], pp. 12-13.)

Some couples may become unduly discouraged in marriage because they believe or have heard that others live their marriages in perfect harmony undisturbed by confrontations or differences in opinion. While some couples may eventually mature to that level, most of us are not that skilled, particularly during the early years of marriage.

With the hectic pace of contemporary living, many married couples ride roller coasters through life, at times experiencing ecstasy, at other times blandness, and at still other times discouragement and disappointment. Couples need to consciously switch their method of measurement from the low of the lows to the high of the highs. During the times of the lows, couples should try to recall the highs or pleasant times of the marriage. Constantly reminding themselves of their marital highs is especially important for newlyweds, whose highs and lows are often more pronounced than those of couples who have been married for years. They might ask themselves, What have the highlights of the marriage been so far? What brought them about? Could we create these or similar experiences again? The good news is that the highs are in our control.

If we plan for and create some good times in marriage, we will have something to cushion the lows when they occur. We'll also find that the lows generally become less frequent and the highs more frequent. By measuring our marriage by our highs and planning for and creating more of them, we immensely increase our capacity to stay in love. We'll probably find too that our marital difficulties are not all that bad when viewed in this balanced perspective. It was Socrates who noted, "If all our misfortunes were laid in one common heap whence everyone must take an equal portion, most people would be contented to take their own and depart." (Laurence J. Peter, Peter's Quotations: Ideas for Our Time [New York: William Morrow and Company, Inc., 1977], p. 206.)

Marriages Will Be Tested

When speaking to an LDS group in California on marriage, I made an observation I hadn't made before. It is so obvious as to be easily overlooked, but I've been careful to emphasize it since: Every marriage will be tried and tested in various ways.

Marital trials and tests come in different ways and intensities. The only given is that they will come. They may be major tests or setbacks such as unemployment, sickness, or the death of a child. But most will likely be the smaller trials and tribulations, which include burnt toast or roast, heavy rain or deep snow, dirty socks or underwear left on the floor, a flat tire, a dead battery in the car, a crowded freeway, a stalled automobile, confusion about schedules, missed appointments, headaches, or "all of the above."

These stresses come from physical, environmental, and mental sources. However, the origins of the irritations, frustrations, and tests are not important. Every married couple has them. The main concern is how married couples choose to react. Our choices of how to deal with the various trials or setbacks are of major importance.

In the fall Susan and I like to drive around the Alpine Loop up Provo Canyon. On mountain slopes we often notice some bared roots of pine trees that are bowed and twisted by the winds and mountain storms. We notice that even the strong Rocky Mountain winds and storms cannot unearth these magnificent trees. Each burst of wind may make them sway or even on occasion make them bow to one side or the other, but all this seems to strengthen them on the very spot where the roots have taken hold.

How do these trees survive the constant buffeting? They have deep roots that grip the rocks and soil and only let go when the tree finally dies. But this growth and tenacity doesn't happen overnight. Strong roots to defy the storms are produced through constant buffeting by the winds. Maybe we should welcome the occasional winds of trials and disappointments. They may be necessary to help us develop strength of character and tenacity.

In Sickness and in Health

There is another aspect of marriage that we seldom talk about. Many wedding ceremonies either state or imply that we marry "in sickness and in health," suggesting we should be as equally devoted to each other when we are ill as when we feel well.

Looking back on twenty-five years of marriage, Susan and I have been fortunate to experience mostly good health. We and our children have made few trips to the doctor or hospital for anything other than colds and a few minor scrapes and cuts that required minor attention. During the few times Susan has been ill, I have been healthy enough to help her through her difficult days. And when I have been down with an occasional flu or cold, she has experienced good health sufficient to look out for my needs.

During one particular holiday season, several of the children took turns, it seemed, staying home a day or two with the flu. Then Susan began experiencing a little coughing and fever. A few days later Doug, our oldest son, got the four-day flu. We learned that the holiday seasons are truly a time for sharing. Between Christmas and New Year's, our eight month old baby, Brandon, developed a cold that required another trip to the doctor and pharmacy. Susan got over her fever but could not get rid of her cough. During this time I did my duty by helping other family members.

Then it hit. One Sunday afternoon in January, I got a headache and started perspiring and wheezing. Doug brought by the 7-Up he had left over and wrote out when to take it and how much. He firmly believed 7-Up was a miracle drug. Susan was not yet better but felt that during those few weeks she had become somewhat of an authority on pain relievers. I assured them all I would be better by morning. But I was not.

Marriage is difficult enough when both partners are healthy. It becomes even more so when one or the other is ill. But what to do when both husband and wife are ill at the same time? Such was our situation that January when flu-ridden husband and wife sat up with an ill baby almost all night. Who should get up with a sick child is another topic in and of itself. But what do you do when both of you have a difficult time rolling out of bed for bottle warming and applications of liquid vitamins and Amoxin?

It's not so much who feels the best. It's who feels the least worse. When the baby cries, both of you wake up and then review your ailments out loud in an effort to show why you should not be the one to get up. But when your high temperature is offset by the other person's difficulty in breathing, you end up doing the sane thing. You take turns getting up with an ill child.

The next morning while lying in bed, I asked Susan, "What makes you feel the best when you are ill?"

"Make up," she replied. "Men do not understand that how a woman feels is greatly affected by how she looks."

I sat up in bed and wondered if a little blush and eye shadow really would clear up my head.

"Brent, why don't you get out of bed and help me clean the kitchen?" she inquired.

"It's because," I began, "I can't breathe, talk, and work at the same time."

"Why not just skip the talking and practice breathing and working?" she asked. Susan must not have watched any of those ads on television for cold medicines where wives pour spoonfuls of the stuff down hubby's throat and rub his back at the same time.

Susan did give me a hug while I was getting out of bed. I believe that those hugs and small acts of attention are what every husband and wife need to practice. Sickness is no fun at any time. But when you're both ill, you need to do some things in your marriage that you ordinarily wouldn't do. Along with the hugs and patience, we used medication and got lots of rest. (The data on the effectiveness of blush and eye shadow is not in.) You will probably find, as we did, that during times of sickness in marriage, husbands and wives need to be extraordinary in their sensitivity and attentiveness. Those are the times least suited for bickering, fault-finding, and hurt feelings.

Marital Potholes

In addition to illness, marital tension and stress can be experienced in a variety of ways. Conflict can arise over major issues such as whether or not to seek employment in another city. Conflict often occurs over major decisions like buying an automobile or buying a new or larger home. Most of us soon become aware of the areas of conflict in our marriage that cause us problems. But there is another dimension of the marital relationship when things do not go so well that we need to be aware of. I call it the marital potholes.

Not long ago Susan and I decided to drive over to American Fork to visit her mother. There are three ways to get from Orem to American Fork. We could take the "old road," the one that goes through Lindon and Pleasant Grove. Or we could take Eighth North down to the I-15 freeway. Still another option is to travel the back roads down by Utah Lake. This particular time we decided to go on the back roads, which takes more time but is a pleasant drive through the countryside.

We were driving along that evening, talking to each other and enjoying the fresh country air and the scenery. But apparently I was not paying enough attention to my driving. We hit a large pothole in the road.

As we recovered from the jolt, Susan asked, somewhat annoyed, if I wanted her to drive. I replied that I hadn't seen the pothole in time to avoid it. In my own defense, I commented that some potholes are unavoidable because they can't always be detected. She countered that the one I hit was both visible and avoidable. I tried in vain to disagree, and then the disagreement was over. The temporary stress in our marriage lasted little more than one minute, short but real. The momentary jolt of hitting the pothole caused some discomfort for both of us. The pothole was not particularly large or deep, certainly not large enough to cause much concern. The jar of the pothole was over almost as soon as it began, and we continued on that evening and enjoyed the remainder of the drive.

Sometimes in marriage, things seem to go well, and then we hit potholes of various kinds. They are the short, often unforeseen, and sometimes unavoidable aspects of life that cause momentary conflict or stress in marriage. Marital potholes are unique from other problems because they can't always be detected in advance and the origin is often unknown. In addition, we sometimes don't know why they upset us. But the fact is, they do.

Marital potholes create discomfort and sometimes cause momentary strained feelings. And they can be quite disruptive if we are traveling fast or hit a series of them in succession. But one pothole usually doesn't do much damage or last very long, particularly if we recognize its temporary nature. The impact is often over as quickly as it begins.

Potholes in life, either in marriage or on the road, can be survived if we are alert, have a tight grip on the steering wheel, maintain control, and keep our eyes on the road ahead. And not make a pit out of a pothole.

The Humpty Dumpty Syndrome

During marriage, almost every married couple will face a few major crises. A crisis may be highly detrimental to the couple, or it may actually prove to be beneficial. You might wonder, "How could a crisis, trial, or major setback in life be beneficial?" I call the answer the "Humpty Dumpty Syndrome." As children, we recall repeating the Humpty Dumpty nursery rhyme many times:

Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall, Humpty Dumpty had a great fall. All the king's horses and all that king's men, Couldn't put Humpty together again.

Many people are, indeed, like Humpty Dumpty. After a fall their life seems to be shattered. And like the horses and king's men, no one can seem to help them reconstruct their lives.

Why Humpty Dumpty couldn't be put back together is interesting. First, horses obviously aren't very good at reassembling broken eggs. And second, once an egg breaks, the shell is broken into many small pieces. Therefore, Humpty Dumpty remained shattered.

Some people, when they experience a major crisis in life, are not like Humpty Dumpty. The pieces of their life can be put back together. How these pieces are reassembled often makes the person, or couple, stronger, more resilient, and better able to cope with life. In their cases the crises eventually prove to be a blessing rather than a burden.

How well a person, couple, or family deals with a crisis depends on several things. First, what is the state of the emotional health of the person or persons prior to the crisis? Second, what is the nature, intensity, and duration of the crisis? And third, and perhaps most important, what is done about it once the crisis occurs? What are the crisis-coping skills? All these, plus the help sought in dealing with a crisis, contribute to the outcome and impact of a crisis in life.

When I was teaching college in Wisconsin, I had a graduate student in her late twenties who was doing very well. She told me one day that she married when she was in her late teens. And for reasons still unknown to her, her husband died just one year after their marriage. She understandably was devastated by the experience. She said she went into a major depression and had to seek professional counseling for several months. She related how she was eventually able to come to grips with her husband's death. She was also able to deal with many of her personal problems and concerns she had prior to her marriage.

As a result of the counseling she had, she said that she became a better, stronger person. She eventually remarried, had two children, and was then at the university pursuing a graduate degree. In her case she had carefully reassembled and put back together again the pieces of her life.

As newlyweds, remember that the crisis is not what counts the most. What you do about it is what really matters. (Unlike Humpty Dumpty, don't let horses help you with the reassembling process.) Consider whether you might be like my graduate student in Wisconsin. Even though you experience a painful, overwhelming event in life, you can emerge from it a stronger, better person or married couple. It all depends on the action you take afterward. And that is up to you.
