Brent A. Barlow, Just for Newlyweds ( 1992)

Chapter 12

Staying On Course

Newlyweds today generally get a great start on their marriage. The ceremony, the wedding dinner, the reception, and the honeymoon are joyous occasions. Family and friends often come in great numbers to wish the new bride and groom well. They start off right on course.

But where will they be a month later? A year later? Five years later? Will they still be on course, or will they be drifting in the current turbulence of marital disruption?

I've always been amazed how airline pilots and navigators can reach their destinations right on the mark—and usually on schedule—when the destinations are so far away and unseen for most of the journey. I recently heard an interesting observation about planes and boats: they are usually off course 95 percent of the time. Only through the constant attention of the pilot, captain, and navigators are planes and ships constantly brought back on course during the journeys.

I think that's a wonderful analogy for newlyweds. If you are like most other married couples, you will likely drift off course, on occasion, in your efforts to have a rewarding and successful marriage. But commitment helps you get back on course and continue the journey. Just because you are off course does not necessarily mean the trip must be ended. Determine where you are now, compare it with where you want to be, and get back on course.

Some newly wedded couples eventually divorce or fail to stay in love because they experience a series of failures—times when they are off course. The disappoints could be financial or occupational. They could be related to education, health, children, or any other number of sources. The fact is, we all experience failures.

Parable of the Sower

One of the interesting parables taught in the Bible is the parable of the sower. (See Matt. 13:3-8.) Jesus tells of a sower who went about scattering seeds. Not all of them grew because some fell on beaten paths or hardened soil, while others fell in stony places or among thorns. Only when the seeds fell on good ground, did they take root and bear fruit.

The parable was originally given in regard to the people's receptivity to the message of Jesus Christ. But there is another significant message contained in the parable: not everything we attempt to do in life is going to be successful; every seed we sow will not necessarily take root.

One interesting thing about the parable is that the sower had no way of determining in advance which of the seeds would take root and grow. But he labored to cast them about in hopes that at least a few would germinate and flourish.

Susan and I learned early in our marriage that we would experience many failures in life: not every job sought would be obtained; not every book written would be published; not every vacation carefully planned would be invigorating and refreshing; not every investment made would yield a return of 15 percent (if any); and not every car purchased would run smoothly for a hundred thousand miles or even past the warranty without adjustments and major repairs. Life would have many failures and setbacks.

We have also learned, however, that failure comes not only through unwise judgment, but also because of circumstances over which we have little or no control. We have learned some of our most valuable lessons in life through failure. But once we learned that failure was part of life, we've tried not to be unduly concerned. We keep casting our seeds in life with the faith and hope that some will take root—and they do. We eventually reap what we sow. (See Gal. 6:7.)

Seasons of Gardening

In learning this valuable lesson about the law of the harvest, we have tried not to become preoccupied with the failures that surely come. Rather, we try to enjoy the occasional success. Rather than focus on the toil of the summer when the sun scorches the garden, the bugs attack, and some plants wither away and die, we have tried to focus on the harvest that will come.

The law of the harvest teaches us about the major seasons: spring, the time of planting and investing effort; summer, the time of nurturing and protecting; and autumn, the time of harvesting and reaping the reward of our efforts. But what about winter? What is it for, and when does it occur?

Most people believe that winter follows autumn and is a time for rest and recuperation. Others, however, believe that winter precedes spring and is a time of anticipation and preparation. Those people who have lived in a rural or farming community know that winter is a time to prepare for spring. It's the time we repair machinery and invest time and money in what we will need. And every winter is followed by a spring. That is a fact of life.

Perhaps you are presently in a nonproductive time of your marriage. Maybe you have had some failures in the recent past. During this time of your married life, you may see yourselves frozen into a way of life and living. As you huddle together, you believe that winter follows autumn.

Could there be better times ahead? If you and your spouse believe that winter precedes spring, you may prepare by repairing and investing for the vigorous growth that lies before you. Such is the law of the harvest. It applies to plants, and it also applies to people.

Where Do We Focus in Life

Some experts on human potential have made an interesting observation. They claim that only one out of every one hundred people is trained or is capable of dwelling on his positive attributes and successes. The other ninety-nine people tend to focus on their failures. They become preoccupied with what does not go well rather than with what does.

Some time ago I was asked to make some audiocassettes on marriage for SyberVision Systems in California. The president of the company, Steve Devore, told me he wanted something useful on marriage that he could market nationwide. The concepts had to be broad and general enough that almost any married couple of any ethnic, cultural, or socioeconomic background could benefit from them. I was also asked to create a workbook to go along with the six hours of audiocassettes.

It was quite a challenge, and I worked three months on the project. After the tapes and workbook were finally on the market under the title of Successful Marriage, I began to wonder if others would like and accept the audiocassettes. After a few months we began to see some results. I talked to one of the company representatives on the phone one day about the sales. He said that the program was selling about as expected. Then he mentioned, "Oh yes, about 10 percent of the cassettes are being returned for purchase refund."

After the call, I sat at my desk for a moment. Ten percent were being returned! I was stunned and, to be quite honest, very disappointed. I left the room and told Susan what I had just learned. The company offered a full sixty-day money-back guarantee on every product they sold. And apparently one out of every ten customers on my program were taking them up on their offer.

During the next few weeks the thought wouldn't go away. Ten-percent failure! I couldn't stop thinking about it. Finally, I called Steve DeVore on the phone and told him about my concern. He laughed and told me that if I were going into marketing, I would have to develop a new perspective on failure. Nationwide, he said, the return rate on similar audiocassette programs is about 30 percent with a thirty-day guarantee. The overall return rate for their company averaged about 20 percent with a sixty-day guarantee. He said they felt very good about their guarantee and the quality of their products. Since my program had only a 10 percent return, they felt the marketing was going very well. When I hung up, I had a new perspective of failure.

Not everything we do in life will work out or succeed. And we may perceive some things as failures that actually are not failures. There will be setbacks, but they should be compared with growth and accomplishments. Rather than focus on the 10-percent failure rate, I am now quite proud that 90 percent of the people are satisfied with the cassette programs on marriage. And I have become a little more philosophical—I want to be included in the one percent who focus on what goes right in life.

Keep Track of Marital Successes

The story is told of a great artist who painted a tiny picture of a bouquet of roses. The painting was magnificent. Never before, it seemed, had man executed so deftly a reproduction of nature. The picture was the envy of all artists who saw it and the despair of the lovers of art who yearned to buy it for their collections.

But the painter steadfastly refused to sell his work of art, saying, "Whenever I feel my hand has lost its cunning, whenever I doubt my ability, I look at my little picture of the roses and say to myself, 'You painted that. Your hand drew it. Your imagination conceived the colors. Your skill put the roses on the canvas.' Then I know that what I have done I can do again."

His philosophy of success was to hang on the walls of our minds the memory of our successes. We should take counsel of our strengths, not our weaknesses. We should think of the good jobs we have done, the times we rose above our average levels of performance and carried out ideas or dreams or desires for which we had deeply longed. Then we should hang these pictures on the walls of our minds and look at them as we travel on the roadways of life."

This story has significance for couples. As a marriage counselor I've noted that couples often become preoccupied with what has gone wrong with their marriage. Both husband and wife can rehearse, almost upon cue, all the failures and setbacks of their marital relationship. But if asked to recall some of the successes, some of the things they have done well, some obstacles they encountered and overcame, many couples have a difficult time identifying any.

While learning from our mistakes in marriage is important, we must keep them in perspective. If we continue to think of negative situations and failures, our behavior tends to follow suit. But the opposite is also true. If we tend to think of the more positive aspects of life, the things we have succeeded in doing, we, like the artist with his magnificent painting, are reminded of our strengths rather than our weaknesses.

Susan and I often catch ourselves playing a silly game. At the end of a long, difficult day, we start rehearsing all the things we intended to do but didn't get accomplished. One of us will start out by citing something left undone, and then the other follows. Unless we catch ourselves, we can go on and on.

One way we have found to stop this habit is to talk about the "dids" rather than the "did nots." Sometimes we amaze ourselves with what we actually did accomplish. Like most other married couples, we occasionally can stand back and admire our picture of roses.

Perhaps newlyweds should follow the advice of the artist concerning his painting: Focus on your strengths! When you do this, you will have a rich resource upon which to draw should you reach a point in your marriage when, individually or jointly, you begin to doubt your ability. Then you too can say, "If we've done it once, we can do it again." Then you can resolve to once more do what is needed.

Your Marital Net Worth

About ten years after we were married, Susan and I decided we would sit down and determine our financial net worth. We had some instructions before us on how this was to be done. First, we wrote down the mortgage on our home and the money owed on our automobile. It was a sizeable amount. Then we added all our other debts, including credit card accounts and furniture payments. When we added up our list, we were quite discouraged. We had not realized that we had so many liabilities. As we looked over our list of debts, we talked about them for some time. It was a dismal feeling, to say the least.

Finally we looked at the instructions again, which suggested we make a list of what we owned—our assets. So we listed the market value of our home and cars, the approximate value of our furniture and household appliances at the time, and a few other items of value that came to mind. After adding up the list of assets, we subtracted the sum of our liabilities from the sum of our assets. The result was our financial net worth.

We found that even though we owed others a considerable sum of money, our assets were slightly greater. When all factors were considered, we found we were actually worth something financially. This exercise also taught us another valuable lesson about life, and particularly about marriage: Liabilities must always be weighed against assets.

When we were determining our financial net worth, we dwelt a long time on our debts or liabilities. If that was all we had looked at, we might have become unduly discouraged. Only after we had determined what we owned did the whole financial picture take on a different perspective. When compared to our assets, our liabilities didn't look quite so bad.

As a marriage counselor, I often get long lists from couples detailing what is wrong with their marriage—their marital liabilities. They tend to rehearse these at length and continuously talk about what has gone wrong in their marital relationship. I often suggest they refocus their attention on their marital assets: What is going well now or has gone well in the past? Do they regard their children as assets in their marriage? In addition, what have they invested thus far in the marriage in time, money, energy, and emotion? When couples concentrate on the positive aspects, the marital troubles—both imagined and real—seem less disruptive. When dealing with money and marriage, remember that liabilities must always be weighed against the assets.

Perhaps you and your spouse would like to complete one or two exercises pertaining to marriage and past successes. The first exercise is called "Determining Our Marital Net Worth," and the second is simply called "BAGS."

Determining your marital net worth. Under the column of "Liabilities," list some of your present concerns or problems in your marriage ("Work Areas"). Next, under the column of "Assets," list some of the accomplishments or successes you and your spouse have achieved thus far in your marriage. Marital assets might include such things as major and minor satisfactions derived from the marriage, your children, other activities you jointly enjoy, your home, some of your material possessions, education and jobs attained, and any crises or difficult experiences you have confronted and overcome in your marriage.

DETERMINING OUR MARITAL NET WORTH Assets (Accomplishments) Liabilities (Work Areas) Examples Examples Stayed together ___ years Need to spend more time One child together as a couple Survived serious illness of wife Too much time spent with Both committed to marriage family/friends More endeavor needed in spiritual area

Look at both lists and compare them. Which list is longer?

Can you remember anything else that should go on either list, particularly under Assets? (Remember, most naturally focus on liabilities.) Now consider the following equation: Assets—Liabilities =Net Worth.

Hopefully, you have more marital assets than liabilities. If not, don't worry. You'll just have to go to work and make more deposits to cover future withdrawals. Just remember:

(1) In determining your marital net worth, your liabilities must always be compared to your assets.

(2) Marital net worth improves by either "decreasing" your liabilities or "increasing" your assets, or both.

BAGS. The second exercise is called "BAGS," which is an acronym for Blessings, Accomplishments, Goals, and Service. You can do this jointly or individually. At the top of a clean sheet of paper, write "Blessings"; on a second page, write "Accomplishments"; on a third page, write "Goals"; and on a fourth page, write "Service." (See Denis Waitley, Seeds of Greatness, [New York: Pocket Books, 1983], p. 49.)

Now go through each page or topic and write down everything you have done, individually or jointly, in that area. Under "Blessings," write down the things that you have been given or that have come to you in life without your own efforts: health, a sound mind, the country in which you live, or anything else for which you are genuinely thankful. In essence, "Count Your Many Blessings"; literally, name them one by one. As you recall other blessings later, go back to your work sheet and record them.

Under "Accomplishments," write down anything you have attained or done well in life through your own efforts. Go back to your childhood and teen years. Did you win any awards or prizes for any outstanding efforts? Write them down! (In my BAGS list, I recorded that I scored sixteen points in a play-off game in basketball in 1956 at Gunnison Valley High School!) If you graduated from high school or college, write it down. What contributions have you made to your community in the past? Record everything you have accomplished in life of which you are justly proud.

Next, go to the sheet marked "Goals" and write down some things you want to accomplish or attain in the future. Again, you might do this as a married couple or as an individual. You might have some immediate goals you want to accomplish in the next few months. But what do you wish to accomplish five years from now? Ten years? Twenty years? After retirement?

And finally, what services have you rendered to others during your life up to now? Write these under "Service." This would include any church work or anonymous help rendered to a disabled or disadvantaged person. Review what you have done for your neighborhood or community. Include volunteer work or donations to organizations.

After you have started your BAGS list, add to each of the four columns as past events come to mind. Remember, your list is a marriage inventory, not for anyone else to see except you and your spouse. It is a reminder of the good and positive things that have happened to you in the past. It keeps life's accomplishments and failures in perspective.

When you experience a setback in life or a genuine failure of some kind, get out your BAGS list and read it. In reality, your list becomes your portrait of roses. And like that artist, you can look at it again and again and say to yourself, "I did it once . . . I can do it again!"

The admonition to dwell on positive things, including what happens in our marriages and families, is not new. The Apostle Paul told us to focus on the good things in life: "Whatsoever things are true, . . . honest, . . . just, . . . pure, . . . lovely, . . . of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things." (Philip. 4:8; italics added.)
