Brent A. Barlow, Just for Newlyweds ( 1992)

Chapter 13

Some Thoughts about Divorce

Many newlyweds may reach a point in the early years of marriage when they actually contemplate divorce. Unfortunately, society has become so divorce-prone that couples frequently marry today thinking that they have an unspoken escape clause written into the marriage contract. Divorce is so much in our thinking that many spouses bring up divorce during disagreements as a matter of course, even when they have no intention of separating. Here are a few thoughts to consider:

Don't Decide about Divorce under Stress

Susan and I have had to make countless decisions together. Some of these decisions have been made wisely, with beneficial outcomes. Others have not. But we are learning. And one thing we have learned is not to make major decisions in life during times of stress. We learned this in part from our son's paper route.

When our son Jon was thirteen years old, he returned one summer evening from having completed his paper route. "This sure is a good job," he said as he got off his bicycle. "Delivering these thirty-eight papers takes less than half an hour. And it's pretty good money for the time involved."

Jon was right. Delivering the evening newspapers was a good job for him. Particularly in the summertime and during good weather. But on Sundays, he had to deliver them in the morning, and during the winter months, we both had to get up at six so I could take him in the car to deliver the papers.

I recall one cold snowy Sunday during January. I woke Jon at 5:30 A.M. He was tired but got up anyway and put on his hat, heavy coat, gloves, and rubber boots. When he opened the front door, a gust of cold air blew in. We were greeted by nearly one foot of new snow swirling around in the bitter wind. Jon closed the door. "I don't know if the paper route is worth it," he said. "Look at the snow. Just open the door and feel how cold it is."

He was right about the cold. I didn't want to go out either. But we couldn't quit now, so I told him we would talk it over while delivering the papers. Jon agreed but kept grumbling about how unpleasant it is to deliver newspapers on cold winter days. He constantly questioned whether he should keep his paper route. We also got stuck once along the way, and Jon had to help push the car out of the snow. We finished the paper route and started for home. Should he quit or continue his paper route?

Finally I said to my young son, then numb with cold, "Jon, you should never make up your mind about a paper route during a snowstorm."

What I meant was that major decisions should never be made during times of discomfort or stress. Jon and I then talked about the snow and how the worst would be over in a few weeks. We reminisced about the spring, summer, and fall seasons and about the way he felt during those times. He admitted that the job was much more pleasant then and that it was pretty good work for the time and amount of money involved.

Jon kept his paper route for another year until he gave it to his younger brother Jason. Both learned to whiz around the neighborhood on their bicycles, and by working only about thirty minutes a day, they earned most of the spending money they needed. They enjoyed the warm, pleasant months, but they also prepared for the winters.

Major decisions in life (for young boys or anyone) require plenty of time and thought. This is particularly true of decisions about getting into or out of marriage.

Talking about Divorce

While we should be careful not to automatically think about divorce when difficulties arise in marriage, we should be even more cautious not to talk about it to our spouse. During the past few years, I have noticed an interesting trend. The frequency with which a couple talk about divorce often determines whether or not it will actually occur.

A married couple may experience a conflict that upsets and disturbs them. They might try to work it out, but their efforts seem futile. If the problem continues and the tension mounts, what should they do?

One common reaction is for either or both to mention divorce. At first, usually neither takes it seriously. It is just a thought. They may think that talking about divorce is understandable because it is so common. They constantly hear about it in the media. Perhaps they have had close friends or family members terminate their marriages. According to present-day attitudes (shared unfortunately by many Latter-day Saints), they think that if their own marriage takes a downswing, the logical thing to do is consider divorce.

For some couples, divorce may be the appropriate solution. As an LDS marriage counselor, it took me some time to concede that it is best for some individuals not to be married to each other. Abuse or neglect, for example, will destroy people rather than build them up. Addictions will strain marriages and create unhealthy relationships. And people can change in negative ways and become unbearable to live with after the marriage has occurred.

But I believe many couples divorce unnecessarily. They hit some snags or rough spots in life and decide to end their marriages. Sometimes the decision to divorce just gradually eases into their thinking. It may not be so much what some couples want to do. They just can't think of any alternative.

I have found that we often gravitate toward our dominant thought patterns. This is the modern way of saying what was noted centuries ago: "For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Prov. 23:7.) Earl Nightingale has become well-known and wealthy for effectively teaching six simple words: "We become what we think about."

If we become what we think about, then the more often we think and talk about divorce, the more likely we set ourselves up for it. If we let our minds wander during marital difficulty and frequently talk about separation, then separation becomes more of a probability for us.

Talk about divorce can begin innocently. Perhaps it is just a thought. Or, in a moment of anger, a husband or wife might threaten divorce as a means of getting back at a spouse. Just a threat, they may think later. But what if the partner in that argument or in later arguments counters with his or her own threat of divorce? Soon the couple is off to the lawyer's office because of something said in a moment of anger. Even idle mentions of divorce seldom stay idle. Emotional patterns have a tendency to escalate.

As I counsel couples in marriage, I suggest that they not mention divorce until all other alternatives have been explored and tested. If you are in a difficult situation right now in your own marriage, you can spend the time far more fruitfully and even happily by working to improve the marriage than by working to end it. Remember that you might bring about a divorce prematurely and unnecessarily just by talking about it so often.

Is the Grass Really Greener Elsewhere?

During the course of a marriage, husbands and wives may sometimes wonder if they have made the right choice of partners. Many people who are displeased with their marriages often think that they could do better by leaving their spouses. Rather than working to improve their marriages, they feel that starting over with someone else is the answer.

During the past few years in the United States, marriage has been attacked from a variety of directions. Some have claimed that marriage is outdated while others note the value of being single to enjoy the freedom that supposedly comes with divorce. But does research indicate that this is so?

In his book Helping Couples Change: A Social Learning Approach to Marital Therapy, Dr. Richard Stuart has made some insightful, well-documented observations on both marriage and divorce. After a careful review of the literature, he notes, "The acid test of the wisdom of divorce can be found only in an assessment of its effects." (New York: The Guilford Press, 1980, p. 8.)

Dr. Stuart first reviews some of the positive results of divorce: "(1) A freedom from domestic routines; (2) an opportunity to rear children without the opposition of the other parent; (3) freedom from conflict with a troubled mate; (4) an opportunity to control one's own resources and life space; and (5) opportunities to make personally fulfilling choices without constraint through the need to consider the wishes of others." He then cautions, "But divorce is very far from an unmixed blessing" and notes the following findings from extensive research in the field of marriage and family:

Someone once compared divorce to jumping off the Eiffel Tower. You first feel an initial sense of freedom, exhilaration, and liberation; but then you quickly face the consequences. Dr. Richard Stuart concludes:

It is clear that broad trends greatly favor the continued health and well-being of those who sustain their marriages. . . . Divorce may be a liberating experience for two people who would have suffered emotionally, physically, economically, or otherwise had they remained together. But it can also signal the start of a gradual process of deterioration of these and other dimensions, with freedom bring the potential for disaster much as it carries with it a hope for nirvana. . . .

The tide seems to flow in the direction of marriage and families, and efforts to improve troubled marriages move with and not against this tide.

The existence of a stable marriage has many benefits. . . . It helps partners to carve out and to maintain a stable personal identity. It provides a foil for screening perceptions and motivations to improve their quality. It seems to enhance personal, professional, and social living and to reduce the pain of many physical and emotional stresses. (P. 11, 14-15.)

One national survey cited in Helping Couples Change concluded that "Marriage and family life are the most satisfying parts of most people's lives and being married is one of the most important determinants of being satisfied with life." (P. 15.)

I would urge Latter-day Saint newlyweds (or any couple, for that matter) who are seriously contemplating divorce to carefully read Dr. Diane Medved's book The Case against Divorce (New York: Donald I. Fine, 1989). The psychologist from California takes a courageous, persuasive, and long-overdue stand against divorce. She states her premise on pages ten and eleven:

I write this book as a counterbalance, to shake a few shoulders, with hopes that I might spare some children helplessness and some partners pain. I want to expose the forces that strive to hide the damage of divorce. Too many people think "If only I could be out of this marriage . . . " and conclude that sentence with their own private miracles. To repeat: It's not their fault; they're victims of propaganda. But the lure lets them down, for after they buy it they inevitably remain the same people, with the same problem-solving skills, values, and styles of relating to another. And so they can't help but choose and shape new relationships into duplications of their spoiled romance. How can they be expected to see that divorce is, with few exceptions, the wrong way to improve their lives? (Italics added.)

She also says that we are often too tolerant of friends and relatives who are divorcing, trying to be understanding when in fact we are being blind:

It's finally time to renounce—openly and clearly—these self-serving platitudes about independence and fulfillment and look at the reality of divorce. We act too frequently as if every infirm marriage deserves to die, based simply upon the emotional report of one distressed partner. Rather than viewing a separation first with alarm, we're full of sympathy for a divorcing friend, and we offer understanding of the temporary insanity involved in severing old ties.

Still influenced by the "do your own thing" era, we don't act constructively. We don't take the husband (or wife) by the shoulders and shake him. We don't shout in his ear that he might be making a disastrous mistake. Even if we care immensely about him, we feel it's too intrusively "judgmental" to do more than step back and say "Okay, if that's what you want," and close our eyes to the consequences. My research suggests that this is more cruelty than friendship. (P. 8.)

Can People Learn to Love Each Other Again?

I have often been contacted by individuals who have asked this question: If a husband and wife no longer love each other, is it possible for them to learn to love each other again? This is a compelling question, and the answer may determine the future of many marriages.

As noted early in this chapter, I am a firm believer that action generally follows thought or belief. This principle is critical to those husbands and wives who are wrestling with the question of renewing love. If they believe they can't love their spouses again, they won't. They may not even try. But if they believe they can—that loving each other again is possible—then at least they might try. Put another way, whether you believe you can, or believe you can't—you're right.

A close friend contacted me not long ago. She wrote a long letter indicating that she and her husband no longer loved each other and that they were seriously contemplating divorce. She then asked, "Is it possible for us to learn to love each other again?" Here are a few thoughts I sent in reply. (The names have been changed for obvious reasons.)

Dear Ann:

Thank you for sharing your concerns and feelings in your letter. I know it is difficult, but I admire you for doing it.

You and Phil undoubtedly face difficult days of decision ahead. I know your decision to either divorce or stay married will be made thoughtfully, carefully, and even prayerfully.

I shed a few tears after receiving your letter. Maybe it is because I do care a great deal about what happens to you, to Phil, and to your children.

You asked in your letter whether it is possible for the two of you to love each other again. That is a very difficult question but one about which I have strong feelings.

The answer is simply "yes." It is possible for you both to love each other again. Totally, deeply, and completely. Others have done it, and so can you.

You indicated that you have sought divine guidance through prayer on this matter. Another of the simple truths in life is this: "If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that believeth." (Mark 9:23; see Matt. 17:20; Philip. 4:13.)

As Latter-day Saints we share similar religious values and believe in a second life, or a "life hereafter." We hope it will be spent with loved ones we now know. Most of us believe that the "next life" begins after death. (And in a real sense, you and Phil have experienced the death of your relationship.) But as my friend and associate Dr. Lynn Scoresby, a psychologist, has reminded so many people, this second life can begin during mortality. And it can begin with people with whom we are presently associated.

A new life together is possible for you and Phil, but it will take genuine belief, work, and effort. All things are possible. But you will determine whether or not it will occur.

Susan and I send our love and will think about you during the difficult days ahead. We value your friendship and will continue to do so in the future.

Sincerely,

Brent Barlow
