Brent A. Barlow, Just for Newlyweds ( 1992)

Chapter 14

A Trip to Temple Square

Before we conclude this book on marriage for newlyweds, I would like you to come with me on a tour of Temple Square in Salt Lake City. You have likely been there before, but I would like you to go with me one more time.

By December of 1964 Susan and I had been dating several months. I wanted to ask her to marry me but didn't know where to go or what to say for the occasion. For some reason unknown to me at the time, I decided to take her to Temple Square. On December 31, New Year's Eve—a stormy winter evening—we drove from Provo to Salt Lake City. I parked the car near Temple Square, and we walked over and stood between the Handcart Monument and the Sea Gull Monument. After a few minutes I asked her to marry me.

She started to cry. At first I thought she was happy. But she continued to cry.

"Is there someone else?" I asked.

"There's got to be," she replied.

Finally she consented. So there we were: two young BYU students who loved each other but were naÃ¯ve and unaware of the journey ahead. Susan and I have gone back to Temple Square many times and stood on that exact spot where we originally agreed to marry each other. Sometimes we are overwhelmed with what has happened to us.

We were married on June 5, 1965, and we both graduated from BYU. Since our wedding date, we have lived in thirteen apartments and homes in Utah, Florida, Illinois, and Wisconsin. I completed two advanced degrees, and Susan has worked either part- or full-time as an elementary school teacher. I have worked as an LDS seminary teacher at Davis High School in Kaysville, Utah; as an institute instructor at Tallahassee, Florida; and as a college professor at Southern Illinois University, University of Wisconsin-Stout, University of Utah, and finally Brigham Young University. During our twenty-five years of marriage, we both have lost a parent through death. Susan's father, Cecil Day, died in 1968, and my mother, Ruth Peterson, died in 1976. That New Year's Eve in 1964, when we decided to get married, we didn't anticipate the seven active and energetic children that would eventually come, bless our marriage, and introduce us to parenthood.

On our twenty-fifth wedding anniversary on June 5, 1990, Susan and I returned to that same spot on Temple Square. As we discussed both the past and the future of our marriage, I couldn't help but think about that sacred spot where it had all begun a quarter of a century before. I looked around and saw two monuments and two buildings that have become symbolic to us in our marriage. Perhaps they could be for others also.

The Handcart Monument

First, there is the Handcart Monument depicting a husband, wife, and their children pulling their handcart across the plains on their way to the Salt Lake Valley. To us the Handcart Monument represents struggle and effort in making a marriage work.

When I taught at Southern Illinois University, I received a small grant to study the Mormon handcart pioneers. Susan and I traveled to Iowa City, where the handcart companies originated. We found the fields in which the Mormon pioneers had camped in 1856 before leaving for the Salt Lake Valley. I read many of the journals of those who made the trip, which described the struggles and efforts of those early Saints. About that same time we found some large wheels off an old discarded Amish wagon near Carbondale, Illinois. We made our own handcart, and tried to build it to scale. The cargo box was three feet wide, four feet in length, and sturdy enough to hold five hundred pounds, all the worldly goods and possessions a family was allowed on the one-thousand-three-hundred-mile trek.

On more than one occasion when life has been hectic and somewhat difficult for us, we compare ourselves to the handcart pioneers. We think that we struggle now, but then we look at the many pictures and drawings we have collected over the years and realize that we just struggle in more comfortable ways.

We have come to appreciate the fact that marriage is not intended to be particularly easy. Not that we try to make it difficult. Life sometimes makes it that way. But we have agreed to tote our handcart in our generation and pull together to bear the burdens placed upon us.

President Spencer W. Kimball once made a comment that made the handcart analogy even more significant to Susan and me:

We repeat for emphasis from Matthew: "Enter ye in at the strait gate." That's a s-t-r-a-i-t gate, not the shortest distance between two points. Strait means hard, difficult, exacting, that kind of a gate. And that's the kind of a gate that marriage is. An eternal marriage is also strait and difficult, but it's rewarding and beautiful. "Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." (Matt. 7:13-14.)

Now, all Latter-day Saints are not going to be exalted. All people who have been through the holy temple are not going to be exalted. The Lord says, "Few there be that find it." For there are the two elements (1) the sealing of a marriage in the holy temple, and (2) righteous living through one's life thereafter to make that sealing permanent. Only through proper marriage—and I repeat that—only through proper marriage can one find that strait way, the narrow path. No one can ever have life, real life, in any other way under any other program. ("Marriage Is Honorable," in Speeches of the Year, 1973 [Provo: BYU Press, 1974], pp. 265-66; italics added.)

The Sea Gull Monument

Directly north of the Handcart Monument is the Sea Gull Monument representing the event in 1848 when gulls rescued the pioneers by eating the crickets that were destroying the much needed crops. To Susan and me, the Sea Gull monument has come to represent one important element needed in life. And that is hope.

I have stated on many occasions that every LDS couple I know is fighting crickets of some kind. It seems to be part of mortality. During our struggles as newlyweds and later on in marriage, Susan and I often wondered when the Lord would intervene in our lives and when he would allow us to struggle.

Throughout our journey from state to state during our marriage, we have experienced numerous difficult moments. We learned that truly it is sometimes the darkest . . . right before the storm! And like the Prophet Joseph Smith, we too have uttered the words, "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?" (D&C 121:1.) I believe that every LDS couple offers that prayer on several occasions during their married life. We too petition for divine help with our daily struggles.

The question is why does the Lord sometimes let us struggle before assisting us? Why don't the sea gulls come immediately? I have been so intrigued with the sea gull and cricket episode in Church history that I have studied it closely, and I have found several interesting things.

Orson Pratt, John Brown, and a few others first entered the Salt Lake Valley on July 19, 1847. Note the contrasting irony of the following two journal entries of Orson Pratt. First he wrote, "We could not refrain from a shout of joy which almost involuntarily escaped from our lips the moment this grand and lovely scenery was within our view."

In the paragraphs to follow, Orson Pratt continued to write of the beauty of the Salt Lake Valley. Then he added one short, significant sentence: "We found the drier places swarming with very large crickets, about the size of a man's thumb." (Brigham H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 5 vols. [Provo: BYU Press, 1965], 3:216, 219.)

I tell that story to newlyweds in my classes because I think it has a message. The crickets were there when the pioneers arrived. The Mormon men and women had faced difficulties and trials before they even entered the valley. But they drove down Parley's and Emigration canyons and made their homes. It was said of the Mormon pioneers that they went west willingly because they had to. They had no choice because the Lord was depending on them.

The same is true of young couples marrying today. In real ways they are still pioneers looking down into the valley. They look around at the difficulty and disruption in many homes in the nation and world. Still, they too march down into the valley to start their homes and family life. And they do it willingly. The Lord and others are depending on them. Yes, there will be crickets to fight, but the sea gulls are on standby alert.

When studying the sea gull and cricket incident, I also learned another valuable lesson about marriage and family life. The crickets attacked the crops early in the spring of 1848, but the sea gulls did not arrive immediately. Why? Does the Lord expect us to actually fight crickets? More than once when Susan and I have had some difficult moments, we looked out on the horizon and saw a symbolic bird approaching. We hoped it was a sea gull. In an unusual twist of events, it sometimes turned out to be a buzzard. We saw what we thought was the light at the end of the tunnel, and it turned out to be another freight train heading our direction. But our experience and testimony are that the sea gulls are right behind the buzzards and freight trains. The Lord will never let his covenant people go under. Struggle, yes. But never go under.

Someday I would like to write a book titled Between the Crickets and the Sea Gulls, or What to Do until the Sea Gulls Arrive. It would deal with that difficult period between the time we make our petitions for divine assistance and the time when it finally comes. One time in the late 1970s, Alex Haley, author of Roots, came to the BYU campus to speak. He told a story that, in a way, has to do with crickets and sea gulls. Alex Haley said that his grandmother had once taught him something about when the Lord helps and when he doesn't. She told him, "God doesn't come every time you call, but when he does come, he is never late."

Perhaps that is the answer to crickets, sea gulls, and contemporary life. The Lord may want us to struggle some, for what purpose we're not always sure, but he will never let us down. It is not so much if he will assist, but how and when. The Lord has assured that he will help, but he will do it in his own due time. (See Eccl. 3:1; D&C 43:29.) A recent bride once told me about the importance of hope, of anticipating better times ahead. She said that she and her husband had married with the highest hopes and dreams of a happy marriage. But shortly after their marriage in the Logan Temple, the crickets attacked. In hordes. Her husband became ill and had to drop out of school. She became pregnant, had a miscarriage, and also had to quit her education. Her husband became so ill that he couldn't work. Against their desires, they had to live first with his parents, and later with hers. They had to receive financial assistance from the Church for several months until he was well enough to find work, then finally continue on with his education.

The young wife, now with a little baby daughter, told me that there was one verse of scripture they read often during those difficult years of marriage: "Search diligently, pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work together for your good, if ye walk uprightly and remember the covenant wherewith ye have covenanted one with another." (D&C 90:24.)

The scriptures also teach that love bears and endures "all things." (1 Cor. 13:7.) Our thirteenth Article of Faith states, "We have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all things." What better way is there to bear and endure difficult moments in marriage than by believing and hoping?

The Tabernacle

Directly north of the Handcart Monument and the Sea Gull Monument is the Mormon Tabernacle. It was built in 1868. The Tabernacle might simply represent "community."

In a real sense, we need each other. We need the person we married, but we also need a continued relationship with family, friends, neighbors, church members, and others in the community. I have often cautioned newlyweds to carefully choose their friends and associates during the early years of marriage. Carefully select those with whom to build a "community," because those people will have a great impact and, in some cases, may greatly affect the outcome of the marriage.

This is particularly true during times when a couple may be contemplating separation. Couples who are on the brink of divorce go through a subtle socializing process. Many in their "community" may influence them negatively, and the couple may in turn influence their community negatively. I have seen it happen many times. One married couple will be unhappy and share their disappointments with another married couple. The second couple, in turn, become involved to some degree and start looking more critically at their own relationship. Sooner or later, usually sooner, both couples start gravitating toward divorce.

If you are disgruntled with your new marriage, avoid others in the same situation. Avoid telling friends or family members just how bad things are. If you find a sympathetic or empathic ear to encourage your verbal depiction of troubles, matters could become worse. And what's more, sometimes an unwise bond forms if the listener is of the opposite sex. Keep in mind that adultery often results more from empathy than from lust.

During your early years of marriage, and for the rest of your marriage for that matter, select a community of friends who themselves are happily married or are at least committed to the concept of marriage. That is one of the great things about our church. It is both a local and worldwide community to which each member can belong. We call each other "brother" and "sister." We come together to symbolically break bread and eat and drink together—the sacrament. We meet together often regarding the welfare of our souls (see Moro. 6:5), and by the very nature of our baptismal covenants, we agree to bear one another's burdens, comfort those who stand in need of comfort, and mourn with those who mourn (see Mosiah 18:8-10). We Latter-day Saints, of all people, should build "community" because we understand how much we truly need each other.

The Temple

The last edifice we will look at on our trip to Temple Square as newlyweds is the Salt Lake Temple. It stands as a visual link between this life and the next. It reminds us of eternity. As Paul noted, "If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable." (1 Cor. 15:19.)

I have asked many young Latter-day Saints why they want to marry in the temple. They usually give only one or two answers. The first is something like "So we can be together forever," and the second is "It is such a beautiful place." As far as getting married in a beautiful place, that is understandable. The LDS temples are beautiful. But there are other beautiful places in the world to get married. Some of the early Saints were married on Ensign Peak near Salt Lake City with the sweeping mountains and forests to surround them.

Whenever we talk of "eternal" marriage, we think only in the time dimension: forever. Is our goal only to be with someone forever, regardless of the nature of the relationship? In Doctrine and Covenants 19:7-12, the Lord explained to Joseph Smith the meaning of the word eternal in the phrase "eternal punishment." The Lord revealed, "Endless is my name. Wherefore—eternal punishment is God's punishment. Endless punishment is God's punishment." In a similar way, eternal marriage is not only one that lasts forever, but also one that has the quality of godliness. Eternal marriage means godly, God-like, or Christlike marriage. It is one that has the potential to endure forever, bringing warmth, fulfillment, and growth to the couple and their children. I cannot think of anything less appealing than being together forever with someone I do not care deeply about. I want to have a quality, Christ-like relationship with my wife and children.

I also ask both singles and newlyweds at BYU if temple marriage and eternal marriage are synonymous. Can you have one without the other? If two people marry in the temple, never return, and are less than Christlike to each other, do they have a temple marriage? Technically, they have been married in the temple, so "yes," they do have a temple marriage. But we learn in the temple that we must apply or practice what we learn and covenant. There must be an application aspect of temple marriage.

Another key question. Is eternal marriage a process, an event, or both? We often talk of "getting married in the temple"—an event. But I also like to think of it as a process whereby we apply principles taught in the temple on a day-to-day basis. Actually eternal marriage is both. It is a process that begins with an event. Without the event, the process couldn't begin. And we need to return to the temple often to understand or remind ourselves what the process entails. We need to be reminded that temples are the link with both the past and the present, with mortality and the other side of the veil. As our children grow and mature, we need to be reminded that there is and can continue to be joy in our posterity. This is particularly important because the rigors of mortality may cause us to think otherwise.

Acres of Spiritual Diamonds

A young LDS woman drove down from Salt Lake City a short time ago to see me. I had recently spoken in her stake on marriage, and she came, she said, to thank me for telling a particular story. She said it triggered the transition from her decision to divorce to her decision to stay married. You may have heard the story before. It is called "Acres of Diamonds."

Have you ever heard of the Golconda Diamond Mine near the Indus River in India? It has produced some of the world's largest and most magnificent diamonds, including the crown jewels of England and Russia. How the mine was discovered was made famous by Russell Herman Conwell, a Protestant minister who traveled the world with his famous lecture "Acres of Diamonds." Conwell gave the lecture more than six thousand times in the United States and abroad, and, through that, he raised seven million dollars for the education of students at Temple University, which he founded in Philadelphia during the 1880s.

During November 1988 I flew to Philadelphia for a convention on family life. I took my twelve-year-old son, Jason, with me. One afternoon we decided to visit Temple University, and while we were there, I went to the University bookstore and asked for a copy of the official version of "Acres of Diamonds." They gave me the booklet Acres of Diamonds: A Man, a Lecture, a University, a short history of Temple University and its originator, Russell H. Conwell.

According to Conwell, a farmer named Ali Hafed who lived near the River Indus heard that others were becoming wealthy with their discoveries of diamonds. Ali sold his farm, left his wife and children, and went in search of diamonds. He traveled into Palestine, wandered all over Europe, and finally died . . . in abject poverty in Barcelona, Spain. The man who purchased Ali Hafed's farm later discovered that it was literally covered with diamonds—acres of diamonds—and he became a wealthy man. The Golconda Diamond Mine was later established on Ali Hafed's land.

Had Ali remained where he was and learned to recognize diamonds in the rough, he would have become one of the wealthiest men in the world. Instead, he left his home, his farm, and his family in search of wealth elsewhere.

I like to tell the story because I think it has an overriding spiritual message. I often wonder what we leave at home in order to acquire the things in the world. How many of us have left our own "acres of diamonds" with regard to marriage and family in order to pursue other interests? Are too many of us like Ali Hafed, thinking happiness and wealth will always be found somewhere else? When Russell H. Conwell told the story, he encouraged the listeners to stay where they were and look for success and wealth right in their own community. And many did.

The scriptures, ancient and modern, give interesting admonitions relating to the theme of "acres of diamonds." What do we give up of a spiritual nature in pursuit of temporal things? Jesus asked, "For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul [or spouse, or family]? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" (Mark 8:36-37.) Also, if we remain faithful to gospel principles and covenants, we are promised, "He that receiveth me receiveth my Father; and he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him." (D&C 84:37-38; italics added.)

Each one of us should carefully evaluate our own "acres of diamonds." There are three basic spiritual lessons I think we can learn from the story: (1) I believe that most of us can find peace, contentment, and happiness in life with our present marriage partner. (2) Learning the lesson of Ali Hafed, we should know what we have, what we would leave if we moved on. We may be leaving our own acres of diamonds. (3) We should learn to recognize diamonds in the rough that are uncut and unpolished.

This last thought was what brought the woman from Salt Lake City to see me. I had suggested that everyone has a spiritual nature that often goes unnoticed. The worth of each soul is, indeed, great. (See D&C 18:10.) So precious are we all—ourselves, our spouses, and our children—that Jesus Christ came to this world and gave his life for each one of us. That is how much we each mean to him! But in the day-to-day, humdrum existence of life, or because of the more trying and painful experiences, we fail to note or remember that each of us is a spiritual diamond in the rough, uncut and unpolished. But through toil and effort, the spiritual brilliance of each might yet be discovered.

In March 1832 the Lord made this promise: "Ye are little children, and ye have not as yet understood how great blessings the Father hath in his own hands and prepared for you; and ye cannot bear all things now; nevertheless, be of good cheer, for I will lead you along. The kingdom is yours and the blessings thereof are yours, and the riches of eternity are yours." (D&C 78:17-18; italics added.)

Susan and I would like to invite all married couples, especially the newlyweds, to return to Temple Square often. Stand between the Handcart Monument and Sea Gull Monument. Do it particularly if you are having difficult moments in your marriage. And most important, do it if you are seriously thinking of ending your marriage by divorce or separation.

Look at each of the following and think of these words:

Handcart Monument: struggle, effort, sacrifice (reread President Kimball's comments on marriage being the s-t-r-a-i-t gate).

Sea Gull Monument: hope and belief. (Reread D&C 90:24.)

Tabernacle: community. (Reread Mosiah 18:8-10.)

Temple: eternity. (Reread D&C 78:17-18.)

The promise is, that if we are faithful, the riches of eternity will be ours. We, too, can have our own acres of spiritual diamonds. It is written, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him." (1 Cor. 2:9.)

A Tearful Tribute

March 21, 1991, is a day I will never forget. It was the day our oldest son, Doug, was married to Becky Borden. The occasion was a joyous and yet sentimental one for both Susan and me and Bob and Neva Borden, parents of the bride. The marriage was the first of any son or daughter in either the Barlow or Borden family. (As this book goes to press, my daughter Tammy has announced her engagement. Susan and I extend to her our well-wishes for her forthcoming marriage.)

On the morning of the wedding in the Salt Lake Temple, we had a wedding breakfast. Bob Borden and I were invited to pay tributes to our son and daughter as they commenced their married life. I have given hundreds of lectures to thousands of students on the importance of and preparation for marriage. But now this was my own son and his soon-to-be bride to whom I had to speak.

What would I tell this young couple whom I dearly loved, just a few hours prior to their marriage? Finally, I decided to read to Doug and Becky a poem by Jan Struther called "Epithalamium: Marriage as an Act of Creation" (an epithalamium is a poem or song in honor of the bride and groom). After Bob gave his fitting tribute, I started to read, maintaining my usual stoic manner, but halfway through the poem, I became tearful. I apologized later for my sentimentality, but really, I enjoyed the tearful moment. I knew of nothing more fitting for the occasion than what I was trying to read.

Here is the poem, which I would like to share with all newlyweds as they begin their married life together:

The raw materials of love are yours . . . Fond hearts, and lusty blood, and minds in tune: And so, dear innocents, you think yourselves Lovers full-blown. Am I, because I own Chisel, mallet and stone, A sculptor? And must he Who hears a skylark and can hold a pen A poet be? If neither's so, why then You're not yet lovers. But in time to come (If senses grow not dulled nor spirit dumb) By constant exercise of skill and wit, By patient toil and judgement exquisite Of body, mind and heart, You may, my innocents, fashion This tenderness, this liking, and this passion Into a work of art.
