Hyrum L. Andrus, God, Man, and the Universe ( 1968)

1

The New Gospel Dispensation

. . . the time cometh, saith the Lamb of God, that I will work a great and a marvelous work among the children of men; a work which shall be everlasting, either on the one hand or on the other—either to the convincing of them unto peace and life eternal, or unto the deliverance of them to the hardness of their hearts and the blindness of their minds unto their being brought down into captivity, and also into destruction, both temporally and spiritually. . . .—NEPHI.

Those who heard the striking story related by Joseph Smith, a humble, uneducated farm boy from up-state New York, were generally divided into two camps. Having heard the claim that he was called of God to usher in a new and final dispensation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, some accepted him as a prophet of the living God of similar statute to Moses or Elijah. Others ridiculed his claim and rejected his message. Having visited Joseph Smith shortly before his death at the hands of a mob with painted faces, Josiah Quincy, who later became Mayor of Boston, noted the controversy that centered around this picturesque American and said:

The man who established a religion in this age of free debate, who was and is today accepted by hundreds of thousands as a direct emissary of the Most High—such a rare human being is not to be disposed of by pelting his memory with unsavory epithets. . . . The most vital questions Americans are asking each other today have to do with this man and what he has left us. . . . Burning questions they are, which must give a prominent place in the history of the country to that sturdy self-asserter whom I visited at Nauvoo. [^1]

Having observed the beautiful city of Nauvoo which Joseph Smith and the Latter-day Saints had built as the most prosperous metropolis in Illinois, and having noted that it "was an orderly city, magnificently laid out, and teeming with activity and enterprise," Quincy reported with astonishment that "all the diligent workers" who had reared the "handsome stores and comfortable dwellings bowed in subjection" to Joseph Smith and his spiritual claims. To the sophisticated Bostonian, this was utterly ridiculous. He labelled the Prophet's explanations of religious principles as "absurdities" and made reference to his "blasphemous assumptions" of divine authority and power. To Quincy, visiting Nauvoo was like being in an asylum for the insane where some unhappy inmate was a victim of the delusion that he had received the appointment of vicegerent of the Deity upon earth. He said: "It was like a dream to find one's self moving through a prosperous community, where the repulsive claim of one of these pretenders was respectfully acknowledged." [^2]

Yet Quincy could not summarily dismiss Joseph Smith. From a public wastebasket he salvaged three letters to the Prophet which revealed the caliber of men who gave unquestioned credence to his claims. From these letters and what he saw at Nauvoo, the eminent visitor could only conclude that it was not merely the stories that Joseph Smith told of his communion with God that commanded the allegiance of others, "but some mastering force of the man who handled them." "If these letters go little way toward interpreting the man," he wrote after relating their contents, "they suggest that any hasty interpretation of him is inadequate." Quincy concluded his account of his visit on this note of frustration: "If the reader does not know just what to make of Joseph Smith, I cannot help him out of the difficulty. I myself stand helpless before the puzzle." [^3]

Quincy has not been alone in his perplexity. It requires but a brief survey of the accumulating literature dealing with Joseph Smith to convince one that in the final analysis others have been similarly frustrated, though they may not have been as honest as Quincy in stating their confusion. Rather than seek to explain Joseph Smith according to a given theory, this work will deal essentially with his ideas. Having considered Joseph Smith's thought, the reader may then be in a better position to judge for himself the source of the Prophet's teachings and the validity of his claims.

The Dispensation Of The Fulness Of Times

The Meaning of a Dispensation

Joseph Smith lived in a day of reformers when utopian thinkers were setting forth various theories of society. [^4] But the Prophet was not a utopian in the sense that that term is generally used. Though he set forth the plan of an ideal society, he was distinct in that he claimed to receive revelation and authority direct from God to promulgate a new dispensation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ with its divine program for the social, economic, and political well-being of man.

The word "dispensation" is derived from the word "dispense"; and it means to deal out, to bestow upon, or to appoint to one from a higher power. In religious thought, it has reference in the broad and general sense to the divine arrangement and administration of the affairs of the earth. As pertaining to a particular period, it is a time during which God dispenses His truth, power, and authority to mankind.

According to Latter-day Saint thought, there have been several dispensations given to man from the beginning of the world. David W. Patten, a leading apostle in the latter-day dispensation, declared:

Unto Adam first was given a dispensation. It is well known that God spake to him with His own voice in the garden, and gave him the promise of the Messiah. And unto Noah also was a dispensation given; for Jesus said, "As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of Man;" and as the righteous were saved then, and the wicked destroyed, so it will be now. And from Noah to Abraham, and from Abraham to Moses, and from Moses to Elias [i.e., Elijah], and from Elias to John the Baptist, and from then to Jesus Christ, and from Jesus Christ to Peter, James, and John, the Apostles—all received in their time a dispensation by revelation from God, to accomplish the great scheme of restitution, spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world began; the end of which is the dispensation of the fulness of times, in which all things shall be fulfilled that have been spoken of since the earth was made. [^5]

It may be said that a dispensation is given to each person who is called of God, according to the commission he receives. The Apostle Paul wrote, for example: "I am made a minister, according to the dispensation of God which is given to me for you." [^6] When viewed in light of this broad and general definition, there are many dispensations. But when a dispensation is said to consist of the delegation of keys of the Holy Priesthood to a given prophet, giving him the right to direct others in their priestly operations during the period which is specified in his commission, the number of dispensations is greatly reduced. Joseph Smith taught: "Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fullness of times; i.e., the dispensation of all the times have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ to the end of the dispensations that are to be revealed." [^7] Although the dispensation given to Adam included the right to direct the program of the Gospel in all ages of time, others were given dispensations under his authority. "This, then, is the nature of the Priesthood," Joseph Smith explained, "every man holding the Presidency of his dispensation, and one man holding the Presidency of them all, even Adam; and Adam receiving his Presidency and authority from the Lord." [^8]

By the nature of his calling, Noah stands next to Adam in the keys and authority that pertain to this earth. [^9] But between Adam and Noah there were several great prophets and patriarchs. Joseph Smith referred to Abel as holding "the keys of his dispensation." [^10] And of Enoch, he said: "He is reserved . . . unto the presidency of a dispensation." [^11] These two men, with the possible addition of Seth, [^12] stand out as the greatest presiding figures between the time of Adam and Noah.

After Noah, such men as Shem and Melchizedek held the keys of the Priesthood in their day. [^13] But since God gave special promises to Abraham that his seed would be chosen of the Lord in their generations, the dispensation that was given to this great patriarch is of special significance. A revelation to Joseph Smith speaks of "the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham" as being one of the most important dispensations given to man in ancient times. [^14] Isaac and Jacob were associated with this dispensation as presiding patriarchs under Abraham, and through them the promises given to Abraham were perpetuated. There were also others after the flood who received special appointments from God, including the brother of Jared who presided over a people who migrated to the Western hemisphere and became a great nation that endured for several hundred years. [^15]

To Moses was committed a major dispensation; and after him, other great prophets of Israel were given power and revelation from God. Joseph Smith explained: "Elijah was the last prophet before Christ that held . . . the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood." [^16] In addition, there were other prophets who left the land of Palestine to head dispensations in far-away places. Prominent people among the northern kingdom of Israel were taken first to Assyria, and they then migrated to the north and became lost to the world. Jesus later visited them and probably commissioned apostles and prophets to minister unto them; they have kept a record of the inspired writings of their dispensation. [^17] About 600 B.C., Lehi, and his righteous son, Nephi, led a colony to the Western hemisphere under the direction of the Lord. They also were given a dispensation. Inspired prophets and apostles [^18] were commissioned with a dispensation of grace and power to minister unto this branch of Israel.

To John the Baptist was given power "to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord, in whose hand is given all power." [^19] "The kingdom of God for a season seemed to rest with John alone," Joseph Smith observed. [^20] But after John came the Son of God, the great High Priest of the Holy Priesthood, "holding the keys of the universe," [^21] but coming to this earth to make an infinite atonement and redeem all "whom the Father had put into his power and made by him." [^22] To Peter, Jesus promised to give "the keys of the kingdom of heaven"; [^23] and he, with James and John, received those keys on the Mount of Transfiguration. [^24] In its scope, their dispensation consisted of the presidency in the apostleship over the whole house of Israel, including such groups as the colony of Lehi and the Twelve whom Jesus commissioned to minister to the Nephites on the Western hemisphere. [^25] It also includes the presidency over Israel in the last days, and for this reason Joseph Smith referred to Peter, James, and John as "possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times." [^26]

The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times

"It is in the order of heavenly things that God should always send a new dispensation into the world when men have apostatized from the truth and lost the priesthood," Joseph Smith explained. [^27] But the dispensation which he was called to direct consisted of more than a restoration of the Gospel of Jesus Christ with its saving ordinances. In explaining "the extent or authority" of this last dispensation, David W. Patten said: "It means this, that the dispensation of the fullness of times is made up of all the dispensations that ever have been given since the world began, until this time." [^28] The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times (that is, the Dispensation of the Fulness of Dispensations [^29]) is a composite dispensation, comprising all the keys, powers, authorities, and revelations that have been committed to man in all former ages of time. It is to be a dispensation of consummation and of fulfillment. The Prophet thus declared: "The dispensation of the fulness of times will bring to light the things that have been revealed in all former dispensations." [^30] Again he said: "God purposed in Himself that there should not be an eternal fulness until every dispensation should be fulfilled and gathered in one, and that all things whatsoever, that should be gathered together in one in those dispensations unto the same fulness and eternal glory, should be in Christ Jesus." [^31] Finally, as he referred to the program of the last dispensation, Joseph Smith said: "It is necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the fulness of times, which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present time." [^32]

But even this is not the full extent of the nature and power of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, for there were to be things revealed in this last dispensation that pertain exclusively to it and its program. Having made the statement last quoted in the paragraph above, Joseph Smith wrote: "And not only this, but those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times." [^33] For this reason the Lord declared in a revelation: "For I deign to reveal unto my church things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the dispensation of the fulness of times." [^34]

All Things to be Gathered Together in Christ

In writing of a dispensation which was then future from his day, the Apostle Paul said:

. . . [God] having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself:

That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him. [^35]

"From the above quotation we learn that Paul perfectly understood the purposes of God in relation to His connection with man," Joseph Smith observed, "and that glorious and perfect order which He established in Himself, whereby He sent forth power, revelations, and glory." [^36] The great dispensation which Paul foretold, in which the work of God on earth would be consummated, is that which Joseph Smith claimed to have been commissioned to initiate. Several revelations to the latter-day seer made reference to the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, [^37] and in a discourse the Prophet explained its purpose in relation to other dispensations. [^38] On another occasion, he declared to the Saints: "We are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the Latter-day glory; it is left for us to see, participate in and help to roll forward the Latter-day glory, 'the dispensation of the fullness of times, when God will gather together all things that are in heaven, and all things that are upon the earth, even in one,' when the saints of God will be gathered in one from every nation, and kindred, and people, and tongue, when the Jews will be gathered together into one, the wicked will also be gathered together [at Jerusalem [^39] to be destroyed, as spoken of by the prophets; the Spirit of God will also dwell with His people, and be withdrawn from the rest of the nations, and all things whether in heaven or on earth will be in one, even in Christ." [^40]

The Prophet held that only by gathering all things together in Christ could the great designs and objectives of the latter-day dispensation be achieved. To this end, a system would have to be established capable of bringing all things pertaining to human interest and welfare under the law of Christ, enabling Him to direct the affairs of men on earth by the revelation of His will. To illustrate this point, Joseph Smith said:

When the children of Israel were chosen with Moses at their head, they were to be a peculiar people, among whom God should place His name; their motto was: "The Lord is our lawgiver; the Lord is our Judge: the Lord is our King; and He shall reign over us." While in this state they might truly say, "Happy is that people, whose God is the Lord." Their government was a theocracy; they had God to make their laws, and men chosen by Him to administer them; He was their God, and they were His people. Moses received the word of the Lord from God Himself; he was the mouth of God to Aaron, and Aaron taught the people, in both civil and ecclesiastical affairs; they were both one, there was no distinction. So will it be when the purposes of God shall be accomplished: when "the Lord shall be King over the whole earth," and "Jerusalem His throne." "The law shall go forth from Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." [^41]

So necessary is it to build up the Kingdom of God according to this plan that the Prophet stressed: "This is the only thing that can bring about the 'restitution of all things spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world was'—'the dispensation of the fullness of times, when God shall gather together all things in one.'" [^42] Again he said of the great work to be accomplished in the latter days:

It has been the design of Jehovah, from the commencement of the world, and is His purpose now, to regulate the affairs of the world in His own time, to stand as a head of the universe, and take the reins of government in His own hand. When that is done, judgment will be administered in righteousness; anarchy and confusion will be destroyed, and "nations will learn war no more." It is for want of this great governing principle that all this confusion has existed; "for it is not in man that walketh, to direct his steps. . . ."

Other attempts to promote universal peace and happiness in the human family have proved abortive; every effort has failed; every plan and design has fallen to the ground; it needs the wisdom of God, the intelligence of God, and the power of God to accomplish this. The world has had a fair trial for six thousand years; the Lord will try the seventh thousand Himself; "He whose right it is, will possess the kingdom, and reign until He has put all things under His feet;" iniquity will hide its hoary head, Satan will be bound, and the works of darkness destroyed; righteousness will be put to the line, and judgment to the plummet, and "he that fears the Lord will alone be exalted in that day." [^43]

A People to be Prepared for the Millennial Reign

Before Christ can take the reins of power and government in the millennial system, Joseph Smith held that a preparatory work must be accomplished: a people must be gathered from the nations of the earth and prepared for the millennial reign. This was a major objective of the new dispensation from the beginning. The Prophet's account of the visitations of the Angel Moroni will be considered in chapter two of this volume. In reporting the angel's initial visit in September, 1823, Joseph Smith later wrote:

This messenger proclaimed himself to be an angel of God, sent to bring the joyful tidings that . . . the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the Gospel in all its fullness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the millennial reign. I was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of His purposes in this glorious dispensation. [^44]

This view of the latter-day dispensation Joseph Smith expressed from time to time during his lifetime. "Beloved brethren, you must be aware in some measure of my feelings, when I contemplate the great work which is now rolling on, and the relationship which I sustain to it, while it is extending to distant lands, and thousands are embracing it," he wrote in 1841 to the authorities of the Church in the British Isles. "I realize in some measure my responsibility, and the need I have of support from above, and wisdom from on high, that I may be able to teach this people, which have now become a great people, the principles of righteousness, and lead them agreeably to the will of Heaven; so that they may be perfected, and prepared to meet the Lord Jesus Christ when He shall appear in great glory." [^45]

But this was not to be the work of man, but the work of God. As will be shown later in this chapter, Latter-day Saints believe that the prophets and saints of former dispensations understood the plan of God for the earth; and their eyes were upon the last great dispensation, when God's work in the earth would be brought to its fruition and consummation—when the Kingdom of God would be built up according to the full and perfect plan of God, with power to reach back and unite the righteous of all ages into one great divine system in preparation for the reign of Christ upon the earth. This was "a work that God and angels have contemplated with delight for generations past, [and] that fired the souls of the ancient patriarchs and prophets," Joseph Smith explained. "The building up of Zion is the cause that has interested the people of God in every age; it is a theme upon which prophets, priests and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight; they have looked forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live; and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipation they have sung and written and prophesied of this our day." [^46]

As has been indicated, it was not intended that the latter-day work would be carried on and consummated by the efforts of man alone. Instead, the Saints were expected to learn the ways of God and apply their efforts in union with His Holy Priesthood beyond the veil. The attainment of such union by revelation through the Holy Spirit constituted a major part of the work of preparing themselves as a people for the millennial reign of Christ. "The heavenly Priesthood will unite with the earthly, to bring about those great purposes; and whilst we are thus united in the one common cause, to roll forth the kingdom of God, the heavenly Priesthood are not idle spectators, the Spirit of God will be showered down from above, and will dwell in our midst," the Prophet wrote. "The blessings of the Most High will rest upon our tabernacles, and our name will be handed down to future ages; our children will rise up and call us blessed; and generations yet unborn will dwell with peculiar delight upon the scenes that we have passed through, the privations that we have endured; the untiring zeal that we have manifested; the all but insurmountable difficulties that we have overcome in laying the foundation of a work that brought about the glory and blessing which they will realize; a work that God and angels have contemplated with delight for generations past; that fired the souls of the ancient patriarchs and prophets; a work that is destined to bring about the destruction of the powers of darkness, the renovation of the earth, the glory of God, and the salvation of the human family." [^47]

The Challenge of the New Dispensation

Aside from its claim to unite all former dispensations into one divine millennial system in which the purposes of God would be brought to full fruition, the design of the new dispensation was "to promote the universal good of the universal world; to establish peace and good will among men; to promote the principles of eternal truth; to bring about a state of things that shall unite man to his fellow man; cause the world to 'beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks,' make the nations of the earth dwell in peace, and to bring about the millennial glory, when 'the earth shall yield its increase, resume its paradisean glory, and become the garden of the Lord.'" [^48]

To fulfill these objectives, three things would be necessary: First, a system of thought would have to be developed sufficiently complete and consistent to meet the challenge of the intended revolution and bear it off successfully. Of this requirement a prominent easterner wrote to an elder close to the Prophet at Nauvoo: "You are aware . . . that an attempt to promulgate new doctrinal tenets in religon, is an enterprise of momentous magnitude, and it is an undertaking, which in order to succeed, will require great reflection, a perfect knowledge of human character, and determined perseverance." [^49] Second, the action of supernatural powers would be required. For the earth to be renewed spiritually, God would have to extend divine powers of truth and light to men sufficiently powerful to illuminate their minds and bind their hearts together in truth. Only by a program that would bring man into an actual spiritual union with God could the earth be brought to "resume its paradisean glory." [^50] Finally, the mechanics of the new society would have to be defined, consistent with its inner spirit and philosophy; and the machinery, or outward functions, of the system would have to be arranged in such a way that they would give intelligent expression to the ideals upon which the society rested. [^51]

Here was a major challenge that confronted Joseph Smith, for regardless of where he obtained his ideas, the fact remains that no system of any consequence can be established successfully among men without meaningful philosophical concepts upon which it can be based. Man's regard for others and his accepted duty to God are rooted therein. A true and enobling philosophy must be founded in the dignity of man, and it must answer intelligently the questions: What is man that others should be mindful of him? From whence did he originate? What is his purpose in life? What is his future destiny? And how is he related to God and to the universe?

Philosophy is the great pulling together process—the synthesis of all known truth. If philosophy and religious faith are actually founded in truth, they should be one. There should be no inconsistencies between them. This, however, was not the case in Joseph Smith's day. "The wedded union of philosophy and religion, so essential to the peace of the meditative mind," George Ripley observed, "has not yet been consummated in the sanctuary of our holiest thoughts." [^52] To such extent was this an obvious fact that Ripley's fellow transcendentalist, Orestes A. Brownson, lamented: "We are religious only at the expense of our logic." [^53]

True religion or philosophy must have its foundation in the realities of the cosmos. The least that can be required of one who sets forth a new and meaningful religion or philosophy is that he be aware of the physical realities of the universe. Here in some respects may be seen the problem that confronted Joseph Smith. Not only was modern science still in its infancy, but most Americans of the early nineteenth century had little opportunity to make such studies as could then be made as a means of formulating a philosophy of life compatible with the modern world. President John Quincy Adams lamented in an Annual Message that in the field of astronomy there was "neither observatory nor observer upon our half of the globe." [^54] This fact was also noted in 1832 by the English astronomer Sir George Biddell Airy, to the embarrassment of patriotic intellectuals in America. [^55] Not until the following decade were observatories established at Harvard, Cincinnati, and Washington. [^56] The status of scientific thought of the time was also indicated by the fact that many people accepted the Symmes theory, which held that the earth was composed of about five concentric spheres, each inhabited on the concave and convex sides. [^57] Meanwhile, orthodox Christians in every sect still believed that the earth was created from nothing and would return to nothing. It was not until this period that the law of conservation of matter [^58] began to be understood by some thinking men. And it was not until the close of the nineteenth century that the prevailing idea of a relatively fixed universe espoused earlier by Sir Isaac Newton was overthrown by discoveries of stellar movements.

From the standpoint of human knowledge, Joseph Smith was even more limited than the great majority of his fellow Americans in his opportunity to acquire scientific data as a means of formulating a new philosophy of life. [^59] Nor is there evidence that he sought for such data before the foundation principles of his thought were laid. Instead, he claimed revelation from God as the source of his information concerning the ultimate realities of man and the cosmos. From this source he claimed to have acquired the principles of a divine philosophy that in the opinion of John Taylor, an intelligent and thoughtful student of the Prophet's thought and the third President of the Church, are "beyond the ken of human judgment, beyond the reach of human intelligence." [^60] Admitting that the new system was "an engima to the world" and that though it was philosophical, it was "heavenly philosophy" revealed from God to man, [^61] Elder Taylor in comparing it with human systems of thought said:

The philosophers in the world understand something of the rules of natural philosophy; but those rules will never lead a man to the knowledge of God; if he ever obtains this knowledge, it must be by the principle of revelation. All the works of God, whether on the earth or in the heaven, are constructed on strictly philosophical principles. We understand in part the things of earth; when we see things as God sees them, we shall then understand the philosophy of the heavens: the mysteries of eternity will be unfolded and the operations of mind, matter, spirit, purpose, and designs, causes and effects and all the stupendous operations of God will be developed, and they will be found to accord with the strictest principles of philosophy, even the philosophy of the heavens. [^62]

Advocates of the philosophy of heaven argued that what a man sees depends largely upon where he stands, and that man can best comprehend life by viewing things from the vantage point of God's understanding. Having communed with God, Joseph Smith observed: "I could go back and trace every subject of interest concerning the relationship of man to God. . . . I can enter the mysteries; I can enter largely into the eternal worlds." [^63] Theodore Parker, a great American theologian contemporary with the Prophet, longingly exclaimed: "Oh, that some young genius would devise the 'Novum Organum' of humanity, determine the 'Principia' thereof, and with deeper than mathematic science, write out the formula of the Human Universe, the Celestial Mechanics of Mankind." [^64] But Joseph Smith claimed that this goal had largely been realized through the new revelation that was committed to him, as a necessary part of his divine mission. "Thy mind, O man! if thou wilt lead a soul unto salvation," he wrote from a dungeon cell in Missouri, "must stretch as high as the utmost heavens, and search into and contemplate the darkest abyss, and the broad expanse of eternity—thou must commune with God." [^65] Having applied in some measure the divine formula of revelation, Brigham Young, the Prophet's most attentive disciple and his successor in the leadership of the Church, rejoiced that in this way man could gain "wisdom enough while in this mortal tabernacle, to be able to look through the whys and wherefores of the existence of man, like looking through a piece of glass that is perfectly transparent; and understand the design of the Great Maker of this beautiful creation." [^66]

Revelations to Joseph Smith provide the basis for a new and meaningful synthesis of knowledge capable of encompassing and tying together into one vast rational unit all the truth known to man. To John Taylor, the new revelation was "nature, philosophy, heaven and earth, time and eternity united." [^67] Of this new system of thought, he said without hyperbole:

. . . it is as high as heaven. . . . It is deeper than hell. . . . It is as wide as the universe, it extends over all creation. It goes back into eternity and forward into eternity. It associates with the past, present and future; it is connected with time and eternity, with men, angels, and Gods, with beings that were, that are and that are to come. [^68]

With the new dispensation there was also a restoration of the keys of revelation by which further knowledge could be acquired. [^69] In the development of the Kingdom of God and its divine powers of truth in the earth, Joseph Smith anticipated

. . . a time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld, whether there be one God or many Gods, they shall be manifest. All thrones and dominions, principalities and powers, shall be revealed and set forth upon all who have endured valiantly for the gospel of Jesus Christ. And also, if there be bounds set to the heavens or to the seas, or to the dry land, or to the sun, moon, or stars—all the times of their revolutions, all the appointed days, months, and years, and all their glories, laws, and set times, shall be revealed in the days of the dispensation of the fulness of times. [^70]

As implied in the statement above, not all truth was immediately to be revealed. Many great and important principles of knowledge were to be reserved for the faithful when Christ manifested Himself in glory and power to cleanse the earth and reward every man for his labors in establishing the Kingdom of God. A revelation promised:

Verily I say unto you, in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things—things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven. And all they who suffer persecution for my name, and endure in faith, though they are called to lay down their lives for my sake, yet shall they partake of all this glory. [^71]

In the new dispensation, the quest for truth was therefore united with the desire to establish righteousness upon the earth, and with the hope for a peaceful, progressive, and enlightened world society under the Kingdom of God. The millennium was expected to be an era surpassing in glory and splendor the most intelligent expectations of man. Sacred and secular truth would indeed cover the earth as the waters cover the seas, and the resurrected Christ would then reign personally in the power of His divine truth upon the earth. To this end, the program of the new dispensation was dedicated, as a meaningful prelude to the millennial kingdom of Christ.

The New Dispensation Foretold

Ancient Prophets Spoke of the New Dispensation

Joseph Smith accepted as a fact the declaration made anciently by Amos: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." [^72] If God speaks beforehand to His prophets of things which He designs to bring to pass in the earth, the prophets in earlier ages should have known of the great dispensation in the last days in which the work of God would be consummated in the earth, and evidence of their knowledge should be found in sacred writings. Because Latter-day Saints accepted this proposition, their literature abounds with explanatory treatments of biblical prophecies, showing that the ancient prophets spoke of the modern dispensation. In this chapter, only those biblical prophecies that speak of the establishment of the new dispensation will be considered. Other prophetic statements that speak of specific aspects of the work of the last dispensation, or things to be accomplished in the latter days, will be treated in their appropriate places throughout this study.

The Apostle Paul's Declaration

The Apostle Paul's declaration concerning the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times as a great dispensation future to his day was quoted earlier in this chapter. Therein he stated that God had made known to the early Christians that in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times He would "gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth." [^73] Paul therefore understood that there would be another great dispensation—a giving out of truth, power, and authority from God—future to his day, a period of gathering and of consummating the divine purposes in Christ.

The Apostle Peter's Statement

As has been indicated, the new dispensation was to be a time of restitution, or restoration, and several revelations to Joseph Smith speak of it in this light. [^74] The Apostle Peter alluded to a period of restitution that would precede Christ's second coming and be associated with His advent in glory when he admonished certain Jews:

Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord;

And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you:

Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began. [^75]

Here Peter is speaking of Christ's return to the earth; and he declares that this will take place "when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord" [^76]—the period during which the earth will be renewed and receive again a paradisiacal glory, [^77] when Jesus rends the veil and every corruptible thing is consumed by the brightness of His coming to dwell upon the earth in His glory.

Christ's coming in glory to the earth will bring to completion "the restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." [^78] Restitution is the act of restoring that which has been taken away or lost. It means to return to, or recover, a former position or condition. In this instance, it means to return the earth to a comparable state to that which prevailed when it was first created and resided for a time in the presence of God. [^79]

For Peter to speak of "the times of restitution of all things" as a period future to his day implies other specific occurrences in addition to those which have been referred to above: First, he would have to have understood that there would be a complete perversion of the Christian gospel and system which he and the other apostles were then endeavoring to establish upon the earth. It is impossible to restore that which has not been lost, and Peter declared that "all things" would be restored, which implies that all essential elements in the true Christian system would be lost. Second, a restitution of "all things" must of necessity include a restoration of the true Gospel of Jesus Christ and its related social order, in the period or "times of restitution" of which Peter spoke. Third, the fact that Peter declared that "the heaven must receive" Christ "until the times of restitution of all things" indicates that the apostle understood that Christ's second coming would be during the "times of restitution." Finally, since Peter declared that all the holy prophets since the world began have spoken of the "times of restitution," it follows that a major theme in biblical testimony must support the view that there would be a latter-day work of restitution.

The Apostle John's Vision

The Apostle John also foretold the restoration of the Gospel in the latter days. Of John's vision on the Isle of Patmos, Joseph Smith said: "John the Revelator saw an angel flying through the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth." [^80] The passage to which the Prophet alluded in the revelation of John reads:

. . . I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,

Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters. [^81]

There are two important points in this statement: First, John saw that at a time future to his day, an angel would come to earth with the Everlasting Gospel to preach to all people. [^82] Second, the angel would come just before the hour of God's judgments upon the world in the last days. [^83]

In speaking of the fulfilment of John's vision, Joseph Smith made pointed reference to "Peter, the angel flying through the midst of heaven," then added: "Moroni delivered the Book of Mormon." [^84] Man does not have the Everlasting Gospel and the right to proclaim it by the mere possession of a scriptural record, but only as the Melchizedek Priesthood is restored. This Peter did. [^85] In addition, Moroni revealed the Book of Mormon [^86] which, in the sense of its message, contains "the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ." [^87] Therein, the Lord said, "are all things written concerning the foundation of my church, my gospel, and my rock." [^88]

Daniel's Prophecy

In referring to other biblical prophecies concerning the establishment of the latter-day dispensation and its program, Joseph Smith said: "The ancient prophets declared that in the last days the God of heaven should set up a kingdom which should never be destroyed, nor left to other people; and [at] the very time that was calculated on [in the prophetic time-table], this people were struggling to bring it out." [^89] The prophecy to which the latter-day seer referred was Daniel's inspired interpretation of King Nebuchadnezzar's dream in which the Babylonian monarch was shown a huge image that typified the world orders, or major political systems, of the future. [^90] The Babylonian monarch had seen a huge image with head of fine gold, breast and arms of silver, belly and thighs of brass, legs of iron, and feet and toes part of iron and part of clay. God made known to Daniel that the head of gold represented the Babylonian kingdom. But after it, another kingdom would rise which would be inferior to it, as silver is inferior to gold. A third governing system likened unto the brass in the image would then rule. The fourth great political order would be strong like iron, with power to break in pieces and bruise. It would be divided as the body is divided downward into the legs. After an extended period, typified by the legs, and after a general change of order within the divided kingdom, typified by the changes incurred in passing downward from the upper to the lower parts of the legs, a system of national states would rise in the latter days typified by the feet and toes of the image. Of these Daniel explained:

. . . as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.

And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay. [^91]

Latter-day Saints maintain that according to Daniel's interpretation, the parts of the huge image which Nebuchadnezzar saw represent five great political orders or systems which would emerge in succession from his day until the latter times, when the Kingdom of God would be established and developed, eventually, to bear righteous rule over the whole earth: (1) the head of gold—the Babylonian Empire; (2) the chest and arms of silver—the Medo-Persian Empire; (3) the brazen belly and thighs—the Greco-Macedonian Empire; (4) the legs of iron—the Roman Empire, which was divided as the body divides into the legs, with one center at Rome and the other at Constantinople, and which extended in its two divisions down into later times; and (5) the feet and toes of iron and clay—the several kingdoms and states of the modern world.

The French Revolution which began in 1789 destroyed the last vestiges of the Holy Roman Empire, which had been formed in A. D. 800 from the Roman Empire in the West. The Holy Roman Empire became extinct officially in 1806 when Francis II, the last Emperor, resigned the elective imperial crown of the Empire for the hereditary crown of Austria. (The Eastern Roman, or Byzantine, Empire had come to an end in 1453 when Constantinople was captured by the Turks.) Sometime before the beginning of the nineteenth century, the spirit of nationalism had been gaining strength in the world and had already expressed itself in the formation of several national states. After the demise of the Holy Roman Empire, the spirit of nationalism became a seething force dominating the world of the nineteenth century. By its influence, the modern national-state system was brought fully into being, and the time for the establishment and development of the Kingdom of God as foretold by Daniel arrived. Speaking of the latter-day kingdoms which were typified by the feet and toes of the huge image, Daniel said: "In the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed; and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever." [^92]

The Kingdom of God in Nebuchadnezzar's dream was likened to a stone cut out of a mountain without hands, "which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and broke them in pieces." [^93] The Latter-day Saint view does not hold that the Kingdom of God in the last days will be a militaristic power that subjugates the world by force. Instead, it holds that God, in establishing His Kingdom upon the earth, will bring the nations to judgment after the Gospel has been preached unto them and, if they fail to repent, to destruction. The Kingdom of God will then, if not before, become a universal power. Of the results of the latter-day era of judgment, Daniel said: "Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshing floors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth." [^94] Like John the Revelator, Daniel foretold that the period during which the latter-day dispensation or kingdom would exist would be one of great judgments upon the world; and in the consummation of those judgments, the Kingdom of God would rise to inaugurate a new era of righteousness upon the earth. To King Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel concluded: "The great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure." [^95]

The Mission Of Joseph Smith

The Place of Joseph Smith in the New Dispensation

Joseph Smith said of his determination to aid in establishing the Kingdom of God: "I calculate to be one of the instruments of setting up the kingdom of Daniel by the word of the Lord, and I intend to lay a foundation that will revolutionize the whole world." Of the means by which this kingdom would be established and developed in the earth, he said: "It will not be by sword or gun that this kingdom will roll on; the power of truth is such that all nations will be under the necessity of obeying the Gospel." [^96]

Because Joseph Smith was chosen to initiate the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, he was given the right to obtain knowledge by revelation concerning the past and the future as it relates to the gathering together of all things in Christ. A revelation explained: "I have given unto him the keys of the mystery of those things which have been sealed, even things which were from the foundation of the world, and the things which shall come from this time until the time of my coming, if he abide in me." [^97]

To Joseph Smith also was given all the general keys, rights, and powers of the Priesthood pertaining to the Kingdom of God that were bestowed upon the prophets in all former dispensations. [^98] In speaking of the coming of ancient prophets to him to commit the keys of their dispensations, the Prophet said: "What do we hear? . . . the voice of Michael, the archangel [i.e., Adam]; the voice of Gabriel [i.e., Noah], and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!" [^99]

"The principles which he had, placed him in communion with the Lord," John Taylor said of Joseph Smith, "and not only with the Lord, but with the ancient apostles and prophets; such men, for instance, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, Adam, Seth, Enoch, and Jesus and the Father, and the apostles that lived on this continent as well as those who lived on the Asiatic continent." [^100] Of the vision of truth and of the ministrations which the latter-day Seer received, John Taylor said on another occasion:

. . . the principles and purposes of God were developed fully to the vision of his mind, and he gazed upon the things that are to transpire in the latter-day associated with the dispensation that he was called upon by the Almighty to introduce. He learned by communication from the heavens, from time to time, of the great events that should transpire in the latter days. He undersood things that were past, and comprehended the various dispensations and the designs of those dispensations. He not only had the principles developed, but he was conversant with the parties who officiated as the leading men of those dispensations, and from a number of them he received authority and keys and priesthood and power for the carrying out of the great purposes of the Lord in the last days, who were sent and commissioned specially by the Almighty to confer upon him those keys and this authority, and hence he introduced what was spoken of by all the prophets since the world was; the dispensation in which we live which differs from all other dispensations in that it is the dispensation of the fulness of times, embracing all other dispensations, all other powers, all other keys and all other privileges and immunities that ever existed upon the face of the earth. [^101]

Both John Taylor and his brother William stated that Joseph Smith "seemed to be as familiar with these people i.e., the ancient prophets and patriarchs] as we are with one another." [^102] From the ancient prophets and through revelation the Prophet claimed to receive the ideas which he promulgated. President Taylor explained:

At that time he was a feeble youth, inexperienced, without a knowledge of the learning of the day. But God put him in possession of that kind of intelligence, and what may be termed a scientific knowledge of all things pertaining to this earth, and the heavens, if you please, which was altogether ahead of all the intelligence that existed in the world. He commenced as opportunity presented by following the education he had received from the Almighty, by teaching the principles of life and salvation, the principles of the everlasting Gospel, by conferring upon others that priesthood which had been conferred upon him, and by organizing a state of things that was after the pattern of the heavens, that was calculated to live and grow and increase, that had the principle of life and vitality within itself, and that was calculated to draw together the honest in heart and assimilate them in their ideas and views and feelings and faith, and empower them to operate with him and with the Lord and with the holy priesthood that had existed in former ages. And thus he commenced to organize the Church with all its various offices under the direct inspiration, guidance and revelation of the Lord. [^103]

In establishing the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, a new witness of God was to be raised up in the last days. In explaining the nature of his commission as the presiding figure of the new dispensation, Joseph Smith read from the 24th chapter of Matthew and gave a literal rendition of verse 14 as it would be translated from German: "And it will be preached, the Gospel of the kingdom, in the whole world, to a witness over all people: and then will the end come." [^104] He then explained:

The Savior said when these tribulations [spoken of in Matthew 24 concerning the last days] should take place, it [i.e., the Gospel] should be committed to a man who should be a witness over the whole world: the keys of knowledge, power and revelations should be revealed to a witness who should hold the testimony to the world. . . . The old German translators are the most correct—most honest of any of the translators; and therefore I get testimony to bear me out in the revelations that I have preached for the last fourteen years. The old German, Latin, Greek and Hebrew translations all say it is true: they cannot be impeached, and therefore I am in good company.

All the testimony is that the Lord in the last days would commit the keys of the priesthood to a witness over all people. [^105]

"Where a testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the testator," the writer of the epistle to the Hebrews declared. "For a testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at all while the testator liveth." [^106] As God's witness over the last dispensation, Joseph Smith fulfilled this requirement. "To seal the testimony of this book [i.e., the Doctrine and Covenants, which contains revelations and inspired writings of Joseph Smith] and the Book of Mormon, we announce the martyrdom of Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Hyrum Smith the Patriarch," John Taylor wrote in an official proclamation concerning the death of the two presiding figures of this dispensation. "He [i.e., the Prophet] lived great, and he died great in the eyes of God and his people; and like most of the Lord's anointed in ancient times, has sealed his mission and his works with his own blood; and so has his brother, Hyrum. . . . Their innocent blood on the floor of Carthage jail is a broad seal affixed to 'Mormonism' that cannot be rejected by any court on earth." [^107]

Joseph Smith of the Lineage of Israel

In the anticipated revolution, a new world order was expected to rise in the last days, and the existing order dominated by Western civilization was expected to pass away. The gathering together of all things in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times was to include the work of identifying and gathering the modern remnants of Israel, God's ancient covenant people. To Joseph Smith, the Angel Moroni declared in 1823, "that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled." [^108] In the fulfillment of this covenant, the messianic hope of Israel was finally to be realized. The declarations of God's prophets in ancient times would come to pass, and the promises which God made to Israel in ancient days would be fulfilled. Scattered Israel would be gathered out of obscurity and out of darkness, with others who would join her ranks, and be organized into a millennial people in preparation for the reign of Christ on earth. [^109]

The subject of Israel and the doctrine of election in the flesh (i.e., God's appointment of priesthood rights and blessings to certain lineages in the flesh) will be discussed in later volumes of this work, along with the expected transformations by which a new world order would emerge under the direction of latter-day Israel. It is sufficient to say at this point that Joseph Smith claimed to be descended from Israel, and that he was rightly entitled by lineage to the keys, authority, and power which were centered in him. A revelation referred to the patriarchs "Joseph and Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham, your fathers, by whom the promises remain." [^110] And another revelation declared specifically to the Prophet: "Abraham received promises concerning his seed, and of the fruit of his loins—from whose loins ye are, namely, my servant Joseph." [^111]

The Book of Mormon identifies Joseph Smith as being a descendant of the ancient patriarch Joseph, who was sold into Egyptian slavery by his brothers. Because the latter-day Joseph would begin the work of restoring Israel and renewing God's covenant with the descendants of that ancient elect people, it was said that he would be like the ancient Joseph: he would be an instrument in the hands of God in bringing Israel unto salvation. By the work of the modern seer, a foundation would be laid to redeem the remnants of Israel and establish them upon the law of God, with others who would identify themselves with the latter-day dispensation. In this way, the millennial kingdom would be built in preparation for the reign of Christ upon the earth. The patriarch Joseph said:

A seer shall the Lord my God raise up, who shall be a choice seer unto the fruit of my loins. . . .

Thus saith the Lord unto me: A choice seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and he shall be esteemed highly among the fruit of thy loins. And unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren, which shall be of great worth unto them, even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenants which I have made with thy fathers. . . .

And he shall be great like unto Moses, whom I have said I would raise up unto you, to deliver my people, O house of Israel.

And Moses will I raise up, to deliver thy people out of the land of Egypt.

But a seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and unto him will I give power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loins—and not to the bringing forth my word only, saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have already gone forth among them [in the Bible]. . . .

And out of weakness he shall be made strong, in that day when my work shall commence among all my people, unto the restoring thee, O house of Israel, saith the Lord. . . .

Behold, that seer will the Lord bless; and they that seek to destroy him shall be confounded; for this promise, which I have obtained of the Lord, of the fruit of my loins, shall be fulfilled. Behold, I am sure of the fulfilling of this promise;

And his name shall be called after me; and it shall be after the name of his father. And he shall be like unto me; for the thing, which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation. [^112]

The Significance of Joseph Smith

Because of the nature of his mission, Latter-day Saints hold that Joseph Smith stands at the focal point of human affairs in modern times. In this respect, his position may be likened to that which is held by Jesus, who was the stone set at naught by the builders which became "the head of the corner" [^113] and the "only sure foundation" upon which man can build. [^114] Of the significance of the Prophet's work to the world in modern times, Nephi, an ancient prophet on the Western hemisphere, wrote: "The time cometh, saith the Lamb of God, that I will work a great and a marvelous work among the children of men; a work which shall be everlasting, either on the one hand or on the other—either to the convincing of them unto peace and life eternal, or unto the deliverance of them to the hardness of their hearts and the blindness of their minds unto their being brought down into captivity, and also into destruction, both temporally and spiritually." [^115] So important was the word of God which the latter-day seer was to bring forth that when Jesus ministered unto the ancient inhabitants of America after His resurrection, [^116] He revealed unto them the prophetic picture of the latter days and said:

. . . it shall come to pass that whosoever will not believe in my words, who am Jesus Christ, which the Father shall cause him [i.e., the latter-day prophet] to bring forth unto the Gentiles, and shall give unto him power that he shall bring them forth unto the Gentiles, (it shall be done even as Moses said) they shall be cut off from among my people who are of the covenant. . . .

And I will execute vengeance and fury upon them, even as upon the heathen, such as they have not heard. [^117]

Upon the acceptance or rejection of the new dispensation of the Gospel and its social, economic, and political program hangs the fate of all nations and peoples in the latter days. By revelation to Joseph Smith, the Lord said: "I have sent unto you mine everlasting covenant [i.e., the Gospel and its related program], . . . and the nations of the earth shall bow to it; and, if not of themselves, they shall come down, for that which is now exalted of itself shall be laid low of power." [^118] No greater or more positive ultimatum has ever been issued than that given to the modern world through Joseph Smith in relation to the dispensation of the Restored Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Footnotes

Though the admonition given in this statement was an appropriate one, it was made several years (at least eight) after the mold of the new dispensation had been set and its major doctrinal concepts expressed.

After I got through translating the Book of Mormon, I took up the Bible to read with the Urim and Thummim. I read the first chapter of Genesis, and I saw the things as they were done. I turned over the next and the next, and the whole passed before me like a grand panorama; and so on chapter after chapter until I read the whole of it. I saw it all! Then I think of the sectarian priests boasting of what they know. Why I have forgotten a thousand times more than they know.—Spoken at the house of Benjamin Brown, New York State, 1832. Related by Lorenzo Brown, "Joseph Smith, Jr. Papers," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The above report states that Sidney Rigdon was with the Prophet on this Journey to the East, but the Prophet recorded that he made the trip in company with Bishop Newell K. Whitney. See HC, I, p. 295.

---
Notas:
[^1] Quincy, op. cit., p. 400.
[^2] Ibid., p. 278.
[^3] Ibid., p. 376. (Italics in the original.)
[^4] Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith By His Mother (Salt Lake City, 1954), p. 32.
[^5] See ibid., pp. 37-40. At the time ginseng root was selling at a high price in China, as a remedy for the plague. The American variety, which throve in northern New York and New England, was gathered by many people, including children and Indians, who roamed the woods in search of the plant. The Empress of China, for example, carried thirty tons of ginseng roots to the Orient and netted the owners of the ship a 25 percent profit on their investment. See Nelson Manfred Blake, A Short History of American Life (New York, 1952), p. 190; R. Carlyle Buley, The Old Northwest Pioneer Period, 1815-1840 (Indianapolis, 1950), I, pp. 335-336; John Allen Krout and Dixon Ryan Fox, The Completion of Independence, 1970-1830 (New York, 1844), pp. 63-64.
[^6] Probably the best description of this whole region is found in Whitney Cross, The Burned-over District: The Social and Intellectual History of Enthusiastic Religion in Western New York, 1800-1825, Ithaca, New York, 1950.
[^7] As do some writers.
[^8] Editorial by W. D. Purple in the Norwich, New York Union, April 28, 1877, cited in I. Woodbridge Riley, The Founder of Mormonism (New York, 1902), p. 26.
[^9] Pomeroy Tucker, Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism (New York, 1867), pp. 12-13.
[^10] Cross, op. cit., p. 140.
[^11] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 63-64.
[^12] Tucker, op. cit., pp. 12-13; History of Wayne County, 1789-1877, (1877), p. 150.
[^13] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 67.
[^14] "History of Joseph Smith, Jr., by himself," in Joseph Smith's Letter Book at Kirtland, November 27, 1832 to August 4, 1835, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^15] HC, V, p. 423.
[^16] JD, VII, p. 111.
[^17] Ibid., XII, p. 357. Again, Elder Pratt wrote:
[^18] See Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith the Man and Seer (Salt Lake City, 1960), pp. 52-77.
[^19] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 82.
[^20] J. H. Kennedy, Early Days of Mormonism (New York, 1888), p. 15. This comment assumes that Joseph Smith was not telling the truth when he related his spiritual experiences to the people of Palmyra. The point is that they did not believe him. Hence the above inference.
[^21] Oramus Turner, History of the Pioneer Settlement of Phelps and Gorham's Purchase, and Morris Reserve (Rochester, 1852), p. 214.
[^22] John Humphrey Noyes, History of American Socialisms (Philadelphia, 1870), pp. 267-268.
[^23] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 68.
[^24] HC, I, p. 2.
[^25] For evidence that this conference was held in Vienna, Ontario county, New York, see F. W. Conable, History of the Genesee Annual Conference of Methodist Episcopal Church (New York, 1885), pp. 142, 158 ff. Rev. James H. Hotchkin states: "The village of Vienna is in the town of Phelps."—Hotchkin, A History of the Purchase and Settlement of Western New York and the Rise, Progress, and Present State of the Presbyterian Church in that Section (New York, 1848), p. 379. There is another Vienna in Oneida county, but the Vienna where this conference was held is now known as Phelps.
[^26] Conable, op. cit., p. 159. For example, Chase reports that a Methodist revival was underway just west of Rochester, near Brockport, on the Ridge Road, in the spring of 1820.—Ibid., p. 166.
[^27] Ibid., p. 175.
[^28] Records of the Presbytery of Geneva," pp. 36-38; courtesy of Presbyterian Historical Society, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. On date of October 8, 1820, the "Records of the Synod of Geneva" state:
[^29] Hotchkin, op. cit., p. 135. This revival extended into the year 1821. Hotchkin continued:
[^30] Turner, op. cit.
[^31] Conable, op. cit., p. 160.
[^32] Ibid., pp. 174-175.
[^33] Ibid., p. 158.
[^34] Several Methodist preachers during this period were young unmarried men. Though Joseph was then but fourteen years of age, he could have been made a part of the local effort and worked among the young people in the area of Manchester and Palmyra as Turner seems to imply.
[^35] History of Wayne County, 1789-1877 (1877), p. 150.
[^36] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 69.
[^37] HC, I, p. 3.
[^38] Conable, op. cit., p. 159.
[^39] Ibid., p. 161. See also pp. 147-148, 151, 152-153.
[^40] See Cross, op. cit., pp. 40-43.
[^41] HC, I, pp. 2-3.
[^42] Ibid., p. 3.
[^43] HC, I, pp. 3-4. This account was first published in TS, III (March 15, 1842), pp. 726-728, 748-749.
[^44] HC, I, p. 4.
[^45] Ibid.
[^46] Ibid., pp. 5-6. In a letter to John Wentworth, editor of the Chicago Democrat, Joseph Smith also wrote:
[^47] Ibid., I, p. 8.
[^48] Kennedy, op. cit., p. 16.
[^49] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 90.
[^50] Ibid. To illustrate, he said:
[^51] MS, XXI pp. 158-159.
[^52] HC, I, pp. 6-7.
[^53] Ibid., p. 7.
[^54] See Cross, op. cit., pp. 40-43, for a discussion of this situation.
[^55] HC, I, pp. 7-8.
[^56] Tucker, op. cit., p. 16.
[^57] History of Wayne County, p. 150.
[^58] HC, I, p. 9.
[^59] Latter Day Saints' Messenger And Advocate, Kirtland, Ohio, I (December, 1834), p. 40. This was the official Church organ between 1834 and 1837. Hereafter this source will be abbreviated as MA, followed by the volume, date, and page numbers.
[^60] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 74.
[^61] HC, I, p. 11. This account was published originally in TS, III (April 1, 1842), beginning on page 749.
[^62] MA, I (February, 1835), p. 79. This account was written by Oliver Cowdery.
[^63] HC, op. cit.
[^64] Ibid., pp. 11-12.
[^65] Ibid., IV, p. 537. This account is from the Prophet's letter to John Wentworth, editor and proprietor of the Chicago Democrat, published in the TS, III (March 1, 1842), beginning on page 707.
[^66] Ibid.
[^67] MA, I (February, 1835), p. 79.
[^68] Ibid.
[^69] HC, I, p. 12.
[^70] MA, op. cit., p. 80.
[^71] HC, op. cit.
[^72] See Hugh Nibley, Lehi in the Desert & The World of the Jaredites, Salt Lake City, 1952, for a penetrating analysis of this period of their history as given in the Book of Mormon, to determine whether that volume's account of Lehi's activities in Jerusalem conforms to the "local color" of the period, whether it describes a "state of social organization" which exactly agrees with our present archaeological and documentary evidence, whether the personal names contained in the story are satisfactory for that period and region, and whether there is anything "unreasonable in the story itself" when placed in the historical context of 600 B. C. Dr. Nibley, a noted scholar in this field, comments: "Virtually all that is known of the world in which Lehi is purported to have lived has been discovered within the last hundred years—mostly within the last thirty." On the basis of the above criteria, he concludes his analysis of the story of Lehi in Jerusalem by stating:
[^73] For example, Lehi found "a genealogy of his fathers" written upon the brass plate, by which he knew that "he was a descendant of Joseph" the son of Jacob, or Israel. This record also contained the writings of two prophets named Zenos and Zenock about whom Mormon, the last Nephite historian, wrote: They testified particularly concerning us, who are the remnant of their seed."
[^74] TS, III (September 15, 1842), p. 922. The Isthmus of Darien is now known as the Isthmus of Panama.
[^75] See 3 Nephi 9-28.
[^76] Appended to the Plates of Mormon was another set of plates, called the Small Plates of Nephi, containing the personal writings of nine successive historians, beginning with Nephi.
[^77] MA, I (February, 1835), p. 80.
[^78] HC, I, p. 12.
[^79] See Mosiah 8:13; Abraham 3:1ff; D&C 3:12; 130:8-10.
[^80] HC, op. cit.
[^81] MA, op. cit., p. 79.
[^82] See HC, I, pp. 12-13, for Joseph Smith's report of these scriptures. See also MA, I (April, 1835), pp. 109-112, for a statement by Oliver Cowdery giving additional information on the scriptures which Moroni quoted.
[^83] HC, I, p. 13. See also MA, I (February, 1835), p. 80.
[^84] HC, IV, p. 537.
[^85] MA, I (April, 1835), p. 112. Oliver Cowdery gave two examples to illustrate this method: When Moses was enveloped in the powers of God's Spirit he beheld "the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the Spirit of God." Moses also beheld "the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not."—Moses 1:27-28. God also "showed unto the brother of Jared all the inhabitants of the earth which had been, and also all that would be; and he withheld them not from his sight, even unto the ends of the earth." Ether 3:25. Oliver Cowdery stated that Joseph Smith was taught in a similar manner.
[^86] MA, op. cit., A quarto is a book or pamphlet having pages the size of a fourth of the printer's sheet. A quarto vocabularly probably means a dictionary.
[^87] HC, I, pp. 13-14.
[^88] Ibid.,
[^89] The upper stone he described as being "thick and rounding in the middle on the upper side, and thinner towards the edges, so that the middle part of it was visible above the ground, but the edge all around was covered with earth." The box had been "formed by laying stones together in some kind of cement" and in the bottom "were laid two stones crosswise of the box, and on these stones lay the plates and other things with them."—Ibid., pp. 15-16.
[^90] MA, II (October, 1835), pp. 198-199. Joseph Smith's mother later wrote that this portrayal was given "in such a striking manner, that the impression was always vivid in his memory until the very end of his days; and in giving a relation of this circumstance, not long prior to his death, he remarked, that ever afterwards to was willing to keep the commandments of God."—Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 81.
[^91] MA, II (October, 1835), p. 199.
[^92] HC, I, p. 16.
[^93] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 110.
[^94] 94. Daniel 2:35.
[^95] 95. Daniel 2:45.
[^96] 96. HC, VI, p. 365.
[^97] 97. D&C 35:18. See also D&C 64:5. Acting on this basis, Joseph Smith commenced to make an inspired revision of the Bible. One of the early Saints reported some years later that the Prophet said of this work:
[^98] 98. There are some reservations to the keys, etc. which he received. Adam did not commit to Joseph Smith the keys of presidency which he holds over the earth as its initial patriarch, nor did Noah commit the keys of his presidency. Likewise, Peter, James, and John did not commit the keys of presidency in the apostleship over the house of Israel which they hold. But all general keys and powers that were had within all past dispensations were restored.
[^99] 99. D&C 128:21.
[^100] 100. JD, XXI, p. 94. In making this statement, John Taylor declared: "I know of what I speak for I was very well acquainted with him and was with him a great deal during his life, and was with him when he died."—Ibid.
[^101] 101. Ibid., XX, pp. 174-175.
[^102] 102. Ibid., XXI, p. 94; Young Woman's Journal, XVII, p. 548.
[^103] 103. JD, XX, p. 175.
[^104] 104. HC, VI, p. 363.
[^105] 105. Ibid., pp. 363-364.
[^106] 106. Hebrews 9:16-17.
[^107] 107. D&C 135:1, 3, 7. (Italics in the original.)
[^108] 108. HC, IV, p. 537.
[^109] 109. See, for example, Deuteronomy 4:26-31; Jeremiah 31:31-34; Ezekiel 20:33-38.
[^110] 110. D&C 27:10.
[^111] 111. D&C 132:30.
[^112] 112. 2 Nephi 3:6-7, 9-11, 13-15.
[^113] 113. Psalms 118:22-23; Acts 4:11.
[^114] 114. Jacob 4:16-17.
[^115] 115. 1 Nephi 14:7.
[^116] 116. See 3 Nephi, in the Book of Mormon.
[^117] 117. 3 Nephi 21:11, 21. For the statement by Moses, see Deuteronomy 18:18-19; Acts 3:22-23.
[^118] 118. D&C 49:9-10.
