Hyrum L. Andrus, God, Man, and the Universe ( 1968)

2

The Call of a Modern Prophet

. . . while fervently engaged in supplication, my mind was taken away from the objects with which I was surrounded, and I was enwrapped in a heavenly vision, and saw two glorious personages, who exactly resembled each other in features and likeness, surrounded with a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noon day. They told me that all religious denominations were believing in incorrect doctrines, and that none of them was acknowledged of God as His Church and kingdom: and I was expressly commanded "to go not after them," at the same time receiving a promise that the fullness of the Gospel should at some future time be made known unto me.—JOSEPH SMITH.

In an isolated region near Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, the third son of Joseph and Lucy Mack Smith was born, December 23, 1805; they named him Joseph after his father. Josiah Quincy wrote that he was "born in the lowest ranks of poverty, without booklearning and with the homeliest of all human names." But the eminent Bostonian observed: "Of the multitudinous family of Smith, . . . none had so won human hearts and shaped human lives as this Joseph. His influence, whether for good or for evil, is potent to-day, and the end is not yet." [^1]

Quincy lamented that founders of religions often have greater influence upon mankind than statesmen and poets; [^2] and in recognition of this fact, he began the report of his interview with the Prophet by writing:

It is by no means improbable that some future text-book, for the use of generations yet unborn, will contain a question something like this. What historical American of the nineteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen? And it is by no means impossible that the answer to that interrogatory may be thus written: Joseph Smith, the Mormon prophet. And the reply, absurd as it doubtless seems to most men now living, may be an obvious commonplace to their descendants. History deals in surprises and paradoxes quite as startling as this. [^3]

The Prophet's Formative Years

Early Family Experiences

Joseph Smith, Sr., was a native of Topsfield, Essex County, Massachusetts, where his family had resided since Robert Smith came from England in 1638. At the time of his marriage to Lucy Mack in 1796, he owned a "handsome farm" at Tunbridge, Vermont. [^4] Later he began a mercantile career and invested heavily in a shipment of ginseng root to China; but he was swindled out of the proceeds of the venture, and to meet the obligations he had incurred, he was forced to sell his farm and business. [^5]

Following this misfortune, the Smiths made half a dozen moves in twice as many years in Vermont and New Hampshire. They engaged primarily in farming. At Sharon, Vermont, Joseph Sr. also taught school during the winter months. When circumstances permitted, the children attended the common schools; and for a time the second son, Hyrum, was sent to an academy at Hanover, New Hampshire.

Economically, Vermonters had fared rather badly during the War of 1812. When the post-war slump that spread over the nation was accentuated in New England by the frigid summers of 1815 and 1816, Vermont farmers moved westward in droves. With them went the Smith family, to locate at Palmyra and later Manchester, New York.

Palmyra is situated in a glacial region where the rolling hills of New York's Finger Lake section taper down to the drumlin-studded Ontario plain. By 1820, the village and its immediate vicinity had attained a population of about sixty persons per square mile. Although recent immigration had brought the population up to a relatively stable figure, the country was by no means settled when the Smiths arrived in 1816. Northward toward Lake Ontario there were fewer habitations; and toward the south and west were villages where land had been cleared for little more than ten years. The competition of the Erie Canal in 1825 produced rapid transformations toward a settled economy and brought with it many social changes. Even then it was some time before good roads allowed easy access to neighboring towns. Men went to town occasionally, but in the main, isolated conditions made families in a given locality largely dependent upon each other for their limited social activities. This was particularly true from 1816 to 1830, when the Smiths resided in that region. [^6]

Though it is unfair to label the Smiths as "frontier drifters," [^7] it is understandable that Joseph Sr., upon his arrival in Palmyra, should be described as being "of gaunt and haggard visage," wearing "rusty clothes." [^8] Having made the move to New York, the Smith family contracted to purchase an unimproved piece of land, most of which was covered with standing timber, [^9] about two miles south of Palmyra in an area where the "younger and less culturally sophisticated" immigrants from Connecticut and Vermont had settled. [^10] Evidence indicates that the Smiths worked hard to get established. While the male members of the family cleared about thirty acres of heavy timber the first year, Mrs. Smith was able to furnish the provisions for the family and some household furniture by painting oil-cloth coverings for tables and stands. [^11] During these early years, the Smith family also chopped and retailed cordwood, raised and bartered agricultural products and garden vegetables, manufactured and sold black-ash baskets and birch brooms, made maple sugar and molasses during the season for this work, and peddled cake and beer in the village on days of public doings. [^12]

Educational Opportunities of Joseph Smith

Lucy Mack Smith later wrote that little of historical significance occurred during the early life of her son Joseph, until he reached his fourteenth year, "except those trivial circumstances which are common to that state of human existence." [^13] The indigent circumstances of the Smith family, with nine living children to support after the year 1821, made it extremely difficult for Joseph to obtain more than the rudiments of education. In noting this fact, he later wrote:

. . . as it required the exertions of all that were able to render assistance for the support of the family, therefore we were deprived of the benefit of an education. Suffice it to say I was merely instructed in reading, writing and the ground rules of arithmetic, which constituted my whole literary acquirements. [^14]

The Prophet characterized himself as a "rough stone" upon which the "sound of the hammer and chisel was never heard" until God took him in hand. [^15] His cousin, George A. Smith, referred to him at the commencement of his career as "a ploughboy, . . . one who cultivated the earth, and had scarcely education enough to read his Bible." [^16] Orson Pratt, who became one of the Prophet's most learned disciples and whose scholarship was recognized by the Royal Society of London, related that as Joseph Smith began his mission he was "scarcely in possession of an ordinary common school education." [^17]

Despite his limited formal education, both friend and foe who knew him in his youth agreed that Joseph Smith possessed a good mind. [^18] His mother revealed a basic characteristic of his nature when she observed: "He seemed much less inclined to the perusal of books than any of the rest of our children, but far more given to meditation and deep study." [^19] An antagonist later wrote: "His mind was retentive; he was possessed of a rude eloquence of speech, and had that power of expression that to the stranger or simple would seem the outward form of a sincere belief within." [^20] The young men of Palmyra had a debating club to which Joseph belonged. Oramus Turner wrote: "He used to help us solve some portentous questions of moral or political ethics, in our juvenile debating club, which we moved down to the old red school house on Durfee Street, to get rid of the annoyance of critics that used to drop in upon us in the village." [^21]

Joseph Smith's First Vision

Historical Setting of the First Vision

During the second and third decades of the nineteenth century, Western New York was greatly agitated by religious revivals, one of several forms of enthusiasm that swept over the country during the first half of the nineteenth century. Along the line where DeWitt Clinton built his famed Erie Canal there had congregated a people characterized by unusual religious beliefs and peculiarly devoted to crusades aimed at the perfection of mankind, the reform of society, and the attainment of millennial happiness. These were young, adventurous sons of puritan and pilgrim fathers. By contrast with their stay-at-home brothers, they were more easily stirred by the fomenting ideas of the time and were more responsive to things not of this world. In this region of country, faith and fancy mingled together, as true disciples of divine light and uplifting ideals rubbed shoulders with shallow enthusiasts and erotic spiritualists. Said one writer of 1870: "Taking Rochester for a center, and a line of fifty miles for radius, we strike a circle that includes the birthplace of nearly all the wonderful excitements of the last forty years." [^22] Out of this section came Joseph Smith and what the world calls "Mormonism"; here originated the anti-Masonic excitement of the mid-1820's that greatly influenced the politics of the nation by giving birth to the Whig party; here the Fox sisters first heard the mysterious noises afterward known as the "Rochester rappings," which marked the beginning of modern-day spiritualism; here conjurors plied their trade and peepstones of various sorts became fashionable among certain elements of society; here religious revivals were made famous by their fervor and intensity; here the many perfectionist theories found willing and ardent adherents; and here people responded most vigorously to the gospel of Fourierism, proclaimed by Brisbane, Greeley, Godwin, and the Brook Farmers of New England. Small wonder the area became known as the "Burnt District," or the "Burned-over District" as it was seared by one wave of enthusiasm after another.

The Revival of 1819-1820

Writing of events which occurred in the year 1819, the Prophet's mother said: "There was a great revival in religion, which extended to all the denominations of Christians in the surrounding country in which we lived." During this revival, "many of the world's people, becoming concerned about the salvation of their souls, came forward and presented themselves as seekers after religion." [^23]

Joseph Smith explained that this revival "commenced with the Methodists, but soon became general among all sects in that region of country." [^24] In making this statement, the Prophet undoubtedly had reference to the revival that began when the Annual Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church was held July 1-8, 1819 at Vienna (now Phelps [^25]), a town about ten miles from Manchester where the Smith-family lived. Methodist conferences were characterized by revival meetings and this conference was no exception. Other revivals also followed after the conference adjourned. Abner Chase, an influential Methodist minister who was present at the Vienna Conference, stated that it "was followed by a glorious revival of the work of God among both preachers and people." [^26]

Evidence of other revivals in that region of New York State in 1819 and 1820 is given by Reverend Manly Tooker, a Methodist preacher who started a school at Ulysses, on the west side of Cayuga Lake, in the fall of 1819. Almost immediately a revival began. Tooker said:

From this time through the entire winter meetings were held every night in that house, there being no house of worship in that part of the town. Scarcely a meeting closed without conversions, and the revival extended to adjoining towns, and several hundreds were added to the different Churches as the fruit of it. [^27]

Tooker's report that several hundreds joined the "different" churches in Ulysses and surrounding towns indicates that the revival spread to other denominations. Here again the revival started with the Methodists.

When the Presbyterians met at Phelps, February 1, 1820, the committee appointed to take notes and report on the state of religion within the bounds of the Geneva Presbytery reported:

In Ulysses, Phelps, Waterloo and Canandaigua are some prospects of a revival of religion. During the spring and summer past the congregation of Geneva experienced a very considerable refreshing from the presence of the Lord; and in Cayuga and Junius 1st Church a work of grace has lately commenced and is now increasing.

During the past year more have been received into the communion of the churches than in any former year. [^28]

Of the widespread nature of this revival among Presbyterians, Reverend James H. Hotchkin wrote:

The years 1819 and 1820 were characterized by revivals in Sherburne, Smyrna, Smithfield, and neighboring towns; Homer, Truxton, Coventry, Neward Valley, Ithaca, Ludlowville, Genoa, Auburn, Onondaga, Marcellus, Geneva, Phelps, Jamestown, and Ellicott. Some of these were very extensive, and in view of them it may be truly said, that a great company were obedient to the faith. [^29]

Joseph smith evidently attended the Methodist revival meetings in the woods near Vienna, in the summer of 1819. Oramus Turner reported that "after catching a spark of Methodism in the camp meeting, away down in the woods, on Vienna road, he was a very passable exhorter in evening meetings." [^30] As will be shown hereafter, his affiliation with the Methodist cause occurred shortly before his First Vision.

The Methodist cause was on the move; and about this time that church was giving considerable attention to Ontario county where the Smith family lived. In his History of the Genesee Annual Conference, Reverend Conable does not report any major revivals occuring in this area before 1819. But at the Annual Conference at Vienna, the Ontario District was organized, and sixteen preachers were appointed to serve in towns within the new district. [^31] Of the Genesee Conference preachers of that time, Bishop George is represented to have said, at the General Conference of 1820, that he

. . . always knew from his first acquaintance with Methodist preachers, that they would get men converted who would convert; but he never knew, until he visited the Genesee Conference, that methodist preachers would get men converted whether they would or not. That when he came to this Conference he found the preachers laying siege to the hearts of men and to the throne of grace, and that they took no denial from earth or heaven, but struggled till they prevailed with both. [^32]

At the Vienna Conference in 1819, a Missionary and Bible Society was organized, auxiliary to the Missionary and Bible Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church, to have its "center society" at Ithaca, New York. [^33] It is possible that Joseph Smith was affiliated with this organization for a time and served on the local level in the area of Palmyra and Manchester. Turner's statement that Joseph Smith became a "passable exhorter" for Methodism points to this possibility. [^34] The History of Wayne County also states: "Revivals occurred, and Smith joined a class of probationers in the Methodist church of Palmyra, but soon withdrew." [^35]

There were some features about the revival of 1819-1820 which caused it to end on a negative note, particularly in the area of Manchester and Palmyra. The Prophet's mother states that when those who were awakened began to discuss the question of which church to join "a dispute arose, and there was a great contention among them." [^36] Joseph Smith gives a similar report. He wrote: ". . . a scene of great confusion and bad feelings ensued; priest contending against priest, and convert against convert; so that all their good feelings one for another, if they ever had any, were entirely lost in a strife of words and contest about opinions." [^37]

Others speak of the negative aspects of this revival. Writing of the conference at Vienna, Reverend Chase said: "There were moments during the session of that General Conference when the fears of many were excited for the safety and unity of the Church." Because of this contention "a partial secession afterward took place"; and "during this state of agitation the Church evidently suffered loss in spirituality." [^38] Of the prevailing opposition from sources external to Methodism, Reverend George Peck wrote: "It seemed a settled fact, that wherever we came into contact with any other denomination there was opposition to be encountered." Though Methodism had long existed in Western New York, "still it had to dispute every inch of ground, and, indeed, efforts were made to drive it from ground which it had long occupied." [^39]

Because of the conflict, people were divided among the religious parties that existed within the several churches as well as along denominational lines. And in the revival, attention was centered to a great degree upon parties and party issues, as well as upon the distinctive beliefs of the various churches. [^40] Joseph Smith wrote that "great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the people." [^41] This does not necessarily mean that they became members of the existing churches. Again he explained: "When the converts began to file off, some to one party and some to another, it was seen that the seemingly good feelings of both the priests and the converts were more pretended than real." [^42] The revival of 1819-1820 was an abortive affair that failed to produce many positive results for the existing churches. It was an emotional upsurge that ended on a negative note.

The Vision in the Grove

The war of words and party strife had its affect upon young Joseph. At first he kept himself aloof from the contending parties, though he attended their meetings as often as occasion would permit. In time he became somewhat partial to the Methodists, as has been indicated. But so great was the confusion and strife that he could not come to any conclusion as to who was right and who was wrong. "In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself, what is to be done?" he explained. "Who of all these parties are right; or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be right, which is it, and how shall I know it?" [^43]

Continuing, the Prophet explained: "While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of the parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads:

If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.'" [^44]

Though Joseph's independent character prevented him from being swayed by the mere emotion that influenced many in that day, his deeply religious nature and meditative mind were assurances that the admonition of James would be given serious consideration. The Prophet later wrote:

Never did any passage of Scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passage of Scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible. At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to "ask of God," concluding that if He gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture. [^45]

Having determined upon a course of action, Joseph retired to a beautiful grove near the Smith home, early one morning in the spring of 1820. He later related:

. . . having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction. But exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name, and said—pointing to the other—"THIS IS MY BELOVED SON, HEAR HIM."

My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right—and which I should join. I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong, and the personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in His sight: that those professors were all corrupt; that "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the commandments of men: having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." He again forbade me to join with any of them: and many other things did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time. When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking up into heaven. [^46]

Effects of Joseph's Vision

The Prophet's vision put an end to his inquiry into religious opinions. "I had now got my mind satisfied so far as the sectarian world was concerned," he wrote. [^47] After reporting that Joseph had made a previous profession to the Methodist faith, Kennedy wrote that "he abandoned even this slight church connection and was soon afterward heard denouncing sectarianism as an evil, and to declare that all the churches were built upon a false foundation." [^48] His mother also commented on his new attitude when she recalled that during the winter of 1823-24 a minister began working in their neighborhood to effect a union of the different churches. But though she and other members of the family viewed his actions with favor, she observed: "Joseph, from the first, utterly refused even to attend their meetings." When encouraged to do so, he said:

Mother, I do not wish to prevent your going to meeting, or any of the rest of the family's; or your joining any church you please; but, do not ask me to join them. I can take my Bible, and go into the woods, and learn more in two hours, than you can learn at meeting in two years, if you should go all the time. [^49]

Not only was Joseph wary of the ability of sectarianism to teach the word of truth, but he also perceived some hypocrisy in those who administered the law of Christ. Of his opinion of the religious movements of the day, his mother related: "Joseph would say, it would do us no injury to join them, that if we did, we should not continue with them long, for we were mistaken in them, and did not know the wickedness of their hearts." [^50]

Though by nature Joseph Smith was tolerant toward the honest beliefs of others, he hated hypocrisy and sham. Later in his life he declared: "I love that man better who swears a stream as long as my arm yet deals justice to his neighbor and mercifully deals his substance to the poor, than the long, smooth-faced hypocrite." [^51] This trait of character coupled with his negative opinion regarding sectarianism, did not promote good social relations with his neighbors who were siding enthusiastically with the several religious parties. Nor did the fact that Joseph gave an account of his vision to one of the Methodist ministers help matters. He later recounted: "I was greatly surprised at his behavior; he treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt, saying, it was all of the devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the Apostles, and that there would never be any more of them." [^52] Joseph evidently informed others of his experience, as he said: "I soon found . . . that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to increase. . . . This was common among all the sects: all united to persecute me." [^53]

The prevailing sectarian strife took the form of many distinct campaigns in which various coalitions were formed against a particular object or opposing coalition. Protestants were arrayed against Catholics, and Presbyterians against Baptists. The evangelical faiths shared a common hatred for Unitarians and Universalists, while Baptists, Presbyterians, and Methodists formed a phalanx against those who called themselves Christians. Within many of these bodies the conservatives were also united against the enthusiasts of their own ranks. [^54] When Joseph Smith related his experience and asserted that none of the religious faiths were right, he evidently became the target for a campaign in which all unitedly condemned him. Of his feelings on the matter, he later wrote:

It caused me serious reflection then, and often has since, how very strange it was that an obscure boy, of a little over fourteen years of age, and one, too, who was doomed to the necessity of obtaining a scanty maintenance by his daily labor, should be thought a character of sufficient importance to attract the attention of the great ones of the most popular sects of the day, and in a manner to create in them a spirit of the most bitter persecution and reviling. But strange or not, so it was, and it was often the cause of great sorrow to myself. However, it was nevertheless a fact that I had had a vision. . . . I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart, Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision, and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it, at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God and come under condemnation. [^55]

The forces of opposition caused Joseph to retreat into discreet silence in the presence of those who ridiculed him. Tucker thus observed: "Taciturnity was among his characteristic idiosyncracies, and he seldom spoke to any outside of his intimate associates, except when first addressed by another." [^56] The History of Waync County, 1789-1877 also said of him: "Taciturn unless addressed, he was not believed when he did speak." [^57] But one thing Joseph found difficult to bear was isolation from friends and associates, and he was driven by circumstances to seek company with the rougher elements of Palmyra. Being left "to all kinds of temptations," he later confessed that he "frequently fell into many foolish errors, and displayed the weakness of youth, and the foibles of human nature." [^58] But in his confession the Prophet explained that he had not "been guilty of wrongdoing or injuring any man or society of men." He said: "Those imperfections to which I allude, and for which I have often had occasion to lament, were a light, and too often, vain mind, exhibiting a foolish and trifling conversation." [^59]

The Origin Of The Book Of Mormon

The Coming of Moroni

During the years immediately following 1820, Joseph was occupied in physical labor. He could be found working on his father's farm, hauling cordwood into town, digging a well, working in a grist mill or with a carding machine, or going with a neighbor to perform a day's labor for hire.

On the evening of September 21, 1823, Joseph retired to his bed in what his mother later described as a "serious and contemplative state of mind." [^60] Thereupon, he said, "I betook myself to prayer and supplication to Almighty God for forgiveness of all my sins and follies, and also for a manifestation to me, that I might know of my state and standing before Him." Having previously received a communication from God by humble inquiry, he entered into this venture with "full confidence in obtaining a divine manifestation." [^61] As he prayed, hours passed unnumbered—how many or how few he could not recall, being oblivious to his surroundings because of the concentration of his mind in faith. [^62] Finally, he reported:

. . . I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor. He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked and his arms also a little above the wrist, so, also were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing on but this robe, as it was open, so that I could see into his bosom. Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately around his person. [^63]

Having addressed Joseph by name and introduced himself as Moroni, a messenger "sent from the presence of God," the angel advised the young man that the Lord had a work for him to do, and that his name "should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues; or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people." [^64] The heavenly messenger then explained "that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled, that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the Gospel in all its fullness to be preached in power, unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the Millennial reign." [^65]

Joseph was informed that he "was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of His purposes in this glorious dispensation." [^66] In this work the scriptures would be fulfilled which say: "God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things which are, that no flesh should glory in his presence." The Lord's "strange act" among men would indeed be "a marvelous work and a wonder" by which the wisdom of the wise would perish and the understanding of the prudent be hid. [^67]

The angel continued: "This cannot be brought about until first certain preparatory things are accomplished, for so has the Lord purposed in his own mind." [^68] These preparatory measures consisted of the work of translating an ancient record that was deposited in a nearby hill, "written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence they sprang." [^69] Of the angel's message, Joseph said: "He represented them as once being an enlightened and intelligent people, possessing a correct knowledge of the gospel, and the plan of restoration and redemption." [^70] The record contained "the fulness of the everlasting Gospel, . . . as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants" of the Western hemisphere." [^71]

The people whose record the angel revealed arrived on the Western hemisphere from Jerusalem about 589 B.C., under the leadership of Lehi, a descendant of the patriarch Joseph, son of Jacob. In Jerusalem, Lehi had joined with Jeremiah and others to warn the people to repent; and he prophesied that unless they did repent, severe judgments would come upon them. But those in power repudiated the prophets, and Lehi was forced to flee with his family and others into the desert. [^72] They carried with them a scriptural record, written on brass plates and kept as a family history of the tribe of Joseph. [^73] After a pilgrimage of several years, the colony of Lehi arrived in the Western hemisphere, landing "a little south of the Isthmus of Darien." [^74] After their arrival, they divided into two opposing groups. The Lamanites, who took their name from the eldest son of Lehi, became a wild and degenerate people and were characterized by a dark skin. The Nephites were named after Nephi, the most righteous son of Lehi, who became their prophet and king at the death of his father. They were a white and cultured people who perpetuated the law and traditions of the Israelites.

Prophets were called by God to minister to the Nephites. They clarified the meaning of the Law of Moses and taught the people of the coming of Christ, promising them that after Christ's crucifixion He would manifest Himself in person unto them. Later in the Book of Mormon an account is given of the visitation of the resurrected Lord to the Nephites. [^75] While with them, Jesus taught them His Gospel, committed to them a new dispensation of divine authority, organized His Church after the pattern which He established at Jerusalem, and perfected the Kingdom of God among them in its economic and political law.

For nearly two hundred years the heavenly order that Jesus established on the Western hemisphere flourished, and the people lived in free and open union without dissension. Finally, pride arose among them because of their wealth and prosperity; the true Christian order started to crumble; and the people began to divide again into opposing groups called Nephites and Lamanites. As the death struggle of the degenerating Nephite culture approached, Mormon, their prophet-general started to abridge the history of his people from the time they left Jerusalem, using records they had kept from the beginning. After the death of Mormon in the last great battle that annihilated his people, his son Moroni finished the record and buried it in a hill. [^76] It was this same Moroni, now a heavenly messenger, who visited Joseph Smith to reveal the sacred record.

The angel Moroni explained to Joseph Smith that "a part of the book was sealed, and was not to be opened yet." "The sealed part contains the same revelation which was given to John upon the isle of Patmos," he declared, "and when the people of the Lord are prepared, and found worthy, then it will be unfolded unto them." As for the unsealed portion of the ancient record, Joseph Smith was "expressly informed that it must be done [i.e., brought forth] with an eye single to the glory of God; if this consideration did not wholly characterize all his proceedings in relation to it, the adversary of truth would overcome him, or at least prevent his making that proficiency in this glorious work which he otherwise would." [^77] With the record "were two stones in silver bows—and these stones, fastened to a breastplate, constituted what is called the Urim and Thummim." [^78] The Urim and Thummim were said to operate by the gift and power of God on a visual principle. [^79] Those who used them anciently were called seers. "God had prepared them for the purpose of translating the book." [^80]

Moroni explained the nature of the latter-day work, stating that according to God's "covenant which he made with his ancient saints, his people, the house of Israel, must come to a knowledge of the gospel, and own that Messiah whom their fathers rejected, and with them the fulness of the Gentiles be gathered in, to rejoice in one fold under one Shepherd." [^81] To give added clarity to his explanation, the angel quoted and explained several biblical texts. According to his explanation, these scriptures speak of the gathering of Israel to the lands of their inheritance in the last days, the sanctification of the modern remnants of Israel under the law of God, and the destruction of the wicked among the nations of the earth as the great millennial era is ushered in. [^82]

Along with his verbal instructions, the angel used visual powers to convey important information to Joseph. The Prophet wrote: "While he was conversing with me about the plates, the vision was opened to my mind that I could see the place where the plates were deposited, and that so clearly and distinctly that I knew the place again when I visited it." [^83] This method was also used to give Joseph a clear understanding of the ancient inhabitants of the Western hemisphere, whose history was contained on the sacred record. He wrote: "I was also informed concerning the aboriginal inhabitants of this country, and shown who they were, and from whence they came; a brief sketch of their origin, progress, civilization, laws, governments, of their righteousness and iniquity, and the blessings of God being finally withdrawn from them as a people was made known unto me." [^84] In his account, Oliver Cowdery explained:

When God manifests to his servants those things that are to come, or those which have been, he does it by unfolding them by the power of that Spirit which comprehends all things, always; and so much may be shown and made perfectly plain to the understanding in a short time, that the world, who are occupied all their life to learn a little, look at the relation of it, and are disposed to call it false. You will understand then, by this, that while those glorious things were being rehearsed, the vision was also opened, so that our brother was permitted to see and understand much more full and perfect than I am able to communicate in writing. [^85]

Elder Cowdery also indicated that the recorded statement was "but a shadow, compared to an open vision of seeing, hearing and realizing eternal things." Having likened Joseph's vision to those given to many ancient prophets, he said: "If the fact was known, it would be found, that of all the heavenly communications to the ancients, we have no more in comparison than the alphabet to a quarto vocabulary." [^86]

Before departing, the angel cautioned Joseph that he was not to show the ancient record to any person after he received it. The Prophet then reported: "I saw the light in the room begin to gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking to me, and it continued to do so, until the room was again left dark, except just around him, when instantly I saw, as it were, a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended until he entirely disappeared, and the room was left as it had been before this heavenly light had made its appearance." As Joseph "lay musing on the singularity of the scene and marvelling greatly" at what he had been told, the angel again appeared and "related the very same things which he had done at the first visit, without the least variation." He then informed the Prophet of "great judgments which were coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and pestilence." With this the angel again ascended, only to appear a third time and repeat the same message, adding the cautions that because of his indigent circumstances, Joseph would be tempted to get the plates for monetary purposes, which the angel strictly forbade. After the third visit, Joseph heard a cock crow, indicating that day was approaching. [^87]

Subsequent Appearances of Moroni

The next day as Joseph went to work in the field, he was so exhausted that his father sent him to the house. But after the exertion of crossing a fence out of the field, he lay down under an apple tree. Again the angel appeared, repeated the message, and sent Joseph back to inform his father of the vision and commandments which he had received. [^88]

Later that day Joseph went to see the sacred record, which was located about two miles from the Smith home in a hill near the village of Manchester, Ontario county, New York. This hill has since been called Cumorah. There he found the plates on the west side of the hill not far from the top, in a stone box-beneath the ground covered over by a stone of considerable size. [^89] For a short time he was tempted to get the record for monetary gain, but as he endeavored to obtain it, he was forbidden by the angel who again appeared unto him. "In an instant," Oliver Cowdery wrote, "all the former instructions, the great intelligence concerning Israel and the last days, were brought to his mind." In humility and shame he remembered the experience of the previous night "when his heart was fervently engaged in prayer to the Lord, when his spirit was contrite, and when this holy messenger from the skies unfolded the wonderful things connected with this record." Elder Cowdery continued:

At that instant he looked to the Lord in prayer, and as he prayed darkness began to disperse from his mind and his soul was lit up as it was the evening before, and he was filled with the Holy Spirit; and again did the Lord manifest his condescension and mercy: the heavens were opened and the glory of the Lord shone round about and rested upon him. While he thus stood gazing and admiring, the angel said, "Look!" and as he thus spake he beheld the prince of darkness, surrounded by his innumerable train of associates. All this passed before him, and the heavenly messenger said, "All this is shown, the good and the evil, the holy and impure, the glory of God and the power of darkness, that you may know hereafter the two powers and never be influenced or overcome by that wicked one. [^90]

After Joseph had witnessed a display of the power of Satan in contrast to the glory and power of God, the angel then gave him a general view of future developments in the new dispensations, stating

. . . nothwithstanding you have seen this great display of power, by which you may ever be able to detect the evil one, yet I give unto you another sign, and when it comes to pass then know that the Lord a God and that he will fulfill his purposes, and that the knowledge which this record contains will go to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people under the whole heaven.—This is the sign: When these things begin to be known, that is, when it is known that the Lord has shown you these things, the workers of iniquity will seek your overthrow: they will circulate falsehoods to destroy your reputation, and also will seek to take your life; but remember this, if you are faithful, and shall hereafter continue to keep the commandments of the Lord, you shall be preserved to bring these things forth; for in due time he will again give you a commandment to come and take them. When they are interpreted the Lord will give the holy priesthood to some, and they shall begin to proclaim this gospel and baptize by water, and after that they shall have power to give the Holy Ghost by the laying on of their hands. Then will persecution rage more and more; for the iniquities of men shall be revealed, and those who are not built upon the Rock will seek to overthrow this church; but it will increase the more opposed, and spread farther and farther, increasing in knowledge till they shall be sanctified and receive an inheritance where the glory of God will rest upon them; and when this takes place, and all things are prepared, the ten tribes of Israel will be revealed in the north country, whither they have been for a long season; and when this is fulfilled will be brought to pass that saying of the prophet—"And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord"—But, notwithstanding the workers of inquity shall seek your destruction the arm of the Lord will be extended, and you will be borne off conqueror, if you keep all his commandments. Your name shall be known among the nations, for the work which the Lord will perform by your hands shall cause the righteous to rejoice and the wicked to rage: with the one it shall be had in honor, and with the other in reproach; yet, with these it shall be a terror because of the great and marvelous work which shall follow the coming forth of this fulness of the gospel. [^91]

Joseph did not receive the plates at this time; he was "informed that the time for bringing them forth had not yet arrived." The Prophet explained: "He told me that I should come to that place precisely in one year from that time, and that he would there meet with me, and that I should continue to do so until the time should come for obtaining the plates." Of his subsequent visits to the hill, Joseph Smith said: "At each time I found the same messenger there, and received instruction and intelligence from him at each of our interviews, respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and in what manner His kingdom was to be conducted in the last days." [^92] Joseph may also have been instructed in the use of the Urim and Thummim on these occasions, as his mother reported that it was by this sacred instrument "that the angel showed him many things which he saw in vision." [^93] As a prophet of God called to usher in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, he was given knowledge by heavenly means sufficient to carry out the great work he was entrusted to perform.

Footnotes

His advantages for acquiring scientific knowledge were exceedingly small, being limited to a slight acquaintance with two or three of the common branches of learning. He could read without much difficulty, and write a very imperfect hand; and had a very limited understanding of the elementary rules of arithmetic. These were his highest and only attainments; while the rest of those branches, so universally taught in the common school throughout the United States, were entirely unknown to him.—Orson Pratt, Remarkable Visions (Liverpool, England, 1848), p. 1.

In the Presbytery of Genesee it is reported, that the greater part of our churches are in a luke warm state—that the want of ministers is severely felt—that some of our churches scarcely hear a sermon from any of our order in the course of a year, and that from every quarter is heard the Macedonian cry "come over and help us." To alleviate this general gloom in a few instances the spirit has been poured out, and a goodly number hopefully brought from the darkness of nature into Gods marvelous light.—p. 220; courtesy of Presbyterian Historical Society, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

In the following year we find as congregations or places visited in a special manner, with the gracious influences of the divine spirit, the names of Smithfield, Cazenovia, Lenox second church, Manlius third church, Onondaga second church, DeRuyter, German, Oxford, Virgil, Preble, Homer, Truxton, Skeneatoles, Elbridge, Brutus, Sennett, Auburn, Lyons, Phelps. West Bloomfield, Lima, Avon, Rochester, Ogden, Ridgeway, Shelby, East Riga, West Riga, Barre, and Royalton. It will be perceived that in this list of names several are the same that were named the preceding year. Probably the revival that commenced the preceding year was continued, and so became a subject of report two years in succession—Ibid.

I retired to a secret place in a grove, and began to call upon the Lord; while fervently engaged in supplication, my mind was taken away from the objects with which I was surrounded, and I was enwrapped in a heavenly vision, and saw two glorious personages, who exactly resembled each other in features and likeness, surrounded with a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noon day. They told me that all religious denominations were believing in incorrect doctrines, and that none of them was acknowledged of God as His Church and kingdom: and I was expressly commanded "to go not after them," at the same time receiving a promise that the fullness of the Gospel should at some future time be made known unto me.—Ibid., IV, p. 536.

You look at Deacon Jessup, and you hear him talk very piously. Well, you think he is a very good man. Now suppose that one of his poor neighbors should owe him the value of a cow, and that this poor man had eight little children; moreover, that he should be taken sick and die, leaving his wife with one cow, but destitute of every other means of supporting herself and family—now I tell you, that Deacon Jessup, religious as he is, would not scruple to take the last cow from the poor widow and orphans in order to secure the debt, notwithstanding he himself has an abundance of everything.—Ibid., p. 91.

Though this accusation seemed to be extreme and without foundation. Mother Smith nevertheless reported that to their surprise "one year had scarcely expired when we saw Joseph's prophecy literally fulfilled."—Ibid.

It is wholly, from beginning to end, a history of the Old World. . . .

There is no point at all to the question: Who wrote the Book of Mormon? It would have been quite as impossible for the most learned man alive in 1830 to have written the book as it was for Joseph Smith. And whoever would account for the Book of Mormon by any theory suggested so far—save one—must completely rule out the first forty pages.—Ibid., pp. 138-139.

Nephi 10:16. See also 1 Nephi 5:14. Prophets of the family of Joseph therefore wrote on the brass plates for the benefit of their posterity.

Of Moroni's manifestations to Joseph Smith, George Q. Cannon said "Moroni, in the beginning, as you know, to prepare him [i.e., Joseph] for his mission, came and ministered and talked to him from time to time, and he had vision after vision in order that his mind might be fully saturated with knowledge of the things of God, and that he might comprehend the great and holy calline that God had bestowed upon him."—JD, XXIII, p. 362.

After Joseph obtained the plates in 1827, the place where they had been hidden became known to the people of Palmyra. Having made a business trip to Palmyra from Fayette, New York, in 1828, David Whitmer later reported: "I had conversation with several young men who said that Joseph Smith had golden plates." Inquired Whitmer: "How do you know that Joe Smith has the plates? They replied: "We saw the plates [sic, i.e. place] in the hill that he took them out of, just as he described it to us before he had obtained them." Whitmer said "These parties were so positive in their statements that I began to believe there must be some foundation for the stories then in circulation all over that part of the country."—Kansas City Journal, June 5, 1881, reprinted in MS XLIII (July 4, 1881), p. 422. On this occasion David Whitmer first met Oliver Cowdery who planned to visit the Prophet to investigate his story further, and promised to inform David of his findings. Oliver later went to Harmony, Pennsylvania. to see the Prophet and wrote most of the Book of Mormon as Joseph Smith dictated it to him in the translation. On the strength of the above evidence, with the testimony that Oliver Cowdery gave, the Whitmer family welcomed the Prophet into their home where the translation was completed.

Oliver Cowdery stated that he visited the sacred repository from which the plates were taken in 1830. In writing a detailed description of it in 1835, he said: "It is sufficient for my present purpose to know, that such is the fact that in 1823, yes, 1823, a man with whom I have had the most intimate and personal acquaintance, for almost seven years, actually discovered by the vision of God, the plates from which the Book of Mormon, as much as it is disbelieved was translated."—MA, II (October, 1835), pp. 195-197. The Reverend John A. Clark, a resident of Palmyra, wrote as late as 1840 that there still could "be seen an excavation in the side of a hill from where, according to the assertion of the Mormon Prophet, the metallic plates, sometimes called the Golden Bible were disinterred."—John A. Clark, Gleanings By the Way (Philadelphia and New York, 1842), pp. 216-217.

---
Notas:
[^1] 2 Nephi 3:12.
[^2] Genesis 49:22-26.
[^3] Genesis 12:1-7; 26:1-5.
[^4] Genesis 49:26.
[^5] Genesis 48:16.
[^6] Genesis 48:19.
[^7] Genesis 48:16.
[^8] See 1 Nephi 2:20; 18:23; 2 Nephi 3:4-5.
[^9] 3 Nephi 15:12; 20:22.
[^10] See Ezekiel 37:15-20, as quoted below, in light of verses 21ff.
[^11] Ezekiel 37:15-20.
[^12] John 10:16.
[^13] 3 Nephi 15:13-14, 16-19, 21-24.
[^14] 2 Nephi 3:19-20.
[^15] Mormon 8:16. See also 2 Nephi 33:12-13.
[^16] Isaiah 29:4.
[^17] 2 Nephi 26:14-17.
[^18] Moses 7:62.
[^19] HC, II, p. 260. See also ibid., III, p. 389; D&C 84:88.
[^20] See Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 100-101.
[^21] See JD, XIII, p. 47; XVII, p. 374; XXI, p. 161; XXIII, p. 362. Elder layor stated that he was merely repeating that which the Prophet had told him. Orson Pratt stated that Joseph Smith had been ministered to by "the angels of God" during these early years.—Ibid., XIII, p. 66; XV, p. 185.
[^22] HC, IV, p. 537.
[^23] MA, II (October, 1835), p. 197.
[^24] See Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 81.
[^25] William Smith on Mormonism: This Book Contains a True Account of the Origin of the Book of Mormon (Lamoni, Iowa, 1883), pp. 9-10. In his account written many years after the events occurred and probably from memory. William implies that this meeting took place before rather than after Joseph went to view the plates in the hill. William also states that the angel appeared to Joseph in a wooded area, instead of in his bedroom. Here it is apparent that he is confusing the Prophet's First Vision, which took place in a grove, will the appearance of the angel Moroni to him in his room. Apparently realizing the need for greater accuracy in the details of his statement, William concludes his report of the angel's appearance by saying: "A more elaborate and accurate description of his vision, however, will be found in his own history" Ibid., pp. 8-9. In a published interview with William Smith in 1841, the Reverend Dr. James Murdock of New Haven, Connecticut quoted the Prophet's brother as stating that the angel Moroni appeared to Joseph at night in his bedoorm.—Rev. James Murdock, Hartford Observor, June 19, 1841, reprinted in Peoria Register and North-Western Gazetter, Peoria, Illinois, September 3, 1841. A copy of the latter paper is in the Congressional Library, Washington, D. C. Of Joseph's meeting with the Smith family mentioned above, Rev. Murdock quotes William Smith as saying:
[^26] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 81. The degree to which the family became involved in these things is indicated by Mother Smith's report of Alvin's untimely death shortly after the initial appearances by the angel Moroni. Alvin's concern about the work of the new dispensation had been such that she wrote: "Whenever Joseph spoke of the Record, it would immediately bring Alvin to our minds, with all his zeal, and with all his kindness; and, when we looked to his place, and realized that he was gone from it, to return no more in this life, we all with one accord wept over our irretrievable loss, and we could 'not be comforted, because he was not.'" Ibid., p. 89.
[^27] Ibid., p. 82.
[^28] "Journal of Wandle Mace, 1809-1890," Brigham Young University Library pp. 46-47. Of the sentiments which were expressed by the Prophet's parents as they related these early incidents, Mace said:
[^29] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 82, 83.
[^30] Jesse William Knight, The Jesse Knight Family: Jesse Knight, His Forebears and Family (Salt Lake City, 1940), pp. 9-10.
[^31] Tucker, op. cit., p. 16.
[^32] See p. 150.
[^33] HC, I. pp. 354-355.
[^34] These affidavits were printed in Mormonism Unveiled, published at Painesville, Ohio, in 1834. Because of the reputation of Hurlburt, the book was published under the name of Eber D. Howe, a printer at Painesville. Since its publication, it has become the basis of anti-Mormon literature. Though these affidavits reflect the prejudice that was manifested toward the Smiths, they verify to physical facts relating to the origin of the Book of Mormon.
[^35] Interview of Joel Tiffany with Martin Harris, January, 1859, Tiffany's Monthly, V (New York, 1859), p. 168. (Original papers in the New York Public Library.) In publishing this account, the editor wrote: "The following narration we took down from the lips of Martin Harris, and read the same to him after it was written, that we might be certain of giving his statement to the world. It should be understood, however, that Harris is not a reliable source in all aspects of the origin of the Book of Mormon. In this interview, he states that he was not connected with the events associated with the origin of the book until about the first of October, 1827. His account must be read with this fact in mind. For example, in speaking of the discovery of the plates, he quotes Joseph Smith as saying that "an angel had appeared to him, and told him it was God's work." But at this point in the interview, Tiffany writes: "Here Mr. Harris seemed to wander from the subject, when we requested him to continue and tell what Joseph then said." Martin evidently wasn't sure of his facts at this point and for this reason began to wander. When he came back to his story, he is reported to have said: "Joseph had before this described the manner of his finding the plates. He found them by looking in the stone found in the well of Mason Chase. The family had likewise told me the same things."—Ibid., p. 169. This is an obvious distortion. The Prophet did not find the plates by looking in a stone. He is said by his mother to have been taught and shown many things by the angel, through the Urim and Thummim. See Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 110. It is also known that, in addition to the Urim and Thummim, Joseph possessed an object which is called the "seer stone," through which he claimed to receive revelations. Though the stories of the origin of the seer stone contradict each other in some points, Joseph Smith seems to have had it in his possession before September, 1827, when he acquired the plates and their related articles, including the Urim and Thummim. In his report which was given more than thirty years after the time about which he is speaking, Harris was obviously confused on some points about which he did not have personal knowledge.
[^36] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 91-92. For Joseph Smith's account of this venture, see HC, I, p. 17, originally published in TS, III (May 2, 1842), p. 772.
[^37] See the last footnote in the preceding paragraph.
[^38] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit.
[^39] Both Joseph and his mother insist that he persuaded Stoal to cease digging. See ibid; HC, I, p. 17.
[^40] In concluding the account of this phase of his history, the Prophet wrote: Hence arose the very prevelant story of my having been a money-digger." Ibid.
[^41] Affidavit made by Willard Chase and published in Eber D. Howe, Mormonism Unveiled (Painsville, Ohio, 1834), p. 245. Chase stated that earlier in the year Joseph Smith, Sr. told him that a heavenly being had visited his son some years before and "informed him that in a certain place there was a record on plates of gold, and that he was the person that must obtain them." Evidently the Prophet was not able to pay for a chest at the time of his request, so he proposed to give Chase "a share in the book," which probably meant that he promised to pay him from the sale of the book. Chase refused, and Joseph was forced to use a chest belonging to his brother Hyrum.—Ibid., pp. 242, 245 Tucker also quotes Chase to the same effect.—Tucker, op. cit., p. 31 And Peter Ingersoll, for whom Joseph worked on occasion, said of him: "He told me that he actually went to Willard Chase, to get him to make a chest, in which he might deposit his golden Bible."—Howe, op. cit., p. 236.
[^42] HC, I, p. 18.
[^43] For a detailed account of these proceedings, see Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 102-104. These facts are verified in the biographical sketch of Joseph Knight Sr. See Knight, op. cit. Martin Harris also states that Joseph took his wife with him when he obtained the plates, indicating that she remained at the foot of the hill in prayer while he obtained them. See Tiffany's Monthly, pp. 164-165
[^44] Having stated that Joseph finally obtained the plates, Martin Harris said: He then took the plates and hid them in an old black oak tree top which was follow." Tiffany's Monthy, p. 165. After reporting when Joseph got the Plates, Willard Chase said: "He said he then took the book out of the ground and hid it in a tree top, and returned home."—Howe, op. cit., p. 246. Mother Smith described their hiding place as follows:
[^45] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 104-108. Brigham Young, who lived about twelve miles from Palmyra at this time, corroborates this report concerning the conjuror. See JD, V, p. 55. See also p. 91.
[^46] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit. In one of six articles on the Book of Mormon, starting January 7, 1831, the Palmyra Reflector published a garbled story that parallels but makes light of these events. Martin Harris related the difficulties Joseph had in getting the plates home at this time. See Tiffany's Monthly, p. 166. Willard Chase also mentions the difficulties involved in getting the plates to the Smith home. See Howe, op. cit., p. 246.
[^47] Original letter on file in the Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^48] HC, IV, p. 537.
[^49] Ibid., I, p. 19.
[^50] Mother Smith indicates that "several others" from the Palmyra area went to work for Stoal. See Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 92. To what extent Joseph continued to associate with these men when Stoal ceased his operations is not known. But it seems that he made an effort to disassociate himself from them. Martin Harris stated:
[^51] Tiffany's Monthly, p. 167.
[^52] Interview with David Whitmer, published in the Kansas City Journal, June 5, 1881, reprinted in MS, XLIII (July 4, 1881), p. 422. See also Andrew Jensen, Historical Record, VI (May, 1887), p. 208.
[^53] This name is sometimes spelled Beman, and Mother Smith refers to him as Braman. See Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 112. See also HC, II, p. 43.
[^54] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit. Pomeroy Tucker refers to this incident—op. cit., p. 30. Martin Harris also stated that when the Prophet brought the plates home they were "hidden under the hearth in his father's house."—Tiffany's Monthly, pp. 166-167.
[^55] Tiffany's Monthly, p. 167.
[^56] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 113. Mother Smith seems to indicate that when the plates were taken from under the hearthstone, they were placed in the top of the cooper's shop. Martin Harris, who claimed to have talked these matters over with "Joseph, his wife, brother, sisters [and], his father and mother stated that the Prophet first hid the plates in the box under the shop floor: but having been warned by an angel, he removed the plates and hid them "in the chamber of the cooper's shop among the flags [flax?]." That night a mob "took up the floor, and dug up the earth, and would have found the plates had they not been removed."—Tiffany's Monthly, p. 167.
[^57] Tiffany's Monthly, p. 167. Harris observed that the plates were first "kept in a cherry box." But when his wife and daughter visited the Smith home just before Joseph moved to Harmony, Pennsylvania, Harris noted that the plates were then "in the glass box," which his wife and daughter were permitted to lift.
[^58] Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt (New York, 1874), pp. 117-118. See HC, II, p. 43, for Joseph's reference to their visit at the Beaman home.
[^59] "Autobiography of Erastus Snow," quoted in Joseph William Olsen, "Biography of Erastus Snow," unpublished Master's thesis, Brigham Young University 1935, p. 27.
[^60] Tiffany's Monthly, pp. 169-170. Harris states that a day or two before he went to see the Prophet his wife and daughter visited the Smith home. Harris reported:
[^61] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 118. On this point, Martin Harris said:
[^62] Tiffany's Monthly, p. 170. Mother Smith reports that when it was "known that Joseph was about moving to Pennsylvania, a mob of fifty men collected themselves together, and they went to Dr. McIntyre and requested him to take the command of the company, stating that they were resolved on following 'Joe Smith' and taking his 'Gold Bible' from him." But McIntyre "told them they were a pack of devilish fools, and to go home and mind their own business." A quarrel then commenced "respecting who should be captain, and it ran so high that it broke up the expedition."—Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 118-119.
[^63] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 118. Harris implies that he helped prepare these things for the journey, as he states that "we put the box of plates into a barrell."—Tiffany's Monthly, p. 170.
[^64] See Jensen, op. cit., VII (January, 1888), p. 364.
[^65] From an affidavit certified to by Isaac Hale and published in Howe, op. cit., p. 264. Hale continued: ". . . I became dissatisfied, and informed him [i.e. Joseph Smith] that if there was any thing in my house of that description, which I could not be allowed to see, he must take it away; if he did not, I was determined to see it. After that, the Plates were said to be hid in the woods.—Ibid.
[^66] MA, I (February, 1835), p. 80.
[^67] See Isaiah 29:4.
[^68] Isaiah 29:11-14.
[^69] 2 Nephi 27:6-7.
[^70] 2 Nephi 27:15-20.
[^71] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 114 (Italics in the original.)
[^72] Ibid., p. 119. There is some evidence that Martin Harris did not know of the scriptural implications of his visit to the East until after he had returned, when the Prophet called his attention to the statement in Isaiah chapter 29. See A. Metcalf, Ten Years Before the Mast; Shipwrecks and Adventures At Sea! Religious Customs of the people of India and Burmah's Empire. How I Became a Mormon and Why I Became an Infidel (Malad City, Ind., 1888), p. 70.
[^73] HC, I, p. 19.
[^74] Ibid.
[^75] Tucker, op. cit., pp. 45, 61. The Painesville Telegraph, Painesville, Ohio, May 7, 1831, published a statement from a Palmyra correspondent who said of Harris's reputation: "Mr. Harris was among the early settlers of this town, and has ever borne the character of an honorable and upright man, and an obliging and benevolent neighbor." The Rochester Advertiser, Rochester, New York, August 31, 1829, copying from the Palmyra Freeman, Palmyra, New York, referred to Harris as "an honest and industrious farmer."
[^76] HC, I, p. 20. This statement was published originally in TS, III (May 2, 1842), pp. 772-773. In a letter to Eber D. Howe, February 17, 1834, Dr. Anthon acknowledged Harris' visit, but said: "He requested an opinion from me in writing, which of course I declined giving." Letter reproduced in Howe, op. cit., pp. 269-272. But in writing to the Reverend Dr. Coit, Rector of Trinity Church , New Rochelle, New York, April 3, 1841, Anthon said:
[^77] MA, II, (October, 1835), p. 198.
[^78] See 1 Nephi 1:2; Mormon 9:32.
[^79] Clark, op. cit., p. 229.
[^80] The first three lines of the above fragment were published initially in The Prophet, New York, December 21, 1844, a weekly edited by Samuel Brannan in behalf of the Church. The seven-line fragment above came into the possession of David Whitmer, who wrote: "I have in my possession . . . the original paper containing some of the characters transcribed from one of the golden plates, which paper Martin Harris took to Professor Anthon, of New York, for him to read 'the words of a book that is sealed.'"—David Whitmer, An Address To All Believers In Christ (Richmond, Mo., 1887), p. 11. Edward Stevenson stated that Whitmer exhibited this fragment to him in 1871. See his Reminiscences of Joseph Smith, p. 21. The Richmond Conservator, Richmond, Mo. March 25, 1881, stated that Whitmer had "a fac similie of the characters" from which the Book of Mormon was translated. See Jensen, op. cit., VI (January 1887), p. 211. The original fragment is currently in the possession of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, at Independence, Mo.
[^81] MA, op. cit., p. 79.
[^82] See HC, I, pp. 12-13, for Joseph Smith's report of these scriptures. See also MA, I (April, 1835), pp. 109-112, for a statement by Oliver Cowdery giving additional information on the scriptures which Moroni quoted.
[^83] HC, I, p. 13. See also MA, I (February, 1835), p. 80.
[^84] HC, IV, p. 537.
[^85] MA, I (April, 1835), p. 112. Oliver Cowdery gave two examples to illustrate this method: When Moses was enveloped in the powers of God's Spirit he beheld "the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the Spirit of God." Moses also beheld "the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not."—Moses 1:27-28. God also "showed unto the brother of Jared all the inhabitants of the earth which had been, and also all that would be; and he withheld them not from his sight, even unto the ends of the earth." Ether 3:25. Oliver Cowdery stated that Joseph Smith was taught in a similar manner.
[^86] MA, op. cit., A quarto is a book or pamphlet having pages the size of a fourth of the printer's sheet. A quarto vocabularly probably means a dictionary.
[^87] HC, I, pp. 13-14.
[^88] Ibid.,
[^89] The upper stone he described as being "thick and rounding in the middle on the upper side, and thinner towards the edges, so that the middle part of it was visible above the ground, but the edge all around was covered with earth." The box had been "formed by laying stones together in some kind of cement" and in the bottom "were laid two stones crosswise of the box, and on these stones lay the plates and other things with them."—Ibid., pp. 15-16.
[^90] MA, II (October, 1835), pp. 198-199. Joseph Smith's mother later wrote that this portrayal was given "in such a striking manner, that the impression was always vivid in his memory until the very end of his days; and in giving a relation of this circumstance, not long prior to his death, he remarked, that ever afterwards to was willing to keep the commandments of God."—Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 81.
[^91] MA, II (October, 1835), p. 199.
[^92] HC, I, p. 16.
[^93] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 110.
