Hyrum L. Andrus, God, Man, and the Universe ( 1968)

3

The New Witness for Christ

Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will take the stick [i.e., record] of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah [i.e., the Bible], and make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.—EZEKIEL.

The Book of Mormon was to come forth in the latter days for a divine purpose. To the patriarch Joseph, son of Jacob or Israel, the Lord said in ancient times: "The fruit of thy loins shall write; and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write; and that which shall be written by the fruit of thy loins, and also that which shall be written by the fruit of the loins of Judah, shall grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to the knowledge of their fathers in the latter days, and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord." [^1]

Biblical Background Of The Book Of Mormon

Jacob's Prophetic Blessing

The story of the Book of Mormon has its setting in the biblical days of the patriarch Jacob, grandson of Abraham and heir to the promise which God gave to the Father of the Faithful. Before he died, Jacob bestowed an inspired blessing upon each of his sons, the twelve patriarchs of Israel. Of Joseph, he said:

Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall:

The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him:

But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel:)

Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb:

The blessings of thy father [i.e., Jacob] have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors [i.e., Abraham and Isaac] unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren. [^2]

There are several important points within this blessing: First, Jacob stated that the posterity of Joseph would be numerous. Second, Joseph's "branches" or descendants would run over the "wall"; that is, they would leave the land of their initial inheritance and go to other lands. Third, though Joseph had been opposed, he would be strengthened by the God of Jacob, who would send the shepherd or stone of Israel—the Messiah. Fourth, the Almighty would bless Joseph and his posterity with the blessings of heaven—the revelation of heavenly truth and power—as well as with the blessings of the breast and of the womb. Fifth, Jacob having prevailed above his progenitors in the blessings of God which he received, placed these blessings upon the head of Joseph. Jacob's progenitors, Abraham and Isaac, were given the land of Canaan for an inheritance. [^3] But Jacob's blessing was greater than theirs, and it extended to the land upon which there were "everlasting hills." [^4] The word everlasting means that which lasts forever or is interminable. According to the Latter-day Saint view, Jacob was not speaking of the duration of certain hills in the sense of time, but of a land of everlasting hills, which extended from one pole of the earth to the other. This land was given to Joseph, whose posterity would run over the wall to possess it.

Jacob's blessing upon Ephraim and Manasseh, the sons of Joseph, also revealed the prophetic destiny of these branches of Israel. According to Jacob, the posterity of Ephraim and Manasseh would "grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth." [^5] In re-affirming and clarifying this promise, Jacob said of Manasseh: "He . . . shall become a people, and he . . . shall be great: but truly his younger brother [i.e., Ephraim] shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a multitude of nations." [^6] Instead of becoming a scattered people, the posterity of Ephraim and Manasseh would become a "multitude of nations" in the "midst of the earth." [^7]

According to the Book of Mormon, God gave the Western hemisphere as an inheritance to the patriarch Joseph, through the blessing of his father Jacob. [^8] This volume also reports that Christ appeared unto the descendants of Joseph upon the Western hemisphere after His resurrection and confirmed the fact that they were "a remnant of the house of Joseph," and that He would fulfil the covenant which He made with their father Jacob concerning them. [^9]

God's Word to Ezekiel

To Ezekiel, the Lord declared that the descendants of the patriarch Joseph and the patriarch Judah would both write the word of God, and that the inspired writings of Joseph's posterity would be brought forth preliminary to the gathering of the scattered remnants of Israel from the nations of the earth in the latter days. [^10] Ezekiel wrote:

The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,

Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions:

And join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand.

And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying, Wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these?

Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.

And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand before their eyes. [^11]

That the two sticks to which the Lord referred were records is evident from the fact that they were to be written upon—one for Judah and the children of Israel his companions, and one for Joseph and the house of Israel his companions. The record of Judah was to be with the people from the time of its writing. But the Lord promised to take the stick of Joseph and put it with the stick of Judah and make them one stick, or record, in His hands. The two records would then be one before the eyes of the people.

Christ's Other Sheep

Jesus referred to a branch of Israel other than the Jews, when He said to His disciples in Jerusalem: "Other sheep I have, which are not of this [i.e., the Jewish] fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd." [^12] The Book of Mormon reports that following His crucifixion, the Lord manifested Himself openly to the seed of Joseph on the Western hemisphere and taught them His gospel. At this time He said unto them:

. . . this is the land of your inheritance; and the Father hath given it unto you.

And not at any time hath the Father given me commandment that I should tell it unto your brethren at Jerusalem. . . .

This much did the Father command me, that I should tell unto them:

That other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

And now, because of stiffneckedness and unbelief they understood not my word; therefore I was commanded to say no more of the Father concerning this thing unto them.

But verily, I say unto . . . you, that ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

And they understood me not, for they supposed it had been the Gentiles; for they understood not that Gentiles should be converted through their preaching.

And they understood me not that I said they shall hear my voice; and they understood me not that the Gentiles should not at any time hear my voice - that I should not manifest myself unto them save it were by the Holy Ghost.

But behold, ye have both heard my voice, and seen me; and ye are my sheep, and ye are numbered among those whom the Father hath given me. [^13]

The Voice From the Dust

The word of the Lord written by the posterity of Joseph was to come forth from the earth in the latter days. "It shall be as if the fruit of thy loins had cried unto them from the dust; for I know their faith," God said to the patriarch Joseph. "And they shall cry from the dust; yea, even repentance unto their brethren, even after many generations have gone by them." [^14] As Moroni, the last surviving prophet of the Israelite culture that came to the Western hemisphere, prepared to hide the record of his people in the earth to await the time when he, as an angel of God, would reveal its sacred resting place in the last days, he said of that record: "It shall be brought out of the earth, and it shall shine forth out of darkness, and come unto the knowledge of the people; and it shall be done by the power of God." [^15]

Isaiah, the great Hebrew prophet, wrote of a people who would be unto God as Ariel, or Jerusalem, in that they would be brought to destruction. Of them he said: "And thou shalt be brought down, and shall speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be, as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust." [^16] In a commentary on Isaiah's words, Nephi, the righteous son of Lehi, who led a colony of the patriarch Joseph's descendants to the Western hemisphere, said:

. . . I prophesy unto you concerning the last days; concerning the days when the Lord God shall bring these things forth unto the children of men.

After my seed and the seed of my brethren [as a remnant of Joseph] shall have been smitten; . . . yea, after the Lord God shall have camped against them round about, and shall have laid siege against them with a mount, and raised forts against them; and after they shall have been brought down low in the dust, even that they are not, yet the words of the righteous shall be written, and the prayers of the faithful shall be heard, and all those who have dwindled in unbelief shall not be forgotten.

For those who shall be destroyed shall speak unto them out of the ground, and their speech shall be low out of the dust, and their voice shall be as one that hath a familiar spirit; for the Lord God will give unto him power, that he may whisper concerning them, even as it were out of the ground; and their speech shall whisper out of the dust.

For thus saith the Lord God: They shall write the things which shall be done among them, and they shall be written and sealed up in a book. . . . [^17]

Enoch's Vision

According to a revelation given to Joseph Smith, the biblical patriarch Enoch was shown in vision the establishment of the great latter-day dispensation. To the antediluvian seer, the Lord said: "And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth." [^18]

The meaning of the Lord's declaration to Enoch that truth would come forth out of the earth is clear from what has been said above. The statement that righteousness would be sent down from heaven meant to Joseph Smith that heavenly messengers would commune with men in bringing about the latter-day work. "I ask, how righteousness and truth are going to sweep the earth as a flood," he inquired? "I will answer. Men and angels are to be co-workers in bringing to pass this great work." [^19]

Many beings from beyond this mortal state were involved in the establishment of the new dispensation which had its origin in heaven. In addition to the yearly interviews at the Hill Cumorah which Moroni had with Joseph Smith, there were other visitations which that heavenly messenger made to give him instructions. [^20] Other prominent figures from the ancient American culture also manifested themselves to the Prophet according to later reports by John Taylor and George Q. Cannon. They made mention of visits by Nephi, Alma, and Mormon. [^21] Joseph Smith also indicated that more than one heavenly personage communed with him during this period. He wrote to the editor of the Chicago Democrat: "After having received many visits from the angels of God unfolding the majesty and glory of the events that should transpire in the last days, on the morning of the 22nd of September, A. D. 1827, the angel of the Lord delivered the records into my hands." [^22]

Preparing To Receive The Record

The Prophet's Character Matured by Experience

Though he was given a knowledge of the ancient record and the work to be performed in the last days in 1823, this alone was not sufficient to prepare the Prophet for the tasks that were ahead. He would be rebuffed by the sophistry and disbelief of the world, and experience was a necessary preparation for the work he was called to perform. "He was young, and his mind easily turned from correct principles, unless he could be favored with a certain round of experience," Oliver Cowdery, who became the Prophet's closest associate during the translation of the ancient record, explained. "And yet, while young, untraditioned, and untaught in the systems of the world, he was in a situation to be led into the great work of God, and be qualified to perform it in due time." [^23]

Joseph Supported by His Family

It is doubtful that Joseph Smith could have succeeded in establishing the new dispensation without the support he received from his father's family. At an early date, they became intimately involved in the work of bringing forth the ancient record. Having returned from the Hill Cumorah after his interview with the angel, Joseph related his experiences to the family. [^24] The Prophet's brother William, then age twelve, later wrote:

After we were all gathered, he arose and told us how the angel appeared to him. . . . He continued talking to us sometime. The whole family were melted to tears, and believed all he said. Knowing that he was very young, that he had not enjoyed the advantages of a common education; and knowing too, his whole character and disposition, they were convinced that he was totally incapable of arising before his aged parents, his brothers and sisters, and so solemnly giving utterance to anything but the truth. [^25]

As Joseph continued speaking, his oldest brother, Alvin, who was noted for his "kind and amiable" disposition, manifested concern at his apparent fatigue and said: "Now, brother, let us go to bed, and rise early in the morning, in order to finish our day's work at an hour before sunset, then, if mother will get our suppers early, we will have a fine long evening, and we will all sit down for the purpose of listening to you while you tell us the great things which God has revealed to you." [^26] The next evening found the Smith family again listening attentively to Joseph. Mother Smith later wrote:

. . . before proceeding, he charged us not to mention out of the family that which he was about to say to us, as the world was so worked that when they came to the knowledge of these things they would try to take our lives; and that when we should obtain the plates, our names would be cast out as evil by all people. Hence the necessity of suppressing these things as much as possible, until the time should come for them to go forth to the world.

After giving us this charge, he proceeded to relate further particulars concerning the work which he was appointed to do, and we received them joyfully, never mentioning them except among ourselves, agreeable to the instructions which we had received from him. [^27]

The degree to which Joseph claimed to be instructed concerning the aboriginal inhabitants of America is indicated by the reports which his mother gave after the book had been published. In relating those early incidents, she said: "Sometimes Joseph would describe the appearance of the Nephites, their mode of dress and warfare, their implements of husbandry, etc., and many things he had seen in vision." [^28] In her published account, she stated:

. . . Joseph continued to receive instructions from the Lord, and we continued to get the children together every evening for the purpose of listening while he gave us a relation of the same. . . .

During our evening conversations, Joseph would occasionally give us some of the most amusing recitals that could be imagined. He would describe the ancient inhabitants of this continent, their dress, mode of traveling, and the animals upon which they rode; their cities, their buildings, with every particular; their mode of warfare; and also their religious worship. This he would do with as much ease, seemingly, as if he had spent his whole life among them. [^29]

During those early years, Joseph also related his experiences to others in whom he placed confidence. Among those were members of the family of Joseph Knight, Sr., who lived in the southern part of the state. Knight employed several men to work on his farm, and while in his employ Joseph won the distinction of being "the best hand he ever had." The eldest son, Newel, became "particularly attached" to the Prophet and later wrote of him: "His noble deportment, his faithfulness, and his kind address, could not fail to win the esteem of those who had the pleasure of his acquaintance." Speaking of Joseph's spiritual experiences, Newel said: "Joseph . . . would entertain us with his accounts of the wonderful things which had happened to him, and we were deeply impressed with the truthfulness of his statements concerning the plates of the Book of Mormon which had been shown to him by an angel of the Lord." [^30]

The Prophet Rebuffed by the World

But when word got out about Joseph's experiences and he mentioned them to the people of Palmyra, they were less impressed. Pomeroy Tucker, who then resided in Palmyra, caustically recalled: "He could utter the most palpable exaggeration or marvelous absurdity with the utmost apparent gravity." [^31] The History of Wayne County states that "he was given to . . . mysterious pretense," and that "he was not believed" when he spoke of these things. [^32] Later Philastus Hurlburt, who was excommunicated from the Mormon Church for "unchristian-like conduct with the female sex" [^33] and became a bitter enemy to the Prophet, collected affidavits from more than sixty citizens of Palmyra certifying that members of the Smith family were ignorant, deluded deceivers. [^34] The basis upon which they made their judgment was revealed when Martin Harris questioned a group of men in the village, early in October, 1827: "How do you know that he [i.e., Joseph] has not got such gold plates?" They replied: "Damn him! angels appear to men in this enlightened age! Damn him, he ought to be tarred and feathered for telling such a damned lie!" [^35]

Joseph Becomes a Money Digger

In October, 1825, Joseph Smith began to work for Josiah Stoal of Bainbridge, Chenango county, New York, to supplement the family income with his wages of fourteen dollars a month. In that day, the lure of hidden treasures stimulated serious discussion in many quarters, and people of all classes were engaged in the search. Stoal had heard of an old Spanish silver mine across the border in Pennsylvania and was attempting to locate it. According to Mother Smith, he wanted the Prophet to work for him because he had heard that Joseph "possessed certain means by which he could discern things invisible to the natural eye." [^36] She does not say what Joseph had in his possession. But Stoal was acquainted with Joseph Knight, Sr., and may have heard from him of the Urim and Thummim which were with the gold plates. Joseph could also have had the seer stone [^37] at this time. But whatever the fact may have been, financial needs dictated the decision. "Joseph endeavored to divert him from his vain pursuit, but he was inflexible in his purpose and offered high wages to those who would dig for him in search of said mine, and still insisted upon having Joseph to work for him," Mother Smith explained. "Accordingly, Joseph and several others returned with him and commenced digging." [^38] After working with Stoal and his crew for about a month, Joseph persuaded him to stop digging. [^39] It was primarily because he worked for Stoal that Joseph Smith was later branded in the popular mind as a money-digger. [^40]

While in Stoal's employ, Joseph Smith became acquainted with Emma Hale, daughter of Isaac Hale at whose boarding house he then stayed. Joseph and Emma were married January 18, 1827.

Joseph Entrusted With The Record

The Plates Taken from the Hill

On September 22, 1827, Joseph Smith was given custody of the ancient record and its related articles. In anticipating this event, he asked a local carpenter, Willard Chase, to make a chest in which he could keep them. Chase dated the Prophet's request sometime in the forepart of September, 1827, adding that Joseph said he was "expecting soon to get his gold book, and he wanted a chest to lock it up." [^41] In reporting that he was given the plates, Joseph merely said: "Having gone as usual at the end of another year to the place where they [i.e., the plates, etc.] were deposited, the same heavenly messenger delivered them up to me with the charge that I should be responsible for them: if I should let them go carelessly or through any neglect of mine I should be cut off; but that if I would use all my endeavors to preserve them, until he the messenger should call for them, they should be protected." [^42]

Josiah Stoal and Joseph Knight, Sr. were visiting at the Smith home when the Prophet obtained the record. With his wife Emma, Joseph left the house shortly after midnight on September 22, taking Knight's horse and wagon to make the trip. [^43] After obtaining the record, the Prophet secluded it in a hollow log in the woods and returned home early that morning, shortly after sunup. [^44]

The Local Excitement

Evidence indicates that there was considerable excitement in Palmyra during the latter part of September, 1827. Soon after the Prophet obtained the record, it was rumored that a group of men were organizing a search for it, and they had "sent sixty or seventy miles for a certain conjuror, to come and divine the place where the plates were secreted." [^45] To check the report, Joseph's father paid a casual visit to a neighbor's house and found the group; whereupon word was sent to the Prophet, who was some distance away digging a well. When Joseph then decided to bring the plates home, he was ambushed at short intervals by three different men, each of whom he knocked to the ground. He arrived home with a dislocated thumb, and was "altogether speechless from fright and the fatigue of running." [^46]

Mother Smith states that her husband, Mr. Knight, and Mr. Stoal went in search of the assailants, but they had fled. In later years, Martha Campbell wrote in behalf of Stoal to the Prophet, who then resided at Nauvoo, Illinois:

He [i.e., Stoal] says he has never staggered at the foundation of the work, for he knew too much concerning it. If I understand him right, he was the first person that took the plates out of your hands the morning you brought them in, and he observed, "Blessed is he that sees and believeth, and more blessed is he that believeth without seeing." He seems anxious to get there [to Nauvoo] to "renew his covenant with the Lord." [^47]

In writing to John Wentworth of the Chicago Democrat, Joseph Smith described the plates as follows:

These records were engraven on plates which had the appearance of gold, each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long and not quite so thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings, in Egyptian characters, and bound together in a volume as the leaves of a book, with three rings running through the whole. The volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part of which was sealed. The characters on the unsealed part were small, and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many marks of antiquity in its construction, and much skill in the art of engraving. With the records was found a curious instrument, which the ancients called "Urim and Thummim," which consisted of two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a breastplate. [^48]

Excitement continued to mount after the Prophet obtained the ancient record. He wrote: "Rumor with her thousand tongues was all the time employed in circulating falsehoods about my father's family, and about myself." [^49] Joseph seems to have been caught in a web of circumstances that increased the opposition against him. Having worked for Josiah Stoal, he was marked in the popular mind as a money digger; [^50] and in the opinion of those with whom he had worked, he was subject to the code of the money diggers which required him to share what he found. Martin Harris stated that the money diggers claimed "they had as much right to the plates as Joseph had, as they were in company together." In taking this position, they asserted "that Joseph had been traitor, and had appropriated to himself that which belonged to them." [^51] That these men were actively opposed to the Prophet is attested to by David Whitmer. While in Palmyra in 1828, he conversed with some men who assured him "that Joseph Smith certainly had golden plates, and that before he had attained them he had promised to share with them, but had not done so and they were very much incensed with him." [^52]

Mobs prowled around the Smith home repeatedly and ransacked the premises; and as a result, Joseph was forced to change the hiding place of the plates from time to time. Having learned that a mob was being formed, the Prophet hurried home to protect the plates. Alvah Beaman, a trusted friend from the village of Livonia, came for a visit about this time, [^53] and the two men hastily took up the hearthstone in the Smith home and placed the box containing the plates under it. They had scarcely finished when the mob arrived. [^54] Later Joseph hid the plates across the road in a cooper's shop. Of the reason why they were removed from under the hearthstone, Martin Harris said: ". . . the wall [of the house] being partly down, it was feared that certain ones, who were trying to get possession of the plates, would get under the house and dig them out." [^55] One night when the plates had been wrapped in cloth and buried in a quantity of flax in the shop loft, and the box had been hid under the floor of the shop, a mob "rummaged round the house and all over the premises." Mother Smith states: "The next morning we found the floor of the cooper's shop torn up and the box which was laid under it shivered in pieces." [^56]

According to Martin Harris, the plates were then put into "an old Ontario glass-box" which was cut down and suited for this purpose by Alvah Beaman. "Old Mr. Beaman sawed off the ends, making the box the right length to put them in," Harris said, "and when they went in he said he heard them jink, but he was not permitted to see them." Martin added: "He told me so." [^57]

Evidence indicates that after the plates were placed in the new box, they were concealed for a time under the hearthstone in the Beaman home. In March 1834, Joseph Smith and Parley P. Pratt stopped at the Beaman residence while on a missionary journey to the East. In reporting their visit, Elder Pratt wrote that Joseph had been on intimate terms with this family for several years, and the evening was spent reminiscing about early experiences. Beaman had assisted Joseph "preserve the plates of the Book of Mormon from the enemy, and had at one time had them concealed under his own hearth." [^58] Erastus Snow, Beaman's son-in-law, also said: "The family was early associates of the Smith family in the State of New York, and assisted the Prophet materially in hiding the plates when the enemies were searching for them." [^59] Apparently it became too difficult to protect the plates at the Smith residence, so Joseph moved them to the Beaman home for a time.

The Move to Pennsylvania

To allay the mounting excitement, the Prophet finally decided to move to Harmony, Pennsylvania. Before going, he requested Martin Harris to assist him in the translation of the record. Martin later said that Joseph had seen through the Urim and Thummim that he was the man to assist in the work. The Prophet had brought the plates again to his father's residence, as Harris said:

While at Mr. Smith's I hefted the plates, and knew from the heft that they were lead or gold, and I knew that Joseph had not credit enough to buy so much lead. I left Mr. Smith's about eleven o'clock and went home. I retired to my bedroom and prayed God to show me concerning these things, and I covenanted that if it was his work and he would show me so, I would put forth my best ability to bring it before the world. He then showed me that it was his work and that it was designed to bring the fulness of his gospel to the gentiles to fulfill his word, that the first shall be last and the last first. He showed this to me by the still small voice spoken in the soul. Then I was satisfied that it was the Lord's work, and I was under the covenant to bring it forth. [^60]

Before Joseph left Palmyra, Martin Harris presented him with fifty dollars "to do the Lord's work"; [^61] and he advised the Prophet to leave a few days before his announced time, warning that "he would be mobbed if it was known when he started." [^62] Having sent a request to his brother-in-law, Alvin Hale, to come to Palmyra and move him and his wife to Pennsylvania, Joseph prepared for the journey. Mother Smith wrote: "The Record and breast-plate, for security, he nailed up in a box and then put them into a strong cask; and after filling the cask with beans, headed it up again." [^63] The cask was then loaded on the wagon with other household goods. The Prophet and his party had gone but a short distance when they were overtaken by an officer of the law, who ransacked their wagon but failed to delve deep into the barrel of beans. Before they reached their destination, another officer overtook them and conducted a similar search, with like results. [^64] Being confident that Joseph had the plates, his assailants were reluctant to accept the negative report of the first officer.

When Joseph and Emma arrived in Harmony, Pennsylvania, the Hale family was informed of the nature of the Prophet's work. Isaac Hale, Joseph's father-in-law, later certified that after the Prophet arrived he was told of the plates and shown the box that contained them, "which had to all the appearances been used as a glass box of common window glass." No doubt this was the same box that Alvah Beaman prepared for the plates. Hale continued: "I was allowed to feel the weight of the box, and they gave me to understand, that the book of Plates was then in the box—into which, however, I was not allowed to look." [^65]

Testing The Wise And The Learned

Isaiah's Prophecy Concerning the Learned

As the angel Moroni revealed the ancient record to Joseph Smith, he explained that "the scripture must be fulfilled before it is translated, which says that the words of a book, which are sealed, were presented to the learned; for thus has God determined to leave men without excuse, and show the meek that his arm is not shortened that it cannot save." [^66] The scripture to which Moroni referred is found in the book of Isaiah, who said of the coming forth of a record of a people who would be brought down and "speak out of the ground": [^67]

The vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed:

And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned.

Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men:

Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. [^68]

It should be noted that the words of the book, not the book, were to be delivered to the learned. But the book was to be delivered to another who was not learned, and through his instrumentality God promised to bring forth a marvelous work and a wonder in which the wisdom of the wise would perish and the understanding of the prudent would be hid. In his inspired commentary on Isaiah, Nephi explained: "The Lord God shall bring forth unto you the words of a book, and they shall be the words of them which have slumbered." Within the sealed book would be "a revelation from God, from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof." [^69] But these more sacred disclosures would not be given to man in the days of wickedness, and for this reason part of the record would be sealed. As the work began in bringing forth that portion of the ancient record that God designed to give unto man before the day of millennial righteousness, Nephi observed:

. . . the Lord shall say unto him [i.e., Joseph Smith] to whom he shall deliver the book: Take these words which are not sealed and deliver them to another, that he may show them unto the learned, saying: Read this, I pray thee. And the learned shall say: Bring hither the book, and I will read them.

And now, because of the glory of the world and to get gain will they say this, and not for the glory of God.

And the man shall say: I cannot bring the book, for it is sealed

Then shall the learned say: I cannot read it.

Wherefore it shall come to pass, that the Lord God will deliver again the book and the words thereof to him that is not learned [i.e. Joseph Smith]; and the man that is not learned shall say: I am not learned.

Then shall the Lord God say unto him: The learned shall not read them for they have rejected them, and I am able to do mine own work; wherefore thou shalt read the words which I shall give unto thee. [^70]

Isaiah's Prophecy Fulfilled

After Joseph obtained the record, his mother explained: "The first step that he was instructed to take in regard to this work was to make a facsimile of some of the characters, which were called reformed Egyptian, and to send them to some of the most learned men of this generation and ask for the translation thereof." [^71]

In carrying out these instructions, Joseph Smith and Martin Harris agreed that when the Prophet arrived in Harmony. Pennsylvania, he would transcribe some of the characters from the plates. Martin would then take them to linquists in the East "to give them an opportunity to display their talents in giving a translation of the characters." [^72] Upon arriving at Harmony, Joseph reported: "I copied a considerable number of them [i.e., characters from the plates], and by means of the Urim and Thummim I translated some of them." [^73] In February, 1828, Martin Harris arrived in Harmony, picked up the characters Joseph had "drawn off the plates," and set out for New York City [^74] where he visited Dr. Charles Anthon and Dr. Samuel L. Mitchell. Harris, whom Tucker characterizes as "proverbially a peaceful as well as an honest man," returned from his journey "confirmed rather than shaken in his belief," [^75] and reported:

I went to the city of New York, and presented the characters which had been translated, with the translation thereof, to Professor Charles Anthon, a gentleman celebrated for his literary attainments. Professor Anthon stated that the translation was correct, more so than any he had before seen translated from the Egyptian. I then showed him those which were not yet translated, and he said that they were Egyptian, Chaldaic, Assyric, and Arabic; and he said they were true characters. He gave me a certificate, certifying to the people of Palmyra that they were true characters, and that the translation of such of them as had been translated was also correct. I took the certificate and put it into my pocket, and was just leaving the house, when Mr. Anthon called me back, and asked me how the young man found out that there were gold plates in the place where he found them. I answered that an angel of God had revealed it unto him.

He then said to me, "Let me see that certificate." I accordingly took it out of my pocket and gave it to him, when he took it and tore it to pieces, saying, that there was no such thing now as ministering of angels, and that if I would bring the plates to him, he would translate them. I informed him that part of the plates were sealed, and that I was forbidden to bring them. He replied, "I cannot read a sealed book." I left him and went to Dr. Mitchell, who sanctioned what Professor Anthon had said respecting both the characters and the translation. [^76]

The angel Moroni indicated in 1823 that the ancient record could not be translated by the learning of that generation. [^77] Modern man was only then beginning to learn Egyptian; and even more important, the characters on the plates were said to be reformed Egyptian, the original having been modified and mixed with other ancient dialects during a thousand years of usage, to form a unique language. [^78] Though Dr. Anthon and Dr. Mitchell may have been able to interpret some of the characters and give a partial judgment concerning them, other reports of Harris's visit to these learned men indicate that he was aware of their limitations. Reverend John A Clark said of Harris: "After his return he came to see me again, and told me that, among others, he had consulted Professor Anthon, who thought the characters in which the book was written very remarkable, but he could not decide exactly what language they belonged to." [^79] The Rochester Gem, September 5, 1829, said: "Harris states that he went in search of some one to interpret the hieroglyphics, but found that no one was intended to perform that all-important task but Smith himself." And the Rochester Advertiser and Telegraph, August 31, 1829, copying from the Palmyra Freeman, reported Harris's trip and commented: "But all to whom he applied (among the number was Professor Mitchell of New York happened not to be possessed of sufficient knowledge to give satisfaction!"

A fragment of the transcript which Martin Harris was given by the Prophet has been preserved and is reproduced below:

Having fulfilled the Lord's commandment to prove the named in their knowledge and in their dedication to God, the Prophet prepared to translate the ancient record. As has been indicated, the work was to be done by the gift and power of God, through the medium of the Urim and Thummim. It was to be a new witness for Christ, to come forth in fulfillment of ancient prophecy.

Footnotes

The next day he went into the field, but he was unable to work, his mind being oppressed by the remembrance of the vision. He returned to the house, and soon after sent for his father and brothers from the field; and then, in the presence of the family—my informant one of them—he related all that had occurred. They were astounded, but not altogether incredulous.—Ibid.

During another interview at Bradtville, Wisconsin, November, 1893, William Smith was asked: "Did you not doubt Joseph's testimony sometimes?" To this he replied:

No. We all had the most implicit confidence in what he said. He was a truthful boy. Father and Mother believed him, why should not the children? I suppose if he had told crooked stories about other things we might have doubted his word about the plates, but Joseph was a truthful boy. —Zion's Ensign. Independence, Mo., reprinted in The Deseret News, January 20, 1894.

With tears they could not withhold, they narrated the story of the persecution of their boy Joseph, which commenced when he was about fourteen. . . Oh, how many happy hours I have spent with these good old folks. They were as honest and true as it was possible for mortals to be.—Ibid., pp. 45-46.

Since Joseph Knight, Sr. was a close friend and was staying at the Smith residence, Joseph took the liberty of using his horse and wagon without his knowledge. This was later used to vilify the Prophet's character. Willard Chase mentioned it in an accusing tone when he certified that Joseph came to him a few days after making his initial request that Chase build him a chest and reported "that on the 22d of September, he arose early in the morning, and took a one-horse wagon, of someone that had stayed over night at their house without leave or license; and together with his wife, repaired to the hill which contained the book. He left his wife in the wagon, by the road, and went alone to the hill, a distance of thirty or forty rods from the road."—Howe, op. cit. pp. 245-246.

The plates were secreted about three miles from home, in the following manner: Finding an old birch log much decayed, excepting the bark, which was in a measure sound, he took his pocket knife and cut the bark with some care, then turned it back and made a hole of sufficient size to receive the plates, and, laying them in the cavity thus formed, he replaced the bark; after which he laid across the log, in several places, some old stuff that happened to lay near, in order to conceal as much as possible the place in which they were deposited. Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 107-108.

Joseph said the angel told him he must quit the company of the money-diggers. That there were wicked men among them. He must have no more to do with them.—Tiffany's Monthly, p. 169.

When they came home, I questioned them about them [i.e., the plates]. My daughter said, they were about as much as she could lift. They were now in the glass-box, and my wife said they were very heavy. They both lifted them Ibid., p. 167.

I advised Joseph that he must pay all debts before starting. I paid them for him, and furnished him money for his journey.—Tiffany's Monthly, p. 170.

He requested me to give him my opinion in writing about the paper which he had shown me. I did so without any hesitation.—Letter reproduced in Clark, op. cit., pp. 233-238.

---
Notas:
[^1] See MA, II (October, 1835), p. 199.
[^2] D&C 64:33.
[^3] HC, I, p. 20.
[^4] Howe, op. cit., p. 264. Again Hale said: "I went to the house where Joseph Smith, Jr., lived, and where he and Harris were engaged in their translation of the Book."—Ibid., p. 265.
[^5] See, for example, a statement by David Whitmer, published in the Kansas City Journal, June 5, 1881, and reprinted in MS, XLIII, pp. 421-423, 437-439.
[^6] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 116-117. When Harris went to visit Professor Anthon and Dr. Mitchell, his wife was determined to accompany him. But concluding that it was best to go alone, he left without her knowledge of it. This greatly exasperated her and she accused the Smiths of being party to his deception. When Martin returned, she "prepared a separate bed and room for him, which room she refused to enter." To get a copy of the characters which Martin showed to the linguists, she induced a suitor for her daughter's hand to get them from him and make her a copy as the price of her consent to his romantic intentions. When Martin went to Pennsylvania to assist Joseph in the translation, Mrs. Harris insisted upon going with him. As her husband exhibited the characters to friends and acquaintances along the way to Harmony, Mrs. Harris would take "out of her pocket an exact copy of the same; and [she] told those present, that 'Joe Smith' was not the only one who was in possession of this great curiosity, that she had the same characters, and, they were quite as genuine as those shown by Mr. Harris."
[^7] HC, I, p. 21.
[^8] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 125.
[^9] Ibid., pp. 128-129. Mother Smith reports: "I sought him not to mourn so, for perhaps the Lord would forgive him, after a short season of humiliation and repentance. But what could I do to comfort him, when he saw all the family in the same situation of mind as himself; for sobs and groans, and the most bitter lamentations filled the house.—Ibid., p. 129.
[^10] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 129.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 133-134. For Joseph's account of these proceedings, see HC, I, p. 21.
[^12] D&C 3.
[^13] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 138-142.
[^14] D&C 6:14, 15, 17, 22-23. After this revelation had been given, Oliver Cowdery confessed that one night while in Palmyra he "called upon the Lord" to know whether the story of the ancient record was true, "and the Lord manifest to him" that it was true. But until this revelation which Joseph Smith received in Harmony was given, "no being living knew of the thing alluded to in the revelation, but God and himself."—TS, III (July 15, 1842), p. 853. David Whitmer stated that Cowdery wrote to him shortly after this revelation was given and said that Joseph had told him his "secret thoughts, and all he had meditated about going to see him [i.e., the Prophet], which no man on earth knew, as he supposed, but himself."—Jensen, op. cit., p. 208.
[^15] MA, I (October, 1834), p. 14. (Italics in the original.)
[^16] D&C 10:10-34.
[^17] Evidence supporting this conclusion is as follows: First, with Oliver Cowdery as his scribe, Joseph Smith began again to translate on April 7, 1829, and they completed the work about the last of June that year. Cowdery states that prior to the coming of John the Baptist to restore the Aaronic Priesthood (See the section in this chapter entitled "The Aaronic Priesthood Restored."), they had translated the account of Christ's appearance to the Nephites, and it was the Savior's instructions on baptism that caused them to inquire of God concerning their own need for baptism. See MA, I (October, 1834), pp. 14-15. Had they translated the Small Plates of Nephi before beginning again on the Plates of Mormon, they would have had to translate more than four-fifths of the Book of Mormon as we now have it by May 15, 1829 in order to get to the Savior's instructions on baptism. But by beginning with the Book of Mosiah, they would complete only a little more than half of the work by the middle of May, which makes a more equitable distribution of work accomplished before and after that date.
[^18] For the historical background of the Small Plates of Nephi, see 1 Nephi 9 2 Nephi 5:29-33; Words of Mormon.
[^19] See Words of Mormon 3-7.
[^20] D&C 10:45.
[^21] Interview with David Whitmer, Kansas City Journal, June 5, 1881, repunted in MS, op. cit. For the Prophet's statement, see HC, I, pp. 48-49. Evidently the Prophet's parents had also stopped at the Whitmer residence on a journey to Pennsylvania prior to this time. See Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 149.
[^22] Whitmer, Address to All Believers, p. 30.
[^23] Statement to William H. Kelley and G. A. Blakeslee, September 15, 1882, published in Public Discussion Of The Issues Between The Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints And The Church of Christ (Disciples), held at Kirtland, Ohio, February 12 through March 8, 1884, between E. E. Kelley of the Reorganized Church and Clark Braden of the Church of Christ, (St. Louis, 1884), p. 186.
[^24] Weed disclosed this information in a letter dated April 12, 1880 and published in the Appendix of Ellen E. Dickinson's New Light on Mormonism.
[^25] See Tucker, op. cit., p. 52.
[^26] As the first edition sold, Harris's money was returned. In addition, he shared in the profits of the publication. See MS, XXI (August 20, 1859), p. 545; XXVII (July 29, 1865), p. 473.
[^27] In the postscript of a letter to Joseph Smith, who was then in Harmony, Pennsylvania, Oliver Cowdery wrote from Manchester, New York, November 6, 1829: "I have just got to Alma's commandment to his son in copying the manuscript."—"Letterbook at Kirtland, Ohio, November 27, 1832 to August 4, 1835," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^28] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 156-157. Even with these precautions, efforts were made to destroy the manuscript.
[^29] Interview with John H. Gilbert, published in The Post and Tribune, Detroit, Michigan, December 3, 1877, p. 3. (Original in New York Public Library.)
[^30] William A. Linn, The Story of the Mormons (New York, 1902), p. 48. The printer's manuscript was kept by Cowdery, who later gave it to David Whitmer. After his death, it came eventually into the hands of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, at Independence, Missouri, and has since been preserved by that organization. On October 2, 1841, Joseph Smith deposited the original manuscript in the northwest cornerstone of the Nauvoo House, at Nauvoo, Illinois. When it was removed several years later, it was greatly damaged by moisture. After examining a portion of this manuscript, George Renolds wrote:
[^31] D&C 5:11-16.
[^32] D&C 5:24-25.
[^33] Ether 5:2-3.
[^34] HC, I, pp. 52-53.
[^35] D&C 17:3-4.
[^36] HC, I, pp. 54-55.
[^37] Ibid., p. 55.
[^38] See D&C 17. For an explanation of the Sword of Laban and the Liahona see 1 Nephi 4:9, 18-21; 16:10, 26-29; 2 Nephi 5:12, 41; Jacob 1:10, Words Mormon 13; Mosiah 1:16; Alma 37:38, 45.
[^39] MS, XXI (August 20, 1859), p. 545; XL (December 9, 1878), pp. 771-774; XLVIII (June 21, 1886), pp. 389-391; (July 5, 1886), pp. 420-422; Kansas City Journal, June 5, 1881; Richmond Democrat, Richmond, Mo., Feb 2, 1888. Jensen, op. cit., VI (May, 1887), pp. 203-212; Deseret News; IX (April 13, 1859), p. 48.
[^40] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 152-153.
[^41] TS, III (September 1, 1842), p. 898.
[^42] D&C 5:14.
[^43] 2 Nephi 27:13.
[^44] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 154.
[^45] TS III (September 1, 1842), pp. 898-899. The names of the eight witnesses are: Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jr., John Whitmer, Hiram Page, Joseph Smith, Sr., Hyrum Smith, and Samuel H. Smith.
[^46] MA, II (October, 1835), p. 199.
[^47] See 3 Nephi 11.
[^48] HC, I, p. 39, first published in TS, III (August 1, 1842), pp. 865-866.
[^49] Ibid., pp. 39-41.
[^50] MA, I (October, 1834), pp. 15-16; TS, II (November 1, 1840), pp.
[^51] MA, II (October, 1835), p. 199.
[^52] D&C 20:2-3.
[^53] D&C 27:12.
[^54] HC, I, pp. 61-62.
[^55] D&C 18:9. See JD, VI, p. 320, where Brigham Young indicates the Cowdery and Whitmer were apostles.
[^56] D&C 128:20.
[^57] JD, XXIII, p. 183.
[^58] Letter of Addison Everett to Oliver B. Huntington, reproduced in Young Woman's Journal, II (November, 1890), pp. 75-76. During the troublous times the Saints encountered in Missouri, Oliver Cowdery was excommunicated from the Church and remained apart from it until 1848, when he returned as the Saints were migrating to the Great Salt Lake Basin. In an address at Council Bluffs, Iowa, in October, 1848, he said:
[^59] Not only is evidence lacking to support the view that Joseph Smith and Ohver Cowdery went back to the vicinity of Harmony and Colesville before the best of June, 1829, but reason indicates that they could not have done so. If so, they would have had to make the extended journey there and back, ordain David Whitmer, and receive the revelation which speaks of Cowdery and Whitmer being called with the same calling as Paul.
[^60] HC, I, p. 47.
[^61] See ibid., pp. 81-84, 86-101.
[^62] Ibid., pp. 40-41.
[^63] Journal of Reuben Miller, op. cit.
[^64] HC, I, pp. 60-61. Since the date Peter, James, and John restored the Melchizedek Priesthood is not known, it should be observed that the Prophet dates the above manifestation after the coming of the ancient apostles. Having referred to their coming as he delineated certain significant events in the rise of the new dispensation, Joseph said: "And again, the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca county. . . ."—D&C 128:20-21. His use of the word "again" places the expression of the voice of God in the Whitmer chamber after the coming of Peter, James, and John, as does the sequence in in which he mentions these incidents. In the "History of the Life of Joseph Smith, Jr., by Himself," there is corroborating evidence to support this sequence. In delineating the early events of this dispensation, Joseph first made mention in that document of "the testimony from on high," or the First Vision, followed by "the ministry of angels." He then wrote: ". . . thirdly, the reception of the Holy Priesthood by the ministering of angels, to administer the letter of the Gospel—the laws and commandments as they were given unto him [i.e., Joseph Smith]—and the ordinances; fourthly, a confirmation and reception of the High Priesthood after the holy order of the Son of the living God, power and ordinances from on high to preach the Gospel in the administration and demonstration of the Spirit, the keys of the Kingdom of God conferred upon him and and the continuation of the blessings of God to him."—Joseph Smith's Letterbook at Kirtland, Ohio, November 27, 1832 to August 4, 1835; in the Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. The reference in this statement to "the reception of the Holy Priesthood by the ministering of angels" seems to have reference to both the Aaronic and the Melchizedek Priesthood, the first to administer the latter of the Gospel the laws and ordinances or the preparatory Gospel—and the latter to administer the ordinances of the Gospel through which the Spirit and power of God are given unto man. The "confirmation and reception of the High Priesthood after the holy order of the Son of the living God" apparently refers to the manifestation which the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery were given in the chamber of the Whitmer home.
[^65] HC, I, pp. 75-79.
[^66] MA, I (February, 1835), p. 80.
[^67] See Isaiah 29:4.
[^68] Isaiah 29:11-14.
[^69] 2 Nephi 27:6-7.
[^70] 2 Nephi 27:15-20.
[^71] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 114 (Italics in the original.)
[^72] Ibid., p. 119. There is some evidence that Martin Harris did not know of the scriptural implications of his visit to the East until after he had returned, when the Prophet called his attention to the statement in Isaiah chapter 29. See A. Metcalf, Ten Years Before the Mast; Shipwrecks and Adventures At Sea! Religious Customs of the people of India and Burmah's Empire. How I Became a Mormon and Why I Became an Infidel (Malad City, Ind., 1888), p. 70.
[^73] HC, I, p. 19.
[^74] Ibid.
[^75] Tucker, op. cit., pp. 45, 61. The Painesville Telegraph, Painesville, Ohio, May 7, 1831, published a statement from a Palmyra correspondent who said of Harris's reputation: "Mr. Harris was among the early settlers of this town, and has ever borne the character of an honorable and upright man, and an obliging and benevolent neighbor." The Rochester Advertiser, Rochester, New York, August 31, 1829, copying from the Palmyra Freeman, Palmyra, New York, referred to Harris as "an honest and industrious farmer."
[^76] HC, I, p. 20. This statement was published originally in TS, III (May 2, 1842), pp. 772-773. In a letter to Eber D. Howe, February 17, 1834, Dr. Anthon acknowledged Harris' visit, but said: "He requested an opinion from me in writing, which of course I declined giving." Letter reproduced in Howe, op. cit., pp. 269-272. But in writing to the Reverend Dr. Coit, Rector of Trinity Church , New Rochelle, New York, April 3, 1841, Anthon said:
[^77] MA, II, (October, 1835), p. 198.
[^78] See 1 Nephi 1:2; Mormon 9:32.
[^79] Clark, op. cit., p. 229.
