Hyrum L. Andrus, God, Man, and the Universe ( 1968)

4

Founding the New Dispensation

. . . what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the prophets—the book to be revealed. A voice of the Lord in the wilderness of Fayette, Seneca County, declaring the three witnesses to bear record of the book! The voice of Michael on the banks of the Susquehanna, detecting the devil when he appeared as an angel of light! The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna County, and Colesville, Broome County, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times!

And again, the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca County, and at sundry times, and in divers places through all the travels and tribulations of this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints!—JOSEPH SMITH.

Though the work of the new dispensation was divinely initiated, much painstaking effort was required to bring about the purposes of God. The sacred record had to be translated and published to the world; the Holy Priesthood had to be given to men; the restored gospel had to be preached to the world and its saving ordinances administered to those who believed; and finally, those who accepted the message of the new dispensation had to be organized under the law of God and sanctified. All these things had to be accomplished in order to establish Zion upon the earth and spread the kingdom of God abroad in the latter days. [^1] From a humble beginning great things were to be accomplished. "Be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work," a revelation explained. "And out of small things proceedeth that which is great." [^2]

The Translation Of The Book Of Mormon

The Translation Begun

In abridging the history and prophetic writings of the Nephites, Mormon organized his record around prominent men in the successive ages of Nephite history and named the component sections of his work after them: the Book of Lehi; the Book of Mosiah; the Book of Alma; the Book of Helaman; the Book of Nephi; the Book of Nephi, the son of Nephi; and the Book of Mormon, named after himself. Mormon's son Moroni, who survived the death struggle of the Nephite culture, finished the history of his father and added two more books to the Plates of Mormon: the Book of Ether and the Book of Moroni. Moroni also wrote and compiled that portion of the plates which was sealed.

Having returned from the East, Martin Harris settled his affairs at Palmyra and arrived in Harmony, Pennsylvania about April 12, 1828, to assist Joseph with the translation. [^3] Isaac Hale, the Prophet's father-in-law, later observed: "Martin Harris made his appearance upon the stage; and Smith began to interpret the characters of hieroglyphics which he said were engraved upon the plates, while Harris wrote down the interpretation." [^4] By June 14, 1828, Martin had written 116 pages of manuscript on foolscap paper, which constituted the Book of Lehi. [^5]

When Martin Harris arrived in Harmony to assist Joseph with the translation of the record, all was not well between him and his wife. According to the Prophet's mother, Lucy Harris was "naturally of a very jealous disposition" and domineering in her manner. When she first learned of the ancient record, she declared that if Joseph really had "any plates, she would see them, and that she was determined to help him publish them." But when the Prophet explained that he preferred dealing with men rather than their wives, her zeal turned to jealousy, and from that time disruptions occurred within the Harris household. [^6]

Martin felt that it would alleviate his wife's antagonism if he could show her tangible evidence that he was helping to produce a genuine manuscript. The Prophet therefore wrote that Harris "began to importune me to give him liberty to carry the writings home and show them; and desired of me that I would inquire of the Lord, through the Urim and Thummim, if he might not do so." When Joseph inquired, he was told that he must not do it. Harris persisted, and a second inquiry was made with the same result. Finally, after much solicitation, as Joseph later wrote, "I again inquired of the Lord, and permission was granted him to have the writings on certain conditions; which were, that he show them only to his brother Preserved Harris, his own wife, his father and his mother, and a Mrs. Cobb, a sister to his wife." After binding himself in a solemn covenant that he would conform to these instructions, Martin was permitted to take the manuscript to Palmyra. [^7]

It is not known whether Martin Harris used the manuscript to counter the embarrassing inquiries that were made of him as a result of his wife's expressions among the people or whether the desire to exhibit it as a curiosity got the better of him. But he displayed the manuscript freely, if not boastfully, and when its existence became known generally, it was stolen.

Meanwhile the Prophet remained in Harmony with his wife, who gave birth to a son a few days after Martin's departure. The child lived but a short time, and for two weeks it appeared that Emma might also succumb. During these trying circumstances, "Joseph slept not an hour in undisturbed quiet." [^8] When Emma finally began to recover, the Prophet's concern turned to the manuscript; and though he was exhausted, he took a stage for Palmyra. When he found that the manuscript was missing, he exclaimed as he wept and groaned and walked the floor:

Oh, my God! All is lost! What shall I do?

I have sinned—it is I who tempted the wrath of God. I should have been satisfied with the first answer which I received from the Lord; for he told me that it was not safe to let the writing go out of my possession. . . . How shall I appear before the Lord? Of what rebuke am I not worthy from the angel of the Most High? [^9]

As Joseph left for Harmony the next morning, Mother Smith said: "We parted with heavy hearts, for it now appeared that all which we had so fondly anticipated, and which had been the source of so much secret gratification, had in a moment fled, and fled forever." [^10] When he arrived home, Joseph poured out his soul in "mighty prayer before the Lord." While thus engaged, he reported: "An angel stood before me, and answered me, saying, that I had sinned in delivering the manuscript into the hands of a wicked man, and, as I had ventured to become responsible for his faithfulness, I would of necessity have to suffer the consequences of his indiscretion." The angel then took the Urim and Thummim from Joseph but later returned them for a short period, whereupon the Prophet "inquired of the Lord" through them and received an explanation concerning his plight. [^11]

The revelation began by assuring Joseph that "the works and the designs, and the purposes of God cannot be frustrated, neither can they come to naught." Man can fail, even when united with God in a given design. But, continued the revelation: "Remember, remember that it is not the work of God that is frustrated, but the work of men." God works with man within the framework of human agency and responsibility, and He fulfils His obligations without deviating from His word. Failures thus result from the actions of men, and they are accounted unto men. Having explained this principle of responsible agency and having chastised Joseph for giving way to "the persuasions of men," the revelation assured him that by sincere repentance he could "again be called to the work." [^12] Both the plates and the Urim and Thummim were then taken from him. But they were later restored for the purpose of continuing the translation.

The Translation Resumed

During the winter of 1828-29, Oliver Cowdery was employed as the schoolmaster at Palmyra. Since it was customary for teachers to live with families who had children at school, Cowdery boarded for a time at the Smith home. While there, he was told the story of the ancient record, and he became "completely absorbed" in the matter to the point that "it seemed impossible for him to think or converse about anything else." [^13] Finally he resolved to go to Harmony, Pennsylvania as soon as school was closed in the spring and offer his services to the Prophet. Shortly after Cowdery's arrival on April 5, 1829, Joseph Smith received a revelation in his behalf which said:

. . . blessed art thou for what thou hast done, for thou hast inquired of me, and behold as often as thou hast inquired, thou hast received instruction of my Spirit. If it had not been so, thou wouldst not have come to the place where thou art at this time.

Behold thou knowest that thou hast inquired of me, and I did enlighten thy mind. . . .

I tell thee these things as a witness unto thee—that the words or the work which thou hast been writing are true. . . .

Verily, verily I say uno you, if you desire a further witness, cast your mind upon the night that you cried unto me in your heart, that you might know concerning the truth of these things; did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God? [^14]

With this witness to confirm his faith and add to the assurances which the Spirit had given him, Oliver Cowdery settled down to assist with the task at hand. Of his experience at this time, he wrote in a letter to William W. Phelps:

These were days never to be forgotten—to sit under the sound of a voice dictated by the inspiration of heaven, awakened the utmost gratitude of this bosom! Day after day I continued, uninterrupted, to write from his mouth, as he translated, with the Urim and Thummim, or as the Nephites would have said, "Interpreters," the history, or record, called "The Book of Mormon." [^15]

The Prophet was not permitted to re-translate the Book of Lehi. He was informed by revelation that those who stole the manuscript planned to alter it and publish it in an effort to repudiate his work. [^16] When he again began to translate, he therefore continued on to the Book of Mosiah, the next unit on the Plates of Mormon. [^17] For material to take the place of the lost Book of Lehi, Joseph was instructed to translate the Small Plates of Nephi [^18] which covered the same historical period as the Book of Lehi and which Mormon, the Nephite historian, had been instructed to place with his own record. [^19] The revelation directing Joseph Smith to translate the Small Plates of Nephi stated that these materials would "throw greater views" upon the Gospel, and for this reason their contents were more valuable than the Book of Lehi. [^20]

As the work of translation continued, persecution became increasingly severe, due largely to the opposition of some religious elements in the area of Harmony. For a time Joseph's father-in-law sheltered the Prophet and his associate, but as opposition increased it became apparent that they would have to move. Joseph and Oliver had become acquainted with the Whitmer family, who resided at Fayette, Seneca county, New York; and before he went to Pennsylvania, Cowdery had conversed with David Whitmer about the ancient record. On his way to Harmony, Oliver stopped at the Whitmer home and informed them of his plan to visit the Prophet. Because of the family's interest, he also wrote to them after his arrival in Pennsylvania, sending them a small transcript of translated material. When Cowdery again wrote explaining the situation that he and the Prophet were faced with at Harmony and inquiring whether they might reside with the Whitmer family while they completed the translation, David was sent to move them to Fayette. [^21]

David Whitmer later wrote of the translation of the Book of Mormon as he observed circumstances relating to this work at Fayette:

At times when Brother Joseph would attempt to translate, . . . he found he was spiritually blind and could not translate. He told us that his mind dwelt too much on earthly things, and various causes would make him incapable of proceeding with the translation. When in this condition he would go out and pray, and when he became sufficiently humble before God, he could then proceed with the translation. [^22]

Again, Whitmer said of the Prophet at this time:

He was a religious and straight-forward man. He had to be; for he was illiterate and he could do nothing himself. He had to trust in God. He could not translate unless he was humble and possessed the right feelings towards everyone. To illustrate so you can see: One morning when he was getting ready to continue the translation, something went wrong about the house and he was put out about it. Something that Emma, his wife, had done. Oliver and I went up stairs and Joseph came up soon after to continue the translation, but he could not do anything. He could not translate a single syllable. He went down stairs, out into the orchard, and made supplication to the Lord; was gone about an hour—came back to the house, and asked Emma's forgiveness and then came up stairs where we were, and then the translation went on all right. He could do nothing save he was humble and faithful. [^23]

After the translation was finished, Joseph Smith sought a publisher. Egbert B. Grandin, proprietor of the Wayne Signal, at Palmyra was approached, but he at first refused. The Prophet then went to Rochester, New York, and talked with Thurlow Weed, publisher of the Rochester Telegraph, but the influential and crafty politician also declined, on the grounds that he was only publishing a newspaper. [^24] Elihu F. Marshal of Rochester was approached and apparently was willing to accept the job, [^25] but in the meantime Grandin reconsidered and agreed to publish five thousand copies of the Book of Mormon for three thousand dollars. Since it was more convenient to publish the work at Palmyra than at Rochester, a contract was signed with Grandin; and Martin Harris later sold part of his farm to raise the necessary funds. [^26]

Before the printing started, Oliver Cowdery made a transcript of the manuscript. [^27] The appropriate portions of this copy for each working day were then taken to the printer's office, with a guard accompanying the bearer of the manuscript. Another guard was kept at the Smith home, to protect the remaining material. [^28]

The manuscript of the Book of Mormon was consistently lacking in punctuation. It may be observed that there was very little punctuation in written documents before the time when Alexandria was the center of ancient learning, some centuries after Lehi's colony left Jerusalem. Modern punctuation marks are derived from the Greek grammarians in more recent times. Of the manuscript which Joseph Smith submitted to the printer, John H. Gilbert, Grandin's foreman printer and chief compositor, stated: "There was not a punctuation mark in the whole manuscript." Consequently, "the sentences were all run in without capitals, or other marks to designate where one left off and another began." [^29] An observer at the printing office also said:

The penmanship of the copy furnished was good, but the grammar, spelling, and punctuation was done by John H. Gilbert, who was chief compositor in the office. I have heard him swear many times at the syntax and orthography of Cowdery, and declare that he would not set another line of type. There were no paragraphs, no punctuation and no capitals. All that was done in the printing office, and what a time there used to be in straightening sentences out, too. [^30]

Witnesses to the Ancient Record

Joseph Smith was not expected to stand as a lone witness of the ancient record from which the Book of Mormon was translated. In March, 1829, before the Prophet became acquainted with Oliver Cowdery, a revelation promised that "the testimony of three of my servants shall go forth with my words unto this generation." These witnesses were to "know of a surety" concerning the ancient record, for the revelation declared: "From heaven will I declare it unto them. I will give them power that they may behold and view these things as they are." [^31]

In this revelation, Martin Harris was mentioned as a possible witness, with some reservation. "He exalteth himself and doth not humble himself sufficiently before me," the Lord said; "but if he will go out and bow down before me, and humble himself in mighty prayer and faith, in the sincerity of his heart, then will I grant unto him a view of the things which he desireth to know." Should he behold the plates, Harris was instructed to say to the people: "Behold, I have seen the things and I know of a surety that they are true, for I have seen them, and they have been shown unto me by the power of God and not of man." [^32]

As the Prophet approached the end of his work on the Plates of Mormon, he discovered that Moroni, before completing the record and sealing it up in ancient times, wrote a message to the modern translator in which he stated: "Behold, ye may be privileged that ye may show the plates unto those who shall assist to bring forth this work; and unto three shall they be shown by the power of God; wherefore, they shall know of a surety that these things are true." [^33] Having translated this statement, Joseph explained: "Almost immediately after we had made this discovery, it occurred to Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and the aforementioned Martin Harris (who had come to inquire after our progress in the work) that they would have me inquire of the Lord to know if they might not obtain of him the privilege to be these three special witnesses." [^34] Accordingly, the Prophet inquired and received the promise that, through the power of faith, these three men might view the gold plates and their attendant articles. The revelation directed: "And after that you have obtained faith, and have seen them with your eyes, you shall testify of them, by the power of God; and this you shall do that my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., may not be destroyed, that I may bring about my righteous purposes unto the children of men in this work." [^35]

In the latter part of June, 1829, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris, with Joseph Smith, retired to the woods near the Whitmer home in Fayette, New York, to petition the Lord for a view of the ancient record. The Prophet said:

. . . having knelt down, we began to pray in much faith to Almighty God to bestow upon us a realization of these promises.

According to previous arrangement, I commenced by vocal prayer to our heavenly Father, and was followed by each of the rest in succession. We did not at the first trial, however, obtain any answer or manifestation of the divine favor in our behalf. We again observed the same order of prayer, each calling on and praying fervently to God in rotation, but with the same result as before.

Upon this, our second failure, Martin Harris proposed that he would withdraw himself from us, believing, as he expressed himself, that his presence was the cause of our not obtaining what we wished for. He accordingly withdrew from us, and we knelt down again, and had not been many minutes engaged in prayer, when presently we beheld a light above us in the air, of exceeding brightness; and behold, an angel stood before us. In his hands he held the plates which we had been praying for these to have a view of. He turned over the leaves one by one, so that we could see them, and discern the engravings thereon distinctly. He addressed himself to David Whitmer, and said, "David, blessed is the Lord, and he that keeps his commandments;" when, immediately afterwards, we heard a voice from out of the bright light above us, saying, "These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear." [^36]

After this manifestation was over, Joseph went to find Martin Harris, who was some distance away engaged in fervent prayer. Having joined him in supplication, Joseph later wrote: "Before we had yet finished, the same vision was opened to our view, at least it was again opened to me, and I once more beheld and heard the same things; whilst at the same moment, Martin Harris cried out, apparently in ecstasy of joy, ''Tis enough; 'tis enough; mine eyes have beheld; mine eyes have beheld;' and jumping up, he shouted, 'Hosanah, blessing God, and otherwise rejoiced exceedingly." [^37]

The Prophet's report does not mention some of the details in these manifestations. The revelation which promised the witnesses a view of the plates stated that in addition to the plates they would see other sacred relics, including the Urim and Thummim, the breastplate to which the Urim and Thummim could be attached, the sword of Laban, and the Liahona—sometimes called the miraculous directors. [^38] From a number of statements made by the witnesses, it seems apparent that these items were also shown to them. Whitmer repeatedly declared that after Harris retired from their presence and they again began to pray, they were overshadowed by a brilliant light—"not like the light of the sun nor like that of a fire, but more glorious and beautiful"—and immediately "there appeared, as it were, a table with many records or plates upon it" and the articles listed above. Both Whitmer and Harris state that the angel stood on the opposite side of the table; and Cowdery and Harris observed that the heavenly messenger took the plates and "turned the leave over one by one." Evidently the witnesses also examined the items themselves. Whitmer reported that the angel invited such examination, and Harris declared that "as many of the plate as Joseph Smith translated I handled with my hands, plate after plate." Unanimously the witnesses affirmed that the voice of God was heard from the light above them, commanding them to bear testimony of that which they had seen. [^39]

The four men probably spent some time discussing the things they had seen, for it was after 3 p.m. when they returned to the Whitmer home. Mother Smith later wrote:

On coming in, Joseph threw himself down beside me, and exclaimed, "Father, mother, you do not know how happy I am: the Lord has now caused the plates to be shown to three more besides myself. They have seen an angel, who has testified to them, and they will have to bear witness to the truth of what I have said, for now they know for themselves, that I do not go about to deceive the people, and I feel as if I was relieved of a burden which was almost too heavy for me to bear, and it rejoices my soul, that I am not any longer to be entirely alone in the world." Upon this, Martin Harris came in: he seemed almost overcome with joy, and testified boldly to what he had both seen and heard. And so did David and Oliver, adding that no tongue could express the joy of their hearts, and the greatness of the things which they had both seen and heard. [^40]

In obedience to the divine commandment, the three witnesses signed the following testimony to be published with the Book of Mormon:

Be It Known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come: That we, through the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which contain this record, which is a record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people of Jared, who came from the tower of which hath been spoken [i.e., the tower of Babel]. And we also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true. And we also testify that we have seen the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have been shown unto us by the power of God, and not of man. And we declare with words of soberness, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and be brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld and bear record that these things are true. And it is marvelous in our eyes. Nevertheless, the voice of the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient unto the commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things. And we know that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment-seat of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens. And the honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one God. Amen. [^41]

Though none but the three witnesses were to receive the "same testimony" [^42] as they received, the Book of Mormon also stated that "a few" others might behold the ancient record, "according to the will of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men." [^43] Because of this promise, others were also shown the plates shortly after they had been seen by the three witnesses. The place was a secluded spot near the Smith home in Palmyra, where the family retired at times for devotional services. [^44] Here the Prophet presented the plates to eight other men, and they each examined them to their satisfaction. On this occasion there was no manifestation of divine power, no transfiguration of those present in order to endure the glory of God, and no angelic appearance. It was strictly a tangible witness given to sober men who preceived what they saw naturally and felt the ancient record by the physical senses alone. For this reason it was a testimony supplementary to that which was given to the three witnesses. The eight witnesses signed the following statement which has also been published with each copy of the Book of Mormon:

Be It Known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto whom this work shall come: That Joseph Smith, Jun., the translator of this work, has shown unto us the plates of which hath been spoken which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the leaves as the said Smith has translated we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship. And this we bear record with words of soberness, that the said Smith has shown unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we give our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that which we have seen. And we lie not, God bearing witness of it. [^45]

The Kingdom Of God Restored To Earth

The Aaronic Priesthood Restored

Even though the Book of Mormon was expected to be an instrument in the hands of God in restoring the Gospel and establishing the program of the new dispensation, it was also necessary for men to have divine authority, that they might act officially in the name of God in the latter-day work. In 1823, the angel Moroni promised the Prophet that in due time the Priesthood would be conferred upon him and others. In its power and by its authority they could then "proclaim this gospel and baptize by water." [^46]

The authority to preach repentance and baptism, and to baptize, was given Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on May 15, 1829. By this date, the Prophet had translated the account of Christ's ministry upon the Western hemisphere, at which time Jesus taught the Nephites the true mode of baptism and commissioned them with authority to baptize in a new dispensation of the Gospel. [^47] This account stimulated the Prophet and his associate to inquire concerning their own need for baptism. When they went to the woods to pray about the matter, Joseph Smith said: "A messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light, and having laid his hands upon us, he ordained us, saying: 'Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the Gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion, for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness.'" [^48]

Of this ministration and the limitations in the power which was then conferred upon them, Joseph Smith explained.

He [i.e., the angel] said this Aaronic priesthood had not the powe of laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but that the should be conferred on us hereafter. . . .

The messenger who visited us on this occasion, and conferred an Priesthood upon us, said that his name was John, the same that a called John the Baptist in the New Testament, and that he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which priesthood he said would in due time to conferred on us, and that I should be called the first Elder of the Church, and he (Oliver Cowdery) the second. [^49]

Oliver Cowdery wrote a more descriptive account of the restoration of the Aaronic priesthood. He said:

After writing the account given of the Savior's ministry to the remnant of the seed of Jacob, upon this continent, it was easy to be seen, as the prophet said would be, that darkness covered the earth and gross darkness the minds of the people. On reflecting further it was as easily to be seen, that amid the great strife and noise concerning religion, none had authority from God to administer the ordinances of the gospel. For, the question might be asked, have men authority to administer in the name of Christ, who deny revelations? when his testimony is no less than the spirit of prophecy? and his religion based built, and sustained by immediate revelations in all ages of the world, when he has had a people on earth? If these facts were buried, and carefully concealed by men whose craft would have been in danger once permitted to shine in the faces of men, they were no longer to us; and we only waited for the commandment to be given, Answer be baptized."

This was not long desired before it was realized. The Lord, who is rich in mercy, and ever willing to answer the consistent prayer of the humble, after we had called upon him in a fervent manner and from the abodes of men, condescended to manifest to us his will the a sudden, as from the midst of eternity, the voice of the Redeemer spake peace to us, while the vail was parted and the angel of God came down clothed with glory, and delivered the anxiously looked for message, and the keys of the gospel of repentance!—What joy! what wonder! what amazement! While the world were racked and distracted—while millions were groping as the blind for the wall, and while all men were resting upon uncertainty, as a general mass, our eyes beheld—our ears heard. As in the "blaze of day;" yes, more—above the glitter of the May sun beam, which then shed its brilliancy over the face of nature! Then his voice, though mild, pierced to the center, and his words, "I am thy fellow servant," dispelled every fear. We listened—we gazed—we admired! 'Twas the voice of the angel from glory—'twas a message from the Most High! and as we heard we rejoiced, while his love enkindled upon ours souls, and we were rapt in the vision of the Almighty! Where was room for doubt? No where: uncertainty had fled, doubt had sunk, no more to rise, while fiction and deception had fled forever!

. . . think for a moment, what joy filled our hearts and with what surprise we must have bowed, (for who would not have bowed the knee for such a blessing?) when we received under his hand the holy priesthood as he said, "Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer this priesthood and this authority, which shall remain upon earth, that the sons of Levi may yet offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness!"

I shall not attempt to paint to you the feelings of this heart, nor the majestic beauty and glory which surrounded us on this occasion; but you will believe me when I say, that earth, nor men, with the eloquence of time, cannot begin to clothe language in as interesting and sublime a manner as this holy personage. No; nor has this earth power to give the joy, to bestow the peace, or comprehend the wisdom which was contained in each sentence as they were delivered by the power of the Holy Spirit! Man may deceive his fellow man; deception may follow deception, and the children of the wicked one may have power to seduce the foolish and untaught, till naught but fiction feeds the many, and the fruit of falsehood carries in its current the giddy to the grave; but one touch with the finger of his love, yes, one ray of glory from the upper world or one word from the mouth of the Savior, from the bosom of eternity, strikes it all into insignificance, and blots it forever from mind! The assurance that we were in the presence of an angel; the certainty that we heard the voice of Jesus, and the truth unsullied as it flowed from a pure personage, dictated by the will of God, is to me, past description, and I shall ever look upon this expression of the Savior's goodness with wonder and thanksgiving while I am permitted to tarry, and in those mansions where perfection dwells and sin never comes, I hope to adore in that DAY which shall never cease! [^50]

The Priesthood Restored

The angel Moroni had stated in 1823 that after the Prophet and others had been commissioned with authority to proclaim the gospel and baptize in water, they would receive "power to give the Holy Ghost by the laying on of their hands." [^51] Power to perform this essential function is centered in the Melchizedek Priesthood which John the Baptist promised Joseph and Oliver would be given to them in due time. This higher priesthood was conferred upon them by Peter, James, and John, who received it from Jesus Christ.

The date the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored is not known. A revelation in April, 1830, states that by that time Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had been ordained apostles of Jesus Christ, [^52] in which office is centered the full power of the Melchizedek Priesthood. Another revelation which was given during that year spoke of "Peter, James, and John, whom I have sent unto you, by whom I have ordained you and confirmed you to be apostles, and special witnesses of my name, and bear the keys of your ministry and of the same things which I revealed unto them." [^53]

The earliest evidence of the ordination of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to the Melchizedek Priesthood is found in a revelation given in June, 1829. As the Prophet recorded this revelation, he referred to the higher priesthood and said "The following commandment will further illustrate the nature of our calling to this Priesthood, as well as that of others who were yet to be sought after." [^54] To Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer, this revelation said: "I speak unto you, even as unto Paul mine apostle, for you are called even with that same calling with which he was called." [^55] As an Apostle of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, Paul held the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood. For Cowdery and Whitmer to receive the same calling as Paul meant that they had been ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood and were special witnesses of Christ to the Gentiles. It therefore seems that the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored sometime between May 15 and the last of June, 1829.

The Prophet wrote that Peter, James, and John came and restored the Melchizedek Priesthood "in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county [Pennsylvania], and Colesville, Broome county [New York], on the Susquehanna river." [^56] Of the circumstances associated with the coming of these ancient apostles, Erastus Snow, an early convert and an intimate friend of the Prophet, later said: "It was at a period when they [i.e., Smith and Cowdery] were being pursued by their enemies and had to travel all night, and in the dawn of the coming day when they were weary and worn who should appear to them but Peter, James and John, for the purpose of conferring upon them the Apostleship, the keys of which they themselves had held while upon the earth, which had been bestowed upon them by the Savior." [^57]

Though Snow's statement was made several years later, his explanation is supported by the report of Addison Everett, who stated that he heard Joseph Smith relate the circumstances associated with the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood. Shortly before Peter, James, and John came, the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery were arrested at Colesville for preaching, and were being held at the home of the Justice of the Peace. John Reid, a local citizen with some legal training, had been employed to assist them in this unlawful oppression. Everett said:

. . . Mr. Reid came in and said he wanted to speak to his clients in private and that the law allowed him that privilege, he believed. The judge pointed to a door to a room in the back part of the house and told them to step in there. As soon as they got into the room, the lawyer said there was a mob outside in front of the house, "and if they get hold of you they will perhaps do you bodily injury; and I think the best way for you to get out of this is to get right out there," pointing to the window and hoisting it. They got into the woods in going a few rods from the house—it was night and they traveled through brush and water and mud, fell over logs, etc., until Oliver was exhausted; then Joseph helped him along through brush and water, almost carrying him

They traveled all night, and just at the break of day Oliver gave at entirely and exclaimed, "O Lord! Brother Joseph, how long have we got to endure this thing?" They sat down on a log to rest and Joseph said that at that very time Peter, James and John came to them and ordained them to the Apostleship.

They had 16 or 17 miles to go to get back to Mr. Hales, his father-in-law's, but Oliver did not complain any more of fatigue. [^58]

Joseph Smith does not mention this incident in history, other than to say that the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored by Peter, James, and John somewhere between Harmony and Colesville. The Prophet and Oliver moved from Harmony to Fayette, New York, shortly after the first of June, 1829, and they remained in the vicinity of Fayette until the translation of the Book of Mormon was completed, which occurred toward the end of June or the forepart of July, 1829. If the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored in June, 1829, as a revelation which was given that month indicates, it follows that Joseph and Oliver went to Colesville either before they moved to Fayette or immediately upon the completion of the translation. Since there is no evidence that they went from Fayette to Harmony and Colesville before the last of June, they probably visited Colesville before going to Fayette early that month. [^59] From this it would seem that the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored early in June, 1829. On several occasions, Joseph Knight, Sr. brought food and supplies from Colesville to the Prophet and his companion at Harmony, so that the translation might go forward without interruption. [^60] With such interest shown by Knight, it would be appropriate for Joseph and Oliver to visit him and other interested persons in Colesville before they moved to Fayette. Later in his history Joseph Smith reports incidents of mob violence against him at Colesville, but from statements in his record it is plain that these incidents occurred after the Melchizedek Priesthood had been restored. [^61]

The Church Organized

The procedure followed in restoring the priesthood required first that Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery be ordained by the heavenly messenger or messengers, after which they had to ordain each other before the operation was complete. This order was followed in the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood; [^62] and it seems to have been used in the case of the higher priesthood. Having declared that he was "present with Joseph when the Melchizedek Priesthood was conferred to the holy angels of God," Oliver Cowdery stated: "We then confirmed [this priesthood] on each other by the will and commandment of God." [^63] However, their confirmation of the Melchizedek Priesthood upon each other may not have been done until the Church was organized on April 6, 1830. The technical, therefore, they may not have been fully ordance until that time. Of their instruction by the Lord to perform this necessary confirmation, Joseph Smith wrote as he records incidents that occurred the latter part of June, 1829:

We now became anxious to have that promise realized to us, which the angel that conferred upon us the Aaronic Priesthood had given us, viz: that provided we continue faithful, we should also have Melchizedek Priesthood, which holds the authority of the laying of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. We had for some time made this matter a subject of humble prayer, and at length we got together in the chamber of Mr. Whitmer's house, in order more particularly to seek of the Lord what we now so earnestly desired; and here, to our unspeakable satisfaction, did we realize the truth of the Savior's promise—"Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you"—for we had not long been engaged in solemn and fervent prayer, when the word of the Lord came unto us in the chamber, commanding us that I should ordain Oliver Cowdery to be an Elder in the Church of Jesus Christ; and that he also should ordain me to the same office; and then to ordain others, as it should be made known unto us from time to time. We were, however manded to defer this our ordination until such times as it should be practicable to have our brethren, who had been and who should be baptized, assembled together, when we must have their sanction to our thus proceeding to ordain each other, and have them decide by vote whether they were willing to accept us as spiritual teachers or not; when also we were commanded to bless bread and break it with them, and to take wine, bless it, and drink it with them: afterward proceed to ordain each other according to commandment; then call out such men as the Spirit should dictate, and ordain them; and then attend to the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, upon all those whom we had previously baptized, doing all things in the name of the Lord. fn

In compliance with these instructions, Joseph Smith and five other then men met together at the home of Peter Whitmer, Sr., on Tuesday, April 6, 1830. Having offered prayer, the Prophet presented himself and Oliver Cowdery before the assembled brethren to see whether they would accept them as their teachers and directors in the Kingdom of God, and whether they would consent to be organized as a church according to the commandment of God. To these propositions all consented. Joseph Smith then ordained Oliver Cowdery an Elder of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, after which Elder Cowdery ordained Joseph Smith to the office of an Elder. Having blessed bread and wine and partaken of the sacred emblems of Christ's atoning sacrifice with those present, the presiding Elders prayed and laid hands upon each man separately and bestowed upon him the gift of the Holy Ghost, while confirming him a member of the Church of Jesus Christ The Prophet reported: "The Holy Ghost was poured out upon us to a very great degree. Some prophesied, whilst we all praised the Lord and rejoiced exceedingly." [^64] With the conclusion of this meeting, the Church of Jesus Christ became a legal entity upon the earth in the last days. The foundation of the new dispensation was laid.

Footnotes

Upon arriving in Pennsylvania, Lucy Harris informed the Prophet "that her object in coming, was to see the plates, and that she would never leave until she had accomplished it." Thereupon she commenced to ransack the house; "consequently, Joseph was under the necessity of removing both the breast-plate and the Record from the house, and secreting them elsewhere." When Mrs. Harris had searched the house and the premises in vain, she concluded that Joseph had no such plates; and from that time she commenced to slander him. While she remained in Harmony, "she did all that lay in her power to injure Joseph in the estimation of his neighbors—telling them that he was a grand imposter" seeking to get her husband's property. When she finally returned to Palmyra, she went "from house to house, telling her grievances, and declaring that Joseph Smith was practicing a deception upon the people, which was about to strip her of all that she possessed."—Ibid., pp. 119-122.

In reporting this incident, Tucker asserts that Martin's wife stole the manuscript. He does not say, however, how he knew this to be a fact, except to indicate that she kept the matter a profound secret for several years. See Tucker, op. cit., pp. 45-47.

Second, it was late in the work of translation that Joseph Smith reported that Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris discovered from the record that there would be three special witnesses to whom the gold plates would be shown. The Prophet dates this discovery in June, 1829. See HC, I, pp. 51-53 Such promises are found in 2 Nephi 27 (on the Small Plates of Nephi) and Ether 5 (on the Plates of Mormon). Had they translated the Small Plates of Nephi before they finished the Plates of Mormon, they would have come across the promise that there would be witnesses much earlier in the translation, probably while they were still in Harmony, Pennsylvania.

Finally, when Joseph Smith was instructed to translate the Small Plates of Nephi to fill the historical gap caused by the loss of the Book of Lehi, the revelation advised him to finish "the remainder of the work of translation as you have begun."—D&C 10:3.

The only division made in the manuscript is into chapters. The sentences are not divided by punctuation marks and are seldom commenced with capital letters.

The Contributor, Salt Lake City, Utah, V (July, 1884), pp. 366-367.

I was present with Joseph when an holy angel from God came down from heaven and conferred, or restored the Aaronic priesthood, and said at the same time that it should remain upon the earth while the earth stands. I was also present with Joseph when the Melchizedek priesthood was conferred by the holy angels of God . . . .—Journal of Reuben Miller, October 21, 1848, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. Miller's report was later published in the Deseret News, April 13, 1859, but because of a printing error it appears that Cowdery stated that the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored by "the holy angel of God."

In a letter written December 26, 1848, to Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff stated that Orson Hyde, who was present when Cowdery gave this address, had written to him (Woodruff) concerning it. Elder Woodruff's letter was published in MS, XI (February 1, 1849), p. 43. George A. Smith was also present at Council Bluffs, and wrote to Elder Pratt, October 31, 1848, stating: "He [i.e., Cowdery] bore testimony in the most positive terms of the truth of the Book of Mormon—the restoration of the Priesthood to the earth, and the mission of Joseph Smith as the Prophet of the last days." This letter was also published in MS, XI (January 1, 1849), p. 14.

In March, 1846, while still estranged from the Church, Cowdery wrote in a personal letter to a friend:

I have cherished a hope, and that one of my fondest, that I might leave such a character, as those who might believe in my testimony, after I should be called hence, might do so, not only for the sake of truth, but might not blush for the private character of the man who bore that testimony. I have been sensitive on this subject, I admit, but I ought to be so—you would be under the circumstances, had you stood in the presence of John, with your departed brother Joseph, to receive the lesser Priesthood—and in the presence of Peter to receive the greater, and looked down through time, and witnessed the effects these two must produce, you would feel what you have never felt.—Letter to Phineas Young, March 23, 1846. Tiffin, Seneca county, Ohio. Original letter in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. (Italics in the original.)

The Prophet's mother indicates that Joseph returned to Harmony, Pennsylvania shortly after the Book of Mormon was translated and a printer had been engaged. But this was in the summer of 1829. And Cowdery remained in the vicinity of Palmyra and Fayette,—Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., pp. 157-158.

---
Notas:
[^1] Anatomy 4:27-30.
[^2] El 20:34-36.
[^3] HC, VI, p. 303.
[^4] Isaiah 11:9; 2 Nephi 21:9; 30:15.
[^5] D&C 84:96-98.
[^6] D&C 121:28.
[^7] A corporeal body is a body of a material or physical nature.
[^8] Joseph Smith Papers, 1839-1841," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. This statement may also be found in Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith ed. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City, 1963), p. 181, hereafter abbreviated at TPJS.
[^9] HC., VI., p. 305. The following biblical passages, among others, are often cited in Latter-day Saint literature to support this view: Genesis 1:26-27; 5:1-3; Exodus 33:11, 20-23: Numbers 12:7-8; Isaiah 6:1-11; John 12:44-45; Colossians 1:12-15; Hebrews 1:1-3.
[^10] There are other ways by which man is in embryo a theomorphic being. These will be treated at later points in this work.
[^11] Lectures on Faith, No. 5. These theological lectures were delivered by the Prophet before the School of the Prophets, at Kirtland, Ohio, in 1834-1835.
[^12] HC, V. p. 325. See also D&C 130:22. Joseph Smith said on another occasion:
[^13] Moses 1:6. For a clarification of the sense in which the Father was speaking. see chapters eight and nine of this volume.
[^14] See chapter eight.
[^15] See Moses 6:4-6.
[^16] Moses 6:57; 7:35.
[^17] As reported by Orson Pratt in JD, II, p. 342.
[^18] Moses 7:35. For the sense in which the Father is here speaking, see chapters eight and nine in this volume.
[^19] Moses 1:3. See also D&C 19:10.
[^20] He declared: "We believe in the Great Elohim who sits enthroned in yonder heavens."—HC, V, p. 499. Again: "There is the starting point for us to look to, in order to understand and be fully acquainted with the mind, purpose, and decrees of the Great Elohim, who sits in yonder heavens as he did at the creation of this world."—Ibid., VI, p. 303.
[^21] See ibid., pp. 475-476.
[^22] Joseph Smith spoke, for example, of those sacred ordinances performed in the House of the Lord by which the faithful may "come up and abide in the presence of the Elohim in the eternal worlds."—Ibid., V, pp. 1-2.
[^23] D&C 20:21; 29:42, 46; 49:5; 76:13, 23, 25, 35, 57; 93:11; Jacob 4:5, 11; Alma 12:33-34; 13:5.
[^24] Moses 6:57; 7:35.
[^25] Moses 6:57.
[^26] D&C 78:20; 95:17.
[^27] JD, II, p. 342.
[^28] D&C 95:17.
[^29] D&C 35:1; 38:1; 45:7; 49:12; 54:1; 61:1; 84:120; 110:4; 1 Nephi 20:12.
[^30] D&C 110:1-4; 3 Nephi 15:4-5.
[^31] D&C 29:1; 38:1; 39:1.
[^32] 1 Nephi 19:10.
[^33] 3 Nephi 11:14; D&C 8:1; 10:70; 15:1; 66:1.
[^34] D&C 42:1; 43:34.
[^35] D&C 8:1; 10:70; 66:1; 80:5.
[^36] D&C 76:69; 107:19.
[^37] D&C 45:3-5.
[^38] See chapter six entitled "The Nature and Order of the Universe."
[^39] See 1 Nephi 2:17; Alma 31:36; Helaman 5:45; Moroni 8:23.
[^40] See 1 Nephi 10:17, 19; 13:37; 2 Nephi 26:13; 32:3; 33:1; Jacob 7:12; Moroni 3:4, 10:5
[^41] See D&C 6:15; 50:17, 19.
[^42] HC, V, p. 261.
[^43] Ibid., VI., p. 174. Again from the Prophet: "Everlasting covenant was made between three personages before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation of things to men on the earth; these personages, according to Abraham's record, are called God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness or Testator."—"Joseph Smith Papers, 1839-1841," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 190.
[^44] See 1 Nephi 10:19.
[^45] 3 Nephi 11:32.
[^46] "Joseph Smith Papers," op. cit.
[^47] HC, I, p. 5; Smith 2:16-17. (Italics in the original.)
[^48] TS, III (March 1, 1842), pp. 706-707.
[^49] D&C 110:3.
[^50] D&C 130:2.
[^51] HC, II, p. 380.
[^52] Ibid,. p. 317.
[^53] Exodus 13:21-22; 14:19-25.
[^54] Exodus 9:17-22.
[^55] Exodus 34; 2 Corinthians 3.
[^56] 2 Chronicles 5:13-14; 7:1-3.
[^57] 1 Kings 18:21-38; 2 Kings 2:11.
[^58] Matthew 17:1-3; Mark 9:2-8: Luke 9:29-32; 2 Peter 1:17.
[^59] Acts 2:1-2.
[^60] In referring to the angel Moroni, Joseph Smith wrote that he , "being dead and raised again therefrom, appeared unto me."—HC, III, p. 28.
[^61] MA, I (February, 1835), p. 79. In writing to John Wentworth editor and proprietor of the Chicago Democrat, Joseph Smith described this appearance as follows:
[^62] See, for example, HC, II, pp. 380-381; VI, pp. 306, 366, 476; Acts 2:3; "An Interesting Letter," written by Benjamin F. Johnson to George S. Gibbs, p. 8; P. Pratt, Key to Theology, p. 41.
[^63] HC, VI, p. 366. See also p. 476. Brigham Young explained:
[^64] Johnson to Gibbs, op. cit.
