Hyrum L. Andrus, God, Man, and the Universe ( 1968)

5

The Knowledge of God Restored

If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and I will speak unto him in a dream.—NUMBERS.

The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times was ushered in by the appearance of the Father and the Son to Joseph Smith death in the spring of 1820. In this great manifestation, with these that followed, the knowledge of God was again given to man. His nature and character were again revealed, and this in fulfilment of the words of the ancient prophets. Having foretold the scattering of Israel in ancient times, Moses looked down the vista of time to the latter days and promised the scattered remnants: "If from thence thou shalt seek the Lord the God, thou shalt find him. . . . When thou art in tribulation and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shalt be obedient into his voice." [^1] Through Ezekiel, God also promised to reveal Hemself to Israel in the last days. "I will bring you out from the people," the Lord declared of the latter-day gathering. And I will bring you into the wilderness of the people, and there I will I plead with you face to face." That there might be a mistake about the nature of His intended manifestations, the Lord continued: "Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I plead with you, the Lord God." [^2]

As Joseph Smith sought to give others the knowledge such had been revealed to him, he observed: "There are but few in the world who understand rightly the character of God." Nor did the Prophet believe that men in general comprehend their present relationship to the supreme being; "nor that which is past, or that which is to come, as it respects their relationship to God." Yet so important is this knowledge that the Prophet declared: "If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves." "They know but little above the brute beast, or more than to eat, drink and sleep," he continued. "This is all man knows about God or His existence, unless it is given by the inspiration of the Almighty." [^3]

Though it was a major challenge of the new dispensation to teach men the true knowledge of God and to teach them that by revelation they could commune with Him, Nephi the ancient American seer quoted and confirmed the prophetic declaration of Isaiah that when the millennial era is ushered in the earth will "be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." [^4] Having begun to reveal Himself anew, the Lord declared to Joseph Smith that in the last days He will lay His hand upon the nations and scourge them for their wickedness, "until all shall know me, who remain, even from the least unto the greatest, and shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, and shall see eye to eye." [^5] Another modern revelation speaks of "a time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld, whether there be one God or many gods, they shall be manifest." [^6]

Basic Facts Concerning Deity

The Corporeal Nature of God

Joseph Smith held that a true understanding of the nature of Deity must be firmly rooted in the central fact that God is a distinct, tangible being with a corporeal body [^7] similar in form and stature to that which man possesses. "There is no other God in heaven but that God who has flesh and bones," he declared. [^8] Of the form and stature of God, he explained: "If the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible, . . . you would see him like a man in form—like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form of a man." [^9] According to the Prophet, man is a theomorphic being, in that he possesses a physical body that is formed in the very likeness and image of God. [^10] Though God, like man, is a corporeal being, He is free from the corrupt elements that are associated with man's physical body, by which the latter is subject to the many weaknesses and deficiencies of mortal existence. God's body of flesh and bones is spiritual and immortal in its organization, whereas man's body is temporal and mortal. God is perfect in all His bodily attributes and powers, while man is imperfect in his physical being. And God is a divine being, but man in his natural, mortal state possesses only limited characteristics of divinity.

The Godhead

"There are two personages who constitute the great, matchless, governing, and supreme power over all things, by whom all things were created and made, that are created and made, whether visible or invisible, whether in heaven, or earth, or in the earth, under the earth, or throughout the immensity of space," the Prophet said. "They are the Father and the Son." [^11] In a subordinate role to the Father and the Son, yet one with them in managing the affairs of this earth, is another divine personage known as the Holy Ghost, variously designated as the Holy Spirit, the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, etc. Of these three separate personages, Joseph Smith wrote: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit." [^12]

The Father is the primary personage in the Godhead; and though the term "God" is also given to Christ and the Holy Ghost, there is a restricted sense in which it applies with singular meaning to the Father. To Moses, the Father said: "Mine Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, for he is full of grace and truth; but there is no God besides me." [^13] The Father is the ultimate source of all attributes and powers of life, and He is the Supreme Intelligence over all other beings known to man. It is because other divine beings partake of the Father's glory and are appointed to manifest the Holy Spirit to man that they are Gods. Being subordinate to the Father, they are dependent upon Him for the divine attributes and powers which they possess. But since they have authority to speak and act for the Father in developing the attributes and powers of the Holy Spirit in others, they too are called Gods. It will be shown in a later chapter [^14] that Christ is our God because the glory and power of the Father dwell in Him, and because He is the source of the powers of life, truth, and light which man receives from the Father. As Christ's minister in revealing the Father and the Son to man, the Holy Ghost is designated as a God essentially for the same reason.

In the pure language of Adam, [^15] the Father is named "Man of Holiness," [^16] a name which implies that He is an exalted man, and that by means of the divine plan of life and salvation man may eventually become like Him in eternity. A revelation to Joseph Smith also states that the name of the Father is Ahman [^17]—a name-title that seems to be closely identified with that of Man of Holiness. Having revealed Himself to the patriarch Enoch as God and having declared that His name was Man of Holiness, the Father stated further: "Man of Counsel is my name; and Endless and Eternal is my name." [^18] To Moses, He said: "I am the Lord God Almighty, and Endless is my name; for I am without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless." [^19]

In addition to the meaningful appelations above, Joseph Smith used the exalted name-title "Elohim" to designate the Father. [^20] The word "Elohim" is a plural term meaning "Gods," as the Prophet pointed out while analyzing the meaning of the term in Hebrew; [^21] and in this sense he also used it. [^22] Either usage is appropriate, and the reader must determine from the context of the statement in which sense it is being applied.

The second divine personage in the Godhead is the Son. He is the Only Begotten of the Father. [^23] For this reason, He is designated as the "Son of Man," meaning the "Son of Man of Holiness." [^24] The Son of Man is named "Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge." [^25] He is also called "the Son of Ahman," [^26] a name-title closely akin to that of Son of Man. Having explained that in the pure language spoken by Adam the name of God is "Ahman," a revelation to Joseph Smith observed that the name of the Son of God is "Son Ahman." [^27] At the conclusion of another revelation, the latter being declared Himself to be "Son Ahman; or, in other words, Alphus; or in other words, Omegus; even Jesus Christ your Lord." [^28] Alphus is a derivative of the Greek Alpha, and Omegus is a derivative of the Greek Omega, which terms indicate that Jesus Christ is the first and the last, and the beginning and the end. [^29] All things that pertain to life and salvation for man in the past, present, and future center in Him. He is Jehovah [^30]—the great I AM, [^31] the God of the righteous in ages past [^32] and the God of the whole earth. [^33] He is the Savior [^34] or Redeemer [^35] of man, "the mediator of the new covenant," [^36] and man's advocate with the Father. [^37] Since the time of His resurrection, the Son has been a being like the Father in organization and power.

The third divine personage in the Godhead is the Holy Ghost. As a personage of Spirit, the Holy Ghost is composed in His bodily organization of a pure and fine substance called "spirit." [^38] Though the Holy Ghost as a member of the God head is a personal being and not merely a divine forced essence, it should be noted that the divine power emanating from God is sometimes called the "Holy Spirit," [^39] the "Holy Ghost," [^40] the "Spirit of Truth," [^41] etc., and it is necessary to determine by the usage and the context of the statement whether reference is being made to the person or to the power of the Holy Ghost.

Joseph Smith taught repeatedly that there is a distinct being in the Godhead called the "Holy Ghost." He declared: The Holy Ghost is a personage, and is in the form of a personage," [^42] Again: "I have always declared God to be a distinct personage, Jesus Christ a separate and distinct personage from God the Father, and the Holy Ghost was a distinct personage and a Spirit: and these three constitute three distinct personages and three Gods." [^43]

Though the Holy Ghost is associated with the Father and the Son and is one with them in the Godhead, He is not equal in power and authority to either of them. Instead, He is their minister, appointed to reveal the laws, doctrine, and all of the Father and the Son unto man, [^44] and to bear witness of them. [^45] The fact that the Holy Ghost acts in the latter function is apparent from Joseph Smith's reference to Him as "the witness or Testator." [^46]

The Divine Nature of God

As separate and distinct personages, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are beings of transcendent glory and power. As such, they possess a divine nature. In recounting his First Vision, Joseph Smith wrote of the Father and the Son, as they appeared unto him in their glory and power:

I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. . . .

When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the act. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son, Hear Him! [^47]

In another account of this great theophany, the Prophet wrote that the Father and the Son were "surrounded with a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noon day." [^48] Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery also called attention to the brilliance of God's divine nature when they wrote of the appearance of Christ as a glorified being in 1836, stating: "His countenance shone above the brightness of the sun." [^49]

Life such as that which the Father, the Son, and resurrected beings who dwell in their presence possess has a corporeal or physical basis. But in addition, the Prophet explained that it is "coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoy." [^50] The same can be said of the glorified sphere on which God dwells. Joseph Smith mentioned this dual nature of celestial life in reporting a divine manifestation that he and others were given in January, 1836:

The heavens were opened upon us and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. [^51]

References to the righteous state of immortal glory should not be confused with scriptural statements that make use of the term "fire and brimstone" in describing the future state of the willfully rebellious. In distinguishing between the two Joseph Smith said: "Some shall rise [in the resurrection] to the everlasting burnings of God; for God dwells in everlasting burnings, and some shall rise to the damnation of their own filthiness, which is as exquisite a torment as the lake of fire and brimstone." [^52] As the term "everlasting burnings" applies to the future state of the righteous, it denotes the glory and power that are associated with those who reside in the presence of God. But when such terms as "fire and brimstone" be used to refer to the future condition of the willfully perverse, they portray the inner anxiety and turmoil experienced by those who are seriously out of time with the divine truths and power upon which organized life must rest.

Manifestations of Celestial Glory

Because the glory of God has been manifested at times to men on earth, Latter-day Saints accepted as real and plausible the biblical account that God went before ancient Israel to day in a pillar of a cloud and by night in a pillar of fire, give them light"; [^53] that "the Lord descended" upon Mount Sinai in fire," so that "the smoke . . . ascended as the smoke of a furnace"; [^54] that Moses partook so much of the divine nature while in God's presence that "the skin of his face shone" to the extent that the Israelites feared to come near him; [^55] that "fire came down and the glory of the Lord" filled the temple of Solomon so that "the priests could not enter into the house of the Lord"; [^56] that Elijah called "the fire of the Lord" to consume his sacrifice and was himself later translated to heaven in "a chariot of fire"; [^57] that Christ was transfigured by the heavenly element so that "his face did shine as the sun and his raiment was white as the light," while the voice of His Father from "the excellent glory" declared: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well peased"; [^58] and that on the day of Pentecost

"cloven tongues like as of fire" appeared amid "a rushing mighty wind" and "sat upon" the people. [^59]

In modern times, man has been given descriptions of a celestial being [^60] in his glory and power. Joseph Smith's statement concerning the angel Moroni has been quoted in chapter two of this volume. As Oliver Cowdery wrote of the appearance of this heavenly messenger to the Prophet in 1823, he said:

While continuing in prayer for a manifestation in some way that his sins were forgiven; endeavoring to exercise faith in the scriptures on a sudden a light like that of day, only of a purer and far more glorious appearance and brightness, burst into the room. Indeed to use his own description, the first sight was as though the house was filled with consuming and unquenchable fire. This sudden appearance of a light so bright, as must naturally be expected, occasioned a shock or sensation, visible to the extremities of the body. It was, however, followed with a calmness and serenity of mind, and an overwhelming rapture of joy that surpassed understanding, and in a moment a personage stood before him.

Notwithstanding the room was previously filled with light above the brightness of the sun, as I have before described, yet there seemed to be an additional glory surrounding or accompanying this personage, which shone with an increased degree of brilliancy, of which he was in the midst; and though his countenance was as lightning, yet it was of a pleasing, innocent and glorious appearance, so much so, that every fear was banished from the heart, and nothing but calmness pervaded the soul. . . .

The stature of this personage was a little above the common size of men in this age; his garment was perfectly white, and had the appearance of being without seam. [^61]

Certifications Concerning The Divine Nature Of God

Dwells in Everlasting Burnings

Religious terminology makes use of several synonyms in referring to the glory of God, viz.: "eternal fire," "everlasting burnings," "consuming fire," "circling flames of fire," "cloven tongues of fire," "light unapproachable by those of lower sphere," etc. [^62] However, these are earthly symbols used to designate the glory of God, and they indicate that the realm of God's existence is a highly glorified place that radiates a brillance of light far beyond the comprehension of finite man. Joseph Smith declared:

God Almighty, Himself, dwells in eternal fire; flesh and blood cannot go there, for all corruption is devoured by the fire. . . . When our flesh is quickened by the Spirit [in the resurrection], there will be no blood in this tabernacle. Some dwell in higher glory than others. . . . Immortality dwells in everlasting burnings. . . . All men who are immortal dwell in everlasting burnings. [^63]

The term "everlasting burnings" and its synonyms apparently also have a literal meaning, for heat is associated with God's glory. The Prophet is said to have taught "that all light and heat are the 'glory of God,' which is His power." [^64] Having talked with God face to face, Moses declared that had he not been transfigured he would "have withered and died" in God's presence. [^65] A revelation states that when Christ comes in His glory, His presence "shall be as the melting fire that burneth, and as the fire which causeth the waters to boil." The mountains will "flow down" at His presence. [^66] "And every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed; and also that of element shall melt with fervent heat." [^67]

The Glory of God is His Holy Spirit

The glory of God is synonymous in the scriptures with that divine substance, power, or essence which is called the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of God, the Light of Christ, the Light of Truth, etc. [^68]. For example, when Moses was transfigured a that he could behold God in His glory, he explained: "His glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was trans figured before him." [^69] He declared that the transfiguring agent was the glory of God. But a revelation to Joseph Smith on the subject of transfiguration declared, "No man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God." [^70] Thus God's glory is His Holy Spirit. Again, at the conclusing of Moses's experience, the record states: "And the present of God withdrew from Moses, that his glory was not upon Moses." [^71] Shortly thereafter Satan appeared and tempted Moses, who observing the lack of glory in the Adversary on claimed: "Blessed be the name of my God, for his Spirit has not altogether withdrawn from me, or else where is thy glory for it is darkness unto me?" [^72] Again the glory of God a equated with the Spirit of God.

Further evidence in support of the above conclusion a that the manifestation of the Holy Spirit to man through the ordinances of the Gospel is referred to as a baptism of fire. [^73] Thereby man in his fallen spiritual state may be "quickened by a portion of the celestial glory," in preparation for the resur rection when he may "receive the same, even a fulness. [^74] Another revelation expressed the same idea concerning these who receive and apply the Gospel to their lives: "Through the power and manifestation of the Spirit, while in the flesh, they may be able to bear his [i.e., God's] presence in the world of glory." [^75] In this way, the faithful are prepared to endure the full glory of God, while the willfully rebellious die a second spiritual death. From them the Spirit of God is withdrawn, [^76] and in the resurrection they are consigned to a kingdom that without glory. [^77] The withdrawal of the Spirit of God leaves them in a state without glory.

From what has been said thus far, it seems reasonable to conclude that the Holy Spirit is centered in God and constitutes His glory. As a pure and highly capacitated substance, the Holy Spirit partakes of the intelligence of God and is the agent by which divine truth, light, and power are manifested to others. But God's glory, or His Holy Spirit, is not separate from Himself. As part of His total organized being, it constitutes His divine nature by which He is an infinitely spiritual, as well as a corporeal, being.

The Glory of God is Intelligence

A revelation to Joseph Smith gave significant insight into the nature of God's glory when it explained: "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." [^78] As an exalted being with a body of flesh and bones, the Father possesses such divine intelligence that the manifestation of His Holy Spirit or glory, with its related attributes, powers, and light would eclipse the light of the sun at noon day. The essential constituents of God's glory were again made apparent when the same revelation spoke of Christ's acquisition of the acquisition glory and of the way man also may acquire the divine nature of God. "He that keepeth his [i.e., God's] commandments receiveth truth and light," it declared, "until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things." [^79] Here, too, it is apparent that the glory of God consists of intelligence, for the obedient are to be glorified by receiving truth and light which together, constitute intelligence. [^80]

Although the glory of God is intelligence, truth seems to be the most basic constituent of that divine substance, for those who attain the divine nature are "glorified in truth." [^81] Jesus said that the word of God is truth and that the faithful are sanctified by that truth. [^82] This is the living word, which is Spirit. [^83] A revelation to Joseph Smith explained: "The word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ." [^84] Again, from another revelation: "Behold, that which you hear is as the voice of one crying in the wilderness—in the wilderness because you cannot see him—my voice, because my voice is Spirit; my Spirit is truth; truth abideth and hath no end; and if it be in you it shall abound." [^85] Having made these disclosures concerning that divine substance of truth and power which is called the Holy Spirit and which manifest the living word of God to man, [^86] the revelation spoke of man possible glorification by receiving that divine substance: "And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you: and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things." [^87]

A revelation also states that "light and truth forsake the evil one," [^88] which indicates that intelligence consists of the power to apply truth in right action and in overcoming evil and error.

The Presence of God

Because God possesses a divine as well as a corporeal, nature, He has a different relationship than does man to things in space. Man need not be near the person of God in a physical sense to be in His presence. Orson Pratt explained:

What are we to understand by being in the presence of God? Is it necessary, to do so, that we should be in the same vicinity or within a few yards or feet of him? I think not. . . . To go . . . into the presence of God, is to be placed in a condition wherein his presence can be seen. It does not mean, in all cases, that people who return into his presence are immediately placed within . . . a short distance of his person. For instance, . . . we will suppose that it was within the scope of man's power . . . to converse through the aid of the telegraph line ...[with] the people in London. . . . Now, supposing still further, that there was a principle differing from our natural light, a principle of light of a more refined nature, that could penetrate from London to this point, so that it would affect our eyes, then we could both see and hear them at eight or nine thousand miles distance. Would we not be in their presence? Would it really be necessary for us to travel eight or nine thousand miles to get into the same room with them, in order to get into their presence? [^89]

Man is in the presence of God when he is enveloped in the glory of God and is quickened by that intelligent substance so that, to some degree, he is able to behold the divine nature of God and is made a recipient of its intelligent attributes and powers. On such occasions he may or may not be in the presence of God's person. But he is in the presence of God in sense of divine communion when he is enveloped in the glory of God. The state of being enveloped in God's glory before is made synonymous with the state of being in the presense of God. Concerning the great theophany which Moses experienced the record states: "And the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence." [^90] At the conclusion of this divine manifestation, the scripture also says: "And the presence of God withdrew from Moses, that his glory was not upon Moses." [^91]

Though certain prophets have been endowed at times with the divine nature of God, there is a limit to the glory which man can endure as a mortal being. To Moses, God said: "No man can behold all my works, except he behold all my glory; and no man can behold all my glory, and afterwards remain in the flesh on the earth." [^92] God's ultimate work is to glorify that which He creates. [^93] To behold all the works of God, therefore, man must behold all His glory. Such a concentration of glory and power mortal man cannot endure, even when transfigured by the Holy Spirit, and afterward return to mortality. It follows that such manifestations of glory as have been given to mortal men, after which they have returned to the natural mortal state, have been but partial revelations of the divine nature of God.

The Divine Attributes And Powers Of God

God Possesses Infinite Attributes and Powers of Life

As a being of infinite intelligence, God possesses infinite attributes and powers of life. Joseph Smith taught that in God "every good gift and every good principle dwell" [^94] A revelation declared that God "is full of mercy, justice, grace and truth, and peace." [^95] King Benjamin and other Nephite prophets testified of "the goodness of God, and his matchless power, and his wisdom, and his patience, and his long-suffering towards the children of men." [^96] When addressing the throne of grace, Joseph Smith exclaimed to God: "These sittest enthroned, with glory, honor, power, majesty, might dominion, truth, justice, judgment, mercy, and an infinity of fulness, from everlasting to everlasting." [^97] In expressing his news in a printed lecture, the Prophet listed some of the major attributes of God as knowledge, faith or power, justice, judgment, mercy, and truth. [^98] He also made the following observations concerning God:

First, that he was God before the world was created, and the same God that he was after it was created.

Secondly, that he is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, abundant in goodness, and that he was so from everlasting, and will be to everlasting.

Thirdly, that he changes not, neither is there variableness with him; yesterday, to-day, and for ever; and that his course is one eternal round, without variation.

Fourthly, that he is a God of truth and cannot lie.

Fifthly, that he is no respector of persons: but in every nation he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted of him.

Sixthly, that he is love. [^99]

Love is the most pure and holy attribute of a divinely intelligent being. Because God possesses intelligence to the degree that His glory is as "a consuming fire," [^100] it therefore fllows that "God is love." [^101] In speaking to Moses, God equated His "goodness" with His glory. [^102] King Benjamin observed that for man to "come to the knowledge of the glory God" is to know of "his goodness" and taste of "his love." [^103] And a revelation that made reference to the powers and attributes of God's Holy Spirit spoke of "the peaceable things [i.e., attributes, etc.] of immortal glory." [^104]

Perfection of Deity

As a personage of infinite intelligence, the Father is perfect all the divine attributes and powers of His eternal being. His conduct toward others, He fulfills to perfection all the obligations that the qualities of His several attributes require of Him. He possesses the attribute of love, and he acts toward others in every way as the qualities of love require Him to act. He possesses the attribute of justice, and He acts toward others in every way as the qualities of justice require Him to act. He possesses the attribute of mercy, and He acts toward others in every way as the qualities of mercy require Him to act. The same is true of all the attributes that center in Him God is therefore a perfect being.

Joseph Smith spoke of the "perfections of God." "What we mean by perfections," he explained, "is the perfections which belong to all the attributes of his nature." Again, he inquired: "What are we to understand by the perfections of the Deity?" In reply he said: "The perfections which belong to his attributes." [^105] For example, God not only possesses the attribute of knowledge, but there is no deficiency in His understanding. Reference therefore may be made to His perfection in the attribute of knowledge. God is also perfect in His possession of faith or power, for He is not lacking in any way in power to carry out His eternal designs. The same is true of justice, of judgment, of mercy, and of truth. God is perfect in all these attributes. This is what is meant by the perfections of God, or the perfections which belong to His attributes.

While Jesus lived on earth He kept the law of God to perfection; He did not transgress one commandment of His Father. In this respect He was perfect. But until Christ acquired the fulness of His Father's glory, He was not perfect in the divine and eternal sense that the Man of Holiness is perfect. A person's conduct toward others is governed by his sense of justice, mercy, truth, and love, or according to the attributes of justice, mercy, truth, and love which he possesses. These are some of the major attributes which God possesses as a divinely intelligent or glorified being. It follows that only when an individual possesses a fulness of the glory of the Father can he be perfect in the same sense that the Father is perfect—in the sense that he possesses all the attributes in the same perfection that the Father possesses them and acts on the same level of perfection as the Father acts. Though Christ kept the law of God to perfection on earth, He directed the attention of His disciples to the higher standard of perfection which was then exemplified to man by the Father alone. "Why callest thou me good?" the Savior declared to an inquirer. "There is none good but one, that is, God." [^106] To His disciples He commanded: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." [^107] But having been endowed with a fulness of the glory of the Father in the resurrection, [^108] Jesus cited Himself, with the Father, as an example of a perfect being or as the standard of eternal perfection which man should seek. He therefore said to the Nephites as He ministered to them after His resurrection and ascension: "I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect." [^109]

The Omnipresence of God

Though God may be limited in a corporeal sense—or by reason of His corporeal body—to a given place at a given time, He is omnipresent (everywhere present) by means of His divine nature. God's glory is a divine substance, force, or essence that is centered in Him as part of His organized being. Though it is spirit and therefore matter, [^110] it is a substance unlike physical element. A scripture previously referred to defines glory as intelligence, or truth and light, [^111] and other scriptures identify God's glory as that pure and fine substance which is called spirit. [^112] God's glory, which is His Holy Spirit, fills the immensity of space, and in this way He is in all and through all things.

That which is true of the Father is also true of the Son. Because Christ has acquired the fulness of the Father's glory, Joseph Smith wrote that He possesses "the same mind, the wisdom, glory, power, and fulness—filling all in all." [^113] The phrase "filling all in all" means that by means of His divine nature Christ is in and through all things within the Father's kingdom.

A magnet may be used as an analogy to illustrate the corporeal and the divine natures of God and His relationionship to the universe. A magnet is a tangible object whose magnetic properties extend beyond its physical dimensions to permeate its magnetic field. In like manner God is an immanent being who is in and through all things by the manifestation of glory. His glory is as much a part of Him as magnetic properties or forces are essential parts of a magnet. Without His divine nature, the Father would not be God, even as a magnet would not be a magnet without its special properties and powers.

By means of His divine nature, the Father has a relationship with the cosmos that a mere corporeal being does not possess. Nor can an unglorified being easily comprehend the kind of life that God experiences. Because the Father extends His glory—His divine intelligence and power—beyond the limits of His body to fill the immensity of space, the organized cosmos becomes His tabernacle—the extended body of the divine powers of truth, light, and life that emanate from Him. For this reason, Joseph Smith referred to the elements as being the repository "in which dwells all the glory" of God. [^114] Worship of a personal, corporeal God is thus combined in Latter-day Saint thought with a realistic concept of the immanence of divinity within all things. "The elements are the tabernacle of God," a revelation declared; "yea, man is the tabernacle of God, even temples." [^115] Said another revelation concerning the immanence of deity within all things:

He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever. . . .

Behold, all these are kingdoms [of organized life in the cosmos], and any man who hath seen any or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power. I say unto you, he hath seen him; nevertheless, he who came unto his own was not comprehended.

The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not; nevertheless, the day shall come when you shall comprehend even God, being quickened in him and by him. Then shall ye know that ye have seen me, that I am, and that I am the true light that is in you, and that you are in me; otherwise ye could not abound. [^116]

In a commentary on the above revelation, Charles W.Penrose explained: "When we look up to the heavens and behold the starry worlds, which are kingdoms, we behold God moving in His majesty and in His power." But this divine intelligence, or Spirit, "is not understood and cannot be comprehended except through organisms." That is, the divine intelligence which is manifest in and through all things by means of the Holy Spirit must originate in the divine mind of an organized being; and second, in its manifestation, the divine essence of truth and of life must be developed within other responsive organizms. Elder Penrose said of the latter point:

If you see a living blade of grass, you see a manifestation of that Spirit is called God. If you see an animal of any kind on the face of the earth having life, there is a manifestation of that Spirit. If you see a man, you behold its most perfect earthly manifestation. And if you see a glorified man, a man who has passed through all the various grades of being, who has overcome all things, who has been raised from the dead, who has been quickened by the Spirit in its fulness, there you see manifest, in its perfection, this eternal, beginningless, endless spirit of intelligence.

Such a being is our Father and our God, and we are following in His footsteps. He has attained to perfection. He has arisen to kingdoms of power. He comprehends all things because in Him dwelleth the fulness of the Godhead, bodily. He is a perfect manifestation, expression and revelation of this eternal essence, this spirit of eternal, everlasting intelligence or light of truth. [^117]

That this concept originated with Joseph Smith is evidenced by the fact that several of his associates referred to his teachings as the basis for a joint statement in which they declared that intelligent powers and attributes "never can be manifest in any world except through organized beings." [^118] Intelligence is the product of organization and of mind. If there is an intelligent, life-giving force or substance that permeates all things and gives life and law to all things, that divine essence must center in an organized being as an integral part of that divine personage.

Among the Prophet's associates who expressed the view that God is in and through all things was Brigham Young. He said:

If people understood true philosophy—eternal philosophy, they would understand that there is an eternity of matter . . . and it is all acted upon and filled with a portion of divinity. . . .

If we could . . . understand true philosophy, . . . we could comprehend . . . those principles that organized matter into animals, vegetables, and into intelligent beings; and could discern the divinity acting, operating, and diffusing principles into matter to produce intelligent beings, and to exalt them . . . to happiness. [^119]

Orson Pratt explained:

The great architect of the Universe did not construct the magnificent machinery of nature, and endow the materials thereof with certain fixed powers, and then withdraw Himself, or step aside to see the mighty fabric operate. Unintelligent materials are incapable of being endowed with any kind of powers, much less with the wise and intelligent powers that characterize the workings of the universe. God is every moment in nature, and every moment acts upon nature, and through nature, the same as the spirit of man acts in, and through, and upon the tabernacle of his body. If God should withdraw himself from nature or should cease to act upon it, that portion of it without life or intelligence, (if there be any such portion) would immediately cease all action: and while thus apart from nature, no laws could be given to it which could be obeyed; no gravitative or cohesive tendencies could be exerted upon it; no chemical combinations or organic operations could be performed; or in other words unintelligent nature would be entirely dead, and no voice or power could awake it, or have the least effect upon it, without entering into it, and operating upon it, and through it. [^120]

The Omniscience of God

As the center of all truth, light, and life within His vast domain, God is omniscient in that He knows all things therein. It may be for this reason that Joseph Smith characterized Him as "perfect intelligence." [^121] In discussing the attribute of knowledge within God, the Prophet cited the testimony of James: "Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world." [^122] He also quoted Isaiah: "I am God, and there is none like me, declaring the end from the beginning and from ancient time the things that are not yet done saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure." [^123] Joseph Smith then commented:

. . . without the knowledge of all things, God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning to the end, that enables him to give that understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God had all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him. [^124]

The subject of God's omniscience will be discussed in a later volume as it relates to His eternal progression. [^125] For the present, it should be said that so far as this world is concerned God has a knowledge of all things from the beginning to the end, as the statements above declare; and that which is true of this world is probably true of all other spheres which God has created.

God is continually aware of all things within His vast domain by means of His Holy Spirit which is in and through all things and which, as His agent, conveys a knowledge of all things to Him. Alma declared: "The Spirit knoweth all things." [^126] Of the Holy Ghost, a revelation said: "Behold, the Comforter knoweth all things." [^127] The intelligent union God has with the cosmos is illustrated by an experience Enoch had when he "was clothed upon with glory" [^128] and had to some degree the kind of relationship that God has with the universe. While enveloped in the Holy Spirit, the ancient patriarch was shown many things, including the wickedness of men and their misery. Thereupon he wept; and he "stretched forth his arms, and his heart swelled wide as eternity; and his bowels yearned; and all eternity shook." [^129] Being in spiritual union with that intelligent substance that emanates from God to fill universal space, Enoch experienced in some measure the compassion of God and the divine affinity that God has with all things. It seems apparent that it was also in this way that universal nature felt Christ's atoning agony as he suffered and died on the cross. Of the fact that nature would be affected by the suffering and death of Christ, Nephi said: "And the rocks of the earth must rend; and because of the groanings of the earth, many of the kings of the isles of the sea shall be wrought upon by the Spirit of God, to exclaim: The God of nature suffers." [^130]

God is also visibly aware of all things throughout universal space. "He comprehendeth all things," a revelation explained, "and all things are before him." [^131] To Enoch, God stated: "Wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also." [^132] To Moses: "All things are present with me, for I know them all." [^133] And in a revelation to Joseph Smith, Christ declared:

Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I AM, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven. before the world was made; the same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine eyes. [^134]

Moses experienced in part the way in which God is visibly aware of all things at the time when "the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God." [^135] Under these circumstances,

Moses cast his eyes and beheld the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the Spirit of God.

And he beheld also the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God; and their numbers were great, even numberless as the sand upon the sea shore.

And he beheld many lands; and each land was called earth, and there were inhabitants on the face thereof. [^136]

If a mortal man, enveloped to a limited degree in the glory of God and quickened with but a portion of the intelligent power that God possesses, could behold every particle of the earth and all its inhabitants, it may reasonably be concluded that God can see and know all things throughout His many creations. By means of His pervading intelligence, He is aware of every impulse of life throughout His universal tabernacle probably to a greater degree than a living organism is immediately aware of the impulses and feelings of life within its body. Because He is the quickening and sustaining life within all things, God has an intelligent and intuitive union with all things. All things throughout His extensive domain are also visible to Him. Not ever a sparrow falls without the Father being aware of it. [^137]

That which is true of the Father as an omniscient being is also true of Christ. Modern scriptures declare repeatedly that He knows all things. Of Him, Jacob stated: "He knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it." [^138] Ammon said: "He has all power, all wisdom, and all understanding; he comprehendeth all things." [^139] In a revelation to Joseph Smith, the Redeemer declared: "Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, . . . the same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine eyes." [^140] In another revelation, Christ defined truth as "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come," then stated: "The Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth." [^141]

The revelation just quoted indicates that Jesus came to know all things by receiving the fulness of the Father's glory. The Spirit of truth—that divine, intelligent substance that permeates universal space and thereby knows all things—is of God. Jesus received one endowment of this divine substance of truth and light from His Father after another until He obtained in its fulness the Spirit of truth that is centered in the Father. In receiving the Father's glory and the appointment to develop that intelligent substance in others, Christ could declare: "I am the Spirit of truth." [^142] He was the center of the Spirit for others. He was in all and through all things by means of the intelligent substance which He came to possess, and in this way He acquired a "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." [^143] John bore testimony of Him, saying: "He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth." [^144] With this view another revelation explained: "If your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things." [^145]

God Knows the Past, Present, and Future

The truth which the Father and the Son possess is not limited to present knowledge, but also includes the past. Modern scripture teaches that the Holy Spirit is "the record of heaven." [^146] A revelation also says of the Holy Ghost: "This is the record of the Father, and the Son, from henceforth and forever." [^147] The Holy Spirit searches "all things, yea, the deep things of God." [^148] To be endowed with a fulness of this intelligent substance therefore is to receive a complete knowledge of the past and the present within the Father's kingdom.

In receiving the Spirit of truth in its fulness, Jesus also received a "knowledge of things . . . as they are to come." [^149] Of the foreknowledge of Christ as it was manifested before the earth was created, Joseph Smith said:

The great Jehovah contemplated the whole of the events connected with the earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it rolled into existence, or ever "the morning stars sang together" for joy; the past, the present, and the future were and are, with Him, one eternal "now;" He knew of the fall of Adam, the iniquities of the antediluvians, of the depth of iniquity that would be connected with the human family, their weakness and strength, their power and glory, apostasies, their crimes, their righteousness and iniquity; He comprehended the fall of man, and his redemption; He knew the plan of salvation and pointed it out; he was acquainted with the situation of all nations and with their destiny; He ordered all things according to the council of His own will; He knows the situation of both the living and the dead, and has made ample provision for their redemption, according to their several circumstances, and the laws of the kingdom of God, whether in this world, or in the world to come. [^150]

Because the Father's glory has been in and through all things that exist within His vast kingdom since the time they were organized, He is aware of the past and the present actions and conditions of all things that are subordinate to Him. But the question may be asked, How does God know the future? Also, are there limitations to His knowledge of the future? Though complete answers to these questions cannot presently be found, revelations to Joseph Smith give some insights into the subject of God's foreknowledge.

By subordinating all things to Himself in truth, God has power to control the future. And in the power He has to control the future, God has the means to know the future. God subordinates all things to Himself in truth, which gives Him power over all things. "In knowledge there is power," Joseph Smith observed. "God has more power than all other beings, because He has greater knowledge; and hence He knows how to subject all other beings to Him." [^151] Life can exist on a permanent basis only when it acts in harmony with eternal verities. It must be independent in the sphere in which God has placed it. [^152] To this end, intelligence must cleave to intelligence, wisdom receive wisdom, truth embrace truth, virtue love virtue, light cleave to light, and mercy have compassion on mercy. [^153] Though each form of life is free to act for itself in the sphere in which God has placed it, it must subordinate itself freely to God in truth, which gives Him power to control the future and thereby to know the future.

Because man in his present temporal state does not always obey the law of God, it may seem that the above statements are ill-expressed. But it should be remembered that mortal life is a probationary state designed to determine the kind and degree of law each person will obey in eternity. The condition of disobedience prevailing among men will not exist in the resurrection. No person will rise to a kingdom of glory in the resurrection without obeying the law of that kingdom—without freely subordinating himself to God in truth according to the level of life and glory that pertains to that kingdom. [^154] Before man rises in the resurrection, he must learn to apply the principle of obedience and prepare to live the law of the kingdom of glory he inherits. His obedience will give God power to control life by truth; and this, as indicated, will give God power to know the future.

Another means by which God exercises righteous control over life and over the future is that He organizes the many forms of life in the cosmos into kingdoms suited to their several conditions and circumstances. A revelation declares: "There is no space in which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom." [^155] In compliance with the requirements of eternal truth, God determines the sphere, or kingdom, in which each form of life will exist and gives the law that is to govern it. [^156] In so doing, He respects the principles of agency and consent as they pertain to such life. [^157] But having acquired their consent, God requires obedience to the law which is ordained. "Unto every kingdom is given a law," a revelation explains; "and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions. All beings who abide not in those conditions are not justified." [^158] The unjustified are subject to the judgments of God; and in all this God has control. He knows what in truth He can accomplish, and what He will do; and He may determine beforehand the results to be obtained by organizing life within the several kingdoms He ordains. It is only when man, as the greatest of God's creations, freely subordinates himself to God in truth in all things that restricting bounds will be completely removed and man will rise in glory and power, to enjoy the kind of life that God possesses and be one with Him in His eternal designs.

God is in control of His creations, and He organizes and plans all things beforehand to bring about His divine purposes. Having done so, He expresses His will in truth and in judgment so that the future witnesses the fulfilment of that which He has ordained. Nephi declared: "The Lord knoweth all things from the beginning; wherefore, he prepareth a way to accomplish all his works among the children of men; for behold, he hath all power unto the fulfilling of his words." [^159] The pre-earth Grand Organizational Council at which God organized matters relating to this earth and its inhabitants will be discussed in a later chapter. [^160] The Lord was well-acquainted with the spirits which were to come into the world and receive physical bodies. [^161] Having observed their actions over an extended period of time before the earth was created, He finally organized them in such ways that in coming to earth they would help fulfill His ultimate designs and purposes for this creation. Because all things were prepared beforehand and because God knows "the end from the beginning," [^162] He was able to give an ancient prophet a revelation of events "from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof." [^163]

God also possesses infinite knowledge of life, and He knows how each form of life will respond to conditions within the sphere in which it is placed. By organizing life into kingdoms with given bounds and limits and by applying His infinite knowledge to ascertain how life will respond to conditions with these kingdoms, God may know the future.

Furthermore, the Lord governs with justice and equity in the affairs of men to bring about His purposes. But God's foreknowledge and government in the affairs of men do not determine future events contrary to the agency of lesser forms of life. "I believe that God foreknew everything, but did not foreordain [i.e., predestine] everything," Joseph Smith is reported to have said; "I deny that foreordain and foreknow is [sic] the same thing." [^164] The future that God knows is essentially the future that His creatures will make by the exercise of their agency, as they act within the spheres in which they are placed. But when the several forms of life that come to the earth finally learn to subordinate themselves to God in truth, each according to the level of law it is willing and able to obey, God's knowledge of the future will then be based more fully upon His control of the future.

Finally, God's knowledge and control of the future enable Him to make all things serve His divine purposes, even the rebellious acts of others. "Our Father controls the results of our acts at his own pleasure, and we cannot prevent it," Brigham Young explained. "Man may produce and control his own acts, but he has no control over their results. God causes even the wrath of man to praise him, to resound to his glory and the salvation of his children." [^165] Because God possesses the ability to do this, He promises that all things will be made to work together for the good of those who love Him and keep His commandments. [^166]

Possible Limitations of God's Foreknowledge

It may be that there are some legitimate limitations to the existence of truth in the future. All things that pertain to life center in God; He is the beginning and the end, the first and the last. The future depends upon Him and upon the expression of His word of truth, which is His law. He therefore knows all there is to know at a given time about the future. Since organized life does not exist independent of God's law and without the sustaining influence of His Holy Spirit, the future may be said to depend upon God and that which He ordains. Until God or some responsible being acting in accordance with His will expresses an official decree concerning the state of life in the future, truth may not be said to exist respecting the issue. Life within God's kingdom is not static but on-going. This fact suggests that all that is to be in the endless eternities to come is not determined at a given point in time; or, has not been determined from some point in the beginningless past. God declared to Moses, "There is no end to my works, neither to my words." [^167] If God's words are meaningfully expressed (rather than mere repetitions of designs decreed from a time without beginning) and if He is continually speaking forth that which He will do, He must forever be ordaining new things to be accomplished at a future time. With each divine expression, new truth must be brought into being concerning the future. It therefore may be suggested that when He, as a God of truth, sets forth that which He intends to do, or that which shall come to pass, truth exists relative to the future. And when God has not yet decreed that a given action shall transpire, truth in relation to the matter is not yet determined for the future. But as God expresses His will concerning that which He plans to do, new knowledge is forthcoming in relation to things that are to come.

The Omnipotence of God

Latter-day revelation declares that God is omnipotent, or that He has all power. [^168] This is true both of the Father and the Son. When Christ acquired a fulness of the Father's glory, He "received all power, both in heaven and on earth." [^169] Having completed His atoning mission, He sat "down on the right hand of the Father, to reign with almighty power according to the will of Father." [^170] He could then declare in our dispensation: "Behold, and hearken unto the voice of him who has all power, who is from everlasting to everlasting, even Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end." [^171]

Repeatedly in the Book of Mormon, Christ is referred to as the Lord Omnipotent, or the Lord God Omnipotent. [^172] According to Nephi, Christ's omnipotence includes all power to fulfil His words. [^173] With similar emphasis, the brother of Jared exclaimed: "I know, O Lord, that thou hast all power, and can do whatsoever thou wilt for the benefit of man." [^174] This, Alma explained, includes "power to save every man that believeth on his name and bringeth forth fruit meet for repentance." [^175] Jesus also retains "all power, even to the destroying of Satan and his works at the end of the world, and the last great day of judgment." [^176]

Power is a product of organization, and, as the organizer and sustainer of all things, God possesses all the power that exists. In this sense He has all power. But this does not mean that there is no limit to what He can do. He cannot create, in the sense of originating from nothing, the primal life within living organisms. [^177] Nor can He bring matter into being out of nothing. [^178] Furthermore, truth and consistency impose certain legitimate restrictions upon God's use of His power in the areas where He does manifest it. These restrictions are made necessary by the nature and order of life. [^179] A revelation thus declares that the Holy Spirit has "all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment." [^180] From these statements it may be concluded that God has all power to do that which He may will to do as a God of wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment.

Latter-day Saint thought suggests three ways in which God is omnipotent: First, He "upholds all worlds and all things by his power." [^181] All forms of organized life have been formed by God and are sustained by the quickening power of His Holy Spirit. Thus, in the ultimate sense, all life is subordinate to Him and is dependent upon Him.

Second, God has power as a consequence of honor given to Him, for, according to a revelation, His honor constitutes His power. [^182] God's honor is something external to Himself and consists of deference and allegiance given unto Him by others because of respect, loyalty, gratitude, or love. As previously indicated, God must subject all things to Himself by the attraction of truth, for it is only when lesser intelligences submit freely and intelligently to the truth which emanates from His presence (each according to its condition and capacity) and give God honor that He can possess all power within the cosmos. Having subordinated themselves to God in truth, lesser intelligences become independent in the sphere in which they have been placed.

Since God's power depends upon the degree to which lesser intelligences respond to the truth He extends to them, their failure to accept and apply truth constitutes not only a loss of blessings on their part but a loss of power to God. More power accrues unto God from the actions of a faithful son [^183] who qualifies himself intelligently to fulfil the divine will in all things than from an indolent servant who, even though he may do no real harm, does not enhance his life by continuous growth in the divine endowments of eternal truth.

Forms of life other than man may also contribute to God's power, to the degree they possess intelligence and agency. In commenting upon the revelation given to the Apostle John on the Isle of Patmos, Joseph Smith observed: "John learned that God glorified Himself by saving all that His hands had made, whether beasts, fowls, fishes or men; and He will glorify Himself in them." [^184] God's dominion and power are extended in eternity as His divine intelligence, which dwells within all things, becomes increasingly the life of all things and the law by which they are governed. In anticipation of the power God will one day possess when His creatures learn to respond to His will, a revelation declared: "Behold, I am above, and my power lieth beneath. I am over all, and in all, and through all, and search all things, and the day cometh that all things shall be subject unto me." [^185]

Finally, God is omnipotent in judgment. His power to judge is derived from His responsibility to uphold eternal justice, for justice and judgment are factors inherent within His Law. He has all power to execute righteous judgment upon recalcitrant forms of life. Nothing but His will, as it is expressed in truth and equity, can prevent Him from manifesting His power in justice against the disobedient. When lesser intelligences subordinate themselves to Him so that they may be organized and acquire added endowments of life and power, they of necessity grant unto Him the right to uphold justice and to administer judgment within the scope of that relationship. Should God fail to execute justice, He would lose His honor and consequently His power. Thus Alma reasoned that if the works of justice were destroyed "God would cease to be God." [^186]

Summary

By the visions and revelations which Joseph Smith received, knowledge of God was again given to man. The Prophet learned that the Father and the Son are separate beings with tangible bodies of flesh and bones; and the Holy Ghost, the third being in the Godhead, is a personage of spirit. As separate personages, these three are beings of transcendent glory and power. For this reason the Prophet taught that God dwells in everlasting burnings, and that His glory is intelligence, or in other words, light and truth. That divine substance is called the Holy Spirit, and it is a substance of life and truth and light. As a divine being, God possesses infinite attributes and powers of life. He is perfect in the attributes and powers of His eternal being; and by means of His divine nature or glory, He is omnipresent, omniscient, and omnipotent.

Footnotes

The Father . . . [is] a personage of spirit, glory, and power, possessing all perfection and fullness. The Son, who was in the bosom of the Father, [is] a personage of tabernacle, made or fashioned like unto man, or being in the form and likeness of man, or rather man was formed after his likeness and in his image; he is also the express image and likeness of the personage of the Father.—Lectures on Faith, No. 5.

From a superficial reading of this statement some conclude that Joseph Smith here taught a different doctrine. But this passage does not state that the Father does not possess a tabernacle of flesh and bones. The reference to the Father as "a personage of spirit, glory, and power" concerns His divine nature. (See the section in chapter eight entitled "The Relationship in Glory of the Father and the Son" for a discussion of these terms.) Therefore, the terms "spirit," "glory," and "power" are not concerned with the issue of whether the Father possesses a corporeal or a spirit body. On the other hand, Joseph Smith's declaration in the above paragraph that the Son, as a personage of tabernacle, is in "the express image and likeness of the personage of the Father" assumes that the Father is also a personage of tabernacle in the same likeness of organization as the Son.

On the evening of the 21st of September, A. D. 1823, while I was praying unto God, and endeavoring to exercise faith in the precious promises of scripture, on a sudden a light like that of day, only of a far purer and more glorious appearance and brightness, burst into the room, indeed the first sight was as though the house was filled with consuming fire; the appearance produced a shock that affected the whole body; in a moment a personage stood before me surrounded with a glory yet greater than that with which I was already surrounded. This messenger proclaimed himself to be an angel of God. . . .—TS, III, (March 1, 1842), p. 707.

If we could see our heavenly Father, we should see a being similar to our earthly parents, with this difference, our Father in heaven is exalted and glorified. . . It is now written of Him that our God is as a consuming fire, that He dwells in everlasting burnings. . . . Fire is made typical use of to show the glory and purity of the gods, and of all perfect beings.—JD, IV,

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 76:24.
[^2] Moses 1:33.
[^3] Moses 1:38.
[^4] D&C 35:18.
[^5] For example, there are statements that are said to come from Abraham's record which are not found in the published translation. To illustrate, Joseph Smith said: "Everlasting covenant was made between three personages before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation of things to men on the earth; these personages, according to Abraham's record, are called God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness or Testator."—"Joseph Smith Papers, 1839-1841," found also in TPJS, p. 190. After the Prophet's death, William W. Phelps, who was associated with Joseph Smith during the translation of the Book of Abraham, referred to "the records found in the catacombs of Egypt" as his source for stating "that eternity . . . has been going on in this system, (not this world) almost two thousand five hundred and fifty five millions of years."—TS, V, (January 1, 1845), p. 758.
[^6] Abraham 1:31.
[^7] HC, II, p. 334.
[^8] Ibid., III, p. 27.
[^9] Ibid., VI, p. 269.
[^10] Ibid., IV, p. 182.
[^11] D&C 93:33.
[^12] HC, III, p. 387.
[^13] Johnson to Gibbs, op. cit., p. 8.
[^14] HC, VI, pp.308-309.
[^15] D&C 88:37.
[^16] JD, VI, pp. 2-3.
[^17] Key to Theology, p. 43.
[^18] JD, XXVI, p. 27.
[^19] D&C 88:37-38. See also verses 13, 21, and 36.
[^20] 2 Nephi 2:13.
[^21] D&C 131:7.
[^22] HC, IV, p. 575.
[^23] D&C 131:7.
[^24] D&C 84:45.
[^25] D&C 88:6-13.
[^26] Johnson to Gibbs, op. cit. See also Moses 3:5; D&C 77:2.
[^27] D&C 88:6-7.
[^28] This subject will be treated in the next chapter.
[^29] Pratt, op. cit.
[^30] JD, XV, p. 232.
[^31] Ibid., I, p. 8.
[^32] The Seer, I (July, 1853), pp. 102, 103. Justification for Elder Pratt's reasoning in this statement may be found by a thorough study of D&C 88:36-39; 93:29-30.
[^33] Johnson to Gibbs, p. 8.
[^34] D&C 88:6-7.
[^35] D&C 93:23, 29.
[^36] 2 Nephi 2:13.
[^37] JD, VII, pp. 2-3.
[^38] See D&C 130.
[^39] D&C 93:29.
[^40] D&C 93:36.
[^41] D&C 93:19-20, 28.
[^42] See chapter eight for a discussion on eternal life.
[^43] See D&C 88:36-39.
[^44] JD, III, p. 277.
[^45] Brigham Young, The Resurrection (Salt Lake City, 1884), p. 3. In discussing the Latter-day Saint view of a literal resurrection of the physical body, President Young implied that life or intelligence in some form and degree is associated with gross matter when he inquired: "Would not the particles that compose the body of our Savior, according to their intelligence, oppose the idea of becoming a part of any other body but His?"—Ibid., p. 4. Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, and others distinguished between fundamental and non-fundamental elements within the physical body. Though the non-fundamental elements may be changing continually during the life of man on earth, the fundamental elements never change. These elements will be raised in a literal resurrection of the body. See HC, V, p. 339, also Brigham Young's work above.
[^46] D&C 93:30.
[^47] D&C 88:36-38.
[^48] See 2 Nephi 2:11.
[^49] D&C 88:38-39.
[^50] D&C 93:37.
[^51] JD, I, p. 81.
[^52] D&C 93:31.
[^53] See chapter ten.
[^54] D&C 88:38-40.
[^55] D&C 88:25-26.
[^56] JD, XXI, pp. 233-234.
[^57] Moses 7:48-49. Enoch was enveloped in the glory of God and by this means had communicated to him the intelligent expressions of the earth. He did not hear an actual voice such as men hear naturally, but an expression of the earth's reaction to the wickedness of men communicated as a voice to him by the Holy Spirit.
[^58] HC, III, p. 296.
[^59] D&C 88:36-38, 42-43.
[^60] Johnson to Gibbs, op. cit.
[^61] John Taylor, The Government of God (London, 1852), p. 4.
[^62] The Seer, II (March, 1854), pp. 226-227.
[^63] D&C 88:44.
[^64] HC, III, p. 296.
[^65] D&C 130:4-5.
[^66] Abraham 3:1-3.
[^67] Abraham 3:3.
[^68] Abraham 3:9.
[^69] Abraham, Facsimile No. 2, Figure 1.
[^70] Abraham 3:3, 9.
[^71] Joseph Smith's "Egyptian Alphabet and Grammar" and related materials, under "Kolob." For a statement that Methuselah and the antediluvian patriarchs had the Urim and Thummim, see these materials under "Jah oh eh."
[^72] Abraham 3:11-12, 15, 16.
[^73] Abraham 3:3, 9.
[^74] Egyptian Alphabet, etc., under "Kolob."
[^75] Abraham, Facsimile No. 2, Figure 1.
[^76] Abraham 3:8-9. Of this graduated system of time as it is concerned with the earth, Abraham reported:
[^77] Abraham 3:4.
[^78] Abraham 3:11-12.
[^79] Moses 7:30.
[^80] Moses 1:33.
[^81] Moses 1:37.
[^82] Moses 1:30.
[^83] Moses 1:31-35, 38-39.
[^84] Moses 1:37-39.
[^85] Moses 1:32.
[^86] D&C 76:23-24.
[^87] Moses 1:32.
[^88] When Jesus was given "a fulness of the glory of the Father," He "received all power, both in heaven and on earth."—D&C 93:16-17. And a revelation that speaks of God's glory as it is manifest through Christ, in and through all the works of God, states that this divine substance, or light, is "the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things."—D&C 88:5-13.
[^89] See chapters eight, nine, and ten of this volume, where this relationship is treated.
[^90] Moses 2:1-3, 5.
[^91] I. V., John 1:1, 4, 14. For a revelation that equates the word of God with the Holy Spirit that quickens the life within man and leads man upward to God, see D&C 84:45ff. God's word is His Holy Spirit. See D&C 18:34-36; 88:66.
[^92] Moses 1:35, 38.
[^93] See the section in chapter fifteen entitled "The Infinite Scope of Christ's Atonement," for statements indicating that Christ's atonement covers other spheres.
[^94] Moses 1:35.
[^95] See the section in chapter sixteen entitled "Atonement's Power Manifested From the Beginning."
[^96] Enoch could have had this point in mind when he exclaimed to God: "Thou hast taken Zion to thine own bosom, from all thy creations, from all eternity to all eternity."—Moses 7:31.
[^97] In their disembodied state, righteous spirits "inherit the same glory" (though probably not the same fulness) as celestial beings who are resurrected. See D&C 129:1-3; HC, VI, pp. 51-52.
[^98] See chapter fifteen for an explanation of the divine and mortal nature of Christ.
[^99] D&C 76:43. See again the section in chapter fifteen entitled "The Infinite Scope of Christ's Atonement."
[^100] Moses 7:36.
[^101] 2 Nephi 10:3.
[^102] It is said that a like state of corruption will exist in the last days.
[^103] D&C 88:25-26.
[^104] JD, X, p. 175.
[^105] D&C 77:1.
[^106] D&C 130:6-7.
[^107] See HC, IV, p. 209; VI, p. 306.
[^108] JD, I, pp. 333-334.
[^109] 3 Nephi 12:48.
[^110] D&C 131:7-8.
[^111] D&C 93:36.
[^112] See the section in this chapter entitled "The Glory of God is His Holy.
[^113] Lectures on Faith, No. 5.
[^114] HC, VI, p. 308.
[^115] D&C 93:35.
[^116] 38:41, 47-50.
[^117] XXVI, pp. 23-24.
[^118] Deseret News, XIV (August 23, 1865), pp. 372-373.
[^119] 119. JD, VII, pp. 2-3.
[^120] 120. The Seer, II, 227. See the section in chapter six of this volume entitled "Life, or Intelligence, Inherent in Matter."
[^121] 121. HC, II, pp. 12-13.
[^122] 122. Acts 15:18, cited in Lectures on Faith, No. 4.
[^123] 123. Isaiah 46:9-10, cited in Lectures on Faith, op. cit.
[^124] 124. Lectures on Faith, op. cit.
[^125] 125. Volume IV. For a discussion of this subject by the writer, see Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary On The Pearl Of Great Price (Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City, 1967), ch. 14.
[^126] 126. Alma 7:13.
[^127] 127. D&C 42:17.
[^128] 128. Moses 7:3.
[^129] 129. Moses 7:14.
[^130] 130. 1 Nephi 19:12.
[^131] 131. D&C 88:41.
[^132] 132. Moses 7:36.
[^133] 133. Moses 1:6.
[^134] 134. D&C 38:1-2.
[^135] 135. Moses 1:2, 9, 11, 18, 31.
[^136] 136. Moses 1:27-29. For another incident of this kind, see Ether 3:25-26.
[^137] 137. Matthew 10:29.
[^138] 138. 2 Nephi 9:20.
[^139] 139. Alma 26:35.
[^140] 140. D&C 38:1-2.
[^141] 141. D&C 93:24, 26.
[^142] 142. D&C 93:26.
[^143] 143. D&C 93:24.
[^144] 144. D&C 93:26.
[^145] 145. D&C 88:67.
[^146] 146. Moses 6:61.
[^147] 147. Moses 6:66.
[^148] 148. 1 Corinthians 2:10.
[^149] 149. D&C 93:24-26.
[^150] 150. HC, IV, p. 597.
[^151] 151. Ibid., V, p. 340.
[^152] 152. See D&C 93:29-30.
[^153] 153. See D&C 88:40.
[^154] 154. See D&C 88:21-23.
[^155] 155. D&C 88:37.
[^156] 156. A revelation states: "All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence."—D&C 93:30. God therefore places each form of life in its given sphere.
[^157] 157. The Prophet said: "The organizations of the spiritual and heavenly worlds, and of spiritual and heavenly beings, was agreeable to the most perfect order and harmony : their limits and bounds are fixed irrevocably, and voluntarily subscribed to in their heavenly estate by themselves, and were by our first parents subscribed to upon the earth."—HC, VI. p. 51.
[^158] 158. D&C 88:38-39.
[^159] 159. 1 Nephi 9:6.
[^160] 160. See chapter eleven of this volume.
[^161] 161. On the pre-earth existence of man, see chapters seven and eleven.
[^162] 162. Isaiah 46:10. See also 41:26.
[^163] 163. 2 Nephi 27:7. It is said that when the millennium is introduced, the contents of this revelation will be revealed to man. See 2 Nephi 30:17-18.
[^164] 164. HC, IV, p. 78.
[^165] 165. JD, VIII, p. 18.
[^166] 166. See D&C 90:24; 98:3; 100:15; 105:40.
[^167] 167. Moses 1:38.
[^168] 168. See Mosiah 4:9; Alma 26:35; Mormon 5:23.
[^169] 169. D&C 93:17. See also Matthew 28:18.
[^170] 170. D&C 20:24.
[^171] 171. D&C 61:1.
[^172] 172. See Mosiah 3:5, 17-18, 21; 5:2, 15.
[^173] 173. 1 Nephi 9:6.
[^174] 174. Ether 3:4.
[^175] 175. Alma 12:15.
[^176] 176. D&C 19:3.
[^177] 177. See D&C 93:23, 29.
[^178] 178. See D&C 93:33.
[^179] 179. A revelation declares that for life to exist, it must be independent in the sphere in which it has been placed. See D&C 93:30. The condition of independence that is necessary for the existence of life places some restrictions upon the use of God's power as it relates to other forms of life.
[^180] 180. Moses 6:61.
[^181] 181. HC, V, p. 305.
[^182] 182. D&C 29:36.
[^183] 183. Christ is the supreme example of this fact. Later chapters will consider the contributions of this one responsive soul to His Father's power and glory.
[^184] 184. HC, V, p. 343.
[^185] 185. D&C 63:59.
[^186] 186. Alma 42:22.
