Hyrum L. Andrus, God, Man, and the Universe ( 1968)

8

Christ's Pathway to Godhood

He marked the path and led the way, And every point defines To light and life and endless day Where God's full presence shines. —ELIZA R. SNOW.

In the new dispensation, important clarifications were made concerning Christ and His relationship to God and man. As stated in the previous chapter, Jesus was the First-born of the Father's spirit children. He was also selected to be the central figure in the divine plan of life and salvation which the Man of Holiness proposed for His spirit children. That divine plan provided both Christ and man with the opportunity of acquiring physical bodies and of attaining a fulness of the glory and power of the Father in an immortal state. For these reasons the spirit children of the Father were to come to earth so that the faithful among them might become like their exalted Father in the resurrection and be endowed with His divine attributes and powers of life.

The divine plan specified that Jesus would be the first to receive the truth and light of His Father's glory, and that He would receive the divine nature of the Father directly from the Man of Holiness. After receiving these divine attributes and powers of life, Christ would then be charged with the responsibility of developing them in the remainder of the Father's children who would be obedient to that plan. Except for the fact that Jesus was chosen to receive these divine powers and the physical attributes of life directly from the Man of Holiness and that Christ lived a sinless life on earth, while man is in need of a plan of mercy to remit his sins, the divine plan of life for Christ and man is essentially the same. That divine plan required both Christ and man to receive physical bodies; and both were expected to obey the principles and laws by which they could be endowed with a fulness of the Father's glory. Joseph Smith therefore observed: "If a man gets a fulness of the priesthood of God, he has to get it the same way that Jesus Christ obtained it, and that was by keeping all the commandments and obeying all the ordinances of the house of the Lord." [^1]

The Way Of Life

The Three Basic Stages of Life

Within the divine plan which both Christ and man were to follow that they might become like the exalted Man of Holiness there are three basic stages of life: (1) spirit life, (2) physical life, and (3) eternal life. For the central primal intelligence of a given individual to achieve full glory and power in eternity, it must receive the organizations and endowments that pertain to each of these basic stages of life. Upon this proposition the great and eternal plan of life is based.

Spirit Life

The first of the three basic stages of life mentioned above is spirit life. This is the kind of life which an organized spirit possesses by the nature of its organization as a spirit. The central primal intelligence of man was given spirit life at the time of the spirit's primeval birth. By maturing in that pre-earth state, the organized spirit of man was able to perform the functions of life and express the attributes and powers of life that pertain to that stage of existence. Although the human spirit lived and moved in the dignity of a child of God and was capable of acquiring a measure of glory and power in its pre-earth state, it was limited in the functions it could perform and in the glory it could attain. It was necessary for the organized spirit to be "added upon," [^2] that it might continue to develop in the pathway to celestial life and happiness.

Physical Life

As the second stage of life in the over-all program, physical life is the kind of life a being possesses who has a body of flesh and bones. Physical life consists of those powers and attributes which man is given in the physical body. The attributes and powers of physical life are acquired by man when the human spirit is tabernacled in a body of flesh and bones by birth into a world organized from the gross elements of the universe. Having received the endowments of physical life, man must adapt them by wisdom to their proper uses and, by sanctifying the body, mature in all the functions and expressions of the physical organism.

But the full intent and design of God concerning physical life cannot be realized in this mortal state. Man's mortal body is a corrupt body; [^3] it is sown in weakness, and it is subject to the powers, influences, and ailments of this fallen state. Since mortality is a probationary state, physical death must come to all men "to fulfil the merciful plan of the great creator," [^4] that man's corrupt physical body may later be raised in incorruption and power to be made a spiritual body in the resurrection. [^5] The physical bodies of those who are made spiritual and given power to reside in the presence of God will be perfected in all the attributes of the physical being and endowed with the glory of God. The importance of the physical body in the overall plan of life is shown in a revelation that declares: "The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected [that is, connected in resurrected form], receive a fulness of joy; and when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy." [^6]

Eternal Life

Eternal life is the final stage of life in the over-all program that leads to a fulness of joy and power in eternity. Eternal life consists of the divine attributes and powers of life which are associated with celestial glory. The Holy Spirit, which is God's glory, is a living substance—a divine substance that possesses the attributes and powers of God and manifests these attributes and powers of life to others. (The fact that the Spirit is a living substance will be treated more fully hereafter. [^7]) As it emanates from the presence of God, the Holy Spirit (or glory of God) quickens the life within all things in universal space. [^8] To do so, the Spirit must be a living substance, and the powers of the Spirit must be powers of life. For an individual to be endowed with the glory of the Man of Holiness, therefore, is to be given those divine attributes and powers of life that are associated with the Spirit or glory of God. To be thus endowed is to possess eternal life.

It has been said in earlier chapters that there are two kinds of intelligence spoken of in modern scriptures: (1) the primal intelligence of man and (2) that intelligence which a faithful person may acquire through the Holy Spirit, and by which he may eventually be glorified. [^9] Both kinds of intelligence are forms of life. When man is endowed in the resurrection with the kind of intelligence, or life, that constitutes celestial glory, he therefore has eternal life and is made like God in the divine, living attributes and powers of the Spirit which he possesses.

There are several direct evidences that support and throw light upon the definition of eternal life given above: First, modern scriptures so equate eternal life with celestial glory that they indicate that eternal life is a synonym for celestial glory, and that to be endowed with celestial glory is to be given eternal life. Having given the promise of such life to Joseph Smith and other faithful brethren, a revelation explained that eternal life consists of "the glory of the celestial kingdom." [^10] Again, in speaking of eternal life which is given to faithful saints in the world to come, the Lord equated it with "immortal glory." [^11]

Second, modern scripture equates redemption from the first spiritual death, which Adam brought upon the earth by his transgression in Eden, [^12] with eternal life. In other words, to be endowed with celestial glory in the resurrection is to be given eternal life. Speaking of the first spiritual death and the divine plan which would bring the faithful back into God's presence (to a state of celestial glory), a revelation given to Joseph Smith said: "And thus did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the days of his probation—that by his natural death he might be raised in immortality unto eternal life, even as many as would believe; and they that believe not unto eternal damnation; for they cannot be redeemed from their spiritual death, because they repent not." [^13]

Within this statement are several points that should be noted: First, the term "immortality" apparently means only to be resurrected and live forever. Second, the term "eternal life" means something more than to be resurrected. Those who truly believe will be raised "in immortality unto eternal life." Third, eternal life is obtained by being redeemed from spiritual death through the power of the Gospel. Those who do not believe cannot "be redeemed from their spiritual fall" by the power of the Gospel. [^14] It follows, therefore, that to obtain the glory and power of the celestial kingdom in the resurrection is to possess eternal life.

The third point of evidence in support of the definition that is being set forth in this section is that eternal life is to be raised in the resurrection to dwell in God's presence. This point is closely related to the second major point above. Abinadi declared that those who "are raised to dwell with God . . . have eternal life through Christ." This includes (viewing the matter from his day, which was about 150 BC [^15]) those who "died before Christ came, in their ignorance, not having salvation declared unto them." He continued: "And little children also have eternal life." [^16] They are heirs to celestial glory. [^17]

The point stressed above may be illustrated by the fact that unrepentant individuals are raised in the resurrection to eternal damnation, while the righteous are raised to eternal life. Jesus declared: "Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." [^18] There is a resurrection of life and there is a resurrection of damnation. In both instances, the organized spirit of man is restored to the body and the individual is again physically alive. But in receiving the "resurrection of life," those who have done good will be endowed with the attributes and powers of celestial glory, which are attributes and powers of life, even of eternal life. Those who have done evil will be restricted in their access of these divine powers of life. Consequently, they will come forth to the "resurrection of damnation." [^19]

"Eternal" is one of the names of God, [^20] and it means without beginning or end. In Latter-day Saint thought, it is applied to the divine rather than to the corporeal nature of God. [^21] Eternal life therefore is God's life, or the kind of life that God possesses as a glorified being. Those who are endowed with the divine attributes and powers of life that constitute celestial glory may then see as God sees through the power of the Holy Spirit, hear as God hears, move in space as God moves, and manifest his will in and through all things as God manifests His divine intelligence and power in and through universal space.

To illustrate, God does not see merely as man sees. As a being possessing eternal life, He sees things in the future as well as in the past and present. When Enoch was "clothed upon with glory" [^22] he was still a mortal man, but he was endowed in his transfigured state with some of the attributes and powers of eternal life by the glory which he received. He was then shown "the world for the space of many generations." [^23] In this great theophany, the ancient patriarch was given a pre-taste of the divine powers and attributes of eternal life.

When "the glory of God was upon Moses," he was "caught up into an exceedingly high mountain." [^24] Being endowed to some degree with the powers and attributes of a celestial being, the ancient lawgiver "cast his eyes and beheld the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the Spirit of God." Moses also beheld "the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God." [^25] These experiences, and others that could be given, illustrate the powers of sight which beings possess who have eternal life.

The angel Moroni illustrated in some measure the powers of motion which a celestial being possesses. [^26] He was not limited as is a mere physical being. When Moroni finished delivering his message to Joseph Smith, the latter reported: "I saw the light in the room begin to gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking to me, and it continued to do so until the room was again left dark, except just around him; when instantly I saw, as it were, a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended till he entirely disappeared." [^27] In speaking of the powers of motion celestial beings possess, Brigham Young said:

They move with ease and like lightning . . . . God has revealed some little things with regard to His movements and power, and the operation and motion of the lightning furnish a fine illustration of the ability and power of the Almighty. If you could stretch a wire from this room around the world until the two ends nearly met here again, and were to apply a battery to one end, if the electrical condition were perfect, the effect of the touch would pass with such inconceivable velocity that it would be felt at the other end of the wire at the same moment. This is what the faithful Saints are coming to; they will possess this power [i.e., power to travel with such speed], and if they wish to visit different planets, they will be there. [^28]

It should be observed that man must comply with the new and everlasting covenant of marriage [^29] in order to attain a fulness of the glory and power of the Father in the resurrection. [^30] Through this covenant faithful husbands and wives are given a "continuation of . . . seeds [i.e., posterity] forever and ever;" [^31] and only in this way can they acquire "glory in all things." [^32] Of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, the Lord said: "It was instituted for the fulness of my glory; and he that receiveth a fulness thereof must and shall abide the law." [^33] The power to beget children in the resurrection, within the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, is the power of "eternal lives"—the power to continue one's posterity forever. [^34] By contrast, the term "eternal life" denotes the kind, quality, and power of life which God possesses by virtue of His divine nature, or glory. That is, eternal life has reference, as has been indicated, to the spiritual endowments, attributes, and powers of life that are directly related to God's glory, or that constitute His glory. [^35] To acquire eternal life in its fulness (that is, to acquire the full glory of the Father with all its divine attributes and powers of life), man must obey that divine law by which he is given the power of eternal lives in the resurrection.

In expressing the foregoing views, Joseph Smith declared: "Here, then, is eternal life—to know the only wise and true God; and you have got to learn how to be Gods yourselves, and to be kings and priests to God, the same as all Gods have done before you, namely, by going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation, until you attain to the resurrection of the dead, and are able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory, as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power." [^36] For a man to become a king, a priest, and a God in heavenly society, he must obtain a fulness of the glory of the Father, by faithfulness to the Gospel and to the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. In eternity, he will then be "able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory, as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power." [^37] To achieve this fully glorified state is to be made like God. Thereby man may know God, which is eternal life, [^38] "the greatest of all the gifts of God." [^39]

Birth the Gateway to Life

Birth is the gateway into each of the three stages of life referred to above and in each birth, new attributes and powers of life are given to increase the individual's joy and extend his power. By means of a primeval birth, the central primal intelligence of both Christ and man acquired the attributes and powers of organized spirit beings. By physical birth the organized spirits are then tabernacled in bodies of flesh and bones and given the attributes and powers of physical life. To acquire eternal life, each responsible being must be born into the kingdom of God and mature in the spiritual attributes and powers that lead ultimately to celestial glory and power in the resurrection. [^40]

As each person acquires the new attributes and powers that pertain to the three basic stages of life, he becomes identified with a family as the offspring of the persons, or person, from whom he receives the added endowments of life. As the spirits of Christ and man were organized in primeval birth, they became the offspring of God, and they were given membership in the family of the Eternal Father—the Man of Holiness. The same principle applies when one enters into the physical stage of life. Here again each individual is identified, as a child, with the family into which he is born, and he takes upon himself the name of that family. Finally, as each faithful individual partakes of the quickening, regenerating, and glorifying powers that lead, by birth into the kingdom of God, to eternal life, that person becomes a member of a third family circle—the child of the being (Jesus Christ) from whom he receives the divine attributes and powers of life. Filial associations therefore are related to each of the three basic stages of life.

Christ As The Son Of God

Christ's Pathway to Life

To obtain the glory and power of His Father, Jesus entered into the three basic stages of life indicated above and matured in all their respective attributes and powers. In doing so, He subordinated Himself directly to the Father in all of the basic relationships of life by which He became a celestial being; and in each of these stages of life, Jesus was accorded the distinction of being the Son of the Father, the Man of Holiness. Here Christ's pathway to eternal life differed somewhat from the path which man in general follows; for although He pursued the same general path which man must follow, Jesus differed in the source from which He received some of the most vital and important attributes and powers of life.

Christ the Son in Spirit Life

Jesus was the Firstborn of the Father's spirit children. [^41] As was indicated in a previous chapter, Christ was literally the Son of God in spirit life and dependent upon the Father for that which he received. By obedience to the Father's will, Jesus also acquired great intelligence and power, or glory, as an organized spirit. Even in the spirit stage of existence, He became the executive of the Father in creating and sustaining worlds which are to us without number in their spirit as well as in their physical organization.

Christ the Son in the Flesh

As an unembodied spirit, the pre-earth Christ was limited in the glory and power He could acquire, for without a body of flesh and bones He could not obtain all the attributes and powers of life that His Father possessed. But in becoming the Only Begotten Son of the Father in the flesh in this mortal world, He was given (in conjunction with the physical attributes and characteristics which He received from His mother) the perfect physical attributes of that supreme being.

Here again Jesus was dependent upon His Father for some of the attributes and powers of life which He received. Mary, His mortal mother, was "carried away in the Spirit," being "overshadowed by the Holy Ghost." [^42] Under these sanctified circumstances Christ was conceived, and He became in a literal or biological sense the Son of the Most High. And as the Only Begotten Son of the Father in the flesh on this mortal sphere, He matured in the physical attributes and powers of life to the degree that He was in the express image and likeness of His Father's person. [^43] By resurrection, Jesus then raised His body to a full immortal state. When the Lord appeared with His Father to Joseph Smith in the spring of 1820, the latter could then write: "I . . . saw two glorious personages, who exactly resembled each other in features and likeness." [^44]

Christ the Son of God in Eternal Life

Finally, Jesus subordinated Himself to the Father in acquiring the divine attributes and powers of eternal life. John bore testimony of the glorified relationship that Christ attained with the Father when he declared: "I, John, bear record that he received a fulness of the glory of the Father; and he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him." [^45]

Jesus acquired the Father's divine nature to a significant degree before He came to fulfil His earthly mission, for He declared that He possessed glory with the Father before the world was. [^46] In coming to earth, Christ was conceived with the divine nature of the Father implanted within Him in embryonic form, [^47] so that He might develop in the divine attributes and powers of life while in the flesh and manifest them to others. But not until He rose from the tomb did He receive the glory of the Father in its fulness.

By subordinating Himself to the Father in acquiring the divine attributes and powers of that exalted being, Jesus became the Son of God in eternal life. Having referred to the fact that Jesus was subordinate to His Father in receiving the glory and power of that exalted personage, John declared of Christ: "And thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not of the fulness at the first." [^48] In this statement, John was not referring to the fact that Christ was the Son of God in either spirit life or physical life. Instead, John testified that Jesus was the Son of God in the divine relationship of eternal life, because He received not the fulness at the first and because He was dependent upon the Father in acquiring the divine attributes and powers of eternal life or glory. As in spirit life and physical life, Christ is the Son of God in receiving eternal life.

Christ as the Only Begotten Son of God

As previously indicated, Jesus was the Firstborn of the Man of Holiness in spirit life; [^49] and the organized spirits of all men, as literal offspring of God, were brothers and sisters in that stage of life. Being children of the Man of Holiness they all belonged to one family, with Christ as the Firstborn and heir of the Father. In physical life, however, Jesus became the Only Begotten Son of God, while all others of Adam's posterity are sons and daughters of mortal men. Because of this there is a significant distinction between Christ and man. Jesus is the only individual to be born into this mortal sphere who received the physical endowments of life directly from the Man of Holiness, as His Son. But it should be noted that in the relationship of eternal life, Jesus received glory and power directly from His Father, while all others who come unto the Father to attain the divine attributes and powers that lead to eternal life must be glorified in and through Christ. [^50] This means that in the relationship of eternal life, as in that of the flesh, Christ is the Only Begotten Son of the Father, Elohim. Just as no other being in mortality has received, or will receive, a body of flesh and bones with the exalted Man of Holiness as his literal Father, neither will any other person be glorified directly by and in the Father, Elohim. Jesus stands distinctly and preeminently alone as the Only Begotten Son of God in both the physical and the eternal stages of life.

The Nature Of Eternal Life

Service the Pathway to Eternal Life

To live life to its fullest degree one must give of himself in service to others in following the pathway of life that is marked out by the law of God. Jesus exemplified this principle. In order to receive the glory and power of the Father, He was required to obey the laws of spiritual development; and in this way, He matured in the endowments of eternal truth and light. John testified: "I, John, saw that he received not of the fulness [of the Father's glory] at the first, but received grace for grace; and he received not the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness." [^51] Grace may be defined as an unearned gift or endowment given as a manifestation of divine love and compassion, for which the recipient does not pay an equivalent price. But though grace is unearned, it need not be unmerited. When Jesus received the attributes and powers of His Father's glory, He received grace for grace; that is, He received the divine endowments of the Father's glory as He gave grace to others. Service and dedication to the welfare of others, in doing the will of the Father, therefore were keystone principles in Christ's spiritual development. Jesus had also covenanted with the Father that He would consecrate the glory which He would receive and develop in others to the Man of Holiness. [^52] Here, too, He promised to give grace in order to receive grace. John's statement that Christ continued from grace to grace [^53] implies that He continued giving of Himself in service to others until He acquired, one endowment after another, a fulness of the divine intelligence and power of the Father. His final act of grace on earth was to give His life for the redemption of the world; and in return, the Father gave Him a fulness of the attributes and powers of eternal life. By giving all that He possessed on earth, both divine and physical, Jesus acquired by grace in the resurrection all that the Father possessed.

Man also must give of himself in service and dedication to others in doing the will of God, in order to receive the grace of God unto eternal life. For man, like Christ, service is the key to spiritual development. It is not merely a principle with a promise, but a law of life—the law by which man may attain the living attributes and powers that lead to celestial glory. He who fails to serve both God and man is spiritually dead. He cannot be alive in the full sense of the term. Only he who serves others in the kingdom of God is able to retain a remission of personal sins from day to day and grow in the knowledge of the glory of God. [^54] Of the way man must acquire the living endowment of the Spirit, Christ said in a revelation to the Saints: "If you keep my commandments you shall receive of his [i.e., the Father's] fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace." [^55]

The Relationship in Glory of the Father and the Son

As has been stated in a previous chapter, the Father, as a glorified being, has a relationship with the universe that mere corporeal beings do not have, and that they cannot easily understand or appreciate. The same may be said of the divine relationship that exists between the Father and the Son. In his testimony of Christ, John mentioned the divine relationship that came to exist when Christ received the fulness of the Father, saying of Jesus: "And the glory of the Father was with him, for he [i.e., the Father] dwelt in him." [^56] The divine intelligence and power (that is, the glory) of the Father that dwell in the Son is a vital factor in the relationship that exists between these two glorified beings. Of this relationship Jesus bore testimony to the Nephites, stating: "I am in the Father, and the Father in me; and in me hath the Father glorified his name." [^57]

Only by understanding this divine indwelling relationship can one see Joseph Smith's concept of deity. In his Lectures on Faith, the Prophet stressed that the full intelligence and power of the Father are centered in the Son so that both divine beings possess

. . . the same divine mind, the same wisdom, glory, power, and fullness—filling all in all; the Son being filled with the fullness of the mind, glory, and power; or, in other words, the Spirit, glory, and power, of the Father, possessing all knowledge and glory, and the same kingdom, sitting at the right hand of power, in the express image and likeness of the Father, mediator for man, being filled with the fullness of the mind of the Father; or, in other words, the Spirit of the Father. [^58]

The word "mind," as used by the Prophet in the above statement is equated with the word. "Spirit." Thus, the "mind of the Father" is made synonymous with the "Spirit of the Father," and refers to the quickening intelligence, or Spirit that is extended from the Father and developed in its fulness in the Son. Thereby the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father. And since the fulness of the Father's glory (or divine intelligence), with all its divine attributes of life and power, dwells in Christ, the Son possesses the same divine mind or Holy Spirit as the Father. [^59] Their relationship in glory bears some analogy to a powerful electrical circuit, with the electricity passing without restriction from one pole or center of power to another and back again. But in the case of these two glorified beings, the indwelling substance consists of the Holy Spirit which centers initially in the Father. This divine substance constitutes the power of life, light, truth, or Spirit that emanates from God as a glorified being to fill the immensity of space. Being centered initially in the Father, the Holy Spirit is developed in the Son to quicken and endow the Son with the "mind, glory, and power" of the Father, and to give the Son all power in heaven and on earth. Thereby, the two glorified beings are united in one, each possessing the same indwelling Spirit or divine mind as the other.

In this glorified relationship with the Father, Christ does not lose His personal identity or will, for the basic nature of the divine intelligence with which He is endowed prevents such an eventuality. As has been observed, all truth is independent within the sphere of its existence, as all intelligence also; otherwise there can be no existence. [^60] The acquisition of truth and light, or of divine intelligence, leads to independence; and in receiving a fulness of the Father's glory, the Son thus became an independent being possessing all intelligence and power within the Father's kingdom. In addition, the natural affinity that light has to light and that truth has to truth promotes union between the Father and the Son, making them perfectly one. Both independence and union (rather than domination) are thus achieved. The Father and the Son possess two independent wills. But because of His love for truth, the Son voluntarily subordinates Himself in truth to the will of the Father so that the Father's divine intelligence and power can dwell in Him. It is largely a matter of communication and agreement in truth, as the Prophet stressed in commenting on a biblical text that deals with the subject:

"I am agreed with the Father and the Father is agreed with me, and we are agreed as one." The Greek shows that it should be agreed. "Father, I pray for them which thou hast given me out of the world, and not for those alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word, that they all may be agreed with us," and all come to dwell in unity, and in all the glory and everlasting burnings of the Gods. [^61]

Man's Objective in Eternal Life

In the great plan of life, man may be glorified in Christ as He has been glorified in the Father, Elohim. A similar relationship in glory as that which exists between the Man of Holiness and Christ will then exist between Christ and man. Jesus therefore explained in a revelatin given through Joseph Smith to the Saints: "If you keep my commandments you shall receive of his [i.e., the Father's] fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father." [^62]

As stated earlier in this work and as will be treated more fully hereafter, the divine attributes of truth and light that make up the glory of God are powers of life -of eternal life. They constitute the divine nature of God; and as such it may be said that they are parts of God. The major purpose of the divine plan of life and salvation is to develop those attributes and powers of deity in man that comprise the divine nature of Ahman. An unpublished revelation given to Joseph Smith indicates this purpose by asking the question: "What is the name of the Son of God in the pure language?" The answer is given: "Son of Ahman-the greatest of all the parts [that is parts of the divine nature] of God excepting Ahman." Again it inquires: "What is the name of men?" The answer: Sons Ahman." Finally, it asks: "What is the name of angels in the pure language?" And it states: "Anglo-man." [^63]

In discussing this revelation in light of the above-stated objective in the divine plan of life, Orson Pratt said:

The revelation goes on to say that Sons Ahman are the greatest of all the parts of God excepting Sons Ahman and Ahman, and that Anglo-man are the greatest of all parts of God excepting Sons Ahman, Son Ahman, and Ahman, showing that the angels are a little lower than man. What is the conclusion to be drawn from this? It is, that these intelligent beings are all parts of God, and that those who have the most of the parts of God are the greatest, or next go God, and those who have the next greatest portion of the parts of God, are the next greatest, or nearest to the fulness of God; and so we might go on to trace the scale of intelligences from the highest to the lowest, tracing the parts and portions of God so far as we are made acquainted with them. Hence we see that wherever a great amount of this intelligent Spirit exists, there is a great amount or proportion of God, which may grow and increase until there is a fulness of this Spirit, and then there is a fulness of God.

Looking at the subject in this light, there is no longer any mystery in the Scripture that says the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father, for they are always one, working together to accomplish the great work of redemption.

The flesh and bones of the Son were not in the Father, neither did Jesus try to convey such an idea. The Apostles understood . . . that he is infinite. Not infinitely expanded in his person, but that the all-wise substance, called the Holy Spirit, is "in all things, and round about all things."

We see the propriety, then, of this prayer of our Savior's: "Father, I pray not only for these Twelve Apostles that thou hast given me, but for all those who shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee; that they may be made perfect in one, even as we are one."

Hence, then, men are to be one with Christ on the same principle that he is one with the Father. [^64]

Christ As Our God

Jesus the Light and the Life of the World

In acquiring the divine nature of the Man of Holiness, Jesus was appointed to develop the truth and light of the Father's glory in others. He received this appointment before He was given the full glory of the Father; and having been thus appointed, Christ became the light and the life of the world-the source of the divine powers and attributes of truth and light and life of all living things, and the means by which the faithful are sanctified and finally glorified with the divine endowments of eternal life. Thus all powers of truth and light and life that man receives from Ahman center first in Christ, so that no man can come unto the Father except by Him. For this reason Jesus is designated by such titles as those indicated in the following quotations:

. . . verily I say unto you that I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the light and the life of the world—a light that shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehendeth it not. [^65]

I am Alpha and Omega, Christ the Lord; yea, even I am he, the beginning and the end, the Redeemer of the world. [^66]

Listen to the voice of the Lord your God, even Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, whose course is one eternal round, the same today as yesterday, and forever. I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. [^67]

I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father. [^68]

The titles "Alpha and Omega," "the beginning and the end," and "the first and the last" indicate that for man all quickening powers of life and salvation center in Christ and are manifest through him. What can be outside of the beginning and the end? Or what powers of truth, or life, or salvation as are given to man do not have their center in Christ? His glory, as will be shown in the following chapters, is the quickening power of all organized life; and the way to eternal life is to be glorified in Christ as He is glorified in the Man of Holiness.

For these reasons, Book of Mormon prophets testify of Christ: "He is the light and the life of the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened; yea, and also a life which is endless, that there can be no more death." [^69] Of Himself, Jesus declared to the Nephites: "I am the light and the life of the world. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end." [^70] Many centuries earlier He said to the brother of Jared: "I am the light, and the life, and the truth of the world." [^71]

The declarations of modern scripture accord with the testimony of the New Testament in affirming that Jesus is the source of quickening life within man, and that He is the giver of those additional attributes and powers of life that lead to celestial glory. Those who receive Christ and obey His will in all things are given, in an actual and literal sense, additional powers and attributes of life. They "walk in the straight path which leads to life," [^72] and attain "joy because of the light of Christ unto life." [^73] Jesus therefore admonished the Nephites: "Enter ye in at the strait gate; for strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that find it." [^74] It is here that the true Gospel of Jesus Christ differs from a mere body of philosophical, ethical, and moral principles. "In him was the gospel," John wrote of Jesus, "and the gospel was the life, and the life was the light of men." [^75] Again:

. . . the law was given through Moses, but life and truth came through Jesus Christ.

For the law was after a carnal commandment, to the administration of death; but the gospel was after the power of an endless life, through Jesus Christ. [^76]

Christ Himself declared: "As the Father hath life in himself [that is, on the same divine principle that the Father has life in Himself]; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself." [^77] Jesus possessed on earth, and now possesses in their fulness, the attributes and powers of eternal life. John the Apostle wrote that in Christ "was life; and the life was the light of men." [^78] He was then speaking of the quickening power of life that comes from Christ to give light and life to all men. Jesus explained: "It is the Spirit [i.e., the Spirit of God, or the Spirit of life, that centers in Him] that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are life." [^79] Again, as Jesus declared Himself to be the center of the divine attributes and powers of life for man: "I am the light of the world: he that followth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." [^80] Jesus therefore came to earth that men "might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." [^81] He is the "bread of life," or "the living bread which came down from heaven." [^82] He came not only to break the bands of physical death, but to give men the divine attributes and powers of life that lead to eternal life. For this reason, Christ is "the way, the truth, and the life"; [^83] He is "the resurrection, and the life." [^84]

Why Christ is the God of the Earth

The attributes and powers of deity are manifested to others by means of the divine nature of the Father, Elohim. When Jesus received a fulness of the Father's glory, it therefore was said of Him: "He received all power, both in heaven and on earth." [^85] There was then centered in Him a fulness of the Godhead bodily, [^86] and He became an extension of the Man of Holiness to others—the living revelation and expression of that primary being to man.

Because the Man of Holiness dwells in Christ and is manifested through Him, Jesus is the God of the earth. By obtaining the divine attributes and powers of the Father's glory and the responsibility to develop them in others, Christ became the center of truth, light, life, and power for man. As such, Jesus is the God of the earth. He was the God of ancient Israel because, as Joseph Smith explained, "It was through him that they drank of the spiritual rock." [^87] The same principle holds true in Christ's relationship to all men.

Testimonies of Christ as the God of the Earth

Modern scriptures bear consistent and positive testimony to Christ's exalted position as the God of the earth. The Nephite prophet Abinadi was martyred because he declared:

I would that ye should understand that God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people. [^88]

Nephi said:

And as I spake concerning the convincing of the Jews, that Jesus is the very Christ, it must needs be that the Gentiles be convinced also that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God . . . . [^89]

Nephi, son of Helaman, observed:

Nephi [i.e., the initial Nephi] also testified of these things, and also almost all of our fathers, even down to this time; yea, they have testified of the coming of Christ, and have looked forward, and have rejoiced in his day which is to come. And behold, he is God . . . . [^90]

Jacob, brother of the initial Nephi, reasoned:

If there be no Christ there be no God; and if there be no God we are not, for there could have been no creation. But there is a God, and he is Christ, and he cometh in the fulness of his own time. [^91]

Again from Jacob:

They [i.e., the Jews] shall crucify him—for thus it behooveth our God, and there is none other nation on earth that would crucify their God. [^92]

Having risen from the tomb, Christ declared to the Nephites:

. . . I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world. [^93]

Moroni, the last surviving prophet of the Nephite culture, gave this admonition to future inhabitants of the Western hemisphere:

Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ . . . . [^94]

And before sealing up the Nephite record, Moroni explained that it had been written to convince both

. . . Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD, manifesting himself unto all nations. [^95]

Finally in support of this view, one revelation (among many others) to Joseph Smith declared:

Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I Am, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end . . . . [^96]

The pre-earth Christ was Jehovah, the God of Israel, who revealed Himself to the Old Testament prophets. To the Nephites, Jesus explained after His resurrection: "Behold, I am he that gave the law [of Moses], and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel." [^97] Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible also reports Jesus as saying to the Jews: "If ye had kept the law, ye would have received me, for I am he who gave the law." [^98] Of Christ's rejection by the Jews, Nephi wrote in prophetic commentary: "And the God of our fathers, who were led out of Egypt, out of bondage, and also were preserved in the wilderness by him, yea, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, yieldeth himself, according to the words of the angel, as a man, into the hands of wicked men, to be lifted up, according to the words of Zenock, and to be crucified, according to the words of Zenos." [^99] And in modern times the glorified Christ revealed Himself to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and identified Himself as Jehovah, saying: "I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father." [^100]

Clarifications Concerning Christ as God

The designation of Christ as the God of this earth does not alter the basic doctrine that there are three separate and distinct personages in the Godhead: the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Nor does it deny the scriptural declaration that "there is no God besides" the Father, Elohim. [^101] Instead, Christ's designation as the God of this earth rises out of His divine relationship with His Father and is made possible because the glory and power of the Man of Holiness dwells within Christ and is manifest through Him.

Christ alone—that is, Christ without the glory and power of His Father—is not God. The divine attributes and powers within Christ consist of His Father's glory, which is manifest to others through Christ. To be technical the Father is God; and because the Father is in Christ, Jesus becomes the God of this earth.

Christ as the Father

Why Christ is the Father

As a result of His divine union with the Man of Holiness, Christ is also designated appropriately as the Father in some relationships of life. Here, too, He is designated as such because the glory of the Father, Elohim, dwells in Him and is manifest through Him. Jesus expressed the central reason why He is the Father when He declared in a revelation to Joseph Smith: "I am . . . the Father because he [i.e., Elohim] gave me of his fulness." [^102] Abinadi presented the same view of Christ when he declared that in coming to earth Jesus was the Father, "because he was conceived by the power of God." [^103]

In conception, the divine nature of the Man of Holiness was centered in Christ on earth; and because Jesus possessed the divine mind, or glory, of the Father and was appointed to manifest it to others, He was the Father. Christ then stood as the literal personification and revelation of the Father, manifesting the divine powers of life, light, and truth of the Man of Holiness to the world. Of the reason He is the Father, Jesus said to Moroni: "Behold, I am the Father, I am the light, and the life, and the truth of the world." [^104]

The doctrine of the Fatherhood of Christ may best be understood by referring again to the three basic stages of life in the divine plan: (1) spirit life, (2) physical life, and (3) eternal life. In spirit life, man as well as Christ was the literal offspring of the Father, Elohim; and Jehovah, the pre-earth Christ, was the Firstborn. But though Christ and man had a common parentage in spirit life, there are significant distinctions between them in the physical and eternal relationships of life. Of those who have been born upon the earth since Adam, Christ is the Only Begotten Son of the Father in the flesh. All others of Adam's posterity are the offspring of mortal parents. As the Father's spirit children receive the physical endowments of life on earth, they form new family associations, as has been indicated earlier in this chapter. For example, a male and a female spirit having been tabernacled in the flesh by birth to mortal parents, give former brothers and/or sisters in spirit life birth into the physical sphere of life as their offspring. As spirits enter mortality, they therefore become children in physical life of parents who were their brothers and sisters in spirit life, and they in turn became parents to other former brothers and/or sisters who come to earth as their offspring. In like manner, Christ, as the First-born in spirit life, is made the Father of all others in the divine attributes and powers of eternal life because He is the immediate source from which they receive these divine endowments of life. As a former brother in spirit life becomes a father in physical life by becoming the source from which his offspring receive the endowments of the flesh, so does Christ become the Father of all others of the spirit children of the Man of Holiness in the attributes and powers that lead to eternal life. As the Son of God in eternal life, Jesus was appointed to develop the divine nature of His Father in others. In this stage of life, He is the Father.

Testimonies of Christ as the Father

As the God of this earth, Christ occupies a position of Fatherhood above man that is similar to the relationship by which the Man of Holiness is His (Christ's) Father in the living attributes and powers of glory. Christ's Godship therefore is the basis of His divine Fatherhood over men. In referring to Him as the Son of God, the Book of Mormon also designates Him repeatedly as the Father. To the brother of Jared, the pre-earth Christ said:

Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. I am the Father and the Son. [^105]

Limhi said of Abinadi's teachings:

. . . he said unto them that Christ was the God, the Father of all things, and he said that he should take upon him the image of man. [^106]

Moroni explained:

And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ, even the Father and the Son. [^107]

Amulek also declared of Christ:

. . . he is the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth and all things which in them are; he is the beginning and the end, the first and the last; and he shall come into the world to redeem his people. [^108]

Latter-day scriptures accept and elaborate upon the view of Christ expressed by Isaiah, who wrote: "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; . . . and his name shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace." [^109] This divine being is Jehovah, the great I AM, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, even the God of the whole earth. He is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end, in whom all powers of life, light, and truth for this earth center. He is the one God to whom the Scriptures repeatedly refer. Thus, though Latter-day Saints accept the existence of other personages of deity, the Prophet explained that "to us there is but one God—that is pertaining to us; and he is in all and through all [things]." [^110] That one God is the Man of Holiness manifest in and through Jesus Christ.

Clarifications Concerning Christ as the Father

The fact that Christ is manifest as the Father, or that the Father is manifest in and through Christ, does not deny the personal existence of the Father, Elohim, or set Him aside as an unimportant figure in the divine plan of life and salvation. As has been indicated, in a strict and technical sense there is no God but the Man of Holiness, [^111] and the Godship of Jesus is based upon His possession and manifestation of the divine attributes and powers of His Father's glory. The Fatherhood of Christ is based upon the same foundation and is made possible by the divine relationship which Jesus has with His Father. Instead of denying the existence of the Father, Elohim, or setting Him aside, the fact that the glory of the Man of Holiness centers in Christ and is manifest through Christ enables Ahman to reveal Himself to man in the latter's fallen mortal state. Thereby, Jesus is made the living personification and revelation of the Man of Holiness to fallen man; and in this way, man may learn of the Father, Elohim, and come unto Him through His Only Begotten Son. [^112]

In revealing the Father to others, Jesus is not a robot. The reverse is true. Christ's union with the Father is based in truth. To be one with the Father in truth, Jesus must be a free, mature, and independent being capable of acquiring the glory (the divine truth and light, or intelligence) of the Man of Holiness and manifesting it to others. Personal initiative on the part of Christ is necessary; and He must continually express initiative in order to reveal the Father to others. Only in this way is it possible for the Father to dwell in the Son and manifest Himself to others through Christ. But as a result of Christ's initiative in acquiring and expressing the truth and power of the Father, the manifestation of the Man of Holiness to mortal man is actual, or literal. The Son does not merely represent the Father, but the Father manifests Himself through Christ.

Though Christ manifests Himself as the Father, it may be said in a meaningful sense that the Father, Elohim, is manifest in and through Christ. "I was in the world and received of my Father," Jesus declared in a revelation to Joseph Smith, "and the works of him were plainly manifest." [^113] To Philip, Jesus explained: "The words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works." [^114]

Not only were the works of the Father manifest through Christ while He was among men, but in the resurrection Jesus was "raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father." [^115] In like manner, all men will be "lifted up by the Father," [^116] to stand before Christ and be judged by Him in the exercise of the powers of the Godhead which are in Him. [^117] Those who are endowed with celestial glory will then "receive of his [i.e., the Father's] fulness" and be glorified in Christ as Christ is glorified in the Father. [^118]

Summary

The divine plan of life as revealed in the scriptures and taught by Joseph Smith specified that Christ, as the Firstborn of the Father's spirit children, would be the first to receive the truth and light of the Father's glory, and that Jesus would develop the divine nature in man. Within this divine plan there are three basic stages of life: (1) spirit life, (2) physical life, and (3) eternal life. For the central primal intelligence of a given individual to achieve full glory and power in eternity it must receive the organizations and endowments that pertain to each of these basic stages of life. Spirit life is the kind of life an organized spirit possesses. Physical life is the kind of life a being possesses who has a body of flesh and bones. Eternal life consists of the divine powers and attributes of life which a person attains by being endowed with celestial glory in the resurrection. But to attain the full glory and power of God, man must enter into the new and everlasting covenant of marriage by which he may also attain eternal lives—a continuation of posterity forever. Birth is the gateway to life in each of the above stages; and in each instance, the individual becomes the son/daughter of the being from whom he receives the given endowments of life. Jesus is the Son of God in all three basic stages of life, and in the last two stages of life He is the Only Begotten of the Father. His relationship in glory with the Man of Holiness is such that the Father is in Christ, and Christ is in the Father. It is man's purpose to achieve a similar relationship with Christ. Because Jesus is the light and the life of the world He is our God. For this reason, He is also designated as the Father, and as such Christ manifests Himself to man.

Footnotes

. . . if God is an individual spirit and dwells in a body, the question will arise, "Is He the Eternal Father?" Yes, He is the Eternal Father. "Is it a fact that He never had a beginning?" In the elementary particles of His organism, He did not. But if He is an organized Being, there must have been a time when that being was organized. This, some one will say, would infer that God had a beginning. This spirit which pervades all things, which is the light and life of all things, by which our heavenly Father operates, by which He is omnipresent, never had a beginning and never will have an end.—JD, XXVI, p. 23.

Does he [i.e., Christ] possess the fullness of the Father? He does. Colossians i. 19, ii. 9: "For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell." For in him dwelleth all the fullness of the Godhead bodily." Ephesians i. 23: "Which is his (Christ's) body, the fullness of him that fills all in all."

---
Notas:
[^1] See again D&C 93:11-20.
[^2] The patriarchal nature of celestial society will be discussed in Volumes II, III, and IV of this work.
[^3] HC, V, p. 556. See also the Journal of George Laub, unpublished manuscript in the Brigham Young University Library, p. 9.
[^4] TS, V (January 1, 1845), p. 758.
[^5] JD, VI, p. 307. For a discussion of this doctrine by Parley P. Pratt, see ibid., I, pp. 256-263. In the heavenly family, the death of the owner is not a prerequisite to inheritance as it is among men in mortality.
[^6] Though the evidence is not conclusive, declarations in modern scriptures imply that as the Firstborn of the Man of Holiness, Jesus was given initial access to the glory and power of His Father from the time He (Christ) was born as a spirit personage in the primeval world. To the Nephites, Jesus said: "I was with the Father from the beginning. I am in the Father, and the Father in me."—3 Nephi 9:15. If the word "beginning" which Jesus used in this statement has reference to the time of His birth as a spirit child of the Man of Holiness, the words placed in italics may then mean that Jesus has been with the Father from that time, in the indwelling relationship of celestial glory. In this statement, Christ is speaking of His relationship in glory to His Father. By that divine relationship He, as the light and the life of the world, is able to give men power to become the sons of God. See 3 Nephi 9:15-18. In this statement, He therefore seems to imply that He has had that right from the beginning—from the time of His birth in the pre-earth spirit world.
[^7] According to His capacity to receive.
[^8] HC, V, p. 554. Man could not be made an heir in the full meaning of the term in the pre-earth state. This status, in the ultimate and final sense, is given only to those who receive physical bodies and obey all the ordinances of God's kingdom. See ibid., p. 424.
[^9] 3 Nephi 1:14.
[^10] See Hebrews 1:1-3; HC, IV, p. 536.
[^11] I.V., Matthew 11:28.
[^12] I.V., Luke 10:23.
[^13] John 5:26. See chapter fifteen in this volume.
[^14] See Hebrews 1:1-3.
[^15] John 14:8-10.
[^16] Idem.
[^17] Volume II of this work will discuss the idea that men may also partake of these divine powers by being adopted into Christ's divine family. On this basis, holy prophets and saints have been given power to do the works of Christ on earth. Jesus received this divine intelligence and power as the Son of God, but others receive these things by faith in Christ and by subscribing to the articles of adoption by which they become sons and daughters of Christ.
[^18] Isaiah 9:6; 2 Nephi 19:6.
[^19] Mosiah 15:1-5, 7-8.
[^20] D&C 93:4.
[^21] See 2 Nephi 2:20; Acts 17:26.
[^22] See again D&C 93:12-14.
[^23] See again D&C 93:2-4.
[^24] John 14:10.
[^25] See Luke 10:22; John 16:15.
[^26] John 10:9; 14:6.
[^27] I.V., John 1:19.
[^28] HC, I, p. 5.
[^29] D&C 49:5, 28.
[^30] D&C 29:1, 42.
[^31] Moses 7:59-60.
[^32] Revelation 19:10; 22:8-9, 13.
[^33] Acts 7:31-32, 35.
[^34] Exodus 23:20-21.
[^35] Exodus 23:22.
[^36] That is, the atmospheric heaven of the earth.
[^37] Ether 4:12.
[^38] D&C 88:50.
[^39] 2 Nephi 25:12.
[^40] Mosiah 3:8.
[^41] Mosiah 15:4.
[^42] Mosiah 16:15.
[^43] Mosiah 7:27-28.
[^44] Helaman 14:11-12.
[^45] Ether 4:7.
[^46] Alma 11:26-40.
[^47] See Matthew 19:28; John 3:3-6; Romans 8:14-19; Titus 3:5.
[^48] See D&C 39:1-4; John 1:12; Romans 8:14.
[^49] Ether 3:14.
[^50] D&C 34:1-3.
[^51] Mosiah 14:8-12; 15:10-12.
[^52] See chapter sixteen for a discussion of the atonement as the foundation of Christ's Fatherhood.
[^53] Mosiah 1:11; 5:7, 11.
[^54] D&C 39:1-4. For other statements that declare that men may become sons of Christ through the atonement, see D&C 11:30; 35:2; 42:52; 45:8; 50:41; 76:24, 58.
[^55] For biblical statements supporting this conclusion, see John 1:11-13; Romans 8:14.
[^56] See, for example, D&C 14:8; 18:18-25, 40; 42:3; 49:26.
[^57] John 14:10.
[^58] See again D&C 93:5.
[^59] See Moses 7:59-60.
[^60] Moses 7:59-60.
[^61] 3 Nephi 19:18.
[^62] 3 Nephi 19:22.
[^63] See again John 14:8-10.
[^64] John 16:14-16.
[^65] Moses 5:9.
[^66] Idem.
[^67] D&C 21:9.
[^68] See, for example, D&C 29 and 49.
[^69] John 16:13.
[^70] See Lectures on Faith, No. 5.
[^71] The Apostle Paul is the only writer in ancient or modern scripture who makes use of the term "Godhead," and he uses it to refer to the divine essence or substance of truth and power that dwells in Christ. Of Christ, Paul wrote: "For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily."—Colossians 2:9. See also Acts 17:29; Romans 1:20.
[^72] Pratt, Key to Theology, pp. 38-44.
[^73] The scroll of Joseph was part of the material which was with the manuscript from which Joseph Smith translated the Book of Abraham.
[^74] MA, II (December, 1835), p. 236.
[^75] Alma 11:44.
[^76] Moroni 10:27-34. See also 2 Nephi 33:11; Mosiah 16:9-10; Mormon 9:13-14. In an effort to "establish the words of Amulek and to explain things beyond" that which he taught, as expressed in the above paragraph, Alma stated that men must stand before Christ to be judged. See Alma 12:1-15.
[^77] Jesus declared, for example: "The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son."—John 5:22. See also Acts 10:42; 2 Timothy 4:1.
[^78] 2 Nephi 31:21.
[^79] Mormon 7:7. In the modern edition of the Book of Mormon, this phrase has been changed to "are one God," presumably to correct what was thought to be a grammatical error.
[^80] The Testimony of the Three Witnesses published with the Book of Mormon.
[^81] D&C 20:28. This phrase has also been changed to the plural form in the current publication. For the original, see Book of Commandments 24:18.
[^82] 3 Nephi 11:27, 36.
[^83] For example, see Mosiah 15:1-5 in relation to verse 4.
[^84] 3 Nephi 11:23-27.
[^85] D&C 93:16-17.
[^86] Lectures of Faith, No. 5; Colossians 1:19; 2:9.
[^87] HC, VI, p. 477.
[^88] Mosiah 15:1.
[^89] 2 Nephi 26:12.
[^90] Helaman 8:22-23.
[^91] 2 Nephi 11:7.
[^92] 2 Nephi 10:3.
[^93] 3 Nephi 11:14.
[^94] Ether 2:12.
[^95] Title page of the Book of Mormon.
[^96] D&C 38:1.
[^97] 3 Nephi 15:5.
[^98] I.V., Matthew 9:19.
[^99] 1 Nephi 19:10.
[^100] D&C 110:1-4.
[^101] Moses 1:6.
[^102] D&C 93:3-4. To be more specific, Jesus is here speaking of the indwelling glory of the Father, Elohim, in Himself, by which the Father is in Him and He is in the Father. This divine relationship makes Christ the Father, because the Man of Holiness gave Jesus of His fulness.
[^103] Mosiah 15:3.
[^104] Ether 4:12.
[^105] Ether, 3:14.
[^106] Mosiah 7:26-27.
[^107] Mormon 9:12.
[^108] Alma 11:39-40.
[^109] Isaiah 9:6; 2 Nephi 19:6.
[^110] HC, VI, pp. 474-476. (Italics in the original.)
[^111] See again Moses 1:6.
[^112] See D&C 93:19.
[^113] See D&C 93:5.
[^114] John 14:10.
[^115] Romans 6:4.
[^116] 3 Nephi 27:14-15.
[^117] See the section in chapter nine of this volume entitled "In Christ Dwells the Fulness of the Godhead."
[^118] D&C 93:19-20.
