Hyrum L. Andrus, God, Man, and the Universe ( 1968)

10

Manifestations of The Glory and Power of Christ

I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.—JESUS.

Both Christ and man had a similar purpose to achieve in the divine plan of eternal life, and that was to attain the glory and power of the Man of Holiness in its fulness in a resurrected state. But Jesus was given important distinctions in that eternal plan that man does not receive. As has been discussed, Christ was glorified directly by and in the Father, Elohim, and so stands as the Only Begotten Son of the Father in receiving the attributes and powers of eternal life, as well as being the Only Begotten in the flesh. On the other hand, man may be glorified by and in Christ; and thereby man may attain a relationship in glory with Christ similar to that which Jesus has with His Father.

Jesus Christ is the light and the life of the world because all of the divine powers of truth and light and life that come forth from the Father, Elohim, are centered first in Christ and manifested through Him by the authority which the Man of Holiness has given unto Him. In the broad and general sense, these divine powers may be called the Light of Christ. But there are many degrees of divine truth and light and life manifested through Christ, and there are various channels through which the manifestations of His glory are given unto man and other forms of life.

The Light Of Christ

God's Explanation of the Light of Christ

Because Christ is the center of the divine truth, light, and life for all things within His Father's kingdom, that divine substance or essence which is the glory of God and which is manifested through Jesus is designated as the "Light of Christ." The Father, Elohim, no doubt honored the Son by calling this holy power by His name. Other names or synonyms for this divine Light are the "Holy Spirit," the "Spirit of God," the "Spirit of the Lord," the "Spirit of Truth," the "Light of Truth," etc.

Of the Light of Christ, a revelation said:

. . . the glory of the celestial kingdom; which glory is that of the church of the Firstborn, even of God, the holiest of all, through Jesus Christ his Son—

He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth;

Which truth shineth. This is the light of Christ. As also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made.

As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof by which it was made;

As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made;

And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you stand.

And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—

The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things. [^1]

This is the classic statement in latter-day scriptures on the subject of the Light of Christ and its several expressions and functions in the cosmos. There are several facts that should be noted in this statement: First, the words in italics indicate that the Light of Christ is the glory of God that is manifest in universal space through Jesus Christ. This is that divine substance called "Spirit," which is centered initially in the Man of Holiness as a glorified being and is manifest as His divine nature. Being extended initially from Ahman to Christ, it is manifest from the latter being in and through all things.

Second, the experiences which Christ had on earth and those which He underwent in making the atonement evidently were necessary in achieving the end purpose of the divine plan of life and salvation, of developing the glory and power that Jesus receives from His Father in all subordinate beings and forms of life. "He that ascended up on high," the above revelation explains, ". . . also . . . descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth." [^2] For Christ to be in all and through all things as the light of truth means for Him to develop the glory which He receives from His Father in all subordinate forms of life. Though He was the center of these quickening and life-giving powers for all living things within His Father's kingdom before He came to fulfil His earthly mission, He was not able to develop the fulness of glory in the faithful in a resurrected state until He had been resurrected and had acquired the fulness of the Father's divine intelligence and power Himself. To this end Jesus descended below all things, that He might comprehend all things and thereby acquire the full glory of the Father, and be able to develop that glory in all things, to bring about the final purposes of the plan of life and salvation. The full relationship in glory which He attained with His Father could then be extended to others in a resurrected state, that they might be glorified in Him, as He is glorified in His Father.

Third, the glory of the Father, Elohim, which is manifest through Christ constitutes the light of the sun and the power by which that glorified sphere was made. The same is true of the stars, and of the moon and the earth. Joseph Smith is reported to have taught "that all light and heat are the 'Glory of God,' which is His power, that fills the 'immensity of space,' and is the life of all things, and permeates with latent life, and heat, every particle of which all worlds are composed." [^3] The above revelation declares essentially the same thing.

Finally, as a pure and fine substance, spirit evidently has a great capacity to receive and convey truth; and being centered in the person of the Father, Elohim, as His divine nature, the Holy Spirit is endowed by its union with Him with divine truth. Truth shines; and as has been indicated in an earlier chapter, it may be for this reason that the Holy Spirit is said to be light, or the Light of Truth. This divine substance is endowed by the Father with powers and attributes of life. Being first centered from the Father in Christ, it proceeds forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space. Because it is in all things and through all things, the Light of Christ quickens and gives life to all things; and, as the power of God, it governs all things throughout universal space.

An Organization of Light or Glory in the Cosmos

As indicated in the introduction of this chapter, Joseph Smith taught that there are various channels through which the glory and power of God are manifested. In other words, there is an organization of light in the cosmos. The sun, as the center of our solar system, is one of the basic channels through which the Spirit, or glory, of Christ is manifested to this earth. The sun does not derive its light and power directly from Christ, however, but through a series of spheres that go back to Kolob. The Book of Abraham states that the sun receives "its light from Kolob through the medium of Kae-e-vanrash, . . . the governing power, which governs fifteen other fixed planets or stars"; and Kae-e-vanrash receives its light through the medium of other stars that receive their light from Kolob, the great governing body of this stellar system that stands next in government and power to the sphere on which God dwells. [^4] A revelation said of the several spheres throughout the cosmos:

. . . they give light to each other in their times and in their seasons, in their minutes, in their hours, in their days, in their weeks, in their months, in their years—all these are one year with God, but not with man.

The earth rolls upon her wings, and the sun giveth his light by day, and the moon giveth her light by night, and the stars also give their light, as they roll upon their wings in their glory, in the midst of the power of God. [^5]

Joseph Smith's "Egyptian Alphabet and Grammar" indicates that God has established laws which regulate the emission of His glory so that "the right degree of light" cheers "the face of millions of planets." [^6] The Prophet thus anticipated the discovery of the ionosphere that shields the earth from harmful forms of radiation coming from outer space. The "Egyptian Alphabet and Grammar" also implies that there is an organization of light in the universe. It refers to

. . . the highest degree of light, because its component parts are light. The governing principle of light, because God has said, "Let this be the centre for light, and let there be bounds that it may not pass." He hath set a cloud round about the heavens, and the light of the grand governing of 15 fixed stars centre there: There it is drawn by the heavenly bodies; according to the decrees that God hath set, as the bounds of the ocean, that it should not pass over as a flood, so God has set the bounds of light lest it pass over and consume the planets. [^7]

From this statement it seems evident that divine law governs the manifestation of light throughout the universe. Some spheres cannot endure the full glory of God. Consequently the great Creator has set "a cloud round about the heavens," by which certain bounds and limits are given to light "lest it pass over and consume the planets." [^8] Our sun, far from being a dying orb, is part of this vast organization of glory and power. Other great luminaries also figure in the divine system, each receiving and giving light according to the law under which it exists. In this way the glory of God is manifest according to His will throughout universal space.

As an associate of Joseph Smith during the translation of the "Egyptian Alphabet and Grammar" and the Book of Abraham, William W. Phelps later expressed some of the above ideas in poetry. He wrote:

Up in the heavens above, Where the life-giving power is spread, Undivided, There is a fountain of love, Where the Priesthood in virtue, as head, Hath presided, Over planets and stars, and their beings, forever. Here in those mansions, so bright, Where the footsteps of men never tread, In Probation, There is a fountain of light, Where true wisdom and knowledge are spread, In rotation, To the millions of worlds and their people, forever. Right in the centre of this, Is a throne, where our Father sits crown'd, With his neighbors, Here is the spirit of bliss, Which the wisdom of man never found, By his labors, Even light, which is life to creations, forever. [^9]

Not only is the glory of God or the Light of Christ dispensed by means of great stellar bodies, but in its more pure and highly endowed expressions it is given to man through the agency of superior beings who are appointed to be channels of this divine substance of truth and light. One such agent is that personage called the Holy Ghost. (The relationship of these greater channels of divine truth and light to Christ will be discussed at a later point in this chapter.)

Several Kinds and Degrees of Light Within the Light of Christ

There are several kinds of light, endowed with varying degrees of intelligence and power, within the total spectrum of the Light of Christ. Orson Pratt observed: "There are a great many kinds of light besides the light that shines from the sun, moon or stars, or from some artificial light that may be created on the earth." [^10] Some forms are pure, refined, and highly endowed with divine intelligence and power, and may be classified as spiritual light; whereas others are more akin to the gross elements of the earth. The dividing point between these two general divisions of light may be difficult to determine. "We endeavor to distinguish between the natural and the spiritual light," Elder Pratt explained, "but is there any such thing as drawing a line of distinction between the two?" [^11] Instead of attempting to do so, it may be more appropriate to view the Light of Christ in its several manifestations as a divine spectrum with varying kinds and degrees of light extending like a great continuum from its less refined degrees progressively upward to higher and higher forms of light endowed with greater and greater intelligence and power.

The Light of Christ Quickens, Sustains, and Governs all Things

As has been indicated, God's glory is manifested through Christ to quicken, sustain, and govern all that the Father has created by the instrumentality of the Only Begotten Son. Christ therefore declared in a revelation: "The power of my Spirit quickeneth all things." [^12] This incudes life in its resurrected and immortal state, for another revelation declares: "The redemption of the soul [that is, the reunion of the spirit and the body in the resurrection] is through him that quickeneth all things, in whose bosom it is decreed that the poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it." [^13] Universally speaking, the Light of Christ is "the light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God." [^14]

In referring to the revelation from which the last quotation is taken, Orson Pratt observed that it "shows very plainly that light is the principle and law by which everything is governed." He stated: "We cannot find a law throughout universal space but what light has something to do with it." Such forces as gravity and electromagnetism therefore appear to be but surface manifestations of this basic substance, or essence, of truth and power. Elder Pratt noted that "the principle of motion and of power is a principle of light," and that this quickening light is the foundation of man's power to "move, think and reason." He also observed that there is "a connection between these principles that govern the motion of living beings and the light that proceeds forth from the sun." [^15]

Parley P. Pratt also wrote descriptively of the Light of Christ, or Holy Spirit, [^16] and its functions in universal space, stating:

As the mind passes the boundaries of the visible world, and enters upon the confines of the more refined and subtle elements, it finds itself associated with certain substances in themselves invisible to our gross organs, but clearly manifested to our intellect by their tangible operations and effects. . . .

The purest, most refined and subtle of all these substances, and the one least understood, or even recognized, by the less informed among mankind, is that substance called the Holy Spirit. . . .

This is the great, positive, controlling element of all other elements. It is omnipresent by reason of its infinitude, and it pervades all things.

It is the agent or executive, by which God organizes and puts in motion all worlds, and which, by the mandate of the Almighty, or any of His commissioned servants performs all the mighty wonders, signs and miracles ever manifested in the name of the Lord, the dividing of the sea, the removing of a mountain, the raising of the dead, or the healing of the sick. . . .

This is the true light which in some measure illuminates all men. It is, in its less refined existence, the physical light which reflects from the sun, moon, and stars, and other substances, and by reflection on the eye, makes visible the truths of the outward world.

It is, also, in its higher degrees, the intellectual light of our inward and spiritual organs, by which we reason, discern, judge, compare, comprehend and remember the subjects within our reach.

Its inspiration constitutes instinct in animal life, reason in man, vision in the prophets, and is continually flowing from the Godhead throughout all His creations.

God sits enthroned in the midst of all His creations, and is filled and encircled with light unapproachable by those of the lower spheres. . . .

His Holy Spirit centers in His presence, and communicates with and extends to the utmost verge of His dominions, comprehending and controlling all things under the immediate direction of His own will, and the will of all those in communication with Him in worlds without end! [^17]

From this statement several things are apparent: First, the Holy Spirit or Light of Christ is a refined and subtle element which (at least in its higher expressions) is invisible to our gross organs, but clearly manifested in its operations and effects to our intellect. Second, this is the great, positive, controlling element of all other elements. Third, this pure substance pervades all things—it is in and through all things in universal space—and is therefore omnipresent by reason of its infinitude. Fourth, the Holy Spirit is the divine agent by which God organizes and puts in motion all worlds, and by which He or His commissioned servants perform miraculous works in the name of the Lord. Fifth, the Holy Spirit or Light of Christ in some measure illuminates the minds of all men. Sixth, in its less refined existence, the Light of Christ consists of the physical light which man is familiar with in this world. Seventh, in its higher degrees, it gives man power to reason, discern, judge, etc. the things within his reach in this world. Eighth, the Light of Christ is the source of instinct in animal life. Ninth, it is by this divine power that visions are opened to holy prophets. Tenth, an important key by which man may understand this subject is the fact that God is a glorified being. He is filled and encircled with light unapproachable by those of the lower spheres. This light is His glory, which is His Holy Spirit, and which centers in Him and in His presence. Being endowed with divine intelligence and power by the fact that it centers in God, the Holy Spirit communicates with and extends to the utmost verge of His dominions, comprehending and controlling all things under the immediate direction of God's will.

By referring to the concepts of God and the universe that have been set forth in previous chapters and by viewing these points in light of those principles which have been set forth above concerning the Light of Christ, the great Creator's role in organizing, sustaining, and governing the cosmos may be seen and in some degree appreciated. To this end, the following basic propositions should be noted: First, some form of life is associated with all matter in its various degrees of organization within the cosmos, and each form of life possesses some kind of intelligence. [^18] Second, to exist, all truth and all intelligence (and therefore all life) must be independent in that sphere in which God has placed it. [^19] Third, by nature light cleaves to light, truth has a basic affinity with truth, and intelligence has a mutual attraction to intelligence. [^20] Fourth, the Light of Christ, in emanating from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space, unites and interacts with the intelligence which is within the many forms of life to organize, quicken, sustain, and govern all things.

The Divine Spectrum

The Light of the Sun, Moon, and Stars

From the discussion thus far in this chapter it is apparent that there are many and varying degrees of light within the full spectrum of the Light of Christ. The chart below illustrates roughly the various degrees of light within the great continuum of Christ's glory and how the light in each degree affects life on earth:

The light of the sun, with that of other heavenly bodies, is part of the Light of Christ. Having stated that the Light of Truth shines and that this divine substance is the Light of Christ, [^21] a revelation declared that by means of His glory Christ is in the sun and is the light of the sun and the power thereof by which it was made. The same is true of the stars, of the moon, and of the earth. [^22] Continuing, the revelation states: "The light which shineth [that is, sunlight, etc.] which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings." [^23] In other words, the natural light that gives man light in this temporal sphere comes through Christ and is the same light that quickens the understanding of man. This is the light that proceeds from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space, that gives life to all things and is the law by which all things are governed. [^24] Sunlight therefore is part of the light that constitutes the glory of God and is manifested as the Light of Christ.

Several prominent Latter-day Saints have expressed the above view concerning light. Orson Pratt stated that "the light which comes from the sun is spirit." [^25] He also observed: "God has said that the light that proceeds forth from these heavenly bodies is the same light that quickens the understanding of man and that gives life to all things." [^26] Charles W. Penrose identified the Holy Spirit as "that spirit . . . which animates all created things; that which is the light of the sun, and of the soul as well as the light of the eye, that which enables the inhabitants of the earth to understand and perceive the things of God." [^27] John Taylor said:

. . . God is light and in him there is no darkness. He is the light of the sun and the power thereof by which it was made; he is also the light of the moon and the power by which it was made; he is the light of the stars and the power by which they were made. He [i.e., God] says it is the same light that enlightens the understanding of men. What, have we a mental light and a visual light, all proceeding from the same source? Yes, so says the scripture, and so says science when rightly comprehended. [^28]

As part of the Light of Christ, sunlight may be classified as physical light, or as natural light. Of the Light of Christ, Parley P. Pratt wrote: "It is, in its less refined existence, the physical light which reflects from the sun, moon, and stars, and other substances, and by reflection on the eye, makes visible the truths of the outward world." [^29] Charles W. Penrose also observed of the Light of Christ:

It is in the earth on which we stand; it is in the stars that shine in the firmament; it is in the moon that reflects the light of the sun; it is in the sun, and is the light of the sun, and the power by which it was made; and these grosser particles of light that illuminate the heavens and enable us to behold the works of nature, are from the same Spirit which enlightens our minds and unfolds the things of God. As that light comes forth from the sun, so the light of God comes to us. That natural light is the grosser substance or particles of the same Spirit. [^30]

As a manifestation of the Light of Christ, sunlight not only gives light to man and the animals but, as Charles W. Penrose pointed out, "It is the life of the vegetable creation." [^31] In the process of photosynthesis, the intelligent properties associated with the light of the sun quicken and sustain life within the vegetable world. These properties of intelligence are derived from Christ and ultimately from the Man of Holiness.

The Light of Instinct

In its purer and more refined degrees, the Light of Christ is endowed with greater properties of truth and power which quicken and sustain higher forms of life. Elder Penrose explained: "It is the life of the animal creation." [^32] Parley P. Pratt agreed, stating: "Its inspiration constitutes instinct in animal life." [^33] This was their explanation for the various expressions of intelligence so apparent in all kinds of animal, bird, and marine life. If the Light of Christ gives life to all things and is the law by which all things are governed, [^34] these forms of life cannot be excluded from its beneficient influence.

The Light of Life and Reason Within Man

In its greater degrees of purity and power, a revelation stated that "the Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world." [^35] Consequently, Parley P. Pratt wrote:

This is the true light which in some measure illuminates all men. . . .

It is . . . in its higher degrees, the intellectual light of our inward and spiritual organs, by which we reason, discern, judge, compare, comprehend, and remember the subjects without our reach.

Its inspiration constitutes . . . reason in man. [^36]

In its relationship to man, the Light of Christ performs several vital functions. Initially, it quickens and sustains the organized life within man and thereby gives him power to perform the natural functions of life in this temporal sphere. Were it not for the fact that this divine, living substance dwells within man and performs its ordained functions concerning him, a revelation observed that man "could not abound" [^37]—express the functions of life.

In its higher and more intelligent manifestations, the Light of Christ gives man the power to think, and reason, and analyze, thereby quickening the processes of thought and reason within him. A revelation explained, for example, that it is by the influence of the Spirit of Christ that man has power to discern and read the printed word. [^38] Orson Pratt observed: "We need the influence of the Spirit of God to quicken the light that is within us, for light cleaves to light, and the Spirit of God is light, and it cleaves unto the light that enters into the composition of the spirit of man; and when we keep his commandments the Lord is ever ready and willing to quicken the judgment, inform the mind, and lead us along in our thinking and reflecting powers, that we may have power to understand a great many truths." [^39]

Christ's Holy Spirit Leads Man Upward to God

The Light of Christ not only quickens the life within man and endows him with the powers of reason, discernment, and judgment, but it also leads him upward in truth and light to God. In a revelation, Christ admonished:

. . . put your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good—yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously; and this is my Spirit.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy;

And then shall ye know, or by this shall you know, all things whatsoever you desire of me, which are pertaining unto things of righteousness in faith believing in me that you shall receive. [^40]

Since the Spirit of God is life and since its major fruits are love, peace, and joy, those individuals who partake significantly of the influence of the Holy Spirit acquire a depth of life and truth, with love, peace, and joy, about which others who are less responsive to the Spirit know little.

In its uplifting power, the Light of Christ is given to all men of every creed and color upon the earth, and by its influence all men who obey the Gospel may come eventually into the presence of God. On this point a revelation said:

. . . the Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world. And every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the Father.

And the Father teacheth him of the covenant [of the Gospel] which he has renewed and confirmed upon you, which is confirmed upon you for your sakes, and not for your sakes only, but for the sake of the whole world. [^41]

Though the Spirit of Christ exerts an uplifting power upon all men, there are other forces in the world that oppose its righteous influence. Several modern revelations attest to the fact that Christ is "the light and the life of the world," but indicate that the light shines "in darkness and the darkness comprehendeth it not." [^42] "That which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually," Mormon explained; "wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him is inspired of God." The Nephite prophet-general continued:

Wherefore, take heed, my beloved brethren, that ye do not judge that which is evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God to be of the devil.

For behold, my brethren, it is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night.

For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God.

But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil; for after this manner doth the devil work, for he persuadeth no man to do good, no, not one; neither do his angels; neither do they who subject themselves unto him.

And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which ye may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge wrongfully; for with that same judgment which ye judge ye shall also be judged.

Wherefore, I beseech of you, brethren, that ye should search diligently in the light of Christ that ye may know good from evil; and if ye will lay hold upon every good thing, and condemn it not, ye certainly will be a child of Christ. [^43]

As it acts with its enlightening influence upon the mind of man, the Spirit of Christ makes use of the symbols and outward expressions of truth that have been established in the world. A revelation to Joseph Smith explained that "the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the spirit." [^44] To be enlightened by the Spirit through the world means that man is to be enlightened by means of the world. As man ponders the expressions of truth, justice, beauty, love, and holiness that are found in the world, whether they be in the field of art, science, or religion, the Spirit of truth enables him to see and in some measure comprehend the underlying verities of which the symbols are but outward expressions. Man may acquire truth by studying symbols, or expressions, of eternal verities; and in his diligent study of the outward symbol, his mind may be enlightened by the Spirit to see the inward truth.

The same thing is true of divine truth. For this reason, the covenant of the Gospel is established in the world, that man may behold the outward expressions of divine truth and, by pondering the tangible evidence, be enlightened by the Holy Spirit to see the plan of life and salvation. In their more intelligent expressions, the truths of the Gospel are not carved in stone, nor are they written on any inanimate substance. They are planted in the lives of men, so that those who embrace the Gospel become living epistles of Christ, written not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God. [^45] Christ gives them "power to do many miracles, and to become the sons of God." [^46] Consequently they stand as living expressions of the divine truth and power of the Gospel that others might see their good works and be led to glorify God. For this reason the Lord said in a revelation: "I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it." [^47]

The Light, Life, and Power of the Gospel

In addition to the quickening, sustaining, and uplifting powers which are the common heritage of all men in mortality are those higher manifestations of the Spirit which constitute the light and the life of the Gospel. The Gospel of Jesus Christ is not merely a way of life, or a system of theology. In its central program, it is a regenerating and sanctifying power, given to those who comply in faith with the saving principles and ordinances of the plan of salvation. In speaking of these higher spiritual powers, Charles W. Penrose said:

As the light of the sun reveals natural objects to our eyes, so the Spirit that comes from God, with a fitting place to occupy and conditions to operate in, reveals the things of God. We see natural things by the light of the sun. We see spiritual things by spiritual light, and he that is spiritual discerneth all things and judgeth all things, and he that is not spiritual cannot comprehend spiritual things. They are foolishness to him. [^48]

As it is manifested in the Gospel, that divine and intelligent substance which is called the Spirit of Christ is to the man of faith an enlightening and regenerating power. It is the living word—the Spirit of Truth, or the Spirit of revelation and knowledge. To the Church in this dispensation the Lord said:

. . . give diligent heed to the words of eternal life . . . .

For the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ. [^49]

Being centered in God and manifested as His divine nature, the Holy Spirit is endowed with His intelligence and power; and when it is given to man in its living, intelligent expressions, the Holy Spirit is revealed in the word of life, or in the words of eternal life. In the quotation above, the word of God is said to be truth, which is light, and which is Spirit, even the Spirit, or Light, of Christ. The word of the Lord, therefore, is Spirit, or the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

The Holy Spirit may manifest itself in association with the written or spoken word of a man of God, or it may express itself to man independent of another person, as the Spirit of revelation and of truth. Jesus made reference to the first of these ways by which the Spirit is manifested when He declared that the words which He spoke were Spirit, and that they were life. [^50] Here the Spirit was said to be associated with or synonymous to the spoken word. "When a man speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost," Nephi thus explained, "the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the children of men." [^51] Of the word of God as it is manifested solely by the Spirit of revelation, God said to Joseph Smith:

These words are not of men nor of man, but of me; wherefore, you shall testify they are of me and not of man;

For it is my voice which speaketh them unto you; for they are given by my Spirit unto you, and by my power you can read them one to another; and save it were by my power you could not have them;

Wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words. [^52]

Another revelation declared:

Behold, that which you hear is as the voice of one crying in the wilderness—in the wilderness, because you cannot see him—my voice, because my voice is Spirit; my Spirit is truth; truth abideth and hath no end; and if it be in you it shall abound.

And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things. [^53]

Constructive and creative thinking results in a form of revelation, for it requires the influence of the Light of Christ for man to apply those mental processes that lead to truth and understanding. But there is a higher plane of enlightenment that leads to the knowledge and acquisition of divine truth. To attain this higher truth, man must do more than exercise intellectual powers. He must exert the full powers of the soul, which include his whole heart, might, mind, and strength. This is the challenge which the Gospel presents to man. To meet this challenge, his eye must become single to the glory of God—to that divine and intelligent substance which constitutes the divine nature of God. Man's whole body will then be filled with the light, or glory, of God. [^54]

The central purpose of the Gospel is to develop the substance called the Holy Spirit in man until he is filled with light—until he is glorified in Christ, as Christ is glorified in His Father. Man will then comprehend all things. As the Lord continued His instructions in the revelation quoted above, He said: "Sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will." [^55]

The Power of the Holy Ghost

The higher expressions of the Light of Christ that are given to man in the Gospel are manifested through the Holy Ghost, the third personage within the Godhead. For this reason the Light of Christ in its higher manifestations is sometimes called the power of the Holy Ghost. In administering these greater blessings and powers of life unto man, the Holy Ghost, acts as Christ's messenger, with authority to take that which is given to Jesus by His Father and manifest it to those who believe in the Redeemer's name. [^56] The distinction between the power of the Holy Ghost and the lesser light that quickens and sustains the life within man is essentially one of degree in purity, refinement, and intelligence. Brigham Young referred to the power of the Holy Ghost as "the increased rays of that light which lighteneth every man that cometh into the world." [^57] Charles W. Penrose spoke similarly of the gift of the Holy Ghost as "a greater and higher endowment of the same Spirit which enlightens every man that comes into the world." [^58] Other prominent Latter-day Saints have made similar clarifications. [^59]

Because the Holy Ghost acts in a subordinate role to Christ, modern scriptures revealed through Joseph Smith repeatedly state that the Spirit or power of the Holy Ghost is actually the Spirit or power of Jesus Christ—the Spirit or power that the Father, Elohim, has centered in Christ as the God of this earth. In speaking to the Nephites of the latter days, Jesus declared that the Father would pour out the Holy Ghost through Him upon the Gentiles. [^60] Though the scriptures indicate that the convincing power by which man comes to a knowledge of the Gospel is the power of the Holy Ghost, [^61] Mormon wrote more specifically that "as many as were converted [among the Nephites] did truly signify unto the people that they had been visited by the power and Spirit of God, which was in Jesus Christ, in whom they believed." [^62] Alma taught that in obeying the Gospel, man signifies to Christ that he is willing to keep His commandments so that Christ can "pour out his Spirit [i.e., the Holy Ghost] more abundantly" upon him. [^63] Likewise the Lord declared in a revelation given through Joseph Smith to an early convert before he embraced the Gospel: "You shall receive my [i.e., Christ's] Spirit, the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter, which shall teach you the peaceable things of the kingdom." [^64] The companionship of the Holy Ghost promised to worthy saints who partake of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper is specifically referred to as the Spirit of Christ. [^65] With this view Moroni spoke of the spiritual endowments commonly referred to as the gifts of the Holy Ghost as being given to man "by the Spirit of Christ." [^66]

The Power of the Priesthood

The power of the Priesthood is derived from the divine substance or essence known as the Light of Christ in its higher degrees of manifestation. Parley P. Pratt observed that the Light of Christ is the power "by which God organizes and puts in motion all worlds, and which, by the mandate of the Almighty, or any of His commissioned servants performs all the mighty wonders, signs, and miracles ever manifest in the name of the Lord." [^67] This is the power of the Priesthood.

The relationship existing between the Light of Christ and the power of the Priesthood is evident from the fact that the power of the Holy Ghost (as a manifestation of the Light of Christ in its higher degrees) constitutes the power of the Priesthood. Joseph Smith taught that the Holy Ghost, as God's messenger, ministers by His divine power in all divisions of the Priesthood, to give life and vitality to the official acts of those who bear its keys and authority on earth. [^68] A revelation also declared: "Every elder, priest, teacher, or deacon is to be ordained according to the gifts and callings of God unto him; and he is to be ordained by the power of the Holy Ghost, which is in the one who ordains him." [^69] The power of the Holy Ghost therefore is the power by which man acts in performing official functions such as ordaining others to the priesthood.

Joseph Smith observed that "the rights of the Priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of Heaven." [^70] It has been stated that for this earth these powers are centered in Christ and are manifested as the Light of Christ. [^71] This is "the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things." [^72] In other words, this is the power that is manifested through the Priesthood.

In affirming that the Light of Christ is the power of the Priesthood, a revelation explained that before man can utilize the power of the Priesthood he must "be purified and cleansed from all sin" and act under the inspiration of heaven. But of one who is properly ordained and acts in righteousness, the revelation declared: "He is possessor of all things; for all things are subjective unto him, both in heaven and on the earth, the life and the light, the Spirit and the power, sent forth by the will of the Father through Jesus Christ, his Son." [^73] The terms "life," "light," "Spirit," and "power" are synonymns denoting the Spirit or glory of the Father that is given to man through Jesus Christ as the power of the Priesthood.

Summary

Through the Prophet Joseph Smith came revelations which teach that Christ and man had a similar purpose to achieve in the divine plan of eternal life, and that was to attain the glory and power of the Man of Holiness in a resurrected state. But Jesus was glorified directly by and in the Father, Elohim, while man must be glorified by and in Christ. Because the truth, life, and light of God's glory are centered in Christ, He is the life and the light of the world. His glory is manifested as the Light of Christ, which is the light of the sun, moon, and stars. This is the light which is in all things, which gives life and law to all things, and which is the power of God. Light, therefore, is the great principle of life and of law within all things in the cosmos. But there are divine laws governing the emanation of light from the presence of the Father, and the Light or Spirit of Christ is manifested in varying degrees through the channels that are ordained of God. In its lower degrees, the Light of Christ is the light of the sun, etc. Moving up the spectrum, this divine light is the light of instinct in animal, bird, and marine life. In its higher degrees it is the light of life and reason within man. By its divine influence, it also leads man upward to God. In its greater expressions, it is the light, life, and power of the Gospel. Here it is the power of the Holy Ghost, or the power which the Holy Ghost receives from Christ and manifests unto man. Finally, in its authoritative expressions, the light of Christ is the power of the Priesthood—"the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things." [^74]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Abraham 3:22-23.
[^2] Abraham 3:24-25. In considering this statement, special attention should be given to the following points: First, in a technical sense there is no God but the Father (See again Moses 1:6.); but the pre-earth Christ became like unto God in possessing the divine intelligence and power of the Father. When Abraham made mention of the one that was like unto God, he therefore undoubtedly had reference to Jehovah, the pre-earth Christ. As the executive of the Father with access to the glory and power of the Man of Holiness, the pre-earth Christ said unto those who were with him: "We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth," etc. Second, those to whom Christ was speaking were the noble and great spirits that Abraham saw. The antecedent to the word "them" in the first line of Abraham's statement quoted in the body of the text above is the noble and great spirits whom he saw. To them the one like unto God addressed Himself when He spoke of the creation of the earth. Christ would not have spoken to the Man of Holiness in this way, for it would have been improper for the Son to give directions to that superior being. Nor was the Father, Elohim, then speaking to Christ and some other beings, for the Man of Holiness is God and not merely one like unto God. The fact that it was Christ speaking unto "those who were with him" indicates that there was more than one other subordinate being to whom He addressed Himself, for the word "those" is a plural pronoun denoting several persons.
[^3] Abraham 4:1. This verse should be studied in light of Abraham 3:22-24.
[^4] See the Prophet's explanation of this point of doctrine in HC, VI, p. 477.
[^5] HC, VI, p. 478.
[^6] To become a god in this sense is not to be an object of worship, although those who acquired the divine attributes and powers of deity should be honored for the truth they possess and for the example of righteousness which they set. In true worship, man should supplicate the Father in the name of Jesus Christ. Man may also worship Christ in whom the divine nature of the Father has been centered for this earth. But nowhere is it said that the extension of the divine nature of God to man, either now or in the pre-earth state, qualifies him to be an object of worship.
[^7] HC, VI, p. 308.
[^8] Ibid.
[^9] Ibid., p. 307.
[^10] Joseph Smith once arranged the revelation found in D&C 76 in poetic form. Where it promised to reveal the hidden mysteries of God to the faithful, "from days of old, and for ages to come," the Prophet wrote:
[^11] HC, VI, p. 307. (Italics in the original.) See also p. 473.
[^12] Ibid., III, p. 387.
[^13] Moses 1:33-35.
[^14] Moses 4:2.
[^15] The Mormon, August 29, 1857.
[^16] D&C 130:5-7.
[^17] See Matthew 24:36; Smith 1:40.
[^18] See again D&C 130:5-7.
[^19] See 2 Nephi 2:11ff.
[^20] Joseph Smith stated that Lucifer "laid his plans before the Grand Council," but the members of that body "gave their vote in favor of Jesus Christ."—HC, VI, p. 314. There is some evidence to indicate that Lucifer may have been the second born son of the Father's spirit children. William W. Phelps referred to him as "the next heir to Jesus Christ."—TS, V (January 1, 1845), p. 758. And an acquaintance of Joseph Smith reported the Prophet as having taught the same doctrine.—Journal of George Lamb, unpublished manuscript in Brigham Young University Library, p. 9.
[^21] D&C 76:25-26.
[^22] HC, V, p. 388.
[^23] The fact that Lucifer accepted the need for a redeemer implies that he held that spirits ought to come to earth in a fallen state.
[^24] Moses 4:1-4.
[^25] HC, VI, p. 314.
[^26] D&C 29:36. See also the section in chapter five, entitled "The Omnipotence of God."
[^27] Moses 4:1.
[^28] The principles of consecration and heirship will be treated in Volume III of this work.
[^29] Moses 4:2.
[^30] Abraham 3:27-28.
[^31] HC, V, p. 388.
[^32] Abraham 3:28.
[^33] Revelation 12:10.
[^34] JD, I, p. 349. For other statements by Brigham Young see ibid., p. 118, 275; III, p. 203; IV, p. 54; IX, p. 149; XVIII, p. 232.
[^35] The Seer, I (April, 1853), pp. 52-53. See D&C 93:30-31.
[^36] HC, VI, p. 205.
[^37] See Perry Miller, The New England Mind (New York, 1939), p. 369.
[^38] Cannon, op. cit., p. 495.
[^39] D&C 76:25.
[^40] D&C 29:36-37.
[^41] D&C 76:25-26.
[^42] D&C 76:25-26.
[^43] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City, 1966), p. 432.
[^44] Pratt, op. cit., pp. 114-115. For references from Joseph Smith on Satan as an angel of light, see HC, III, p. 392; IV, p. 581; D&C 128:20; 129:4-9.
[^45] Moses 1:14.
[^46] HC, V, pp. 388, 403.
[^47] Abraham 3:26.
[^48] Moses 4:4; D&C 76:25.
[^49] As related by Dr. John M. Bernhisel and reported in R. C. Gemmell, "Early History of the Medical Profession in Utah: Biography of Dr. W. F. Anderson," typewritten MSS, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah, pp. 8-11.
[^50] Moses 4:4.
[^51] Helaman 3:29.
[^52] Gemmell, op. cit.
[^53] HC, IV, p. 605.
[^54] Ibid., III, p. 392.
[^55] Ibid., V, p. 218.
[^56] Gemmell, op. cit.
[^57] Ibid.
[^58] The fact that there was contention in the War in Heaven indicates that everyone did not immediately take sides on the issues that confronted them.
[^59] Gemmell, op. cit.
[^60] HC, III, p. 387.
[^61] See Abraham 3:19, 22-23, where Abraham was shown that spirits varied in the intelligence which they acquired.
[^62] "Joseph Smith Papers, 1839-1841," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 181.
[^63] Abraham 3:22-23.
[^64] Romans 9:11-14.
[^65] 1 Nephi 11:14-20; Mosiah 3:8; Alma 7:10.
[^66] 1 Nephi 3:14-15.
[^67] 1 Nephi 19:1-3; Words of Mormon 6-7; D&C 3 and 10.
[^68] The Mormon, August 29, 1857.
[^69] D&C 56:4. See also D&C 58:32-33; 124:45-53.
[^70] Journal History, February 23, 1847.
[^71] Loc. Cit. The patriarchal aspects of this divine plan will be discussed in Volume II of this work.
[^72] See D&C 132:8-16. The doctrine of Eternal or Celestial Marriage will be discussed in Volumes II and III of this work.
[^73] HC, V, p. 141. See also D&C 127 and 128. This subject will be discussed more fully in Volumes II and IV of this work.
[^74] Abraham 3:23.
