Hyrum L. Andrus, God, Man, and the Universe ( 1968)

12

Basic Concepts in The Creation Story

Thou, earth, wast once a glorious sphere Of noble magnitude, And didst with majesty appear, Among the worlds of God. —ELIZA R. SNOW.

Modern scriptures given to the world through Joseph Smith contain two accounts of the creation. One account is found in the Book of Abraham, which was published in the spring of 1842 as the latter-day Seer's translation of a revelation on the subject given anciently to the patriarch Abraham. [^1] In the Book of Abraham, the claim is also made that the ancient patriarch had in his possession records extending back to the time of Adam, giving "a knowledge of the beginning of the creation, and also of the planets, and of the stars, as they were made known unto the fathers." [^2]

The other account of the creation in modern scriptures is found in the Book of Moses. It consists of Joseph Smith's inspired revision of the story of the creation in Genesis. [^3] The Prophet made his initial revision of this account in 1830. But he made additional revisions thereafter; [^4] and evidence indicates that he intended to make further revisions of the account written by Moses, for he did not consider the text of the creation as it is now published in the Book of Moses to be without some deficiencies. [^5] This account was not published until 1851, several years after the Prophet's death. Had Joseph Smith published his revision of the account of creation written by Moses, before doing so he undoubtedly would have made even further revisions than those now contained in the Book of Moses. [^6]

In addition to the two accounts of the creation referred to above, there are some authoritative statements made by Joseph Smith which add clarity to the story of the creation as given in both ancient and modern scripture.

The Elements Are Eternal

The Earth Created from Eternal Elements

The story of the creation as given in the revelations and translations of Joseph Smith is set within the context of the eternal duration of matter. The elements are eternal; they are as old as God. [^7] The creation of the earth was an organization in which elements were brought together to form a sphere which was then prepared for the various forms of life that were to be placed upon it. The Prophet said:

You ask the learned doctors why they say the world was made out of nothing, and they will answer, "Doesn't the Bible say He created the world?" And they infer, from the word create, that it must have been made out of nothing. Now, the word create came from the word baurau, which does not mean to create out of nothing; it means to organize; the same as a man would organize materials and build a ship. Hence we infer that God had materials to organize the world out of chaos—chaotic matter, which is element and in which dwells all the glory. [^8]

Orson Pratt explained: "When I speak of the beginning, I have reference to the beginning of the earth, in its present organization; I do not have reference to the beginning of duration, for it had no beginning." [^9] Again Elder Pratt wrote:

As the elements of all worlds were not created, but are eternal, and as they have always been the tabernacle or dwelling place of God, they must have eternally been acted upon by His Spirit; consequently they must have passed through an endless series of operations without beginning. Instead of seeking to trace out evidences of a beginning to the elements, we shall at once pronounce them eternal. . . .

How many thousands of millions of times the elements of our globe have been organized and disorganized; or how many millions of shapes or forms the elements have been thrown into in their successive organizations and disorganizations; or how widely the particles have been diffused through boundless space; or of how many different worlds these particles have, at one time and another, formed component parts; or how long they have been parts of the solar system; or how long that system itself has formed a branch of our stellar heavens—is unknown to us mortals. [^10]

In applying the view that the elements are eternal, to the creation of the earth as explained in scripture, Elder Pratt said:

How many transformations this earth passed through before the one spoken of by Moses, I do not know, neither do I particularly care. If it had gone through millions on millions of transformations, it is nothing to us. We are willing, for the sake of argument, to admit that the materials themselves are as old as geologists dare to say they are; but then, that does not destroy the idea of a God, that does not destroy the idea of a great Creator, who, according to certain fixed and unalterable laws, brought these materials, from time to time, into a certain organization, and then by his power completed the worlds that were thus made, by placing thereon intelligent and animated beings, capable of thinking and having an existence. . . . [^11]

Joseph Smith did not accept the dogma of Creationism—the view that the universe was originally brought into existence without preexistent material by the word of God. If the elements are eternal, the scriptural story of the creation concerns but one major action in the history of materials that have existed from a time without beginning. Evidences of antiquity found in the materials of the earth need not having anything to do directly with the creation of the earth, or with that which has occurred since the time the earth was organized. It would be difficult to accept the view that the elements are eternal and maintain at the same time that all evidences of antiquity found in the materials of the earth must be dated since the time of the organization which we call the creation.

Evidence of the Extended Age of Earth's Matter

The scriptural accounts of the creation deal only with the organization of the earth in preparation for the time when Adam, Eve, and the lower forms of life were placed upon it. Prior to that time, the elements of which the earth was composed had an eternal existence. In a letter dated Christmas day, 1844, William W. Phelps wrote to William Smith, the Prophet's brother, "that Jesus Christ, whose goings forth, as the prophets said, have been from of old, from eternity; and that eternity, agreeable to the records found in the catacombs of Egypt [i.e., an unpublished portion of the ancient records from which Joseph Smith translated the Book of Abraham], has been going on in this system (not this world), almost two thousand five hundred and fifty five millions of years." [^12] The importance of this statement is that it seems to have its basis in something Joseph Smith may have translated but did not publish in the writings of Abraham or the patriarch Joseph. If eternity has been going on in the "system" [^13] with which the earth is now associated for 2,555,000,000 years, the materials from which the earth was created at a much more recent date may bear evidence of at least this degree of antiquity. [^14] But even then it should be remembered that the elements are eternal in their duration.

The Creation Accomplished By Intelligent Design

The Earth Created for a Divine Purpose

There is no place in Latter-day Saint thought for the view that the earth was formed by chance. A previous chapter has discussed the divine purpose that has been expressed in the creation of worlds without number. [^15] The same is true of this earth. In the extended ages before the earth was formed, the Man of Holiness had begotten numerous spirit children who were to be given physical tabernacles on a sphere organized for gross elements. Nephi declared: "The Lord hath created the earth that it should be inhabited; and he hath created his children that they should possess it." [^16] When the Grand Council of the Gods convened, the pre-earth Christ expressed a similar view when He said to the noble and great spirits who were with Him: "We will go down . . . and . . . make an earth whereon these [i.e., the remainder of the Father's spirit children assigned to this earth] may dwell." [^17]

But the view of God's purposes concerning the earth does not stop here, for this fallen temporal sphere, eventually, must be made into a celestial sphere to become the abode of the righteous in eternity. A revelation explained: "Therefore, it [i.e., the earth] must needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness, that it may be prepared for the celestial glory; for after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father; that bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for this intent are they sanctified." [^18] The ultimate purpose of God in the creation of the earth is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^19]

The Earth Created by the Power of the Holy Spirit

The earth was not created merely by the action of natural forces such as those that are generally known to man, but by the power of the Holy Spirit—the divine intelligent substance that, under the direction of the Almighty, is "the agent or executive, by which God organizes and puts in motion all worlds." [^20] The Lord declared: "By the power of my Spirit created I . . . all things." [^21]

In his account of the creation, Abraham correlates the actions of the Holy Spirit with the edicts of the Gods when he states: "The Spirit of God was brooding upon the face of the waters. And they (the Gods) said: Let there be light; and there was light." [^22] To Moses, God said: "My Spirit moved upon the face of the waters; for I am God. And I, God, said: Let there be light; and there was light." [^23]

Because God used divine powers to create the earth—intelligent powers that man in his temporal state knows very little about, it would seem that man of himself is not qualified to say how God created the earth or how long it took to accomplish the task. If the pioneers who traversed the continent in covered wagons had been privileged in some way to read the report of a modern business man's travel engagements throughout the world, it would have been foolish for them to judge his actions in light of their knowledge of transportation. So also should mortal man withhold judgment of the revealed accounts of the creation, and he should seek to understand the creation as God said He carried it out. On this subject, man's perspective should be divine, not mortal. He should view the creation in light of God's glory and power, for by the agency of His divine intelligence God has created worlds without number. [^24]

The Creation Carried out According to Intelligent Directives

The creation was carried out according to intelligent directives that came from God. This fact implies that the earth was not formed by slow and gradual processes that occurred over a great period of time, as a result of natural forces operating upon the elements. Instead, as in the construction of a building or any project of human design, decrees were issued and appropriate responses were made to follow in intelligent order. For instance, on the first day of creation the Gods ordered that there be light; and, the record states, they "comprehended the light" and "divided the light, or caused it to be divided from the darkness." [^25] It is again apparent that intelligent directives were followed by immediate responses in the operations of the second and third days of creation, for the report of the activities of each of these days concludes: "And it was so, even as they ordered." [^26] Having recorded the decrees that were issued on the fourth day, Abraham observed: "And the Gods watched those things which they had ordered until they obeyed." [^27] Finally, as the Gods contemplated the remaining activities to be carried out during and after the sixth day, they said: "We will do everything that we have said, and organize them; and behold they shall be very obedient." [^28]

Special Contributions in Moses's Account Of The Creation

Personalities in the Creation

In their accounts of the creation, Abraham and Moses approach the story from different vantage points; and in doing so, each contributes special insights to an understanding of the creation. One example is found in the answer they give to the question of who created the earth. Moses records the fact that God had created worlds without number before this earth was organized, and that it was the Only Begotten Son acting in the power and authority of the Father who actually created these many worlds. [^29] The same was true of this earth, for God declared to Moses: "By mine Only Begotten I created these things; yea, in the beginning I created the heaven, and the earth upon which thou standest." [^30]

These statements make plain the ambiguity found in the Genesis account of the creation where God is recorded as stating, "Let us make man in our image," etc., without clarifying the identity of the other person to whom He is speaking. [^31] Here the Book of Moses confirms the testimony of New Testament writers who declared that God "created all things by Jesus Christ." [^32]

All Things Created First in Spirit Form

Revelations to Joseph Smith make it clear that all things that were created in physical form were first organized from spirit. [^33] This included the earth and all life that was placed upon it. The Latter-day Saint view of the creation cannot be understood without seeing and appreciating this basic fact. Man's physical body is in some respects but a tabernacle for the spirit that was organized long before the physical system was formed. In this tabernacling process, the organized spirit is "added upon"; [^34] that is, it has added to it the organizations and endowments of the flesh.

On this subject, the Book of Moses makes a significant contribution to our understanding of the creation. In the midst of his account of the physical creation (as he begins to relate the activities of the seventh day), Moses inserts a statement to clarify that all life that was then to be placed upon the earth had previously been organized in spirit form. This statement is not an account of the spirit creation; that is, it is not a delineation of events as they occurred in the spirit creation. It is simply a statement that all things that were then to be placed upon the earth had previously been created in-spirit form. As he commenced to relate the events of the seventh day, Moses recorded the Lord as saying:

. . . behold, I say unto you, that these are the generations of the heaven and of the earth, when they were created, in the day that I, the Lord God, made the heaven and the earth;

And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew. For I, the Lord God, created all things of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth. For I, the Lord God, had not caused it to rain upon the face of the earth. And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them; and there was not yet [at the beginning of the seventh day] flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air;

But I, the Lord God, spake, and there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.

And I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul, the first flesh upon the earth, the first man also; nevertheless, all things were before created; but spiritually were they created and made according to my word. [^35]

Special Contributions In Abraham's Account Of The Creation

The Setting of Abraham's Account

To see and appreciate the contributions Abraham makes to an understanding of the creation, it is important to know that the information he received from God was given to him as a part of a more extended vision. [^36] By means of the Urim and Thummim, Abraham first beheld Kolob and the great stellar system associated with that governing sphere. [^37] Next he saw the intelligences, or spirits, that had been organized in the pre-earth state. [^38] Having seen that among these spirits there were many noble and great ones, Abraham saw that these noble and great spirits met in the Grand Council of the Gods to formulate a plan to create the earth and place life upon it. Finally, the ancient patriarch saw the Gods (Christ and the noble and great spirits acting in the power and under the direction of Ahman) create the earth according to the plan that had been made in the Grand Council of the Gods. [^39] It is apparent, therefore, that Abraham is relating the story of the organization of a sphere within the great stellar system over which Kolob presides as the governing body; and Kolob and its related stellar system is the context, or setting, that one must see in order to appreciate the contributions the great patriarch makes to an understanding of the creation. This fact will be shown at a later point in this chapter.

Personalities in the Creation

Joseph Smith once stated that an unpublished portion of Abraham's record designates the Man of Holiness as "God the first, the Creator." [^40] This declaration does not contradict Moses's report that the Father, Elohim, organized many spheres, including this earth, through the instrumentality of the Only Begotten Son. But in these actions, Christ was the agent of the Father and used the name of the Father, the intelligence of the Father, and the power of the Father to organize countless worlds. The Father is the great creator. "Worlds without number have I created," the Man of Holiness therefore declared to Moses; ". . . and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten." [^41]

Like Moses, Abraham makes clear that a divine being other than the Man of Holiness was the personal agent of God in carrying out the program of the creation. Though Abraham merely designates that divine agent as a personage who was "like unto God," [^42] a thorough study of his statement indicates that he had reference to Christ. [^43]

But according to Abraham, there were others who assisted Christ in creating the earth under the direction of the Father. In revealing this fact, the patriarch makes a contribution to our understanding of the creation beyond that which Moses makes. As indicated in the preceding chapter, those who assisted Christ in the creation were the noble and great spirits of the pre-earth state—such great personalities as Abraham. [^44]

Abraham's Blueprint and Account of the Creation

In his record, Abraham combines a report of a previously formulated plan, which may be called a blueprint of the creation, with a statement of that which actually took place when the Gods formed the earth and placed life upon it. Having seen Kolob and the great stellar system associated with that governing sphere, Abraham beheld the intelligences, or spirits, that had been organized in the pre-earth state. As has been indicated earlier in this chapter, Abraham then saw that the noble and great spirits met in the Grand Council of the Gods to formulate the plan to create the earth and place life upon it. Finally, the great patriarch beheld the Gods create the earth according to the plan that had been formulated in the Grand Council which they had previously held. In his account of the creation (with but few exceptions), Abraham relates both the plan of a given day's activities formulated by the Gods in the Grand Council and the subsequent actions that were carried out on that day.

In following the procedure of relating both the plan and the action of the creation, Abraham reports that before the activities of the first day of creation commenced, that being who was like unto God said to the noble and great spirits: "We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell." [^45] Having recorded this statement of intent, Abraham wrote that on the first day the Gods "went down . . . and formed the heavens and the earth." [^46] In this action, they began to carry out the plans they had previously made.

In expressing their plan for the second day, the Gods decreed: "Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and it shall divide the waters from the waters." Of that which they later did, Abraham said: "And the Gods ordered the expanse, so that it divided the waters which were under the expanse from the waters which were above the expanse; and it was so, even as they ordered." [^47]

Though Abraham makes frequent use of the above procedure, he does not employ this method in relating every detail of the creation. In reporting the initial activities of the third day, he merely records that the Gods gathered the waters together unto one place. But of their plan of further activities to be carried out on this day, he reports the Gods as stating: "Let us prepare the earth to bring forth grass," etc. Then, having reported their plan, Abraham declares that on this day the Gods organized the earth to bring forth grass, herbs, etc. [^48]

Again on the fourth day, Abraham does not report the plan of the Gods, but merely states that which they did at that time in organizing "the lights in the expanse of the heaven." [^49] But on the fifth day he reports the plan of the Gods who said: "Let us prepare the waters to bring forth abundantly the moving creatures that have life; and the fowl, that they may fly above the earth in the open expanse of heaven." Having reported their plan, Abraham then states that these things were accomplished on the fifth day. [^50]

Again Abraham does not use his dual method of reporting as he records the initial activities of the sixth day. But having stated that on that day the Gods organized the earth to bring forth animal life, he then declares: "And the Gods took counsel among themselves and said: 'Let us go down and form man in our image, after our likeness,'" etc. Of that which they did toward the end of the sixth day, Abraham then wrote: "So the Gods went down to organize man in their own image, in the image of the Gods to form they him, male and female to form they them." [^51]

Having gone down on the sixth day to organize man, the Gods also reviewed their plans for the seventh day. Though man and other forms of life were not to be organized and placed upon the earth until the seventh day, [^52] the earth was to be finished and all preparations were to be made before life was placed upon the new sphere. As the sixth day drew to a close, it was therefore fitting that the Gods should review their plans for the seventh day. Abraham wrote:

. . . the Gods said: We will bless them [i.e., the man and the woman who were to be formed]. And the Gods said: We will cause them to be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and to have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.

And the Gods said: Behold, we will give them every herb bearing seed that shall come upon the face of all the earth, and every tree which shall have fruit upon it; yea, the fruit of the tree yielding seed to them we will give it; it shall be for their meat.

And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, behold, we will give them life, and also we will give to them every green herb for meat, and all these things shall be thus organized.

And the Gods said: We will do everything that we have said, and organize them; and behold, they shall be very obedient. And it came to pass that it was from evening until morning they called night; and it came to pass that it was from morning until evening that they called day; and they numbered the sixth time. [^53]

As Abraham relates the events of the seventh day, he starts again by stating the plans which were formulated in the Grand Council of the Gods. [^54] On the seventh day the Gods planned to "finish the heavens and the earth, and all the hosts of them." [^55] As here used, the term "hosts" apparently has reference to the many forms of life that were to be placed upon the earth. Abraham wrote:

And the Gods said among themselves: On the seventh time we will end our work, which we have counseled; and we will rest on the seventh time from all our work which we have counseled.

And the Gods concluded upon the seventh time, because that on the seventh time they would rest from all their works which they (the Gods) counseled among themselves to form; and sanctified it. And thus were their decisions at the time that they counseled among themselves to form the heavens and the earth. [^56]

The statement above in italics confirms the fact that Abraham wrote his account of the creation in light of the plans which were made in the Grand Council of the Gods. That which the Gods planned to do on the seventh day was according to "their decisions at the time that they counseled among themselves to form the heavens and the earth." [^57] It was in the Grand Council of the Gods that they took counsel to form the earth and its atmospheric heaven.

But before the Gods rested on the seventh day, they placed the several forms of life upon the earth. Abraham wrote:

And the Gods came down and formed these the generations of the heavens and the earth, when they were formed in the day that the Gods formed the earth and the heavens,

According to all that which they said concerning every plant of the field before it grew; for the Gods had not caused it to rain upon the earth when they counseled to do them, and had not formed a man to till the ground. [^58]

Again it is evident that Abraham wrote his account of the creation in light of the plans which were made in the Grand Council of the Gods.

The Earth Created Near Kolob

From evidence found in the Book of Abraham it appears that the earth was created near Kolob and that for some time thereafter the newly formed sphere was governed by the same law that controls that central governing sphere of our stellar system. As Abraham reports the warning that was given to Adam not to partake of the forbidden fruit in the Garden of Eden, he quotes the Gods as saying: "For in the time that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die." The ancient patriarch then wrote: "Now I, Abraham, saw that it was after the Lord's time, which was after the time of Kolob; for as yet the Gods had not appointed unto Adam his reckoning." [^59]

Two things are apparent from Abraham's statement: First, in the creation and placement of life upon the earth the Gods were operating according to Kolob's time, which is the Lord's time. [^60] Second, the Gods did not "appoint unto Adam his reckoning" at the time he was placed in the Garden of Eden. These points can only mean that some time after life had been placed upon the earth there was a radical change made in the law governing this sphere and that this change gave Adam an entirely different basis for computing time. Writing by revelation, Joseph Smith gave an affirmative answer to the question: "Is not the reckoning of God's time, angel's time, prophet's time, and man's time, according to the planet on which they reside?" [^61] If a person's schedule of time is determined by the rotation of the sphere on which he resides and if Adam had not been appointed "his reckoning" when he was placed upon the earth, it would seem that at that time the earth was not governed by its present law, nor was it rotating as it now is in our solar system.

A member of the Church in the days of Joseph Smith reported that the Prophet taught that the time will come when the earth will be restored to its former place in the cosmos and again "revolve in its original orbit next to Kolob." [^62] Although this report comes second-hand several years after the Prophet's death, evidence indicates that Joseph Smith probably expressed such a view. Others who were close to him and who were instructed by him also made statements in harmony with this report. John Taylor wrote that the earth "was organized near the planet Kolob," [^63] and a lead article in the Times and Seasons (the Church newspaper at Nauvoo) stated in 1842 that sometime after the creation, the earth "was hurled into the immensity of space." [^64] Orson Pratt seems to have concurred in this view for he taught that the earth has occupied its present orbit around the sun "for six thousand years." [^65] Though Elder Pratt does not say where the earth was created, he dates the beginning of its existence in our solar system some time after the creation had been completed and life had been placed upon the earth. Brigham Young explained:

When the earth was framed and brought into existence and man was placed upon it, it was near the throne of our Father in heaven. . . . This is the glory the earth came from, and when it is glorified it will return again unto the presence of the Father, and it will dwell there, and these intelligent beings that I am looking at, if they live worthy of it, will dwell upon this earth. [^66]

Again:

This earthly ball, this little opake [opaque] substance thrown off into space, is ony a speck in the great universe; and when it is celestialized it will go back into the presence of God, where it was first framed. All belongs to God, and those who keep his celestial law will return to him. [^67]

Such statements as those expressed above appear to be commentaries on Abraham's explanation that in the creation and placement of life upon the earth the Gods were operating on Kolob's time and, even after life had been placed upon the earth, they "had not appointed unto Adam his reckoning." [^68] Such statements were first expressed at the time Joseph Smith was translating the Book of Abraham and preparing it for publication, and they appear to have their origin in explanations which the Prophet made to his associates. [^69] All these statements indicate that the earth was in a different state of existence when it was first created than it is in now. Evidently a different law then governed it; it had a different relationship to other bodies in space than it has now, including our sun and the planets in our solar system; and its reckoning of time was the same as that of Kolob, which indicates that the earth was rotating according to the same law and program as that which pertains to Kolob. [^70]

The Time Schedule in the Creation

An awareness of the setting of Abraham's account of the creation makes it easier for students of modern scripture to understand the patriarch's record concerning the time schedule in the creation. As has been indicated earlier in this chapter, Abraham's account of the creation actually starts with his vision of Kolob and the stellar system governing that great sphere. Not only does Abraham indicate that the earth is a part of that great system, but he associates it directly with Kolob during the period of its creation; he also states that during the creation and for a period of time thereafter, the earth had the same schedule of time as Kolob. [^71] Of Kolob's schedule of time, Abraham wrote: "The Lord said unto me . . . that Kolob was after the manner of the Lord, according to its times and seasons in the revolutions thereof; that one revolution was a day unto the Lord, after his manner of reckoning, it being one thousand years according to the time appointed unto that [sphere] whereon thou standest." [^72]

If the earth was directly associated with the Kolob during its creation and if it was still subject for a period thereafter to the same schedule of time as Kolob, it would seem that the events of the creation and placement of life upon the earth were carried out during a period of 7,000 years [^73] according to our present system of computing time. And since it has been nearly 6,000 years since the present temporal order was instituted on earth by the fall of Adam, it would seem that the activities of the creation apparently commenced about 13,000 years ago.

A careful study of evidence found in the scriptures and in the explanations of Joseph Smith supports the above view: First, in the Book of Moses, as in Genesis, each creative period is designated by the term "day," which is said in the Bible to be equivalent to one thousand years as man now measures time. [^74] As has been indicated, Abraham confirms the latter point when he states "that one revolution [of Kolob] was a day unto the Lord, after his manner of reckoning, it being one thousand years according" to man's present schedule of time. [^75]

Second, Abraham uses the term "time" to designate each period in the creation, and he states categorically that the term "time" means one day of the Lord's time. In reporting that the Gods caused the light "to be divided" from the darkness on the first day of creation, Abraham apparently means that they started the earth to rotate according to a given schedule of time. "And it came to pass that from the evening until morning they called night," Abraham wrote, "and from the morning until the evening they called day; and this was the first, or the beginning, of that which they called day and night." [^76] In concluding his report of the second day's activities, Abraham again states: "And it came to pass that it was from evening until morning that they called night; and it came to pass that it was from morning until evening that they called day; and this was the second time that they called night and day." [^77] Then as he concludes his report of the third day, Abraham states: "And it came to pass that they numbered the days; from the evening until the morning they called night; and it came to pass, from the morning until the evening they called day; and it was the third time." [^78] They numbered the days—the first, second, and third day; and it was the third time. The third time? What does the term "time" mean? The question is answered in the unabbreviated statement which Abraham uses at the conclusion of the second day: "And this was the second time that they called night and day." [^79] The term "time" therefore means one revolution of the earth—one full day according to the system of time which the Gods were then using. Thus the term "time" and the term "day" are synonymous in their meaning, and they mean one day of the Lord's time.

After the second day, Abraham abbreviates the statement: And this was the second, third, fourth, etc. time that they called night and day. Thereafter he merely states at the conclusion of the respective days: "And it was the third time." "And it was the fourth time." "And it was the fifth time." [^80] But to make sure that the reader retains in mind the meaning of the term "time," he declares on the sixth day: "And they numbered the sixth time." [^81] In other words, it was the sixth time that they called night and day, [^82] or the sixth day.

The fact that the term "time" means a "day" unto the Lord, or a day of the Lord's time, is confirmed when the Gods warned Adam not to partake of the forbidden fruit and, as quoted in the preceding section of this chapter, declared: "For in the time [i.e., the day] that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die." Abraham then explains: "Now I, Abraham, saw that it was after the Lord's time, which was after the time of Kolob; for as yet the Gods had not appointed unto Adam his reckoning." [^83] That is, the Gods had not appointed unto Adam his own reckoning different from that of Kolob, or the reckoning that man now has on the earth. Having commenced by making the earth rotate according to Kolob's time on the first day of creation, the Gods were still operating upon that system when they placed Adam in the Garden of Eden. They therefore warned Adam that "in the time," [^84] or the day, he would partake of the forbidden fruit he would die. Orson Pratt explained:

In the Book of Abraham, as well as in the inspired translation of the Scriptures, given through Joseph Smith [i.e., the Book of Moses], the Lord says, in speaking of the work of creating this earth, that he was governed by celestial time. According to this new revelation, there is a certain great world, called Kolob, placed near one of the celestial kingdoms, whose diurnal rotation takes place once in a thousand of our years; and that celestial time was measured by those celestial beings, by the rotations of Kolob, hence one day with the Lord was a thousand of our years. If this was the case, the six days of the creation of our earth, the six days during which it was being prepared as a habitation for man, must have been six thousand of our years. When the Lord spoke to Adam, after having placed him in the Garden of Eden, concerning the forbidden fruit, saying—"In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die!" we cannot suppose that the day there referred to meant a day of twenty-four hours. It could not have meant that, for history informs us that Adam lived almost one thousand years from the time of the Fall; but before the day of a thousand years had wholly passed away his death did take place.

The Book of Abraham, translated by the Prophet Joseph Smith, also contains an account of the creation and the fall of man; but the word translated "day" in Genesis is translated in the Book of Abraham "time"—"in the time that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die." In the next sentence the same book says, speaking of time—"The reckoning of time was not yet given to man," that is, the Lord had reckoned previous to that period by the diurnal rotations of Kolob, and that, without doubt, was the day referred to in which our first parents should die, if they ate of the forbidden fruit. [^85]

Third, Joseph Smith is said to have taught "that the six days of creation were six periods of the Lord's time." [^86] He equated the seven days during which the earth was created and life was placed upon it with the seven thousand years of the earth's temporal existence—the period from the fall of Adam to the end of the millennium. The Prophet said: "As God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his work, and sanctified it, and also formed man out of the dust of the earth, even so, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years will the Lord God sanctify the earth, and complete the salvation of man." [^87]

Finally, the argument can be made that there was nothing done in each period of the creation that could not reasonably have been accomplished in a day of the Lord's time. The events of the creation did not occur accidently, nor were they brought to pass in a gradual way by the action of natural forces such as those that are known generally to man. Having planned each day's activities, the Gods expressed their will through the Holy Spirit which carried out each of their decrees in the time that was specified. On the first day, materials were brought together to form the earth as an orb; light was made to shine upon it; and the earth commenced to rotate according to Kolob's schedule of time, so that the light was divided from the darkness. [^88] Second, the atmosphere was organized from elements that surrounded the earth. [^89] The land was then made to emerge on the third day and become dry, as the waters were gathered together unto one place; and the land was prepared to sustain plant life. [^90] On the fourth day some things were done so that the light of the sun, moon, and stars would have a desired effect upon the earth when it became subject to a temporal law. This was an organization of the lights in the firmament (another organization that concerned the earth's atmospheric heaven) and not the creation of the sun, moon, and stars. [^91] Fifth, the waters upon the earth were prepared to sustain marine life and water fowl. [^92] On the sixth day, the land was prepared to sustain animal life; and as that day drew to a close, the Gods came down to form man upon the earth. [^93] Finally, as the seventh day commenced, the earth was fully sanctified by the powers of the Holy Spirit, a mist arose and watered the face of the earth, man was formed, and a garden was planted; and man having been placed in the garden, other forms of life were organized upon the newly created sphere. [^94] When it is understood that these actions were carried out by the power of the Holy Spirit, it may be conceded that each action need not have taken more than a day of the Lord's time to perform.

God's Objectives In The Creation

The Earth Created as a Physical-spiritual Sphere

The great object in the creation was not to organize the earth as a temporal sphere subject to the law that now governs it, but to create a physical-spiritual sphere capable of abiding forever [^95] in the midst of the glory and power of the Father, filled with various forms of life that were also spiritual in the nature of their physical organizations. A physical-spiritual sphere is organized from gross elements, but it is enveloped in the powers of truth, light, and life that exist in the presence of God, and it is quickened and sustained by these divine powers. Such a sphere, therefore, is both physical and spiritual in the nature of its organization. As indicated above, the same was true of the several forms of life which were organized in a physical-spiritual state and placed upon the newly formed and sanctified earth.

If man is to understand the creation, he must see that the earth was formed initially as a physical-spiritual sphere, and that all life that was placed upon it was formed in a like state of organization. That state of existence was, in some respects, similar to the state which will exist in the resurrection, in that resurrected bodies are both physical and spiritual in the nature of their organization. A revelation said, for example, of the righteous: "Notwithstanding they die, they also [with the earth] shall rise again, a spiritual body." [^96] The Nephite prophet Amulek observed: "This mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption." [^97] The Apostle Paul also observed that in mortality man is a "natural body," while in the resurrection he is "raised a spiritual body." He explained: "There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body." [^98]

Latter-day Saint thought asserts that there are two periods when life is spiritual in the nature of its physical organization: (1) immediately after the creation of the earth when life was placed upon the new sphere and (2) when the righteous are restored by the power of God's redemption to a physical-spiritual state in the resurrection. These two spiritual states were spoken of in a revelation which declared:

. . . by the power of my Spirit created I them; yea all things both spiritual and temporal—

First spiritual [in the creation of the earth and physical life], secondly temporal [in the subsequent organization of life according to present temporal law], which is the beginning of my work; and again [looking at the present mortal state in contrast with the future resurrected state] first temporal, and secondly spiritual, which is the last of my work—

Speaking unto you that you may naturally understand; but unto myself my works have no end, neither beginning. . . . [^99]

A casual reading of the above passage may mislead one to conclude that the word "spiritual" in the first instance has reference to the organization of life in the pre-earth spirit state. Two points should be considered: First, the second usage of the term "spiritual" refers unmistakably to the resurrection, when life will be physical-spiritual in the nature of its organization, for this is the last organization which God affects upon life. This being true, there is no reason why the first use of the word "spiritual" in the above statement should not also refer to a physical organization, or to the organization that was brought into being in the creation. Second, to assume that the first use of the word "spiritual" in the above quotation has reference to the pre-earth spirit organization is to imply that the physical earth and all life that was placed upon it were organized initially in a temporal state, for the revelation above states specifically that the next organization was of a temporal nature. But the earth and the several forms of life which were placed upon it were not organized in the creation on a temporal plane. Instead, the earth was first spiritual in its physical organization, and it became temporal by the subsequent organization which occurred at the fall of man. In this regard note that a revelation makes reference to the seven thousand years of the earth's "temporal existence." [^100] This temporal state was instituted by the fall of Adam [^101] and is the intermediate state between the two spiritual organizations referred to in the above quotation. After the creation and until the fall, the earth was not a temporal sphere but a physical-spiritual sphere; and all life that had been placed upon the earth was in a similar state of organization. [^102]

That the several forms of life which were placed upon the earth in the creation were spiritual in their organization is indicated in the following statement concerning the creation of trees and other forms of vegetable life in their physical form on earth:

And out of the ground made I, the Lord God, to grow every tree, naturally, that is pleasant to the sight of man; and man could behold it. And it became also a living soul. For it was spiritual in the day that I created it; for it remaineth in the sphere in which I, God, created it, yea, even all things which I prepared for the use of man; and man saw that it was good for food. [^103]

There are three important points in this statement: First, when the trees were formed "out of the ground," they were "spiritual" in the nature of their organization. This was the "sphere" in which God created them. Second, not only were trees spiritual when they were created in physical form, but this was true of "all things" which God "prepared for the use of man." [^104] Finally, if all things which were prepared for the use of man were spiritual in their physical organization, it follows that man must also have been a physical-spiritual being when he was placed upon the earth. Otherwise he could not have utilized that which was prepared for him.

The Earth Established in a Paradisiacal State of Glory

After the creation, the earth was in a paradisiacal state of glory. There was no veil to shield it from the powers of God's presence; and though the glory of God had not been organized into the earth to become a permanent part of it (as it will be in the redeemed or resurrected earth [^105]), the newly formed and sanctified sphere was enveloped in divine light and truth, which quickened all things upon the earth with the powers and attributes of celestial life. This is the meaning of the statement that the earth was in a paradisiacal state after it was created.

To be more specific, the earth after its creation was in a paradisiacal-celestial state. This term, which combines the meaning of the two words which compose it, describes (1) the state of glory in which the earth existed and (2) the kind or degree of glory by which it was quickened in its paradisiacal state. The earth's paradisiacal state of glory has been described in the preceding paragraph. To say that the earth was in a paradisiacal-celestial state carries the added meaning that the earth was enveloped in the glory and power of the Father, or that kind and degree of glory which the scriptures refer to as being celestial. For instance, a sphere is in a telestial condition when the Holy Spirit is the basic source of the divine intelligence and power which it receives from God; it is in a terrestrial condition when the glory of Christ as the Son is its basic source of truth and light; and it is in a celestial condition when it is capable of receiving the glory and power of the Father. [^106] Since the earth after its creation dwelt in a paradisiacal state amid the glory and power of the Father, it was then in a paradisiacal-celestial state of glory.

There are several points that support the idea that the earth was in a paradisiacal state of glory after its creation and that make clear that nature of life in that state: First, Joseph Smith said that when this earth is redeemed, it "will be rolled back into the presence of God and crowned with celestial glory." [^107] For the earth to be "rolled back" into the presence of God implies that it was once in such a state. A lead-article in the Times and Seasons also expressed this view of the earth. [^108]

Second, when the earth was in the presence of God after its creation, it was in a state of glory similar to that to which it will be renewed at the opening of the millennium. Joseph Smith wrote editorially that God's latter-day program concerning the earth is designed "to bring about the millennial glory, when 'the earth shall yield its increase, resume its paradisean glory, and become as the garden of the Lord.'" [^109] In setting forth the "Articles of Faith" of the Church, he stated that when Christ comes to the earth the second time, the earth "will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." [^110] For the earth to resume its paradisean glory, or be renewed, it must be brought back to a state of glory similar to that which it occupied after it was created. This renewal, however, will not be a complete restoration of the earth to a paradisiacal-celestial state, for during the millennium only the glory of Christ as the Son will be manifest and abide upon the earth. [^111] In other words, the earth will then be in a paradisiacal-terres-trial state of glory.

When Jesus appears in the clouds of heaven at His second coming, all corrupt forms of life will be destroyed by the brightness of His glory. The elements of the earth will "melt with fervent heat." And all things shall become new, that His "knowledge and glory may dwell upon the earth." [^112] Christ's glory will then "be upon" His people, [^113] and the earth will be "clothed with the glory of her God." [^114] By means of the glory which will be manifest, life will be endowed with divine attributes of peace and love, the enmity of all flesh will cease, and truth, life, and union will prevail. There will be no death because the corrupt elements that now cause the body to deteriorate will largely be destroyed in the renewal of the earth, and the earth will be endowed by Christ's glory to a measurable degree with the divine powers of life that are associated with the Holy Spirit. [^115]

Third, the earth will still be a temporal sphere when it is renewed in the millennium, [^116] and because of this the manifestation of Christ's glory and power will result in the earth being transfigured during this period. Being enveloped in glory, it will be quickened so that it can abide in the presence of God. It will then be in a state like that which Jesus was in upon the Mount of Transfiguration. Matthew states that on that occasion Christ's "face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light." [^117] Mark said: "And his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so as no fuller on earth could white them." [^118] "A bright cloud overshadowed" Jesus and His apostles, [^119] and the voice of the Father, Elohim, spoke "from the excellent glory" declaring of Christ: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." [^120]

Joseph Smith seems to have taught that on this occasion Peter, James, and John were also transfigured, [^121] and having experienced this glorified state, the apostles were shown that during the millennium the earth will be elevated to a like condition of glory. "When the day of transfiguration shall come," a revelation declared, ". . . the earth shall be transfigured, even according to the pattern which was shown unto mine apostles upon the mount." [^122]

At the time of the creation, the earth was in a state of glory even greater than that which was manifested upon the Mount of Transfiguration, and greater than that which will prevail on earth during the millennial era. All that is said above of the nature of life in the millennium can be said to a greater degree of the state of life upon the earth immediately after the creation.

Because the state of paradisiacal glory which the earth occupied immediately after the creation is so different from man's present mortal state, it is difficult for man to understand the creation. It may be for this reason that Christ has promised to reveal many things pertaining to the creation after He comes in His glory, and after the earth has been renewed to a paradisiacal state of glory. Only then will man be capable of understanding many deep and meaningful things about the creation. A revelation said:

. . . verily I say unto you, in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things—

Things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—

Things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven.

And all they who suffer persecution for my name, and endure in faith, though they are called to lay down their lives for my sake yet shall they partake of all this glory. [^123]

The fact that the above promises are made as a part of the Lord's explanation concerning the renewal of the earth at the beginning of the millennium indicates that they should be seen in light of that anticipated renewal. God's promise to reveal all things is not limited to the physical details of the creation, but includes the spiritual aspects of the creation, or the physical-spiritual state to which the earth was brought in the creation. This conclusion is supported by the Lord's promise: "And all they who suffer persecution for my name, and endure in faith, though they are called to lay down their lives for my sake yet shall they partake of all this glory." [^124] The revelation implies that there are many things which pertain to the creation that can properly be revealed only after the earth has been restored to a paradisiacal state of glory and man has the necessary experience and environment to understand them. All these things Christ will reveal; and from that great revelation man will learn much pertaining to the true state and condition of the earth at the time it was created.

Summary

Joseph Smith taught that the elements are eternal. The earth had a beginning, but the elements from which it was formed have always existed. The earth was not created by chance, but for a divine purpose—to be the abode of man now and in eternity. It was not created by purely natural processes, but by the power of the Holy Spirit. Divine directions were issued and the Holy Spirit organized the elements in accordance with those directives. In the organization, Christ acted as the great executive of the Father, and the noble and great spirits assisted him. All forms of life had been organized previously in the spirit creation.

Abraham sets his account of the creation in the context of his vision of Kolob and the Grand Council of the Gods. For this reason, his account is both a blueprint and a statement of that which took place in the creation. He also makes it plain that in the creation the earth was placed under the law of Kolob in its schedule of time. Each day, or "time," in the creation therefore consisted of a period of one thousand years as man now computes time.

It is important to understand that the earth was created as a physical-spiritual sphere, not as a temporal sphere, and that it was established in a paradisiacal state of glory. This is a state of glory and power similar to that to which the earth will be renewed during the millennium.

Footnotes

Joseph Smith published his translation of Abraham's account in TS, III (March 15, 1842), pp. 719-722.

. . . Moses, my son, I will speak unto thee concerning this earth upon which thou standest; and thou shalt write the things which I shall speak.

And in a day when the children of men shall esteem my words as naught and take many of them from the book which thou shalt write, behold I will raise up another like unto thee; and they shall be had again among the children of men—among as many as shall believe.—Moses 1:40-41.

First, modern revelation implies that the spirit creation took place ages before the physical organization of the earth occurred. Why should an account of the spirit creation be included as a part of the account of the later organization? The spirit and the physical creations did not occur together, nor did one follow immediately after the other. For instance, as the Firstborn of the Father's spirit children, Jesus Christ created worlds without number before He was born of Mary on earth. (See Moses 1:31-33.) No doubt this took an extended period of time as we now measure it. The inference that Christ had existed as an organized spirit for extended ages before He acquired a physical body implies that others may also have had an extended existence as spirits before coming to the earth.

Second, except for a point of distinction that will be discussed hereafter (that Abraham combines a blueprint with an actual account of the creation), Abraham's account of the creation parallels that which Moses wrote. There can be no question that the account written by Abraham deals exclusively with the organization of the physical earth, for he first beheld the intelligences, or spirits, that had been organized at an earlier time in the spirit creation. He then beheld the creation of the physical earth and was shown that certain of the noble and great spirits participated in the creation. If Abraham's account of the physical creation parallels the account written by Moses, it follows that the later account must also deal with the physical creation.

Third, in the statement of the creation that was revealed to Moses, the Lord declared that it was His purpose to give "an account of this [physical] earth and the inhabitants thereof."—Moses 1:35. There is no reason why God should depart from His stated objective by revealing, in addition, an account of the spirit creation. It was only necessary for Him to clarify that there had been such a prior creation. This fact the Lord clarified in Moses 3:5, 7.

Fourth, with specific reference to the creation of the physical earth, a revelation declared that "God made the world in six days and on the seventh day he finished his work, and sanctified it."—D&C 77:12. These six days of creation are those mentioned in Genesis 1, Moses 2, and Abraham 4. The statements found in these chapters therefore are concerned with the creation of the physical earth, not the previous spirit creation.

Finally, in the spirit creation, the spirit world and all forms of life were organized from that pure fine substance that is called spirit. As stated in a previous chapter, spirit and light are inseparably related to each other. (See chapter six.) This fact indicates that Genesis 1, Moses 2, and Abraham 4 do not deal with the spirit creation, for these chapters are concerned with the creation of the physical earth from gross elements. How, for instance, could darkness reign upon the face of the deep on an earth that was being formed from spirit, or light? How, in such an organization, could the waters be gathered together unto one place and the dry land appear? Was it necessary to organize the earth in relation to the sun in the spirit creation, when the spirit world was formed in the midst of everlasting burnings and was organized out of brilliant elements of spirit or light? From these questions alone it should be evident that Genesis 1, Moses 2, and Abraham 4 do not delineate the events of the spirit creation of the earth and of all life.

Sunday, [July] 13, [1862] . . . in the P. M. Br. Brigham spoke. . . . Said that when this world was first made it was in a close proximity to God. When man sinned it was hurled millions of miles away from its first position, and that was why it was called the Fall.—Walker, op. cit., under date.

For instance, a being endowed with the glory of God is not subject to the same laws as a mere physical being. The resurrected Christ appeared to His disciples as they were locked in a room, and the walls of the room were no barrier to Him. Neither were they to the angel Moroni when he appeared to Joseph Smith in 1823. Of the departure of this resurrected being, the Prophet wrote: "After this communication, I saw the light in the room begin to gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking to me, and it continued to do so until the room was again left dark, except just around him; when, instantly I saw, as it were, a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended till he entirely disappeared."—Ibid., I, p. 13. The scriptures contain several accounts of individuals who were "caught away" by the Holy Spirit, being transported bodily by this divine intelligent power. (See Acts 8:39; 2 Nephi 4:25; I.V., Luke 4:5.) Since the earth was in a state of paradisiacal glory until after the fall of Adam, it could have been transported in space in a similar way, before the divine powers that were associated with it at the time of its creation were withdrawn. Again, in the creation, the powers of God were put into operation, not merely those natural forces now known to man.

---
Notas:
[^1] Life was placed upon the earth at the beginning of the seventh day (See, for example, D&C 77:12), which concluded the activities of that day.
[^2] Abraham 4:11-12.
[^3] Abraham 4:20-21.
[^4] Abraham 4:24-27.
[^5] Abraham 4:29-31.
[^6] Abraham 4:29-31.
[^7] Moses 3:5.
[^8] D&C 77:12.
[^9] HC, III, pp. 285-286. The statement in Genesis to which the Prophet refers is as follows:
[^10] HC, V, pp. 392-393.
[^11] Ibid., VI, p. 310.
[^12] Abraham 3:24.
[^13] Franklin D. Richards and James A. Little, A Compendium of the Doctrine of the Gospel (Salt Lake City, 1882), p. 287.
[^14] Abraham 4:2.
[^15] Moses 2:2.
[^16] "Joseph Smith Papers, 1839-1841," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 181.
[^17] JD, XVI, p. 314.
[^18] Abraham 4:2; Moses 2:2.
[^19] Abraham 4:2.
[^20] Moses 2:2.
[^21] JD, XVI, p. 314.
[^22] Abraham 4:3; Moses 2:3.
[^23] JD, XVIII, p. 327. For a statement by Orson Pratt, see ibid., XVI, pp. 314-315.
[^24] The Evening And The Morning Star, I (February, 1833), p. 65.
[^25] Moses 2:4.
[^26] Abraham 4:4.
[^27] Moses 2:4-5.
[^28] Abraham 4:4-5.
[^29] See the section in the preceding chapter entitled "The Time Schedule in the Creation."
[^30] Moses 2:7.
[^31] Abraham 4:7.
[^32] Abraham 4:8; Moses 2:8.
[^33] See Abraham 5:5; Moses 3:5.
[^34] Abraham 4:9-10; Moses 2:9-10.
[^35] Parley P. Pratt, Voice of Warning, pp. 90-91.
[^36] TS, III (February 1, 1842), p. 673.
[^37] D&C 133:23-24.
[^38] TS, op. cit.
[^39] Abraham 4:11-12. See also Moses 2:11-12.
[^40] This action took place on the fourth day.
[^41] Abraham 4:14-19. See also Moses 2:14-19.
[^42] See JD, XVII, p. 143.
[^43] Abraham 5:13.
[^44] Abraham 4:20-23. See also Moses 2:20-23.
[^45] Abraham 4:24-25. See also Moses 2:24-25.
[^46] Abraham 4:26-27.
[^47] Abraham 4:28-31.
[^48] D&C 77:12.
[^49] Abraham 5:1-2.
[^50] Moses 3:1-2.
[^51] D&C 77:12.
[^52] Abraham 5:3.
[^53] See again D&C 77:12.
[^54] See D&C 101:23-25.
[^55] D&C 84:24.
[^56] I.V., Mark 2:25-26.
[^57] D&C 77:12.
[^58] JD, XVI, p. 325.
[^59] Abraham 5:4-5.
[^60] Moses 3:5.
[^61] Abraham 5:4-5.
[^62] Moses 3:5.
[^63] D&C 77:12.
[^64] Abraham 5:6-8.
[^65] HC, VI, p. 310.
[^66] Moses 3:6-8.
[^67] Abraham 5:20; Moses 3:19.
[^68] The view is sometimes expressed that the term "first flesh" means that Adam was the first to become mortal and therefore alludes to the fall of man. This theory rests upon four assumptions, none of which can scripturally be sustained:
[^69] Moses 3:7.
[^70] Moses 3:5.
[^71] Abraham 5:5; Moses 3:5.
[^72] Moses 1:34.
[^73] Abraham 1:3.
[^74] 1 Nephi 5:11.
[^75] Moses 4:26.
[^76] 2 Nephi 2:20. See also Acts 17:26.
[^77] Abraham 5:14.
[^78] Abraham 5:19; Moses 3:25.
[^79] Abraham 5:20.
[^80] This does not mean that there cannot be some changes and modifications in physical organisms on earth in its present temporal condition. The theory of evolution and the law of present evolution are two different things. The theory of evolution is a fictional construction showing how some suppose that life originated on earth. The law of evolution is that law which permits the presently observed exceptions to occur in the operation of nature.
[^81] Abraham 5:7.
[^82] Johnson to Gibbs, p. 17.
[^83] Luke 3:38.
[^84] Moses 6:22. This doctrine does not deny the fact that in mortality Christ is the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh.
[^85] Abraham 5:8; Moses 3:8.
[^86] HC, VI, p. 476.
[^87] JD, VI, p. 31.
[^88] Ibid., XV, p. 137.
[^89] Ibid., IX, p. 283.
[^90] Ibid., XI, p. 122.
[^91] Ibid., VII, pp. 285-286. For other statements by Brigham Young, see ibid., I, pp. 46-53; III, p. 319.
[^92] Deseret Evening News, December 27, 1913, Sec. III, p. 7.
[^93] Pratt, Key to Theology, pp. 49-50.
[^94] Abraham 5:7; Moses 3:7; Genesis 2:7.
[^95] Moses 6:59.
[^96] Lectures on Faith, No. 2. A writer in the Times and Seasons also declared:
[^97] Lectures on Faith, op. cit.
[^98] Acts 2:1-11.
[^99] Helaman 5:43-45.
[^100] 3 Nephi 19:32-34. See also 3 Nephi 17:15-17.
[^101] 3 Nephi 26:14, 16.
[^102] See HC, III, pp. 385-386.
[^103] See, for example, ibid., V, p. 555; D&C 20:60; 50:27.
[^104] Pratt, Voice of Warning, p. 91. John Taylor quoted and thereby sanctioned this statement in his Government of God, pp. 106-115.
[^105] TS, III (February 1, 1842), p. 672.
[^106] HC, VI, p. 366.
[^107] JD, I, p. 328. Several scriptures state categorically that the fall of Adam brought death. See Moses 4:25; 6:48, 59; Alma 42:6-9.
[^108] JD, XXI, p. 323. See also Ibid., III, p. 344; XXI, pp. 202-203.
[^109] Ibid., I, p. 58.
[^110] 2 Nephi 2:22. From verse 17 it seems that Lehi obtained his information from the Brass Plates of Laban which contained an account of the creation. See 1 Nephi 5:11. The doctrine of the fall of Adam as contained in the Book of Mormon assumes that this state of life existed prior to Adam's transgression. See the following chapter.
[^111] As the millennium commences, terrestrial-type people, which includes many among the heathen nations, will remain upon the earth for a time. They will abide the coming of Christ in glory, which they could not do if the full glory of the Father were manifest. See HC, V, p. 212.
[^112] See D&C 101:23-31.
[^113] D&C 45:59.
[^114] D&C 84:101.
[^115] See again D&C 101:23-31. The fact that there will be no death as indicated in this statement does not mean that there will be no transition from the paradisiacal state to a glorified resurrected state.
[^116] A revelation refers to the seven thousand years of the earth's "temporal existence," which commenced with the fall of Adam. This assumes that during the millennium the earth will still be a temporal sphere.
[^117] Matthew 17:2.
[^118] Mark 9:3.
[^119] Matthew 17:5.
[^120] 2 Peter 1:17.
[^121] HC, III, p. 387.
[^122] D&C 63:20-21. The transfiguration of the earth spoken of in this statement does not refer to the earth in its final redeemed state. To be transfigured it must be in a temporal state. As a temporal sphere, it must then be enveloped in the glory of God and quickened by that divine substance so that it can abide in the presence of God. In its redeemed state, after the millennium, the earth will be a resurrected and glorified sphere, not a transfigured sphere.
[^123] D&C 101:32-35.
[^124] D&C 101:35.
