Hyrum L. Andrus, God, Man, and the Universe ( 1968)

13

The Seven Days of Creation

God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his work, and sanctified it, and also formed man out of the dust of the earth.—JOSEPH SMITH.

The scriptural story of the creation of the earth is simple and direct. Since the elements are eternal, the story of the creation is concerned with but one series of actions affecting the elements of the earth during their eternal existence. According to the scriptures, that series of events commenced about 13,000 years ago; and during seven creative periods of 1,000 years each by man's present measurement of time, the earth was formed and life was placed upon it. [^1] On the first day of creation, elements were brought together to form the earth as an empty and desolate sphere. Each day's activities thereafter, until the conclusion of the sixth day, were designed to prepare the earth for life. Then, after the earth had been finished and sanctified at the beginning of the seventh day, life was formed in a physical-spiritual state and placed upon the earth in a paradisiacal-celestial condition of glory. This, essentially, is the scriptural story of the creation.

The General Outline Of The Creation Story

The First Six Days a Preparation of the Earth for Life

The story of the creation falls logically into two major divisions: (1) statements found in Abraham 4, Moses 2, and Genesis 1 that relate how the earth was formed as a physical sphere and prepared as an orb for life during the first six days of creation, and (2) statements found in Abraham 5, Moses 3, and Genesis 2 that recount the actual placement of life upon the earth at the beginning of the seventh day. The events associated with the first of these divisions concern the preparation of the physical-spiritual earth for life, not the placement of life upon the earth during the respective days of creation. Abraham clarifies this fact when he observes that during the first six days of creation the Gods merely prepared the earth for the several forms of life that were to be placed upon it. On the third day, for instance, he reports the Gods as stating: "Let us prepare the earth to bring forth grass," etc. Abraham then records: "And the Gods organized the earth to bring forth grass from its own seed." [^2] Grass, trees, etc., were not then placed upon the earth, but the Gods merely prepared the earth for these forms of life. On the fifth day the Gods said: "Let us prepare the waters to bring forth abundantly the moving creatures that have life; and the fowl, that they may fly above the earth in the open expanse of heaven." Abraham then observes: "And the Gods prepared the waters that they might bring forth great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters were to bring forth abundantly after their kind; and every winged fowl after their kind." [^3] On the sixth day, "the Gods prepared the earth to bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle and creeping things, and beasts of the earth after their kind." They also "took counsel among themselves and said: Let us go down and form man in our image, after our likeness." Declared Abraham: "So the Gods went down to organize man in their own image." [^4] Although they went down to form man as the sixth day drew to a close, they did not accomplish this task on that day. At that time, they had not yet placed any form of life upon the earth. This is evident by the following declaration made by the Gods as they went down to form man and spoke on the sixth day of that which they intended to do on the seventh day, when they actually placed man and the other forms of life upon the earth:

And the Gods said: Behold, we will give them [i.e., Adam and Eve] every herb bearing seed that shall come upon the face of all the earth, and every tree which shall have fruit upon it; yea, the fruit of the tree yielding seed to them we will give it; it shall be for their meat.

And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, behold, we will give them life, and also we will give to them every green herb for meat, and all these things shall be thus organized.

And the Gods said: We will do everything that we have said, and organize them. . . . [^5]

The phrases placed in italics indicate that none of the several forms of life spoken of in the creation had been placed upon the earth at the close of the sixth day. They make it plain that the herbs and the trees were not yet placed upon the earth. The Gods spoke in the future tense when they said of the beasts and the birds: "We will give them life." And of all forms of life to be placed upon the earth, they declared: "All these things shall be thus organized." [^6] Here again Abraham makes it apparent that during the first six days of creation the earth was merely formed and prepared for life to be placed upon it.

Though the account of the creation written by Moses is not as clear on the above point as that recorded by Abraham, a thorough study of the story which Moses wrote reveals that he too indicates that life was not placed upon the earth until after the sixth day. As the ancient lawgiver begins his account of the seventh day, he reports God as stating: "I, the Lord God, had not caused it to rain upon the face of the earth. . . . And there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air." [^7] Statements in Moses's account of the first six days of creation that seem to imply that life was placed upon the earth at the time the earth was prepared to sustain it are therefore God's affirmations to Moses that the given life was formed and placed upon the earth, not that it was formed and placed upon the earth on the day the earth was prepared to receive it.

All Life Placed Upon the Earth on the Seventh Day

As has been indicated, the second major division within the creation story relates the activities of the seventh day. On this day the earth was finished and sanctified, and the several forms of life were placed upon it. Joseph Smith wrote by revelation concerning the earth and man: "God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his work, and sanctified it, and also formed man out of the dust of the earth." [^8] After man was formed and placed in the Garden of Eden, the other forms of life were created and put upon the earth. These events are related in Abraham 5, Moses 3, and Genesis 2.

Statements made by Joseph Smith indicate that he understood that man was placed upon the earth on the seventh day, as the revelation quoted above states. Speaking of Adam's priesthood, the Prophet said: "He obtained it in the creation, before the world was formed, as in Genesis 1:26, 27, 28." [^9] Had man been placed upon the earth on the sixth day as the final act in the creation, which some conclude by a casual study of the account in Genesis, the statements recorded in Genesis 1:26, 27, 28 (which correspond to those in Moses 2:26, 27, 28) would not have been made before the world was formed. But if the earth was not finished and sanctified in preparation for life until the seventh day, the above declarations of God concerning Adam would have been in the creation and before the earth was fully formed, which indicates that Genesis 1:26, 27, 28 is not speaking of the actual placing of man on earth.

Joseph Smith also accepted the statements in Moses 3:7-8 and Genesis 2:7-8, which report events of the seventh day, as referring to the actual creation of Adam. The Prophet stated: "The 7th verse of [the] 2nd chapter of Genesis ought to read—God breathed into Adam his spirit [i.e., Adam's spirit] or breath of life; but when the word 'rauch' applies to Eve, it should be translated lives." [^10] Again, in speaking of the creation of man as reported in the above verses, Joseph Smith transposed: "God made a tabernacle and put a spirit into it, and it became a living soul." [^11]

Some writers have concluded that life was placed upon the earth as each day's activities during the third, fifth, and sixth days of creation prepared the earth for that form of life. But the evidence which is given in the accounts of the creation that were revealed through Joseph Smith seems definitely to oppose this view. First, Abraham states clearly that the earth was merely prepared on the given day for the respective forms of life which were later placed upon it, not that the given forms of life were then placed upon the earth. There is no evidence in Abraham's account that life in any form was placed upon the earth during any of the first six days of creation. Instead, the ancient patriarch indicates that the activities performed on these days were strictly a preparation of the physical earth for life.

Second, as indicated in Doctrine and Covenants 77:12, Abraham 5:3, and Moses 3:3, and as will be discussed later in this chapter, the earth was not sanctified until the beginning of the seventh day. This seems to imply that it was not until the seventh day that the earth was brought fully up to a paradisiacal-celestial state of glory. If so, the earth was not prepared for life of a physical-spiritual nature to be placed upon it until the seventh day.

Third, statements in Abraham 5:5 and Moses 3:5 clearly indicate that it had not rained upon the earth before the seventh day. Though the earth had been formed and prepared for life in the activities which were consummated at the opening of the seventh day, both Abraham and Moses imply that it was not until God caused a mist to water the whole face of the earth that life could have been sustained naturally upon the newly formed sphere.

Fourth, Moses 3:5 states categorically that at the beginning of the seventh day "there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air." At this point in his account, Abraham gives a similar impression. Both Abraham and Moses clarify that at the beginning of the seventh day there was no life upon the earth.

Fifth, if the several forms of life had been placed upon the earth by the end of the sixth day, Abraham and Moses would have no reason to recount the placement of these forms of life upon the earth as part of the activities of the seventh day, with the emphasis that this was actually when the several forms of life arrived.

Sixth, had man been placed upon the earth on the sixth day after the other forms of life had arrived, the work of creation would of necessity have been finished at the end of the sixth day. But Joseph Smith wrote by revelation, in Doctrine and Covenants 77:12, that God did not finish the work of creation until the seventh day. Abraham 5:1 and Moses 3:1 bear a similar testimony on this point.

Seventh, had the several forms of life been placed upon the earth on the days during which the newly formed sphere was prepared for life, man would have been placed upon the earth on the sixth day. But Joseph Smith wrote by revelation in Doctrine and Covenants 77:12, without ambiguity, that on the seventh day God formed man out of the dust of the earth, after the earth had been finished and sanctified.

Events Of The First Six Days Of Creation

The First Day of Creation

The initial act of the Gods on the first day of creation was to bring together materials and form the earth as an orb. "We will go down, for there is space there," the pre-earth Christ who was like unto God had declared to the noble and great spirits who were with Him, "and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these [i.e., the remainder of the Father's spirit children assigned to this earth] may dwell." [^12] Joseph Smith may have been referring to this initial act when he taught that "this earth was organized or formed out of other planets which were broken up and remodeled and made into the one on which we live." [^13]

Having reported that the Gods came down and "organized and formed the heavens and the earth" on the first day of creation, Abraham observed: "And the earth, after it was formed, was empty and desolate, because they had not formed anything but the earth." [^14] At this point in his account, Moses wrote that "the earth was without form, and void." [^15] Of the more nearly correct view, Joseph Smith said: "In the translation 'without form and void,' it should read, empty and desolate." [^16] The description of the earth as it is currently given in the Book of Moses is not without value. To be void means that the earth was empty of life—unoccupied, or destitute. And in comparison with the finished product, the earth at that time was probably lacking in form and symmetry.

In speaking of the state of the earth after it had been formed on the first day, Orson Pratt said: "The earth when created, according to the accounts we have, was covered with a flood of waters; no dry land, in fact no land at all, appeared, but a flood of waters seemed to encompass it." [^17] Both Abraham and Moses indicate that at this time the earth was inundated with water and that "darkness reigned upon the face of the deep." [^18] It would seem that as the creation commenced, the materials of the earth were not in a gaseous state, but at this point the physical sphere existed, covered with water. The action of the water, which covered the earth until the third day, may have done much to prepare the newly formed sphere to sustain vegetable life.

In his statement that darkness covered the face of the deep on the first day of creation, Moses makes a contribution that is not found in the account by Abraham. Abraham merely declares: "And darkness reigned upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit of the Gods was brooding upon the face of the waters." [^19] But to Moses the Lord stated: "I caused darkness to come up upon the face of the deep; and my Spirit moved upon the face of the water." [^20] This statement seems to imply that even as the elements were brought together to form the empty and desolate earth, they were enveloped to a degree in the light or glory of God. But by divine decree darkness was then made to prevail upon the earth for a period of time. On this point, Orson Pratt said:

It would seem, that light had been shining previous to this time. The universe, probably was lighted up, so far as it existed, and that light shone forth over the face of this embryo creation. Where that light came from or how it was produced is not mentioned; but the Lord was obliged to create darkness in order to envelop the earth therein. [^21]

The fact that the earth was shrouded in darkness for a period of time confirms the fact that it was then void of any form of life.

Having caused darkness to prevail upon the earth, the next act which the Gods performed on the first day was to make light shine upon the dark and desolate sphere. Abraham and Moses record identically the decree: "Let there be light; and there was light." [^22] Apparently this light did not come from the sun but from the presence of God. John Taylor spoke of the Gods causing the light of their glory to shine upon the earth "before the sun appeared in the firmament." [^23] William W. Phelps observed: "We can look back to the morning of creation, when God said, Let there be light, and there was light, without ever remembering that his glory covered the heavens and his brightness was before the brightness of the sun." [^24] Concerning the light that then enlightened the earth, Moses records God as saying: "And I, God, saw the light; and that light was good." [^25] Abraham wrote: "And they (the Gods) comprehended the light, for it was bright." [^26]

Finally, on the first day Moses records that the Lord said: "I, God, divided the light from the darkness. And I, God, called the light Day; and the darkness, I called Night; . . . and the evening and the morning were the first day." [^27] Abraham said of the work of the Gods at this time:

. . . and they divided the light, or caused it to be divided, from the darkness.

And the Gods called the light Day, and the darkness they called Night. And it came to pass that from the evening until morning they called night; and from the morning until the evening they called day; and this was the first, or the beginning, of that which they called day and night. [^28]

Apparently the earth was not organized in relation to the sun at this time, and the way the Gods caused the light to be divided from the darkness was to make the newly formed orb rotate according to Kolob's schedule of time. This was the system which the Gods used for reckoning time in the creation. [^29]

The Second Day of Creation

During the second day organizations were made of the earth's firmament or atmosphere, that it might perform its designed functions and that rain might fall upon the earth. Moses reports the Lord as stating: "I, God, made the firmament and divided the waters, yea, the great waters under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament, and it was so even as I spake." [^30] Abraham makes a similar statement, except that he uses the word "expanse" in place of the word "firmament." [^31] Both of these terms are equated with the word "heaven," [^32] which means, depending upon the context in which it is used, either the atmospheric or the sidereal heaven. At this point in the creation story, the word "heaven" means the atmospheric heaven.

The organization of the atmospheric heaven so that rain might fall upon the earth was a preparatory action, for it is stated that no rain fell upon the earth during the first six days of creation. [^33]

The Third Day of Creation

As the third day of creation commenced, the Gods ordered: "Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the earth come up dry." [^34] At this point the great land mass of the earth emerged from its inundated state and became dry.

If the waters upon the face of the earth were gathered together unto one place on the third day, then the land must also have been in one place. Writing on this subject, Parley P. Pratt said: "From this we learn . . . that the waters, which are now divided into oceans, seas, and lakes, were then all gathered into one vast ocean, and consequently, that the land which is now torn asunder, and divided into continents and islands almost innumerable, was then one vast continent or body, not separated as it now is." [^35] This point was also stressed in an article in the Times and Seasons, at Nauvoo. [^36]

Apparently many major changes have altered the geography of the earth since the time it was organized; and to understand the story of the creation, it is necessary to comprehend in some degree the changes that have taken place. A revelation declared that mighty convulsions of nature in the last days will restore the earth to its original condition. It states that in these cataclysmic upheavals the "great deep . . . shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land; and the land of Jerusalem [i.e., the Eastern hemisphere] and the land of Zion [i.e., the Western hemisphere] shall be turned back into their own places, and the earth shall be like it was in the days before it was divided." [^37] If these great changes restore the earth to the general form it possessed before it was divided, it follows that after the third day of creation the waters that now comprise the oceans were largely in the north countries and the land was in one body. Having shown from biblical prophecies that such a restoration must take place, a writer in the Times and Seasons said: "Now according to the above, the islands and continents will be brought together, the mountains thrown down, and the great waters rolled back to the place where they were at the beginning; and in a word, the earth will be restored to its primeval state." [^38]

Having caused the waters to be gathered together unto one place and the earth to come up dry, the Gods said: "Let us prepare the earth to bring forth grass; and the herb yielding seed; the fruit tree yielding fruit, after its kind." Abraham then reported that they "organized the earth to bring forth" grass, herbs, trees, etc. In making these preparations for the time when such life would be placed upon the earth, the Gods also ordained that these forms of life should bear seed each after its own kind. [^39]

It is not known what the Gods did to prepare the earth for vegetable life. Whether there was organic material within the elements of the earth when it emerged from its inundated state into the light of God's glory is not known. Nor is it known to what extent the existence of organic materials was necessary to sustain plant life upon the earth in the presence of God. The fact that the preparation of the earth for vegetable life was made before the Gods organized the light of the sun [^40] indicates that a situation existed with which man is not now familiar and about which he has little basis to understand.

The Fourth Day of Creation

On the fourth day the Gods "organized the lights in the expanse of the heaven, and caused them to divide the day from the night; and organized them to be for signs and for seasons, and for days and for years." They also organized "the two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night." [^41] As indicated in these statements, this was an organization of light in relation to the earth, not the actual creation of the sun or of the stars.

Since the earth was brought into the presence of God by the processes of the creation and finally crowned with full paradisiacal-celestial glory on the seventh day, it may be questioned whether the actions of the fourth day were immediately related to the earth, or if they were preparations for a future time when the sun, moon, and stars would be its sources of light. Brigham Young seems to have held the latter view, which implies that only when the earth was removed from the presence of God did the sun become its source of light. [^42] The fact that the earth was governed in the creation by Kolob's law and was not given its own reckoning of time until it was placed in its temporal state seems to support this view. [^43]

The Fifth Day of Creation

Abraham states that on the fifth day of creation "the Gods prepared the waters that they might bring forth great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters were to bring forth abundantly after their kind, and every winged fowl after their kind." [^44] As has been discussed in an earlier section of this chapter, these forms of life were not created and placed upon the earth at this time. Instead, this was merely a preparation to sustain such life, as is indicated by the phrases in italics above.

The Sixth Day of Creation

As their initial activity on the sixth day of creation, the Gods "prepared the earth to bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle and creeping things, and beasts of the earth after their kind." [^45] Again, these forms of life were not organized and placed upon the earth at this time, for these actions were merely designed to prepare the earth to sustain such life.

On the sixth day, the Gods also "took counsel among themselves" to form man in their own image and after their likeness, and to give him dominion over all things upon the earth. After they had thus counseled, Abraham said: "So the Gods went down to organize man in their own image, in the image of the Gods to form they him, male and female to form they them." [^46]

Finally, as the sixth day drew to a close the Gods made a review of their plans to organize man and the other forms of life and place them upon the earth on the seventh day. [^47]

Events Of The Seventh Day

The Completion of the Earth

Joseph Smith wrote by revelation "that . . . God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his work." [^48] This evidently included the completion of His work by the creation of all forms of life that were to be placed upon the earth. The Gods therefore declared as they related their plans for this day's activities:

. . . we will finish, the heavens and the earth, and all the hosts of them. . . .

On the seventh time we will end our work, which we have counseled; and we will rest on the seventh time from all our work which we have counseled. [^49]

God also affirmed to Moses that on this day "the heaven and the earth were finished, and all the host of them." The Lord said: "And on the seventh day I, God, ended my work, and all things which I had made; . . . and all things which I had made were finished." [^50] The fact that on the seventh day God finished all the hosts to be placed upon the earth confirms the view that on this day the several forms of life were organized and placed upon the newly formed orb.

The Earth Sanctified

Joseph Smith wrote by revelation that having finished His work on the seventh day, God also "sanctified it." [^51] Abraham also wrote: "And the Gods concluded upon the seventh time, because that on the seventh time they would rest from all their works which they (the Gods) counseled among themselves to form; and sanctified it." [^52]

The sanctification of the earth on the seventh day of creation is likened in Joseph Smith's statement to the sanctification of the earth at the beginning of the millennium, [^53] when the veil over the earth will be removed and the earth will be renewed by the power of Christ's glory to a paradisiacal state of intelligence and power. [^54] It seems reasonable to conclude that the earth was sanctified on the seventh day of creation by being brought fully into the presence of God—into a paradisiacal-celestial state of glory. Not until then was the earth prepared in every way to have life, organized in a physical-spiritual state, placed upon it.

The Seventh Day One of Rest

The view of the seventh day that is given in latter-day scriptures, with the account of the activities which were performed at that time, suggests certain insights into the nature of the sabbath of creation:

First, on the seventh day, the Gods rested from their labors in preparing the physical earth for life.

Second, since the earth was sanctified and made the recipient of paradisiacal glory in the presence of the Man of Holiness on the seventh day, that day was also a day of rest in a spiritual sense. Scripturally the term "rest" means "the fulness of his [i.e., God's] glory" [^55]—that state of divine intelligence, power, and peace which is found in the presence of God. The seventh day was such a period of time. This fact evidences the spiritual condition to which the earth was brought in the creation.

Third, the seventh day was not a period of total inactivity, for on that day the Gods did some things that were necessary to finish their work. These were activities that were consistent with the purpose of the sabbath, for the intent of that holy day from the beginning was not negative but positive and spiritual. For instance, Jesus did works of righteousness in building up His Father's kingdom on the sabbath; and He instituted the Lord's Day in its place by breaking the bands of death and commencing the resurrection of the righteous dead. When His disciples plucked ears of corn and husked and ate them on the sabbath, Jesus defended their actions with the comment:

The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.

Wherefore the Sabbath was given unto man for a day of rest; and also that man should glorify God, and not that man should not eat. . . [^56]

The sabbath is therefore a day to engage in activities that glorify God; and it is not inappropriate for man to prepare food and eat on that day.

In like manner the Gods performed appropriate works to glorify the Father on the seventh day of creation. In a revelation to Joseph Smith, these works are likened to the work which will be accomplished at the beginning of the millennium of rest.

The revelation states: "As God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his work, and sanctified it, and also formed man out of the dust of the earth, even so, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years will the Lord God sanctify the earth, and complete the salvation of man, and judge all things, and shall redeem all things, except that which he hath not put into his power, when he shall have sealed all things, unto the end of all things." [^57] Orson Pratt explained:

. . . you will find that there is a very great work to be performed after the seventh thousand years, called the millennium, has commenced, . . . just as the Lord performed a work in the seventh day of creation, when he planted the Garden of Eden and placed the man Adam therein. He performed quite a temporal [i.e., physical] work in the process of creation on the morning of the seventh day; and so he will perform a work at the beginning of the seventh thousand years, after the seventh millennium [since the fall of Adam] shall open; and the nature of the work, which will then be performed, was typified by that which God performed in the beginning. [^58]

Clarifications Made by Abraham and Moses

Before they give their accounts of the placement of life upon the earth, Abraham and Moses make certain necessary clarifications, according to the approach each takes in relating the story of the creation. Abraham first makes it clear that the Gods were following a previously devised plan or blueprint as they came down on the seventh day to organize the several forms of life. He states: "And the Gods came down and formed these the generations of the heavens and of the earth, when they were formed in the day that the Gods formed the earth and the heavens, according to all that which they had said concerning every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew." [^59]

At this point in his account of the creation, Moses states that all forms of life that were to be organized upon the earth had been created in spirit form before the earth was made. It is not necessary for Abraham to make this clarification, because he relates his vision of the pre-earth state of life, indicating that man then existed as an organized being, as a preliminary statement to his account of the creation. But in the account written by Moses it was necessary for God to declare: "I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth." [^60]

Having made the necessary clarifications in their respective accounts of the creation, Abraham and Moses both testify that at the beginning of the seventh day no life had been placed upon the earth. Abraham observes that the Gods "had not caused it to rain upon the earth when they counseled to do them [i.e., these works], and had not formed a man to till the ground." [^61] In stating to Moses that all things to be placed upon the earth had been organized in a pre-earth spirit creation, the Lord said:

. . . I, the Lord God, had not caused it to rain upon the earth.

And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men [in the primal spirit creation]; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them; and there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air. [^62]

Life Placed Upon the Earth

After making the above clarifications, both Abraham and Moses give accounts of the organization and placement of life upon the earth, beginning with man. In this, they are consistent with a revelation which states explicitly that on the seventh day God "formed man out of the dust of the earth." [^63] Abraham wrote:

. . . there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.

And the Gods formed man from the dust of the ground, and took his spirit (that is, the man's spirit), and put it into him; and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life [i.e., the divine spiritual powers that are required to quicken all forms of organized life], and man became a living soul.

And the Gods planted a garden, eastward in Eden, and there they put the man, whose spirit they had put into the body which they had formed. [^64]

It is plain from this statement that the creation of man was a tabernacling process in which his organized spirit was clothed with a physical body which had been formed. Joseph Smith explained:

God made a tabernacle and put a spirit into it, and it became a living soul. (Refers to the old Bible.) How does it read in the Hebrew? . . . It says "God made man out of the earth and put into him Adam's spirit, and so became a living soul." [^65]

Concerning the creation of man, the Lord said unto Moses:

. . . I, the Lord God, spake, and there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.

And I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul, the first flesh upon the earth, the first man also. . . .

And I, the Lord God, planted a garden eastward in Eden, and there I put the man whom I had formed. [^66]

Two things are of particular importance in the statement above: First, God's declaration to Moses that man was "the first flesh," when read in context, is a clear indication that man was placed upon the earth before the animals. This fact is supported by the statement that after the animals were formed out of the ground, they were brought "unto Adam to see what he would call them." [^67] Here, too, it is apparent that man arrived on earth first. But before man was placed upon the earth, a garden was planted eastward in Eden, and there the man was placed as a lone figure until woman and the animals were formed. [^68]

Second, God declared to Moses that Adam was "the first man." [^69] There were no pre-Adamites. This fact is apparent from the evidence that has been given thus far in this chapter. On the first day of creation, for instance, the earth was empty and desolate; and until the third day, it was inundated in water. When the seventh day commenced, there was still no "flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air." [^70] God had not yet caused it to rain upon the earth. [^71] But the Lord then made a mist rise and water the face of the earth. Man was organized from the dust of the earth; and a garden having been planted, Adam was placed in it as the first flesh upon the earth and the first man also. This is the story that is revealed in the scriptures.

Other scriptural statements support the above facts. Having explained to Moses that He had created worlds without number, God said. "And the first man of all men have I called Adam, which is many." [^72] Evidently God has followed this order in sending His spirit children to receive physical bodies on the countless worlds He has created. Abraham testified that for this earth Adam was "the first man" and our "first father." [^73] Nephi declared that Adam and Eve were "our first parents." [^74] As corroborating evidence, a revelation states that "Adam called his wife's name Eve, because she was the mother of all living." In stating this fact to Moses, God added, "For thus have I, the Lord God, called the first of all women, which is many." [^75] Since there were no women on earth before Eve, who was the first of all women and the mother of all living, it follows that there could have been no men on earth before Adam.

In connection with the above points, the scriptures teach that all men on earth descend through Adam and Eve. They were not merely the first of a given race. Lehi declared: "And they [i.e., Adam and Eve] have brought forth children; yea, even the family of all the earth." [^76]

Having placed Adam in the Garden of Eden and instructed him concerning the trees of the garden, the Gods said: "Let us make an help meet for the man, for it is not good that the man should be alone, therefore we will form an help meet for him." [^77] Eve was then formed and given unto Adam as his wife. [^78]

After relating the story of Adam's creation followed by that of Eve, Abraham states: "And out of the ground the Gods formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air, and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them; and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that should be the name thereof." [^79]

(It should be noted that there is a point of conflict between Abraham's account and that of Moses that cannot presently be reconciled. Abraham states that Eve was organized and placed upon the earth before the animals were formed, but Moses reverses the order and places the animals here first. It is the opinion of the writer that the Book of Abraham gives the correct sequence, and that this is one area of the creation story to which Joseph Smith would have given further attention had he made the final revision necessary to publish his inspired revision of the creation story by Moses.)

Clarifications On The Creation

The Origin of Life on Earth

The origin of life on earth as given in Latter-day Saint thought must be seen in light of several basic propositions: First, God has created worlds without number through the instrumentality of the Only Begotten Son, whose mission is also to redeem and glorify that which He creates. Second, these many spheres have been created as places of habitation for the spirit children of the Father, Elohim, whose stated purpose is to bring to pass their immortality and eternal life. Third, each spirit was fully developed in stature before the physical earth was organized. Fourth, there was no life placed upon the earth in the creation until the seventh day, when Adam was put here as the first flesh and the first man. Fifth, all life that was placed upon the earth in the creation was organized at that time in a physical-spiritual state. Finally, the earth after the creation and before the fall of Adam was in a paradisiacal-celestial condition of glory; and while it remained in this state, death had no power over it.

It seems apparent from the above statements that the materialistic view of the origin of life proposed in the theory of evolution is incompatible with that which is given in modern revelation. [^80] In the creation, there was no gradual evolution of life on earth from lower to higher forms, for there was no life upon the earth at the beginning of the seventh day, until Adam arrived as a physical-spiritual being as the first flesh and the first man on earth. The animals were then formed in a physical-spiritual state and brought to Adam who gave them names.

Since all things which were to be placed upon the earth had been organized in the pre-earth spirit state, the creation of life on this sphere was concerned with giving physical tabernacles to those several forms of spirit life. The question of the origin of life on earth, therefore, is concerned with the issue of how a pre-existing spirit world and spirits were given physical organizations. In the creation of Adam, for example, Abraham wrote: "And the Gods formed man from the dust of the ground, and took his spirit (that is, the man's spirit), and put it into him; and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul." [^81] The creation of Adam consisted of the act of tabernacling his spirit in the flesh.

When it comes to the question of how spirit forms of life were given a physical organization on earth, two principles emerge from statements that have been made by Latter-day Saint authorities: First, it is held that man and the animals were organized physically by the process of procreation; plant life by germination from seeds. Second, the parent life from which the initial earth forms came existed on another sphere. This means that Latter-day Saint thought rejects the doctrine of "special creation" and holds to the view that the stream of life is eternally flowing from redeemed and glorified worlds to newly organized ones. Procreation and transplantation are the two main keys to an understanding of the origin of life on a given sphere.

Joseph Smith is reported by an intimate associate to have taught "that God was the great head of human procreation—was really and truly the father of both our spirits and our [physical] bodies." [^82] Though the fatherhood of God over man's organized spirit was an immediate and direct parental relationship in the pre-earth state, man's descent from deity in the physical endowments of life goes back through Adam. Luke traced the genealogy of man on earth back to "Enos, which was the son of Seth, which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God." [^83] This view is supported in modern scripture which states: "This is the genealogy of the sons of Adam, who was the son of God, with whom God, himself, conversed." [^84]

In speaking of the origin of life for the vegetable kingdom, both Abraham and Moses state that the Gods "planted a garden eastward in Eden." [^85] To plant a garden required seeds from parent stocks. Thus for every living organism that was placed upon the earth there was a living precursor. "Whenever did a tree or anything spring into existence with out a progenitor?" Joseph Smith inquired. He then emphasized: "And everything comes in this way." [^86]

Those men who were taught by the Prophet later expressed the same view of the origin of life on this earth as that which Joseph Smith gave. Heber C. Kimball observed through the process of procreation God first "brought forth spirits" in the pre-earth state, after which "he commenced and brought forth tabernacles for those spirits to dwell in." Elder Kimball stressed: "I came through him, both spirit and body." [^87] Brigham Young declared that a person of deity such as the Father, Elohim, has power by procreation "to produce both spirit and body." [^88] And in speaking of the physical endowments which man possesses, he declared: "We are flesh of his [i.e., God's] flesh, bone of his bone." [^89] Again Brigham Young declared:

Numerous are the scriptures which I might bring to bear upon the subject of the personality of God. I shall not take time to quote them on this occasion, but will content myself by quoting two passages in the 1st chapter of Genesis, 26th and 27th verses. "And God said, let us make man in our image, after our likeness. . . . So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them."

I believe that the declaration made in these two scriptures is literally true. God has made His children like Himself to stand erect, and has endowed them with intelligence and power and dominion over all His works and given them the same attributes which He Himself possesses. He created man, as we create our children; for there is no other process of creation in heaven, on the earth, in the earth, or under the earth, or in all the eternities, that is, that were, or that ever will be. [^90]

Of the origin of other forms of life in addition to man Brigham Young said:

Shall I say that the seeds of vegetables were planted here by the Characters that framed and built this earth—that the seeds of every plant composing the vegetable kingdom were brought from another world? This would be news to many of you. Who brought them here? It matters little to us whether it was John, James, William, Adam, or Bartholomew who brought them; but it was some Being who had power to frame this earth with its seas, valleys, mountains, and rivers and cause it to teem with vegetable and animal life.

Here let me state to all philosophers of every class upon the earth, when you tell me that Father Adam was made as we make adobies from the earth, you tell me what I deem an idle tale. When you tell me that the beasts of the field were produced in that manner, you are speaking idle words devoid of meaning. There is no such thing in all the eternities where the Gods dwell. Mankind are here because they are offspring of parents who were first brought here from another planet, and power was given them to propagate their species, and they are commanded to multiply and replenish the earth. [^91]

Latter-day Saint thought holds that men, angels, and Gods are of the same specie. Joseph F. Smith explained:

. . . God is a being with body, parts, and passions and . . . His Son is in His own likeness, and . . . man is created in the image of God. The Son, Jesus Christ, grew and developed into manhood the same as you or I, as likewise did God, His Father grow and develop to the Supreme Being that He now is Man was born of woman; Christ the Savior, was born of woman and God, the Father, was born of woman. Adam, our earthly parent, was also born of woman into this world, the same as Jesus and you and I. [^92]

Parley P. Pratt contended that it is because of unworthiness that man in general is unaware of his true origin. The carnal mind, unable and unwilling to appreciate and respect the sacred origin of life, would desecrate rather than honor the truth. For this reason these glorious principles were not set forth more clearly in the story of the creation. Having expressed views of the origin of life like those above, Elder Pratt explained:

In after years, when Paradise was lost by sin; when man was driven from the face of his heavenly Father, to toil, and droop, and die; when heaven was veiled from view; and, with few exceptions, man was no longer counted worthy to retain the knowledge of his heavenly origin; then, darkness veiled the past and future from the heathen mind; man neither knew himself, from whence he came, nor whither he was bound. At length a Moses came, who knew his God, and would fain have led mankind to know Him too, and see Him face to face. But they could not receive His heavenly laws, or bide His presence.

Thus the holy man [i.e., Moses] was forced again to veil the past in mystery, and, in the beginning of his history, assign to man an earthy origin.

Man, moulded from the earth, as a brick!

A Woman, manufactured from a rib!

Thus, parents still would fain conceal from budding manhood the mysteries of procreation, or the source of life's ever-flowing river, by relating some childish tale of new-born life, engendered in the hollow trunk of some old tree, or springing with spontaneous growth, like mushrooms, from out the heaps of rubbish. O man! When wilt thou cease to be a child in knowledge. [^93]

From Elder Pratt's explanation it is apparent that when it comes to the question of the origin of life on earth there are certain hidden elements within the creation story. The scriptures state that Adam was created "from the dust of the ground." [^94] But this need not imply that he was formed by bringing the elements of the earth together arbitrarily, as man would form a brick. So also did each of Adam's children become, by physical birth, "of dust a living soul." [^95] Conception and birth constituted the process by which they were thus organized. The same was true of Adam, although he was not a mortal being when he was placed in the garden.

In light of Latter-day Saint theology, a study of the context in which the account of Eve's creation is related suggests that the rib story is symbolic of the New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage. God gave Eve to Adam to be his wife before death entered into the world. She was organized for the express purpose that she might be his companion and that she might be one with him, bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh, mutually sharing the emotions, the designs, and the purposes of his physical organization. The statement that she was taken from man's side symbolizes that she was designed to be his eternal companion, to walk with him in life's calling under the protection of his arm.

Conditions on Earth After the Creation

Being organized as a physical-spiritual sphere in a paradisiacal-celestial state of glory, the earth was placed under a higher law in the creation than that which governs it in its present temporal condition. Because it had a much closer relationship to the glory and power of God than it now enjoys, the earth and all things upon its face were quickened and enlightened to a great degree by that divine intelligence. As a physical-spiritual being abiding amid the glory of God, Adam was blessed with spiritual and intellectual endowments far above those that man now possesses in his fallen, temporal state. Joseph Smith explained:

. . . after man was created, he was not left without intelligence or understanding, to wander in darkness and spend an existence in ignorance and doubt (on the great and important point which effected his happiness) as to the real fact by whom he was created, or unto whom he was amenable for his conduct. God conversed with him face to face. In his presence he was permitted to stand, and from his own mouth he was permitted to receive instruction. He heard his voice, walked before him and gazed upon his glory, while intelligence burst upon his understanding, and enabled him to give names to the vast assemblage of his Maker's works. [^96]

Again Joseph Smith stated:

. . . we learn man's situation at his first creation, the knowledge with which he was endowed, and the high and exalted station in which he was placed—lord or governor of all things on earth, and at the same time enjoying communion and intercourse with his Maker, without a vail to separate them. [^97]

To illustrate the manner in which Adam was endowed with divine intelligence while he was in the presence of God, reference may be made to various times when God's glory has been manifested to man and the effect it has had upon man. On these occasions, the righteous have been endowed with supernatural intelligence. The day of Pentecost was such an occasion. When the Apostles and Elders were gathered together on that day, "there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them." Under the influence of God's glory or Holy Spirit, the Apostles prophesied and spoke in foreign tongue which they had not previously learned, so that the Jews who were gathered there from far away places exclaimed: "We do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God." [^98]

A similar manifestation of God's glory was given to some Lamanites, who were "encircled about . . . by a pillar of fire"; and as a result of the influence of that divine substance of intelligence and power upon them, "they could speak forth marvelous words." [^99]

By this divine agent, the resurrected Christ opened the minds of the Nephites so that when He prayed unto the Father expressing words of such marvelous meaning that human tongue could not express them, "their hearts were opened and they did understand in their hearts the words which he prayed." [^100] Later, as Jesus ministered unto the children of the Nephites, the record states:

. . . he did loose their tongues, and they did speak unto their fathers great and marvelous things, even greater than he had revealed unto the people; and he loosed their tongues that they could utter. . . .

Yea, even babes did open their mouths and utter marvelous things; and the things which they did utter were forbidden that there should any man write them. [^101]

If the glory of God is the Spirit of revelation and of truth, and if Adam was enveloped in God's glory and quickened by that divine substance, it is probable that mortal man is presently incapable of comprehending the nature and degree of intelligence and power which the first man possessed when he was placed upon the earth. In addition, Adam was given dominion in the priesthood over the earth. [^102] He undoubtedly exercised control over all things on earth by the power of the Holy Spirit which constitutes the power of the priesthood. [^103] His dominion was not based upon intellectual supremacy alone, but upon the exercise of spiritual powers of truth and light that were given to him from God. In this respect, his dominion may have been similar to that which Jesus possessed over the elements and over life during the time of His earthly ministry.

The influence of God's glory which prevailed upon the earth was such that life, love, peace, and union—the attributes of that prevading intelligence—were manifested among all forms of life. Of the state of life on the earth in the presence of God, Parley P. Pratt wrote:

. . . the beasts of the earth were all in perfect harmony with each other; the lion ate straw like the ox, the wolf dwelt with the lamb, the leopard lay down with the kid, the cow and bear fed together in the same pasture, while their young ones reposed in perfect security, under the shade of the same trees; all was peace and harmony, and nothing to hurt nor disturb in all the holy mountains.

And to crown the whole, we behold man created in the image of God, and exalted in dignity and power, having dominion over all the vast creation of animated beings which swarmed through the earth, while at the same time he inhabited a beautiful and well-watered garden in the midst of which stood the tree of life, to which he had free access; while he stood in the presence of his Maker, conversed with Him face to face, and gazed upon His glory, without a dimming veil between. O reader, contemplate for a moment, this beautiful creation, with peace and plenty; the earth teeming with harmless animals, rejoicing over all the plain; the air swarming with delightful birds, whose neverceasing notes filled the air with varied melody; and all in subjection to their rightful sovereign, who rejoiced over them; while in a delightful garden, the capital of creation, man was seated on the throne of this vast empire, swaying his sceptre over all the earth with undisputed right; while legions of angels encamped round about him, and joined their glad voices in grateful songs of praise and shouts of joy; neither sigh nor groan was heard through the vast expanse; neither were there sorrow, fear, pain, weeping, sickness, nor death; neither contentions, wars, nor bloodshed; but peace crowned the seasons, as they rolled, and life, joy and love reigned over all God's works. [^104]

"The whole creation as it rolled from the hand of God was pure," [^105] Elder Pratt stated; and while the earth was in this sanctified state, death had no power over the several forms of life upon it. Instead, all things, including the very elements of the earth, were free from deteriorating influences; the powers of the Holy Spirit, which are powers of life, prevailed in and through all things; and in this state, the several forms of life were preserved against any corrupting influences that might have sought entrance into the new creation. "All corruption is devoured by the fire," [^106] Joseph Smith said of conditions in the presence of God. Orson Pratt explained:

The elements were so wisely arranged and proportioned, that life was derived from all things ordained for the use of man or beast, fowl or fish. The nourishing element of life was diffused through the earth, the ocean and the air. Life pervaded every vegetable and fruit not forbidden to man. Life reigned triumphantly throughout this vast creation. Death was unknown; it had not been seen, heard of, nor experienced in all the varied ranks of earthly beings. [^107]

"There were no children of mortality upon it [i.e., the earth]," Elder Pratt decared on another occasion, "no birds, nothing wherein we observe life in this creation existed in its mortal state; but everything that had life was immortal; every bird, fish, fowl, insect, creeping thing, cattle, and man—all were immortal." Had it not been for the change that later occurred in which the earth was reduced to a temporal state, he declared that it "would have continued in all its glory, as it issued from the hand of the creator, to present time." [^108] Concerning Adam and Eve, he stressed: "Death had no dominion, no power over them; they were capable of enduring forever and ever in their organization." [^109]

The Book of Mormon holds that this state of life described above existed upon the earth during the time it was enveloped in paradisiacal glory. Lehi declared that except for the fall of the earth to a temporal state it would have remained as it was when it came from the hand of the Creator, with the same individual forms of life upon it. There would have been no change, no deterioration, no death—but life would have continued as it was when it was placed upon the newly organized and sanctified earth. "If Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen," the inspired patriarch Lehi declared, ". . . and all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end." [^110]

Summary

The revelations given to Joseph Smith state that during the first six days of creation, the physical earth was formed and prepared for life to be placed upon it. On the seventh day, life, beginning with man, was placed upon the earth. On the first day the earth was formed and the Gods caused light to shine upon it. Next they organized the earth's atmosphere. On the third day, the land emerged and the waters were gathered together unto one place. The land was then prepared for vegetable life. The fourth day's activities were concerned with the light the earth was to receive from the sun, moon, and stars. On the fifth day, the water upon the earth was prepared for marine life and the earth was prepared for fowl. During the sixth day, the earth was prepared for the animal kingdom. The Gods also went down to form man; and as the sixth day drew to a close, they recounted their designs concerning the life which was to be placed upon earth on the following day.

As the seventh day began, the preparations of the physical earth had been completed, and the Gods rested from these activities. They then sanctified the earth. The newly formed sphere then resided as a physical-spiritual orb in the presence of the Father, fully prepared for life to be placed upon it. The Gods then caused a mist to rise and water the whole face of the ground. Man was formed. A garden was planted. And Adam was placed in the garden as the first man and the first flesh upon the earth. Eve was then created and given to Adam, after which the animals were formed and brought to Adam to be named. All of this was done in a natural way. Man and animals were formed through the process of procreation, plants by germination. Higher glorified forms of life provided the parent stock from which the earth forms were derived. After the creation, the earth resided for a time in the presence of God, enveloped in His glory and endowed to a great degree with the powers and attributes of the Spirit. Everything was immortal in the sense that it was created to endure forever.

Footnotes

And God said, let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.

And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.—Genesis 1:26-28.

First, it is said that the term "flesh" means mortality whenever it is used in the scriptures. But there are instances when it is used without referring to mortal flesh. A revelation states: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also. . . ."—D&C 130:22. After His resurrection, Jesus declared: "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have."—Luke 24:39.

Second, it is said that the animals were placed upon the earth before man. But both Abraham and Moses state that when the animals were formed they were brought to Adam to see what he would call them. See Abraham 5:20 and Moses 3:19.

Third, as indicated, this view assumes that when God is speaking of Adam as the "first flesh" he is speaking of the fall. But when this term is read in context, it is plain that it is speaking of the placement of life on the earth—not the fall. The record states: ". . . I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul, the first flesh upon the earth."—Moses 3:7.

Fourth, it is implied that all forms of life were placed upon the earth during the first six days of creation, when the earth was prepared for the given life. This view of the creation would put man on earth on the sixth day, after the animals had been created. But a revelation states categorically that man was placed upon the earth on the seventh day. See D&C 77:12. Abraham does not indicate that life was placed upon the earth during the first six days, but declares that during these days the earth was merely prepared for life. He reports the actual creation and placement of life on the seventh day, with man the first to be created. Both Abraham and Moses state that until the beginning of the seventh day it had not rained upon the earth. In making this statement, Abraham declares that until the beginning of the seventh day the Gods "had not formed a man to till the ground."—Abraham 5:5. Moses states: "There was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air."—Moses 3:5.

Our first parents were placed in the metropolis of this lower creation, and power was given them to have dominion over the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the air; they also could converse with God face to face as we converse with our friends; no intervening veil of unbelief was there.—TS, III (February 1, 1842), p. 672.

---
Notas:
[^1] See, for example, 2 Nephi 2; Mosiah 3; Alma 34, 42; D&C 29; Moses 4-6.
[^2] Moses 1:33-34. The context in which this statement is expressed makes it plain that God is not speaking only of this earth, but of the many earths He has created. The same things seems to be implied concerning the name of Eve. A revelation states: "And Adam called his wife's name Eve, because she was the mother of all living; for thus have I, the Lord God, called the first of all women, which are many.—Moses 4:26.
[^3] Moses 5:11.
[^4] 2 Nephi 2:23.
[^5] HC, I, p. 283. See the section in chapter eleven entitled "The Doctrine of Election and Foreordination."
[^6] D&C 29:31-32. See again the discussion of this point in chapter twelve of this volume in the section entitled "The Earth Created as a Physical-spiritual Sphere."
[^7] Moses 5:11.
[^8] 2 Nephi 2:23.
[^9] 2 Nephi 2:25.
[^10] Moses 6:48.
[^11] If the seventh day was indeed a day of the Lord's time, they must have been in the garden until toward the end of that period before they fell. Otherwise it would be improper to call the seventh day a "day."
[^12] D&C 20:65-66; 26:2, 28:13; 38:34; 41:9; 51:12; 72:7; 104:64, 71, 72, 76.
[^13] Manuscript statement containing doctrinal explanations by Joseph Smith, January 5, 1841, "Joseph Smith Papers, 1839-1841," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 181.
[^14] HC, VI, p. 5.
[^15] Moses 7:32.
[^16] Moses 3:16-17.
[^17] 2 Nephi 2:15-16.
[^18] 2 Nephi 2:17-18.
[^19] Moses 4:4.
[^20] Moses 4:5-13. JD, I, p. 329.
[^21] Moses 4:7.
[^22] Moses 4:8-9.
[^23] Moses 4:12.
[^24] The Apostle Paul wrote: "Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression."—1 Timothy 2:14.
[^25] 2 Nephi 2:25.
[^26] 2 Nephi 2:24.
[^27] Moses 4:11.
[^28] Moses 4:13.
[^29] Moses 4:18.
[^30] Moses 4:19.
[^31] Moses 4:20-21.
[^32] Letter of Oliver Cowdery to William Frye, MA, II (December, 1835), p. 236.
[^33] Quincy, op. cit., pp. 386-387.
[^34] TS, V (January 1, 1845), p. 757.
[^35] Moses 4:21.
[^36] Moses 4:21.
[^37] D&C 19:2-3.
[^38] Moses 4:22.
[^39] Moses 4:22.
[^40] Moses 4:23-25.
[^41] TS, III (February 1, 1842), p. 672.
[^42] Ibid.
[^43] JD, XVII, p. 143.
[^44] "Diary of Charles L. Walker, 1855-1902," July 13, 1862. In the official account of this discourse, President Young is reported to have said: "This earthy ball, this little opake [opaque] substance thrown off into space, is only a speck in the great universe; and when it is celestialized it will go back into the presence of God, where it was first framed."—JD, IX, p. 317.
[^45] The Mormon, op. cit. Technically speaking, Kolob is not a planet but a star.
[^46] See Abraham 3:4-9; D&C 130:4-5.
[^47] Moses 5:4; 6:49.
[^48] See the section in chapter five of this volume entitled "The Presence of God."
[^49] 2 Nephi 9:6. See also verse 9.
[^50] Alma 42:7, 9; Helaman 14:16-17.
[^51] Moses 6:49.
[^52] Moses 5:4.
[^53] Moses 5:58.
[^54] See Moses 1.
[^55] See Matthew 17:1-2; Mark 9:2-3.
[^56] Lectures on Faith, No. 2.
[^57] "Joseph Smith Papers, 1839-1841," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 181.
[^58] Pratt, Voice of Warning, p. 91.
[^59] JD, XVI, p. 364. See also ibid., XV, p. 237, for another similar statement by Orson Pratt.
[^60] 2 Nephi 9:15; Alma 11:45; 12:36; D&C 29:41.
[^61] Helaman 14:16; D&C 29:41.
[^62] Alma 42:7-9; Helaman 14:16-17.
[^63] D&C 29:41.
[^64] There is a difference in the degree of spiritual death which Adam and his posterity suffer and that which sons of perdition will experience. Sons of perdition will suffer total spiritual death, while man in mortality is given the blessings of the Light of Christ which are discussed in chapter nine of this volume.
[^65] D&C 76:30-38; 88:32-35.
[^66] Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 432.
[^67] D&C 77:6.
[^68] JD, XXI, p. 323.
[^69] Pratt, Voice of Warning, pp. 91-92. In his The Government of God, pp. 106-115, John Taylor quotes Elder Pratt at length on this subject, thus sanctioning the views of his associate.
[^70] JD, X, p. 312. See also ibid., I, p. 235.
[^71] Adam did not lose a knowledge of the paradisiacal state when he fell. See Lectures on Faith, No. 2, where Joseph Smith stresses this point.
[^72] HC, VI, p. 366.
[^73] Ibid.
[^74] See again D&C 29:31-32.
[^75] TS, III (February 1, 1842), p. 672.
[^76] Isaiah 11:7; 2 Nephi 21:7; 30:13; D&C 101:26.
[^77] Acts 3:21.
[^78] D&C 101:23-26.
[^79] 2 Nephi 30:12-15.
[^80] Moses 3:17.
[^81] Moses 4:9.
[^82] Moses 4:25.
[^83] Moses 6:59.
[^84] Moses 6:48.
[^85] Alma 42:9. See also 2 Nephi 2:5; 9:4, 6, 7; Alma 11:42-45; 12:12, 16, 24, 27, 31, 36; 42:6-9; Helaman 14:16. All these scriptural statements indicate that the judgment of God upon Adam brought temporal death.
[^86] Moses 4:9.
[^87] HC, VI, p. 366.
[^88] A brief analysis of the nature of translated beings may serve to illustrate and give support to this statement. Translated beings are temporal beings who are endowed with a measure of God's glory. Christ declared of John the Apostle: "I will make him as flaming fire and a ministering angel."—D&C 7:6. Although such persons are not taken "into an eternal fulness" of glory such as exists in the presence of the Father, Joseph Smith explained that "their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order."—HC, IV, pp. 209-210. That is, they are endowed with sufficient glory to be able to reside in terrestrial glory; and they are appointed to minister unto terrestrial planets.—Ibid. Such beings have power over death (D&C 7; 3 Nephi 28; HC, op. cit.), no doubt because they are sanctified from all the effects of mortal corruption and because they are greatly endowed with the powers of the Spirit, which are powers of life, so that they have supremacy over death. If the influence of God's glory can sanctify a mortal man and fill him with powers of life to the extent that he has command over death and need not die until God wills him to do so, it is not unreasonable to conclude that Adam need not have died as long as he was in the presence of God endowed with the glory which he possessed before his transgression. If this is true, spiritual death was a necessary prelude in order for physical death to come to man and the several forms of life that were then on the earth.
[^89] JD, IX, p. 305.
[^90] Moses 6:58-59.
[^91] Moses 6:48.
[^92] Alma 42:7-9, 14.
[^93] Alma 12:21-26; 42:2-6.
[^94] D&C 29:39.
[^95] See D&C 58:28; 104:17.
[^96] See the sections in chapter six of this volume entitled "Law Governs All Things" and "All Truth and Intelligence Independent."
[^97] See again D&C 93:30.
[^98] 2 Nephi 2:11-12.
[^99] Loc. cit.
[^100] HC, V, pp. 134-135.
[^101] D&C 3:2-3.
[^102] JD, VI, p. 146.
[^103] HC, V, p. 556.
[^104] Milton, Areopagitica.
[^105] Journal of George A. Smith, last entry made in 1835. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^106] See D&C 76:53, 60-61.
[^107] HC, IV, p. 570.
[^108] Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents in Nauvoo," Woman's Exponent, X (January 1, 1882), p. 114.
[^109] Journal History, May 26, 1839.
[^110] HC, III, p. 291.
