Hyrum L. Andrus, God, Man, and the Universe ( 1968)

14

The Fall of Man

. . . man fell from his standing before God, by giving heed to temptation; and this fall affected the whole creation, as well as man, and caused the various changes to take place.—PARLEY P. PRATT.

The doctrine of the fall of man is prominently expressed in the Book of Mormon and in revelations given to the Church through Joseph Smith. [^1] By the close of the year 1830 the major concepts of the fall had been established in this dispensation. From such statements as were then given, it is apparent that the man Adam was a true historical figure and that the events related in the scriptures concerning him and his wife Eve actually occurred. Although Joseph Smith accepted these events, by revelation he clarified many points concerning them, including the biblical account of the transgression of Adam and Eve.

To understand the doctrine of the fall, man must comprehend to some degree (1) the divine nature of God and (2) the physical-spiritual state that prevailed upon the earth after the creation. In the creation, the earth was brought into the presence of God—into a paradisiacal-celestial state—and it resided in this condition until the time of the fall. All forms of life that were placed upon the earth were organized initially in a physical-spiritual state and were enveloped in the glory of God, being quickened to a great degree by its intelligent attributes and powers. But the fall changed the whole order of life and introduced the present temporal state.

The earth's fall from its paradisiacal-celestial state of glory and the transition that occurred from the initial physical- spiritual condition to the temporal order were necessary antecedents to the atonement of Jesus Christ and the plan of life and salvation which was formulated in the councils of heaven before the earth was created. The doctrine of the fall is fundamental to the whole system of thought enunciated by Joseph Smith. The creation of the earth cannot be understood without an understanding of the nature of the fall. The view of life in mortality which Joseph Smith expressed is centered in the fall, including his view of the nature of man, his mortal agency, and his responsibility before God. The Gospel of Jesus Christ, as the divine program for redeeming man from his fallen state, is also founded upon the reality of Adam's transgression and its several consequences. Except for the doctrine of the atonement, there is no doctrine so vital and fundamental to Latter-day Saint thought as that of the fall of Adam; and Christ's atonement and work of redemption are necessary and meaningful only if the fall is an actual reality.

The Purpose And Design Of The Fall

A Transition to Mortality Necessary

The name "Adam" in Latter-day Saint thought appears to be a generic title denoting man, and it is apparently given as a name-title to the first of all men on the numerous worlds which God has created. Having declared to Moses that He had created worlds without number, the Lord explained: "And the first of all men have I called Adam, which is many." [^2] One who acts in the capacity of Adam therefore seems to stand at the point of transition physiologically and spiritually between deity and man in mortality, and in initiating the fallen temporal state he represents those who come after him as his posterity.

Since Adam and Eve were placed upon this earth in a paradisiacal-celestial state of glory, it was necessary that by their agency, they initiate a change from that high spiritual state to mortality in order to fulfill the purposes of God concerning themselves and this creation. Without such a change, the creation of the earth would have been a useless act, and the plan of the Father to clothe His spirit children with physical bodies and prove them in their new endowments would have been frustrated. They were to be proven by coming into direct contact with powers of sin and death which were to be planted within each physical organism as a result of the fall. These powers could enter the world and be made part of man's physical body only as a result of transgression. For this reason, the fall of Adam was a necessary feature of the divine plan.

By the fall, man was also expected to learn important things essential to his ultimate happiness and power in eternity. Because Adam and Eve resided in a paradisiacal state of glory where they were blessed with endowments of the Holy Spirit far above the divine powers which man naturally possesses in mortality, they were denied immediate and practical knowledge of evil before the fall, which meant that they lacked the experience by which they could appreciate and utilize the divine glory with which they were endowed. Under these conditions, as Eve later observed, they could never "have known good and evil." [^3] Not being confronted with evil, they would have had but a negative form of virtue and goodness. Lehi thus explained: "Wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin." [^4] If man were to progress in the scale of intelligence and power, he would have to learn of the powers of sin and death by practical experience. Having acquired this experience and having been redeemed from his fallen state by faithfulness, he could then utilize the intelligence and power of God's glory in meaningful ways in eternity. A transition to a fallen, mortal state was an essential part of the plan of life by which man could be exalted to glory and power in eternity.

Man's Independence Maintained in the Fall

Joseph Smith held that the fall was designed to give man the choice of entering the temporal, mortal state. In the preearth councils, the Father, Elohim, pointed the way to the experiences which would be necessary in order for His spirit children to become exalted beings like Himself. He did not force them to accept His proposal, but they freely gave their consent to the plan of entering the world under the power of the fall. It was also designed that man himself would initiate the required change to mortality, and thus preserve his dignity as an independent being by acting according to his own will, and that he would stand responsible for his decision. Only in this way could God stand free of blame for the sins of man and extend redemption to him in his fallen temporal state on the basis of mercy and love.

The Power of Procreation Given in the Fall

As indicated in a previous chapter, Adam was foreordained in the Grand Organization Council to "open the ways of the world." He was thus chosen not only to introduce mortality on earth but to begin the propagation of life on the fallen sphere. Thereby he opened "the ways of the world." [^5]

The earth could not be populated while it was in its paradisiacal-celestial state, for Adam and Eve were not given the power of procreation while they were in this state. It was necessary for Adam to fall in order to open the ways of the world. The transition that then occurred was actually a reorganization of life on a lower plain—a new creation in certain respects, according to the laws of the temporal state. This seems to be the meaning of the revelation which speaks of a dual creation—spiritual and then temporal—as being necessary to begin God's work on the earth. The revelation states: "By the power of my Spirit created I them; yea, all things both spiritual and temporal—first spiritual [in the initial organization of life on earth], secondly temporal [by means of the fall], which is the beginning of my work." [^6]

There are several statements which indicate that Adam and Eve could have had no children while they remained in the state they were in before the fall: First, Eve declared after their transgression: "Were it not for our transgression, we never should have had seed." [^7] Second, Lehi expressed the same view when he stated that except for the transition to mortality, Adam and Eve "would have had no children." [^8] He observed: "Adam fell that men might be." [^9] Third, Enoch declared: "Because that Adam fell, we are." [^10] Finally, even though Adam and Eve were placed upon the earth near the beginning of the seventh day, there is no record of them having children until after the fall, which probably occurred several hundred years later according to our present reckoning of time. [^11]

Preparations for the Fall

Within God's kingdom all things are done by common consent. [^12] This was true before as well as after mortality was introduced. Since the action of Adam in initiating the temporal state was expected to influence others, Joseph Smith explained that the spirits that were to come to this earth had the plan of salvation presented to them beforehand, and they sanctioned it. [^13] In consenting to the plan of redemption they of necessity assumed the future transgression of Adam, and they consented to come to the earth under the power of the fall as a necessary prelude to the plan of salvation.

The principle of consent was again expressed when Adam and Eve were placed in the Garden of Eden. Joseph Smith taught that in this action they "voluntarily subscribed" to the "limits and bounds" which governed life in their paradisiacal state. [^14]

Subject to the limitations that were imposed upon them in the garden, Adam and Eve also were given their agency on earth. On this point, the Lord explained: "I gave unto them their knowledge in the day I created them; and in the Garden of Eden, gave I unto man his agency." [^15]

Though freedom is a right that cannot be abrogated without violating the basic laws of life, the nature and variety of choices that confront man may vary according to the circumstances under which he exists. One may consent to be placed in a condition where choice is limited by circumstances, yet exercise free agency before and during the experience. This was the case with Adam and Eve as they entered the garden. Though they were limited in the number and variety of meaningful choices they could make, conditions in the garden were arranged to meet their immediate needs and provide alternatives appropriate to the issues at hand. Among the trees of the garden were two of special importance: the tree of life and the tree of knowledge of good and evil. The fruit of these trees was designed to give man his agency and to provide the means by which he could open the ways of mortal life on earth.

To set the stage for the fall, positive commandments essential to a system of law defining the alternatives which led to life and to death were combined with a regard for man's agency. Having placed the necessary alternatives before Adam in the garden, God said: "Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die." [^16] In this way, Adam was given law and commandment which he was free to obey or disobey, with the just and inevitable result that he would be subject to the consequences of his choice.

It was also necessary for man to be acted upon by an enticing influence. Lehi explained:

. . . to bring about his [i.e., God's] eternal purposes in the end of, man, after he had created our first parents, and the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and in fine, all things which are created, it must needs be that there was an opposition; even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being sweet and the other bitter.

Wherefore, the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself. Wherefore, man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other. [^17]

Without the element of enticement the agency of man would have been but a negative principle, but with it he was brought to decide between the issues that confronted him. Of the source and nature of that enticement, Lehi explained:

. . . I, Lehi, according to the things which I have read, must needs suppose that an angel of God, according to that which is written, had fallen from heaven; wherefore, he became a devil, having sought that which was evil before God.

And because he had fallen from heaven, and had become miserable forever, he sought also the misery of all mankind. Wherefore, he said unto Eve, yea, even that old serpent, who is the devil, who is the father of lies, wherefore he said: Partake of the forbidden fruit, and ye shall not die, but ye shall be as God, knowing good and evil. [^18]

The Story Of The Fall

The above scripture implies that the fall of Adam was directly correlated with the War in Heaven; and it implies that by means of Adam's transgression Satan extended his opposition to God and His righteousness to this earth. The Book of Moses corroborates this conclusion. Having related the account of Lucifer's rebellion in the pre-earth spirit state, the Lord said to Moses: "And he [i.e., Lucifer] became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice." [^19] The test to which the Father's spirit children were subjected in the pre-earth spirit state was to be continued as they came to earth to obtain physical bodies away from the presence of God. This is the historical setting for the story of the fall.

In relating the story of the fall, the Book of Moses states:

. . . now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which I, the Lord God, had made.

And Satan put it into the heart of the serpent, (for he had drawn away many [spirits] after him,) and he sought also to beguile Eve, for he knew not the mind of God [not having been present in the Grand Organizational Council in the spirit world], wherefore he sought to destroy the world.

And he said unto the woman: Yea, hath God said—Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? (And he spake by the mouth of the serpent.)

And the woman said unto the serpent: We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree which thou beholdest in the midst of the garden, God hath said—Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.

And the serpent said unto the woman: Ye shall not surely die; for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it became pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make her wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and also gave unto her husband with her, and he did eat.

And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they had been naked. And they sewed fig-leaves together and made themselves aprons. [^20]

There are several important ideas suggested in the above statement: First, it seems that the serpent was involved in the temptation of Eve, in that Lucifer spoke through the mouth of the serpent as a subtle and willing agent. A knowledge of how this may have been done cannot be known until man can understand the nature of the communication that could have existed between man and the animals in that state of existence when they resided in the presence of God and were enveloped by the quickening and intelligent powers of His glory.

Second, the account of Satan's temptation of Eve very well expresses his formula of temptation. To begin, he challenged Eve's sense of independence by implying that she was unduly restricted in her actions by the commandment of God. "Yea, hath God said—Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?" [^21] His taunting though subtle question aroused within her a false sense of independence. Of course she could partake of the fruit of any tree in the garden, if she so desired. She was free. She could do as she pleased. Such feelings as these probably entered her mind. But there was that taunting question.

At first Eve sought to evade the challenge of Satan's question. She replied: "We may eat the fruit of the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree which thou holdest in the midst of the garden, God hath said—Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die." [^22] (Note that the tempting fruit was placed in the midst of the garden and not in some inconspicuous corner.) Satan's quick and enticing retort implied that God was holding something back from Eve and her husband—that God possessed something that He had not given them, and it was desirable.

With her freedom of action challenged by Satan's initial remark and a desire stimulated within her to acquire that which she did not possess by his suggestive retort, Eve began to look with desire upon the forbidden fruit. As she gazed with desire, the record registers the emotions that arose within her: "And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it became pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make her wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat." [^23] Having permitted desire to gain the mastery over her, Eve transgressed the commandment of God.

Third, in partaking of the forbidden fruit, Adam was not deceived, [^24] but he knowingly disobeyed the commandment of God so that he and Eve could stay together and fulfil the commandment to multiply and replenish the earth. Lehi concluded: "Adam fell that men might be." [^25]

Mortality, with its attending consequences and benefits, was introduced on earth by the agency of man in order that the punishments and rewards of divine law could come upon Adam and his posterity. Although man was free and responsible in making this decision, many factors, including the wisdom and fore-knowledge of God, had combined in producing the end result, so that Lehi could say in summary: "All things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things." [^26]

Consequences of Adam's Transgression

God's Judgments upon Life

Lucifer had not spoken a lie to Eve when he said of the forbidden fruit: "God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil." [^27] Instead, he had made use of the truth to achieve his satanic purposes. The record says of Adam and Eve: "And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they had been naked." [^28] When the Lord confronted them with their transgression, Adam manifested the weakness of his fallen nature by shifting the blame to Eve. "The woman thou gavest me, and commanded that she should remain with me," he apologized, "she gave me of the fruit of the tree and I did eat." [^29] Eve likewise apologized: "The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat." [^30] Then followed the curses which God placed upon man, the animals, and the earth.

To the serpent God said: "Because thou hast done this thou shalt be cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life; and I will put enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and her seed; and he shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel." [^31]

Evidence indicates that prior to this time the serpent had legs. In writing of the papyri from which Joseph Smith translated the Book of Abraham, Oliver Cowdery said:

The language in which this record is written is very comprehensive, and many of the hieroglyphics exceedingly striking. . . . The serpent, represented as walking, or formed in a manner to be able to walk, standing in front of, and near a female figure, is to me, one of the greatest representations I have seen upon paper, or a writing substance; and must go so far towards convincing the rational mind of the correctness and divine authority of the holy scriptures, and especially that part which has ever been assailed by the infidel community, as being a fiction [i.e., the story of the temptation of Eve by the agency of the serpent], as to carry away, with one mighty sweep, the whole atheistical fabric, without leaving a vestage [sic] sufficient for a foundation stone. [^32]

As Josiah Quincy and Charles Francis Adams visited Nauvoo in May of 1844, they were shown the mummies and scrolls which Oliver Cowdery described in the above letter. When Quincy questioned that the reptiles originally had legs, the Prophet rejoined: "Before the Fall snakes always went about on legs, just like chickens. They were deprived of them, in punishment for their agency in the ruin of man." [^33] William W. Phelps also wrote in the official church organ that "the serpent was cursed to crawl upon his belly through the loss of his feet." [^34]

The Lord's decree concerning the enmity that would exist between the seed of the serpent and the seed of the woman has an extended meaning in which the serpent is made representative of Satan, and the seed of the woman—not of the man also—alludes to Christ. "He [not "it," as in Genesis 3:15] shall bruise thy head," God said to the serpent, or Satan, concerning the seed of the woman, [^35] or of Mary. But on the other hand, God added: "Thou shalt bruise his heel." [^36] The final victory, however, will be Christ's. In a revelation to Joseph Smith, Jesus declared that He has "all power, even to the destroying of Satan and his works at the end of the world, and the last great day of judgment. [^37]

To Eve, God said: "I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception. In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children, and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee." [^38] Sin results in sorrow; and in woman's mortal state which was instituted by transgression, her sorrow was to be greatly multiplied. Since Eve took the lead over her husband in instituting those actions that led to the fall, against the order which God established when He created Adam first and gave Eve to him as a help meet, God stressed to Eve: "Thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee." [^39]

To Adam, the Lord said of the conditions of mortality and how they would affect him:

. . . cursed shall be the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life.

Thorns also, and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shalt eat the herb of the field.

By the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, until thou shalt return unto the ground—for thou shalt surely die—for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou wast, and unto dust shalt thou return. [^40]

The fact that God cursed the earth for man's sake indicates that He did not do it arbitrarily but for the good of man so that man could learn the value of labor and that opposition and adversity could exercise their refining influences upon him. Mortality was designed to teach man to exert himself to achieve the rewards of productive labor.

The Earth Removed from near Kolob

On another plane of activity, a series of far-reaching consequences followed the transgression in Eden. The earth which had been organized near Kolob and placed under the law of that governing sphere was removed from that position and relationship. A writer whose article appeared in the Times and Seasons during the Prophet's lifetime declared that at the transgression of Adam "the earth no longer retained its standing in the presence of Jehovah, but was hurled into the immensity of space." [^41] In anticipating the question of how the transgression of Adam affected the whole creation, he said:

We answer that Adam was placed in the garden or capital of the whole earth. And power was given unto him to sway his sceptre over all things upon the earth; therefore, when he fell from the presence of the Lord the whole of his dominion fell also. [^42]

Having explained that in the creation the earth was near the throne of God, Brigham Young declared: "When man fell, the earth fell into space, and took up its abode in this planetary system, and the sun became our light." [^43] Again he declared that when Adam sinned, the earth "was hurled millions of miles away from its first position, and that is why if [i.e., the transgression of Adam with the ensuing consequences] was called the Fall." [^44] John Taylor also wrote that at the transgression of Adam the earth fell "from where it was organized, near the planet Kolob." [^45]

Undoubtedly this caused the change in the earth's reckoning of time, from that of Kolob to the present system. Changing the reckoning of time of a given sphere in space requires that a change be made in its diurnal revolutions, because its schedule or time is determined by the speed of those revolutions. [^46] If the earth's reckoning of time was changed from that of Kolob to its present system, it would follow that vital alterations pertaining to its state and place in the cosmos would have had to have been made. In our present solar system, there is no natural way for a planet to have the same time schedule as Kolob.

The Earth Shut Out from the Presence of God

In the fall, the earth was severed from the divine spiritual powers that had prevailed upon it during its paradisiacalcelestial state; and as those intelligent life-giving powers withdrew, man was "shut out from the presence of God." [^47] To be in the presence of God, as has been observed in a previous chapter, [^48] man must be enveloped in the glory of God and be endowed to a degree with the attributes and powers of deity. When man is shut out from the presence of God, the reverse is true. Having resided initially amid the glory and power of God, Adam and all life upon the earth fell from that state of divine truth and light and life.

Modern scriptures testify of the transition that took place as a result of Adam's trangression. The Nephite prophet Jacob taught that "because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord." [^49] Both Alma and Samuel, the Lamanite prophet, declared that by transgression "our first parents were cut off both temporally and spiritually from the presence of the Lord." [^50] At an earlier date, the patriarch Enoch stated that because man yielded to Satan he was "shut out from the presence of God." [^51] And in writing the account of God's judgments upon Adam and Eve following their trans-gression, Moses stated that "they were shut out from his presence." [^52] Later the Lord revealed the plan of redemption to Adam and his posterity, which was "declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God." [^53] This statement testifies indirectly of the transition that had taken place. Adam had been endowed in his paradisiacal state with glory and power somewhat like Moses later received upon the mount [^54] or like that which Jesus was given on the Mount of Transfiguration. [^55] But in the fall all this was taken away and the earth and its several forms of life were reduced to a fallen state where God's glory was no longer manifested as it had been before the fall.

This is the doctrine that Joseph Smith taught and that his associates later repeated. Having explained that Adam had initially enjoyed "communion and intercourse with his Maker, without a vail to separate between," the Prophet declared that our first parents were later "separated from the presence of God by a vail." [^56] On the assumption that the earth resided after the creation in the glory of God, Joseph Smith declared: "This earth will be rolled back into the presence of God, and crowned with celestial glory." [^57] In his popular Voice of Warning, Parley P. Pratt declared that as a result of Adam's transgression he "was banished from the presence of his Creator and a veil was drawn between them." [^58] His brother Orson explained:

. . . the fall has let down a vail between us and our Father and God. This vail does not prevent the eye of the Almighty from seeing and discerning the conduct of his children, but it prevents us, while in this state of mortality, from beholding his presence, unless we rend the vail by our faith and obedience and, like the brother of Jared, are permitted to come back into his presence. . . . We are now laboring under the imperfections of the fall, and because of that fall a vail shuts us from his presence. [^59]

The First Spiritual Death

The withdrawal of God's glory was to Adam a spiritual death, and it is known scripturally as the "first death," [^60] or the "first spiritual death." [^61] Powers of the Spirit are powers of life. By transgression, Adam lost life in a literal sense. He was cut off from the life-possessing substance which is called the Spirit or glory of God. Both Alma and Samuel the Lamanite prophet designate Adam's being cast out of God's presence as the first spiritual death; and they declare that in being cut off from the presence of God, Adam "brought upon all mankind a spiritual death." [^62] In speaking of Adam's transgression, a revelation to Joseph Smith also explained: "I, the Lord God, caused that he should be cast out . . . from my presence, because of his transgression, wherein he became spiritually dead, which is the first death, even that same death which is the last death, which is spiritual, which shall be pronounced upon the wicked." [^63]

The revelation above declares that Adam was consigned to a spiritual death which is like the spiritual death that sons of perdition suffer. [^64] After the resurrection, sons of perdition are cast out into a state of spiritual darkness—a state of existence that is without glory. [^65] They are severed from the divine powers of life and truth and light that come from God. Adam brought this same kind of death upon himself and the earth. In speaking of that spiritual death, Joseph F. Smith said:

. . . I want to speak a word or two in relation to another death, which is a more terrible death than that of the body. When Adam, our first parent, partook of the forbidden fruit, transgressed the law of God, and became subject unto Satan, he was banished from the presence of God, and was trust out into outer spiritual darkness. This was the first death. Yet living [in a physical sense], he was dead—dead to God, dead to light and truth, dead spiritually; cast out from the presence of God; communication between the Father and the Son was cut off. He was absolutely thrust out from the presence of God as was Satan and the hosts that followed him. That was spiritual death. [^66]

The Earth's Temporal State Introduced

In the fall, the earth was changed from a physical-spiritual sphere residing in the presence of the Man of Holiness to its present temporal state. A revelation which the Prophet dictated spoke of "the seven thousand years of its [i.e., the earth's] continuance, or its temporal existence." [^67] The word "temporal" has reference to this life, or to things of time—that which is transient—as opposed to eternity. The earth's temporal existence began with the fall of Adam.

Orson Pratt contrasted the paradisiacal excellence which the earth once enjoyed with its present fallen condition. "First, it was spiritual in all its blessings and fulness of life and glory," he declared. "Then it was reduced to a temporal condition, wherein misery and wretchedness existed." [^68] His brother Parley observed: "First, man fell from his standing before God, by giving heed to temptation; and this fall affected the whole creation, as well as man, and caused the various changes to take place." [^69] Brigham Young also declared that with the transgression of man there "came a curse" upon the earth and all things thereon. [^70]

The fall did not consist merely of a dimming of Adam's knowledge of spiritual truth and a dulling of his senses to spiritual powers. [^71] It resulted in a transformation of all life upon the earth—an actual reorganization of the several forms of life to meet the circumstances of the temporal order that was then instituted. No longer was life in a physical-spiritual state endowed measurably with celestial powers which constituted the quickening action of life within all things. With the fall the order of existence was changed, and blood became the sustaining factor within man and the animals.

Joseph Smith taught that blood cannot permanently endure the presence of God. "Flesh and blood cannot go there," he explained of God's full presence, "for all corruption is devoured by the fire." [^72] Nevertheless, flesh that is sanctified and quickened by the Holy Spirit can dwell in the presence of God, for the Prophet observed: "When our flesh is quickened by the Spirit, there will be no blood in this tabernacle." [^73] From this it would seem that blood was not the quickening factor within man or the several forms of animal life which were initially placed upon the earth, for they were organized to endure forever in the presence of God. Being physical-spiritual in the nature of their organization, they were quickened by Spirit. But having been organized on a spiritual plane, life was then reorganized according to the temporal order. As has been indicated, these two organizations constituted the beginning of God's work in the creation. [^74] Each was an organization of life under a different law; and both the physical-spiritual and the temporal organizations were necessary to establish the present order of life upon the earth.

Detailed information concerning the full changes that came upon the earth and its several forms of life as a result of the fall has not been revealed. Nor is it known specifically how the renewal of the earth at the opening of the millennium will affect life on this temporal sphere. During the period of their physical-spiritual organization, the animals were not carnivorous. But as a result of the fall "the beasts became ferocious, and went prowling about the wilderness seeking the inferior animals for a prey." [^75] When the earth is renewed during the millennium to a paradisiacal state, it will be transfigured by the glory and power of Christ; and although it will still be a temporal sphere and life will still be in a temporal state, the lion will again cease to be a carnivorous animal and will "eat straw like the ox." [^76]

Apparently the withdrawal of God's glory, with its powers and attributes of life, love, peace, union, etc., opened the way for enmity, hatred, animosity, conflict, etc., to have a place in the earth; and the basic nature of life therefore was altered in the fall. In the "times of restitution of all things" [^77] which will witness the renewal of the earth and the transformation of life to the millennial state, "the enmity of man, and the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of all life, shall cease." [^78] Nephi quotes Isaiah's classic declaration concerning the conditions of millennial peace indicating that these conditions will then be an actual, practical reality. The Book of Mormon prophet wrote:

. . . then shall the wolf dwell with the lamb; and the leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the calf, and the young lion, and the fatling, together; and a little child shall lead them.

And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice's den.

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. [^79]

Such a condition of peace, love, and union prevailed upon the earth during its paradisiacal-celestial state; but that glory, with its divine attributes and powers of life, was withdrawn as a result of man's transgression.

Death Entered the World by the Fall

Several scriptures declare that physical death, known also as temporal death, entered the world as a result of the fall of Adam and the changes that then occurred. In warning Adam not to partake of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, God explained: "In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die." [^80] Eve also understood that death would result from partaking of this fruit, for she observed to Satan: "God hath said—Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die." [^81] When she and Adam finally partook of the forbidden fruit, the Lord decreed: "By the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, until thou shalt return unto the ground—for thou shalt surely die—for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou wast, and unto dust shalt thou return." [^82] God also instructed Adam to teach his children "that by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death." [^83] Later Enoch testified that "by his [i.e., Adam's] fall came death." [^84] Alma also declared that "the fall had brought upon all mankind . . . a temporal [death]." [^85] These scriptural statements declare plainly and positively that until Adam transgressed death had no power upon the earth, but that as a result of the fall death entered the world with power to reduce life back to the dust from which it was organized.

Evidence seems to suggest that two things, essentially, were responsible for the entrance of death into the world: First, the forbidden fruit evidently was involved. The fact that Adam and Eve were told not to touch it lest they should die [^86] implies that it contained deteriorating powers that would bring death into the world. Second, the withdrawal of God's glory seems to have been necessary in order for death to gain power over all things. Since all corruption that may be brought into God's presence is devoured by the fire or glory of God [^87] and since the divine spiritual powers that are associated with God's presence are powers of life, it follows that as long as the glory of God prevailed upon the earth death could not gain supremacy over life. [^88]

Latter-day Saint thought holds that the withdrawal of God's glory from the earth played a significant role in the entrance of physical death into the world, in that spiritual death opened the way for temporal death to exercise its powers over all forms of life on earth. "When our first parents fell from their paradisiacal state," Brigham Young explained, "they were brought into contact with influences and powers of evil that are unnatural [to the spiritual state of life that prevailed before their fall] and stand in opposition to an endless life." [^89]

The fact that spiritual death was an essential factor in bringing physical death is implied in the Lord's instruction to Adam that he teach his children "that by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death." [^90] Though transgression brought the fall (i.e., the withdrawal of God's glory and the changes that were associated with that withdrawal), the fall brought death. Death was therefore a secondary result of Adam's transgression, and it undoubtedly entered the world because the withdrawal of God's glory gave the deteriorating factors within the forbidden fruit ascendancy over life on earth.

The patriach Enoch and the Nephite prophet Alma also expressed a similar view. Enoch declared: "Because that Adam fell, we are; and by the fall came death; and we are made partakers of misery and woe." [^91] Again physical death is said to have come as a result of the fall. Alma taught that since all men are "cut off from the presence of the Lord," this action "brought upon all mankind a spiritual death as well as a temporal [death]." [^92] Still again, severance from God's glory is said to have brought physical death.

It has been suggested that the forbidden fruit which Adam and Eve ate introduced deteriorating elements into their bodies. From them these elements may then have spread to other forms of life. Alma evidently understood this to be the case. He observed that had Adam and Eve "partaken of the fruit of the tree of life at that time [i.e., after their transgression], there would have been no death." But having been shut out from the presence of God, "they would have been forever miserable." God therefore "placed cherubim and a flaming sword on the east of the garden of Eden," Alma explained, "lest our first parents should enter and partake of the fruit of the tree of life, and live forever." "It was appointed unto man to die—therefore, as they were cut off from the tree of life they should be cut off from the face of the earth." [^93] Apparently the fruit of the tree of life was capable of counter-acting the deteriorating forces which Adam and Eve received by eating the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; and by partaking of the tree of life, they would have lived forever in their fallen spiritual state.

From the statements made in the above paragraph, it appears that spiritual death alone would not have brought physical death. Nor does it seem that partaking of the forbidden fruit without being severed from the glory of God would have produced physical death. It does seem that a combination of factors was involved in the introduction of temporal death into the world.

The Place Of Evil And Corruption In The Plan Of Life

The Need for Opposition

Opposition has a meaningful place in the divine plan of life. A revelation explained: "It must needs be that the devil should tempt the children of men, or they could not be agents unto themselves; for if they never should have bitter they could not know the sweet." [^94] Man must experience darkness in order to appreciate light, and in order to utilize the powers of light in an intelligent manner. It is on this basis that men are "agents unto themselves" in this temporal state. [^95] For this reason the plan of life requires that man come to earth and undergo a probation in the flesh where opposition exists in all things. This point is basic to an intelligent understanding of the fall and how it fits into the divine plan of life.

The fact that opposition exists on earth under the fall stems from certain basic points: First, as shown in a previous chapter, organized life has its basis in law. [^96] Second, freedom also has its basis in law, for true freedom requires the existence of alternatives between which man may choose; and these alternatives are the product of law that defines correct actions which lead to joy and life, in contrast to opposing actions that lead to mediocrity or death. Third, either good or evil results from the exercise of agency, because some free agents choose to perform acts which produce good while others choose to commit acts that produce evil. The use men make of their agency therefore determines the relative existence of good and evil in the world. And the existence of evil determines the nature and extent of the opposition that prevails.

Opposition is necessary if man is to become an independent being on earth and in eternity. In an earlier chapter, the point was made that all forms of life must be independent in the spheres in which God has placed them if they are to exist and progress in intelligence and power. [^97] To this end opposition is necessary. To attain true independence, man must obey freely the laws of life, and not succumb to the influence of opposing forces. Although opposition arises from the influence of recalcitrant life, it is a necessary factor in human development. Strange and inconsistent though it may seem, Satan and his adherents in the spirit world and on the earth are necessary factors in the divine plan of life; their influence is designed to aid man to become like God. In speaking to his sons of the need of opposition in all things, Lehi reasoned:

. . . it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, . . . righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad. Wherefore, all things must needs be a compound in one; wherefore, if it should be one body it must needs remain as dead, having no life neither death, nor corruption nor incorruption, happiness nor misery, neither sense nor insensibility.

Wherefore, it must needs have been created for a thing of naught; wherefore there would have been no purpose in the end of its creation. Wherefore, this thing must needs destroy the wisdom of God and his eternal purposes, and also the power, and the mercy, and the justice of God. [^98]

Thus righteousness as well as wickedness is dependent upon the existence of opposition. So also is holiness as well as misery, and good as well as bad. Opposition prevents things from being "a compound in one," [^99] without life or death, corruption or incorruption, happiness or misery, and sense or insensibility. Opposition gives purpose and design to life, showing God to be wise and to be a being of power, mercy, and justice.

The intent of mortal life is not for man to partake of evil, but, having seen and felt the effects of evil, to choose that which is good and which leads to life. "Happiness is the object and design of our existence," Joseph Smith wrote; "and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God." [^100] But though happiness is the great object of life, to acquire it man must achieve righteousness against the opposing influence of evil, truth against the opposing forces of error, and light against the opposing powers of darkness. Only in a fallen mortal state, where misery and death prevail, can man do this.

God Permits Evil to Exist

Evil has a place in the eternal scheme for exalting man to dignity and power—not as something to condone or embrace, but as an opposing force to overcome as a means of gaining strength and power in righteousness. Nevertheless, some theologians have found it difficult to reconcile their views on the absoluteness of God with the fact that evil exists. If God is absolute and if He is the fountain of all that is good, is He responsible for evil? If He is not responsible for evil, why does He as an absolute being permit it to exist? Again, if evil exists despite God, can He still be God? Finally, if God allows evil to exist while He has power to destroy it, what divine purpose can it serve? To these difficult questions Joseph Smith gave meaningful answers.

Besides qualifying the traditional view of the absoluteness of God, the Prophet vindicated Him of the responsibility traditional Christianity had given God for evil. As has been indicated, evil arises as a logical concomitant to the fact that all organized life must be independent within its sphere. So long as independence is prerequisite to organized existence, life must possess an agency that even God cannot curtail without destroying that which He would need to control by compulsion.

This means that in the great plan of life each individual must stand responsible for his own actions. Those who violate the basic conditions of true independence produce evil and foster death within themselves and within others. Such individuals, not God, are responsible for evil; and to the great Judge of the universe they must one day give an account of their conduct.

The fact that men are accorded the dignity of independent beings and are made responsible for their actions was stressed when Martin Harris lost the manuscript of the book of Lehi. His violation of the sacred trust could have prevented the Book of Mormon from being published as a new witness for Christ. A revelation to Joseph Smith exonerated God from all blame. "God doth not walk in crooked paths," it explained, "neither doth he turn to the right hand nor to the left, neither doth he vary from that which he hath said, therefore his paths are straight, and his course is one eternal round." Neither does God fail, even though men who are in covenant-union with Him fail and by their failure bring to naught the work in which they are both engaged. "Remember, remember that it is not the work of God that is frustrated," the revelation continued, "but the work of men." [^101] God was not responsible for the actions of Martin Harris. Consequently He had not failed even though man had failed and the work for the time had been frustrated.

In expressing the above view, Brigham Young said:

With many . . . the question arises, "If God dictates all these affairs, to whom shall sin be attributed?" . . . You understand that you have organizations endowed with a certain portion of divine intelligence, which is supreme, absolute, and independent in its sphere. You are organized expressly for the purpose of being exalted, . . . to design and act as do the Gods. . . . When God organized intelligent beings, he organized them as independent beings to a certain extent, as he is himself. And whether we see an evil act or a good one performed by an intelligent being, that being has performed the act by his will, by his own independent organization, which is capable of doing good or evil, of choosing light or darkness, or performing that which will promote life, or that which will promote death, or a dissolution of his organization. Then, without evil being placed before us, we should not be capable of refusing it; without darkness had come into the earth, we should never have learned how to appreciate the light. Then all the family of Adam and Eve would have been mere machines. . . . But we have learned that in our organization we are as independent as the angels are in theirs, or as any heavenly being that dwells in eternity. [^102]

The Purpose of Adversity

Adversity is inherent in mortality because the powers of sin and death are inseparably associated with life in its mortal state. Life and death, good and evil, virtue and vice, light and darkness are combined together in this fallen world for a divine purpose. Instead of opposition being a curse, the philosophy of life which Joseph Smith expounded holds that it can be a blessing; that affliction, perplexity, and temptation can assist man to acquire eternal joy. The Prophet stated: "Men have to suffer that they may come upon Mount Zion and be exalted above the heavens." [^103] Like John Milton, the latter-day Seer could "not praise a fugitive and cloistered virtue, unexercised and unbreathed, that never sallies out and sees her adversary, but slinks out of the race, where the immortal garland is to be run." [^104] When George A. Smith was suffering with inflammatory rheumatism which swelled the limbs of his body so that he was helpless and could not bear the touch of anything upon his body except a very light blanket, he was visited by his cousin the Prophet. The afflicted man reported:

He told me I should never get discouraged whatever difficulties might surround me. If I was [sic] sunk in the lowest pit of Nova Scotia and all the Rocky Mountains piled on top of me, I ought not to be discouraged but hang on, exercising faith and keep up good courage, and I should come out on top of the heap. [^105]

In this incident may be seen the buoyant confidence and dogged determination within the philosophy of the restored gospel. Though man may be surrounded with difficulties, he need not be overcome even in death, for it is designed in the plan of God that he should triumph eventually over all things. [^106] In the following words, the Prophet again stressed these principles:

All difficulties which might and would cross our way must be surmounted. Though the soul be tried, the heart faint, and the hands hang down, we must not retrace our steps; there must be decision of character, aside from sympathy. When instructed, we must obey that voice, observe the laws of the Kingdom of God, that the blessings of heaven may rest down upon us. [^107]

While imprisoned in mid-winter in a damp, filthy dungeon where their oppressors attempted to feed them on human flesh, Joseph Smith and others expressed their philosophy as they wrote to their brethren: "Rejoice in our afflictions, by which we are perfected, and through which the Captain of our salvation was perfected also." [^108] And as he yearned for freedom in another Missouri dungeon, Parley P. Pratt poetically exclaimed:

But stay my spirit, though thou fain would'st soar On high, 'mid scenes of glory, peace and joy; From bondage free, and bid thy jail farewell. Stop! Wait awhile! Let patience have her perfect work. Return again to suffering scenes, through which the way to glory lies, And speak of things around thee; Thou'rt in prison still! [^109]

Nevertheless, as the winter months wore on and abuse upon abuse was heaped upon the Prophet, and the Saints in destitution were driven from the state, Joseph Smith cried out in fervent prayer:

O God! Where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth Thy hiding place? How long shall Thy hand be stayed, and Thine eye, yea Thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens, the wrongs of Thy people, and of Thy servants, and Thy ear be penetrated with their cries? Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before Thine heart shall be softened towards them, and Thy bowels be moved with compassion towards them. [^110]

In the Lord's reply, man's need to meet and overcome opposition is expressed. Having reminded the Prophet that in his affliction he was not yet as Job, the revelation that followed referred to many experiences he had suffered as being refining elements along the path that leads to eternal glory:

If thou art called to pass through tribulations; if thou art in perils among false brethren; if thou art in perils among robbers; if thou art in perils by land or by sea; if thou art accused with all manner of false accusations; if thine enemies fall upon thee; if they tear thee from the society of thy father and mother and brethren and sisters; and if with a drawn sword thine enemies tear thee from the bosom of thy wife, and of thine offspring, and thine elder son, although but six years of age, shall cling to thy garments, and shall say, My father, my father, why can't you stay with us? O, my father, what are the men going to do with you? and if then he shall be thrust from thee by the sword, and thou be dragged to prison, and thine enemies prowl around thee like wolves for the blood of the lamb; and if thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers, and the sentence of death passed upon thee; if thou be cast into the deep; if the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become thine enemy; if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all; art thou greater than he? [^111]

Opposition and adversity can exercise beneficial influences upon man in many ways: First, if man endures them in patience and in meekness with living faith in Christ, as indicated above, opposition and adversity tend to refine his soul and expand his capacity to feel sympathy and love for others. It was in this light that a revelation promised the Saints: "All things wherewith you have been afflicted shall work together for your good, and to my name's glory, saith the Lord." [^112] But only in and through Christ can mortal afflictions be beneficial in their influences upon man. Another revelation therefore declared: "Search diligently, pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work together for your good, if ye walk uprightly and remember the covenant wherewith ye have covenanted one with another." [^113] Not only would opposition and adversity work to the good of the Saints as individuals but also "to the sanctification of the church." [^114]

Second, afflictions that result from wrong-doing are designed in the plan of life and salvation to correct the recalcitrant person so that he may learn by bitter experience that it is better to love virtue and cleave unto truth. For this reason the Lord explained to Moses that Satan is permitted "to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice." [^115] With the same view, Nephite prophets pronunced blessings upon the land for the righteous, but qualified their promises by stating that if iniquity should abound, the land would be cursed for the people's sake. [^116] By adversity as well as by love, man is taught obedience and given the incentive to learn and obey the law of God. This philosophy was expressed when Frederick G. Williams, a counselor to Joseph Smith in the First Presidency, failed to teach and regulate his family in a proper way. Difficulties arose and a revelation explained:

You have not taught your children light and truth, according to the commandments; and that wicked one hath power, as yet, over you, and this is the cause of your affliction.

And now a commandment I give unto you—if you will be delivered you shall set in order your own house, for there are many things that are not right in your house. [^117]

Third, when man does evil, the afflictions that often follow are designed not only to correct him in his ways but to prepare a way for his redemption through repentance. A revelation declared that "inasmuch as they sinned they might be chastened, that they might repent." [^118] Another revelation explained: "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto-you whom I love, and whom I love I also chasten that their sins may be forgiven, for with the chastisement I prepare a way for their deliverance in all things out of temptation." [^119]

In life's program with its contrasting colors and influences, the fall of man has a divine purpose to fulfil. It seems paradoxical to speak of that which is bitter as being good. Yet only by experiencing the bitter can man truly appreciate that which is sweet; and only by coming into direct contact with corruption in a world where the laws of life exact their immutable requirements can man learn in a meaningful way the need for intelligent obedience. Orson Pratt therefore concluded: "The effects of the fall were [ordained] to continue for a season, until all the inhabitants of the spirit world, designed for this creation, should learn by bitter experience, the unhappy consequences of sin." [^120]

Summary

Joseph Smith taught that the physical earth having been created and placed in a spiritual state amid the glory of the Father, fell from this condition as a result of Adam's transgression. This change was necessary. As an independent agent, Adam brought about the fall that man might be, and that he might gain vital experience in a probationary state. In doing so, Adam became subject to the will of Satan, and both spiritual and physical death entered the world. As the spiritual powers of God's glory withdrew from the earth, many changes occurred. The earth became a temporal sphere. No longer did the law of Kolob govern it, and no longer did God's glory endow it and its several forms of life with divine powers of light and life. Where life, love, and peace had prevailed in the earth, death, animosity, fear, and hatred were manifested. Yet evil and corruption have a place in the plan of life. Without opposition, righteousness cannot be brought to pass. For this reason, God permits evil to exist.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 29:40.
[^2] 2 Nephi 9:7.
[^3] 2 Nephi 9:6-9.
[^4] Mosiah 7:27; 15:1-5; 17:8.
[^5] JD, III, p. 206.
[^6] TS, III (February 1, 1842), p. 673.
[^7] HC, III, p. 30.
[^8] Alma 42:16-22.
[^9] D&C 33:34-35.
[^10] Alma 42:13, 25.
[^11] HC, V, p. 325; D&C 130:20-21.
[^12] D&C 132:8-12.
[^13] 2 Nephi 2:5.
[^14] Alma 42:14.
[^15] 2 Nephi 9:6-7.
[^16] 2 Nephi 9:7-9.
[^17] 3 Nephi 11:11. See also John 18:11.
[^18] Alma 42:15.
[^19] Alma 34:9.
[^20] John 5:26.
[^21] HC, III, p. 392.
[^22] Ibid., VI, p. 51. See also D&C 129:6.
[^23] Luke 24:13-31.
[^24] Acts 9:1-9; 22:6-11.
[^25] D&C 110:1-4.
[^26] Alma 5:50.
[^27] Alma 9:26. See also Alma 13:24.
[^28] 1 Nephi 11:28.
[^29] Mosiah 13:33-34.
[^30] See Mosiah 15:1-5.
[^31] HC, IV, p. 29.
[^32] Ibid., p. 358.
[^33] D&C 93:5.
[^34] The fact that Jesus did possess and manifest the divine intelligence and power of the Father, Elohim, during His early ministry is attested to by His statement to Philip: "Believeth thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works."—John 14:9-10.
[^35] John Taylor, Mediation and Atonement (Salt Lake City, 1950), p. 144.
[^36] Ibid., p. 134.
[^37] Address of President Joseph F. Smith, Box Elder Stake Conference, December 20, 1914; printed in Box Elder News, Brigham City, Utah, January 28, 1915. Thomas G. Truitt of the Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah, researched the details of this address and published reproductions of the talk in a pamphlet entitled Lost Talk Found, Salt Lake City, 1967.
[^38] Nephi 19:35-36. See also 3 Nephi 17:8-24.
[^39] Matthew 1:23.
[^40] See 1 Nephi 19:10.
[^41] Mosiah 3:9.
[^42] Matthew 12:24-27; Mark 3:22-26; Luke 11:15-19.
[^43] 1 Nephi 19:7, 9-10.
[^44] I. V., John 3:34.
[^45] JD, XXI, p. 26.
[^46] Ibid., III, p. 206.
[^47] I. V., Matthew 3:24-25.
[^48] HC, IV, p. 358.
[^49] Mosiah 15:5.
[^50] Mosiah 15:7. See also John 10:18.
[^51] Mosiah 3:7.
[^52] Luke 4:1-4.
[^53] See Matthew 26:51-54.
[^54] Alma 7:11-13.
[^55] D&C 88:6.
[^56] Alma 7:11-13.
[^57] See D&C 93:12-13, 16.
[^58] Mosiah 15:7.
[^59] See D&C 93:11-17.
[^60] See, for example, D&C 93:19-20; John 17:20-23; 3 Nephi 19:29.
[^61] D&C 88:6.
[^62] Alma 34:10.
[^63] Again it should be noted that the Spirit is a substance of life.
[^64] See Mosiah 7:27; 13:28, 34; 15:1.
[^65] Alma 34:12.
[^66] See chapter five.
[^67] Alma 5:50.
[^68] HC, III, p. 387. For example, Joseph Smith taught that translated beings such as the inhabitants of Enoch's city are "ministering angels unto many planets."—Ibid., IV, pp. 209-210. On this point and the subject of Christ's authority, John Taylor wrote:
[^69] D&C 76:41-42.
[^70] TS, IV (February 1, 1843), p. 83.
[^71] D&C 76:20-24.
[^72] See, for example, D&C 25:1; 39:1-4; Moses 6:59-62, 66-68; 7:1.
[^73] TS, IV (February 1, 1843), pp. 82-83.
[^74] D&C 88:6-13, 37, 42, 45.
[^75] D&C 88: 51-61.
[^76] Taylor, op. cit., pp. 76-77.
[^77] JD, XIX, pp. 293-294.
[^78] "History of Joseph Smith," Deseret News, V (May 23, 1855), p. 1.
[^79] See D&C 93:19-20; John 17:20-23.
[^80] See John 5:26.
[^81] Alma 34:10.
[^82] It is not known whether there was a continuous withdrawal of the Spirit from Him during that period.
[^83] D&C 76:42.
[^84] JD, III, pp. 205-206. Erastus Snow also said:
[^85] Mark 15:34.
[^86] Luke 22:44.
[^87] Mosiah 3:7.
[^88] D&C 19:18.
[^89] Genesis 9:4.
[^90] Isaiah 63:3; D&C 133:50.
[^91] John 10:17-18.
[^92] D&C 76:24. That is, they died a spiritual death.
[^93] D&C 29:41.
[^94] Alma 34:35.
[^95] HC, I, p. 5.
[^96] Ibid., VI, p. 317.
[^97] 2 Nephi 9:12.
[^98] Alma 40:13-14.
[^99] Mosiah 2:38.
[^100] D&C 18:11.
[^101] 2 Nephi 9:21.
[^102] D&C 19:16.
[^103] D&C 88:6.
[^104] D&C 19:16-20.
[^105] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 132. See also page 128-129.
[^106] D&C 88:6.
[^107] D&C 19:18.
[^108] See D&C 29:40-41.
[^109] JD, III, pp. 205-206.
[^110] D&C 88:6.
[^111] Romans 6:4.
[^112] See the section in chapter sixteen entitled "Atonement's Power Manifested from the Beginning."
[^113] D&C 90:24.
[^114] D&C 100:15.
[^115] Moses 4:4.
[^116] See 2 Nephi 1:7; Jacob 2:29; 3:3; Alma 45:16; Helaman 13:30; Mormon 1:17.
[^117] D&C 93:42-43.
[^118] D&C 1:27.
[^119] D&C 95:1. [^121]
[^120] 2 Peter 1:17.
