Hyrum L. Andrus, God, Man, and the Universe ( 1968)

15

The Atoning Mission Of Jesus Christ

I would that ye should understand that God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people.—ABINADI.

The doctrine of the atonement revealed through Joseph Smith indicates that before man can see and appreciate the nature of Christ's infinite sacrifice, he must have some insight into five fundamental concepts: (1) the divine nature of God; (2) the physical-spiritual state of the earth, after the creation and before the fall, and its paradisiacal-celestial glory; (3) the fall of man from the presence of God and the transforming changes that occurred when the earth was reduced to a temporal state of existence; (4) the divine Sonship of Jesus Christ—a being who was born of mortal woman into this fallen sphere but who had the divine nature or glory of His glorified Father planted within Him in conception; and (5) the redemption of the earth and its inhabitants through the program of salvation which Christ instituted. The first three of these major concepts have been discussed in previous chapters. The fourth concept and its significance to the atonement will be considered in this chapter; and the last concept will be treated in future volumes. It is only in light of the fall and the redemption of the earth and its inhabitants that the atonement can be seen in its true light.

When the earth was created, it was in the presence of God; and this sphere and all life upon it, being in a physical-spiritual state of organization, were immortal in the sense that they had been organized to endure forever. Life, union and peace then prevailed. But by the transgression in Eden, Satan wrested control of the earth from Adam, and Adam "became subject to the will of the devil." [^1] Spiritual and physical death were then given power over all things; and had the "first judgment" [^2] which was passed upon man and the earth as a result of Adam's transgression been continued unmitigated, all life upon the earth would have crumbled to the dust in physical death to rise no more, while the immortal spirit within each form of life would forever have been banished from the presence of God and would have deteriorated in righteous desires until it became a devil. [^3]

But according to the divine plan of life and salvation, God Himself would come down among mankind and redeem His people. [^4] Jesus was conceived in the flesh with the powers of deity within Himself—those divine powers of life, or glory, which the Father, Elohim, possesses and which Adam lost in the fall. As a divine being, Christ made an infinite sacrifice in order to pay the debt of sin and give life and truth and light to man. Because the atonement is designed, as Brigham Young explained, "to redeem the sons of earth, and the earth itself from all sin that had come upon it," [^5] or, as a Latter-day Saint writer observed, to restore eventually the earth "to its original state and standing," [^6] that divine and infinite act lies at the very center of the eternal plan of life and salvation, and it is the foundation of all that is good and of lasting value in this world and in the world to come. When asked, "What are the fundamental principles of your religion?" Joseph Smith replied: "The fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven; and all other things which pertain to our religion are but appendages to it." [^7]

The Nature And Demands Of Eternal Law The Role of Law

The doctrine of the atonement expressed in latter-day revelation is centered in the immutable requirements of eternal but. The Nephite prophet Alma taught that both penalty and reward are established for each law that God ordains, and that each penalty and reward must be "eternal as the life of the soul." Otherwise, neither justice nor mercy could have "claim upon the creature." [^8] Law is therefore the foundation of organized existence and the genesis of all true progress. A revelation explained:

. . . that which is governed by law is also preserved by law and perfected and sanctified by the same. That which breaketh a law, and willeth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth a abide in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment. Therefore, they must remain filthy still. [^9]

The Lord acts through law and upholds its requirements is such perfection that Alma declared that if divine justice were destroyed, "God would cease to be God." [^10] Thus it is only upon the basis of law that God dispenses His mercies and judgments unto man. "There is a law irrevocably decreed is heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated," the Prophet wrote; "and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." [^11] A revelation explained:

Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion. Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name? Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed? And will I appoint unto you, saith the level, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was. I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord. [^12]

Fallen Man Condemned by Divine Law

As a result of Adam's transgression and in consequence of personal sins, man in mortality is in a fallen state under the bondage of broken laws; and except for the atonement, he would be consigned to a condition of spiritual and physical death without hope of redemption. "By the law no flesh is justified," Lehi explained. [^13] Alma agreed that fallen men were "in the grasp of justice; yea, the justice of God, which consigned them forever to be cut off from his presence." [^14] Jacob declared that nevermore could man return to enjoy the glory and power of God, for without some extricating and redeeming power, "the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration." [^15] Were it possible for man to come to mortality without the beneficient powers of the atonement being extended to bless and uplift him, Jacob concluded that at mortal death his physical body would be "laid down . . . to rise no more"; and his spirit having been cut off from the presence of God by the fall and as a result of subsequent transgressions, would become subject to Satan "to rise [and dwell in the presence of God] no more." [^16] Such would be the consequences of eternal justice upon man if justice were to remain unmitigated by a divine plan of mercy and of life.

The Need Of A Savior

A Plan of Mercy Required

To satisfy the demands of divine justice and institute a plan of mercy, an atonement had to be made. The Father is a God of justice; and justice had to be paid. The Father's will in regard to this matter had to be fulfilled. The honor and integrity of the Man of Holiness had to be sustained in the redemption of the earth and its inhabitants. Justice required the Father to cause the chosen redeemer to suffer. It had to be; truth and consistency made it so. Having fulfilled the will of the Father, Jesus therefore declared: "I have drunk of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning." [^17]

Fallen man unaided by divine mercy, truth, and power could not extricate himself from his fallen state; and mercy could not be extended to man without robbing justice, except the debt of justice were paid. "Therefore," Alma observed, "God Himself atoneth for the sins of the world, to bring about the plan of mercy, to appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also." [^18] Amulek declared: "For it is expedient that an atonement should be made; for according to the great plan of the Eternal God there must be an atonement made, or else all mankind must unavoidably perish; yea, all are hardened; yea, all are fallen and are lost, and must perish except it be through the atonement which it is expedient should be made." [^19]

Three major accomplishments were necessary to restore the earth and its faithful inhabitants to a condition of glory and power: First, the debt of divine justice had to be paid for Adam and all his posterity. Second, the resurrection had to be instituted that the bodies of all men might be brought forth from the grave and united with their spirits. Finally, a plan had to be established to develop the glory and power of God within the earth and its worthy inhabitants. Only in the accomplishment of these three great purposes could the earth become a redeemed and glorified sphere in the presence of God; and the faithful having proven themselves in their mortal probation could then be absolved from sin and given an eternal reward of glory and power in the resurrection.

Christ Came To Earth In Glory

Jesus Possessed Life and Immortality in Himself

Previous chapters have pointed out that the powers of the Spirit are powers of intelligence and of life; and when a person possesses the glory of God, he possesses endowments of life which a mere physical being does not possess. Such was the case with Jesus. He was conceived in the flesh with glory in Himself; and that glory was a principle of life, even of eternal life. Consequently, when He came to earth He had life and immortality in Himself. For this reason He testified: "As the Father hath life in himself, so hath he given the Son to have life in Himself." [^20] It may be asked how the Father, Elohim, has life in Himself. Does He possess the powers of physical life only? Or does He also have the attributes and powers of eternal life in Himself? As He has life in Himself (that is, on the same principle that He has life in Himself), Jesus had life in Himself. If the Man of Holiness is a glorified being with the powers of eternal life, or glory, in Himself, Jesus must also have possessed those same powers of life in Himself during His earthly mission, for He had life in Himself as the Father, Elohim, has life in Himself.

Jesus Had Power to Withhold the Manifestations of His Glory

Joseph Smith explained that a being of physical tabernacle who possesses glory has the ability to withhold or to manifest that glory to others. As an expression of this principle, the Prophet explained: "A spirit cannot come but in glory; an angel has flesh and bones; we see not their glory." [^21] Again he declared: "Spirits can only be revealed in flaming fire or glory. Angels have advanced further, their light and glory being tabernacled; and hence they appear in bodily shape." [^22]

Jesus Himself provides an illustration of the above point. After His resurrection, Christ walked along the road to Emmaus with two disciples. Even though He possessed a fulness of the Father's divine nature, there was no visible manifestation of glory and power expressed on that occasion. [^23] But to Saul on the road to Damascus, Jesus appeared in such glory that Saul was blinded. [^24] To Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, Christ also appeared in glory, and the Prophet found it difficult to express in finite language the majesty and glory of that infinite being. [^25] Undoubtedly Jesus had control over the outward manifestations of His glory and power during His earthly ministry such as He had after His resurrection.

The Testimony of Book of Mormon Prophets

In order that He might fulfil His redeeming mission, Christ was conceived in the flesh with some measure of the truth, power, and attributes of eternal life (or glory) within Himself. To this fact the ancient prophets of the Western hemisphere attested. Alma said of the birth of Christ which was then imminent:

. . . thus saith the Spirit: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, for the kingdom of heaven is soon at hand; yea, the Son of God cometh in his glory, in his might, majesty, power, and dominion. Yea, my beloved brethren, I say unto you, that the Spirit saith: Behold the glory of the King of all the earth; and also the King of heaven shall very soon shine forth among all the children of men. [^26]

Again Alma declared: "Not many days hence the Son of God shall come in his glory; and his glory shall be the glory of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace, equity, and truth, full of patience, mercy, and long-suffering, quick to hear the cries of his people and to answer their prayers." [^27]

The statements in italics above make it plain that Jesus possessed the divine nature, or glory, of His Father when He came to fill His earthly mission. In vision, Nephi was shown the ministry of Christ on earth, and he bore a similar testimony to that which was given by Alma. Nephi explained: "I beheld that he [i.e., Christ] went forth ministering unto the people, in power and great glory; and the multitudes were gathered together to hear him." [^28] According to Abinadi, this testimony was also expressed by other ancient prophets. "Did not Moses prophesy unto them concerning the coming of the Messiah, and that God should redeem his people?" the Nephite prophet inquired. Of the testimony of Moses and others, he stressed: "Have they not said that God himself should come down among the children of men, and take upon him the form of man, and go forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth?" [^29] To come as the God of the earth, Jesus had to possess in Himself the powers and attributes of deity, which are those of immortal glory, for without the intelligence (glory), power and attributes of the Father, He would not have been God. To be God, Christ had to possess the glory of God.

Abinadi testified further that in coming to earth Jesus would be the Father, because He would be conceived by the power of God. [^30] For Christ to be the Father as well as the Son, the divine nature of the Man of Holiness had to dwell in Him in the flesh. The fact that He was both the Father and the Son indicate, therefore, that the glory of Ahman dwelt in Him on earth.

The Testimony of Modern Prophets

Speaking of the powers of the Holy Spirit which Jesus possessed on earth, Joseph Smith said: "Our Savior was 'anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows,' yet so far from the people knowing Him, they said He was Beelzebub, and crucified Him as an impostor." [^31] On another occasion, the latter-day Seer said of Christ: "He was the Son of God, and had the fullness of the Spirit, and greater power than any man." [^32] These statements are in harmony with the declarations of the Lord in a revelation to Joseph Smith. "I was in the world and received of my Father," Christ declared, "and the works of him were plainly manifest." [^33] What did Jesus receive from the Father so that the works of the Man of Holiness were plainly manifest in the world, if not the glory and power of that primary being? [^34]

Those who received their views concerning Christ from the Prophet taught the same doctrine. Having referred to Jesus' statement that He had life in Himself as the Father has life in Himself, John Taylor stated:

It would seem from the above that the Son hath life inherent in Himself, even as the Father hath life in Himself, He having received this power from the Father. Also, that He had power in Himself, as elsewhere stated [See John 10:18], to lay down his body, and also to take it up again; and in this respect He differed from others. . . .

Thus, when He says He has power to lay down His life and power to take it up again, He speaks of a power never before exhibited among men upon this [temporal] earth; and which power, indeed, does not belong to man in and of himself. [^35]

In speaking of another distinctive power which Jesus possessed as the Son of God, John Taylor said: "He had power, when all mankind had lost their life, to restore life to them again; and hence He is the Resurrection and the Life, which power no other man possessed." [^36]

Joseph F. Smith, nephew of the Prophet, explained:

. . . the Father of Jesus Christ in the flesh is the God of Heaven. Therefore Jesus, as He declared, received the power of life from His Father and was never subject unto death but had life in Himself as his Father had life in Himself. Because of this power He overcame death and the grave and became master of the resurrection and the means of salvation to us all. . . .

Mary, the virgin girl, who had never known mortal man, was His mother. God by her begot His Son Jesus Christ, and He was born into the world with power and intelligence like that of His Father.

He was God with us, He was indeed Emmanuel for He came for a purpose and He possessed power that no human being ever possessed. He had power to lay down His life and take it up again. He had power to resist His murderers; if He had so willed it they never could have taken His life. He came for a purpose—what was it?—to redeem man from death. Life everlasting came into the world by the death and sacrifice of this one man. [^37]

Christ Manifested His Glory According to Man's Faith

When Jesus came to earth, He manifested His glory and power unto men only as they expressed faith in Him, or to fulfill some providential act required by His Father. This point was well illustrated as Christ ministered upon the Western hemisphere shortly after His resurrection. Because of their faith in Him, Christ revealed His glory to the Nephites as a brilliant, sanctifying power which enveloped them in heavenly fire and endowed them with its pure attributes and powers of intelligence. The resurrected Lord then observed:

So great faith have I never seen among all the Jews; wherefore I could not show unto them so great miracles, because of their unbelief. Verily I say unto you, there are none of them that have seen so great things as ye have seen; neither have they heard so great things as ye have heard. [^38]

Jesus withheld the visible manifestation of glory and power from the Jews not because he was unable to reveal it, for he clearly implied that had the Jews expressed faith in Him such as the Nephites did, He would have revealed His divine intelligence and power unto them in a similar way. But because the Jews were lacking in faith He largely withheld the expression of His divine nature from them, except in a few instances to those who believed.

The divine being who created this and numerous other worlds and who manifested Himself to the ancient prophets as the God of the universe came to this earth veiled in mortality and as a man, and He was able to manifest Himself in blessings unto men according to their faith. He was Immanuel, which means "God with us." [^39] Before the disbelieving Jews stood the God of their father Abraham, the God of Isaac, and Jacob, even the God of the whole earth. [^40] But when He sought to manifest His divine truth and power unto them in order to bless and teach them the way of eternal life, He was scorned, rebuffed, and rejected. In anticipating the treatment He would receive when He came to earth and manifested His divine power unto men, King Benjamin wrote in an inspired utterance: "After all this they shall consider him a man, and say that he hath a devil, and shall scourge him, and shall crucify him." [^41]

Christ was in the contradictory position of possessing the divine intelligence and power of His Father but unable to manifest them unto the blessing of men because of their lack of faith. In addition he had to submit to their ignorant taunts, "He hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of devils, casteth he out devils." [^42] Nephi wrote in prophetic commentary:

. . . the very God of Israel do men trample under their feet. . . . And the world, because of their iniquity, shall judge him to be a thing of naught; wherefore they scourge him, and he suffereth it; and they smite him, and he suffereth it. Yea, they spit upon him, and he suffereth it, because of his loving kindness and his long-suffering towards the children of men.

And the God of our fathers, who were led out of Egypt, out of bondage, and also were preserved in the wilderness by him, yea, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, yieldeth himself, according to the words of the angel, as a man, into the hands of wicked men, to be lifted up, according to the words of Zenock, and to be crucified, according to the words of Neum, and to be buried in a sepulchre, according to the words of Zenos. . . . [^43]

The Interaction Of Christ's Divine And Mortal Nature

Christ Possessed a Dual Nature on Earth

During His earthly ministry, Jesus was both a divine and a mortal being. In certain respects He was a composite of the nature of Adam before and after the fall. Christ acquired jointly from His immortal Father and His mortal mother the endowments and attributes of physical life, even His body of flesh and bones. From His mother He received, in addition, the elements of mortality by which He could be as other men and could experience the trials and temptations of mortal life. But by His divine conception as the Only Begotten Son of the Father in the flesh, the eternal powers and attributes of immortal glory which His Father possessed were planted in embryo within Him. In some respects, Jesus was born above the power of the fall with direct communion with His Father similar to that which Adam enjoyed before his transgression in Eden.

By the exercise of His divinity, Jesus could rise to direct and immediate communion with His Father. On such occasions, the heavens were opened to Him and He communed by the power of glory with the Man of Holiness and was taught directly by that exalted being. But by the repression of the divine nature He became as a man, and was a man.

Expression of the Divine Nature Within Christ

It is necessary to see the interrelationship and interaction of the divine and the mortal within Christ in order to understand and appreciate the nature of His earthly mission. Speaking of Christ's divinity and the glory that dwelt in Him at this time, John wrote, as is recorded in the Inspired Revision of his Gospel: "For he whom God hath sent, speaketh the words of God; for God giveth him not the Spirit by measure, for he dwelleth in him, even the fulness." [^44]

For Christ to receive the Holy Spirit without measure apparently means that there was no restriction to the divine intelligence and power which He could draw from His Father when a legitimate need arose. That which He required under a given circumstance was readily available, whether it was power to heal the sick, to raise the dead, to change water into wine, to control the elements, or, having laid down His body in death, to take it up again in the resurrection. As Erastus Snow observed of Christ, "He . . . was well prepared for this work, having an inexhaustible source of strength to draw from, the Spirit having been given to him without measure." [^45]

By His spiritual union with the Father, Jesus had access to the Spirit of Truth from His infancy and He was taught directly and openly by the Man of Holiness. Brigham Young explained that while Christ was on earth, He talked with His Father, "dwelt in His bosom, and knew all about heaven, about making the earth, about the transgression of man, and what would redeem the people, and that he was the character who was to redeem the sons of earth, and the earth itself from all sin that had come upon it." Continued President Young: "The light, knowledge, power, and glory with which he was clothed were far above, or exceeded that of all others who had been upon the earth after the fall." [^46] The fact that Jesus acquired great knowledge at an early period in His earthly existence was attested to by Joseph Smith. In speaking of Christ "many years" before the time of His ministry among men, the Prophet's Inspired Revision of Matthew reveals:

And it came to pass that Jesus grew up with his brethren, and waxed strong, and waited upon the Lord for the time of his ministry to come. And . . . he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him. [^47]

With such a channel of revelation and truth as He possessed, it was little wonder that Jesus "spake not as other men." Men speak of that with which they are familiar, and the views expressed in their discourse are taken from their experience and understanding. From His earliest recollection in the flesh Jesus undoubtedly experienced at times the presence of the Father; and from the level of divine truth He acquired His understanding. Though a man, He was also the God of this earth; and His perspective was divine, not mortal. For this reason He spake not as other men, and "he needed not that any man should teach Him."

By means of the divine glory and power which He possessed, Jesus lived on earth without sin. "Why was He perfect?" inquired Joseph Smith. "Because he was the Son of God, and had the fulness of the Spirit, and greater power than any man." [^48] This does not mean that Jesus used the powers of the Spirit which He possessed as an artificial shield against temptation and in this way lived the law of God to perfection. As will be discussed more fully hereafter, He was required to meet and overcome temptation on the same plane that man must do so on earth; and to do this, Jesus undoubtedly repressed the influence of the Spirit within Himself so that in a practical sense He became in every way a man and was subject to the temptations and vicissitudes of mortal life. But by strict obedience to the will of His Father, Christ was able to utilize the powers of the Spirit to mature His character and develop in the divine attributes and powers of the Man of Holiness; and in this way, Jesus acquired the ability to live on earth without sin. Any other conclusion would deny that He trod the same path that man must tread.

It was not merely His being divinely conceived which gave Christ such spiritual powers and strength as have been denied to men in general since the fall of Adam. As the God of this earth, Jesus merited that which He received. He was a being of infinite capacity, capable of acquiring the Spirit without measure; and the relationship which He acquired with the Father by being divinely conceived in the flesh merely opened the way for Him to obtain that which He was capable of receiving. By means of His atonement, all men are given the spiritual powers which they merit and are capable of acquiring in mortality. Thus the Father maintains justice and equity in dispensing His gifts and graces to others.

Christ Subject to the Will of the Father

In coming to earth, Christ was subject to the will of the Father in all things. This seems to imply that there were restrictions placed upon His utilization of glory and power in His own behalf. At times He was required to repress the action of divine truth and power in His own behalf, for only in this way could He be given the experience of a mortal probation and become as other men in experiencing the effects of the fall—sickness, pain, hunger, temptation, sorrow, and death. As noted above, Christ did not manifest His glory unto men except as they expressed faith in Him. Neither did He utilize the divine powers which He possessed to gratify His own flesh, or to compensate for any deficiency of will in disciplining the flesh. Abinadi wrote that Christ subjected the flesh to the Spirit, or the Son to the Father that dwelt in Him, [^49] and the Father required that He suffer temptation, pain, and sorrow to the extent that the flesh became "subject even unto death." [^50] King Benjamin declared prophetically: "He shall suffer temptations and pain of body, hunger, thirst, and fatigue, even more than man can suffer, except it be unto death." [^51]

Two examples illustrate the nature of Christ's mortal trials and His restraint in exercising the powers of divinity. After Jesus had fasted forty days and nights in the wilderness, Lucifer came tempting Him, saying, "If thou be the Son of God, command this stone that it be made bread." [^52] The suggestion was both a challenge and an enticement. The challenge centered upon the question of Christ's divinity. As the Son of God, He possessed divine intelligence and power like His Father—power to organize and command the elements. The enticement came with the suggestion that He use His power to prove the question of His divine Sonship by changing a stone into bread to appease His hunger. But the cleverly devised suggestion was in reality a temptation for the Master to use the powers He possessed contrary to the will of the Father; and Jesus refused to misuse the divinity within Himself. Again, when the Apostle Peter drew his sword and sought zealously to defend the Lord at the time of His betrayal, Jesus reminded His impulsive disciple that were He to pray to the Father He could receive more than ample assistance and protection, for He had the right to command the powers of heaven. [^53]

Christ Suffered the Afflictions of Mortality and Death

Jesus not only met the many trials and temptations of the world but He also took upon Himself "the pains and sicknesses of his people." This He did, Alma observed, "that he might blot out their transgressions according to the power of his deliverance." But there was also a correlated reason to this major purpose. "He will take upon him their infirmities," the Nephite prophet explained, "that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities." In his explanation, Alma emphasized that "the Spirit knoweth all things." Nevertheless, the Son of God found it necessary to suffer "according to the flesh." Since the Spirit knows all things and since Christ was the center of this divine intelligent power even before He came to earth, He knew then of the infirmities of His people. As the God of this earth, was He not the Father of creative and quickening life for all things thereon? And being in and through all things by means of the Holy Spirit, was He not aware of all things, including the pains, sicknesses, and infirmities of His people? But evidently such knowledge was not in every way comparable to that which Christ gained by first-hand experience in the flesh. Hence, Alma emphasized that Jesus suffered as He did that He might know "according to the flesh how to succor his people." [^54] A revelation declared in support of this purpose that Jesus "descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things." [^55] Practical experience in the trials and afflictions of mortality was necessary to the fulfilment of His divine mission.

In order for Christ to descend below all things, it was necessary for the divine elements of life and glory within Him to be repressed in their action upon Him so that He could feel the toils, pains, afflictions, and temptations of mortality, and also suffer death in the flesh. In this way, He suffered the full afflictions of mortality. By extending His virtue and power to heal the sick, give sight to the blind, and restore the lame, He also took upon Himself, in a literal sense, the afflictions of men. Mortal afflictions are not eradicated without the manifestation of a counter force of life to restore the individual to health. Jesus gave of His divine life and power in order to heal the sick and the afflicted, and in this way He took upon Himself their infirmities. Then, to make the atonement, He consented to the withdrawal of the powers of eternal life which He received of His Father to the extent that He could experience the full effects of spiritual death for the sins of all men, and to the extent that His spirit could finally pass through the portals of death into the spirit world. Consequently, there is no sorrow nor suffering known to man that Jesus has not personally endured—no pain, no agony of soul, no turmoil in death. All this He experienced so that He could know "according to the flesh, how to succor his people." [^56] In this way He became fully qualified to assist the sons of earth to achieve mastery of the flesh and the world and to rise from wherever they might be in the depths of sin and despair and come unto righteousness. Man's recognition of and heartfelt acceptance and reliance upon this fact are integral parts of his faith in Jesus Christ.

Christ was not subject to death so long as He willed to live and the immortal powers of life which He received from His Father continued to function within Him. But it was the will of the Father that He should feel the afflictions of mortality and learn obedience by the things which He suffered. Only in this way could He develop from grace to grace in acquiring the divine nature until He achieved the fulness of the glory and power of the Father. [^57] It was also the will of the Father that He pass through this mortal sphere where He was limited in the expression of His divine glory by the lack of faith among men. And in making the transition to higher realms of life and glory, it was designed that He should pay the debt of divine law for erring man, that He might in righteousness exercise His power to break the bands of spiritual and temporal death, and stand as a Redeemer to the world.

Through the experiences of the atonement Jesus probably completed the task of refining and subduing the physical endowments He received on earth. Abinadi declared of Christ: "Yea, even so he shall be led, crucified, and slain, the flesh becoming subject even unto death, the will of the Son being swallowed up in the will of the Father." [^58] By means of these experiences the fulness of the Father's glory was finally centered in Christ in the resurrection, giving Him all power in heaven and on earth. [^59] Through Him, as the light and the life of the world, the divine intelligence and power of God could then be developed to an eternal fulness in others in order to bring about the divine relationship by which Christ could be in them as the Father is in Him. [^60] To this end a revelation explained that Jesus descended below all things, in that He might comprehend all things, "that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth." [^61]

The Nature Of Christ's Atoning Sacrifice

Qualifications of the Redeemer

Jesus possessed the necessary qualifications to accomplish His atoning mission: First, He was conceived on earth with the glory and power of His Father in embryo within Him. Second, He was so constituted that by the exercise of will He could repress the action of His divine power in His own behalf and become as other men in experiencing the effects of the fall. Third, He possessed a divine and infinite capacity of soul which enabled Him to mature sufficiently in the Father's glory during His brief stay on earth until He was prepared to make an infinite atonement. Fourth, through His sensitive and refined nature He could experience pain and sorrow for the sins of all mankind. Finally, the Redeemer lived a sinless life on earth. The condemnation of broken law could not disqualify Him as an appropriate sacrifice for sin.

Christ as an Infinite and Eternal Sacrifice

Having met the above requirements, Christ offered as an infinite and eternal sacrifice both the divine and the physical endowments and powers of life which He possessed. "It is expedient that there be a great and last sacrifice," Amulek reasoned; "yea, not a sacrifice of man, neither of beast, neither of any manner of fowl; for it shall not be a human sacrifice; but it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice." [^62] Neither the sacrifice of man nor the mere sacrifice of flesh and blood, however sanctified and pure, would do, for flesh and blood are not infinite. Neither is blood eternal; nor is the flesh, except when it is quickened by the Spirit. Only that which is divine is infinite and eternal. The objectives to be accomplished required the sacrifice of God, even the God of this earth, who was a being of infinite and eternal powers of life, by reason of the glory which He possessed. [^63] The Book of Mormon stresses continually that "God himself" came down to redeem His people. [^64] Thus Christ offered, in addition to those physical endowments which He received, subdued, and sanctified on earth, the infinite and immortal endowments of eternal life which He was given in embryo by His divine conception in the flesh and which He then matured within Himself by obedience to the Father's will. Concluded Amulek: "There can be nothing which is short of an infinite atonement which will suffice for the sins of the world." [^65]

An infinite sacrifice is more than a sinless sacrifice. Jesus differed from man not only by His supreme sinlessness but by the nature of His organization as a being. In Him were the attributes and powers of eternal life. By the time Christ went to Gethsemane and then to the cross, He had developed these divine attributes and powers within Himself to the degree required to make an infinite and eternal sacrifice. Such an offering would extend in its nature, scope, and power beyond the comprehension of mortal man, and beyond the limits of this finite sphere. An earlier chapter observed that as a glorified being, God has a different relationship with the universe than does man. [^66] This was true also of Christ. His light and glory filled the universe to give life and truth to all things. When He came to fulfil His earthly mission, "the glory of . . . the king of heaven" shone forth among the children of men. [^67] In giving Himself as an infinite and eternal sacrifice, Christ probably offered not only the quickening powers of life and glory which centered in Him for this earth but the quickening and sustaining glory for all the worlds which He had created. In this way it would be possible for Him to offer a sacrifice that would reach into infinity and affect the many worlds which He had created and which He came to this earth to redeem.

The Infinite Scope of Christ's Atonement

Joseph Smith taught the doctrine that Christ's atonement extends beyond this earth to redeem those who live on other spheres which He has created. The Prophet referred to the great Redeemer as "holding the keys of the universe." [^68] In reporting a vision in which he and Sidney Rigdon beheld the glorified Christ on the right hand of God and in which they received divine instructions and testimony concerning Him, Joseph Smith wrote by the Spirit of revelation that Jesus made His sacrifice that "all might be saved whom the Father had put into his power and made by him." [^69] The implied meaning of this statement is that, as an infinite sacrifice, the atonement was made to save all that Christ created by the power of the Father and all that He has jurisdiction over, not merely this earth and its inhabitants. This conclusion is strengthened by a poetic version of this revelation which the Prophet wrote and which reads at this point:

'Tis decreed that he'll save all the works of his hands, And sanctify them by his own precious blood; And purify earth for the Sabbath of rest, By the agent of fire as it was by the flood. The Saviour will save all his Father did give, Even all that he gave in the regions abroad, Save the sons of perdition—they are lost, ever lost! And can never return to the presence of God. [^70]

In the revelation quoted above Joseph Smith reported the word of God to him and Sidney Rigdon, testifying of the same doctrine. The Prophet wrote: "We heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—that by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." [^71] To become a son or a daughter of God through Christ requires one to be born into the kingdom of heaven through the power of Christ's atonement. [^72] For the inhabitants of the worlds which Christ has created to be begotten sons and daughters unto God through the Son of Man, therefore means that the atonement He made on this earth extends to those other spheres which He has created to give them the benefit of His redeeming power. Joseph Smith expressed this view when he arranged the verses above in poetic form as follows:

And I heard a great voice, bearing record from heav'n, He's the Savior, and only begotten of God— By him, of him, and through him, the worlds were all made, Even all that career in the heavens so broad. Whose inhabitants, too, from the first to the last, Are sav'd by the very same Saviour of ours; And, of course, are begotten God's daughters and sons, By the very same truths, and the very same pow'rs. [^73]

The fact that the inhabitants of these many worlds which Christ has created are begotten sons and daughters unto God by receiving divine "truths" and "powers" confirms that Joseph Smith was speaking of birth into the kingdom of heaven, which has its basis in the atonement of Jesus Christ.

The same general view was expressed in a revelation that explained the governing power of Christ throughout the universe. Within the boundless expanses of space "there are many kingdoms," it declares, and God "hath given a law unto all things, by which they move in their times and their seasons." In this way, the orderly cosmos is sustained by the Light of Christ "in the midst of the power of God." [^74] Of the personal ministry of Christ to these spheres the revelation said:

Behold, I will liken these kingdoms unto a man having a field, and he sent forth his servants into the field to dig in the field.

And he said unto the first: Go ye and labor in the field, and in the first hour I will come unto you, and ye shall behold the joy of my countenance.

And he said unto the second: Go ye also into the field, and in the second hour I will visit you with the joy of my countenance.

And also unto the third, saying: I will visit you; and unto the fourth, and so on unto the twelfth.

And the lord of the field went unto the first in the first hour, and tarried with him all that hour, and he was made glad with the light of the countenance of his lord.

And then he withdrew from the first that he might visit the second also, and the third, and the fourth, and so on unto the twelfth.

And thus they all received the light of the countenance of their lord, every man in his hour, and in his time, and in his season—

Beginning at the first, and so on unto the last, and from the last unto the first, and from the first unto the last; every man in his own order, until his hour was finished, even according as his lord had commanded him, that his lord might be glorified in him, and he in his lord, that they all might be glorified.

Therefore, unto this parable I will liken all these kingdoms, and the inhabitants thereof—every kingdom in its hour, and in its time, and in its season, even according to the decree which God hath made. [^75]

John Taylor quoted, and thereby sanctioned, a statement from the Times and Seasons that the twelve kingdoms in the above parable "are governed by the same rules, and [are] destined to the same honor." In referring to this parable, Elder Taylor said:

It is further stated in this section [of the Doctrine and Covenants]: "Therefore, unto this parable will I liken all these kingdoms, and the inhabitants thereof; every kingdom in its hour, and in its time, and in its season; even according to the decree which God hath made."—Verse 61.

That is, each kingdom, or planet, and the inhabitants thereof, were blessed with the visits and presence of their Creator, in their several times and seasons. [^76]

Two points in the above parable seem to indicate that the worlds which Christ is depicted as visiting are temporal spheres in need of redemption to glory: First, He visits these spheres that He might be glorified in the inhabitants thereof, and that they might be glorified in Him. It appears, therefore, that these worlds and their inhabitants are passing through a mortal state at the time of His visitation and are not at that time glorified. The fact that He visits them to extend the power of His glory unto them indicates that His atonement operates in their behalf, for it is only on the basis of the atonement that man is glorified in Christ.

The second point of evidence that these are temporal spheres is that Christ is portrayed as withdrawing from one sphere in order to visit the next. Orson Pratt reasoned:

Why is it necessary that there should be a withdrawal of the presence of the Lord in visiting the different worlds? I think it was necessary, so far as mortality is concerned, and indicates that the inhabitants of these different planets are fallen, as we are. . . . If they were immortal beings and celestial in their nature, the Lord would not act with them thus, for then they would always be in his presence, whether they are beings of one world or another, or whether the worlds upon which they dwell are as numerous as the sands upon the sea-shore; when they become celestial the veil that obscures the view of mortals is removed, and it makes no difference whether a world be a million, a hundred million, or a million million of miles distant from another, if the veil is taken away, they are still in each other's presence. [^77]

Since the ministry of Christ to other spheres is explained by means of a parable, it need not be concluded that there are but twelve worlds which He has created and which He redeems. Nor does it necessarily follow that all these spheres are now undergoing their fallen temporal state. Revelation on these points is lacking. There is a statement by Joseph Smith that seems to indicate that after His resurrection, Christ may have ministered to redeemed individuals on other spheres. The Prophet declared: "Jesus went in body after His resurrection to minister to translated and resurrected bodies." [^78] The fact that the Savior went to minister to translated and resurrected beings after His own resurrection seems to imply that those to whom He then ministered were others than the righteous of this earth who were with Him in His resurrection.

There is another sense in which the atonement of Jesus Christ was infinite and eternal in its nature. This is based upon the fact that the effects which sin have upon man would never cease except for Christ's gracious act. Unmitigated, the effects of sin would endure for all eternity. The atonement is infinite and eternal in that it has power to erase the consequences of sin that would last to all eternity, and in that it opens the way for man to acquire divine powers of life which he may exercise and enjoy to all eternity. Both in breadth and in depth, Christ's sacrifice was infinite and eternal in its nature and power.

Insights Into the Nature of Christ's Infinite Atonement

A major purpose in the plan of life and salvation is to endow each righteous person with the glory and power of God. [^79] But for the present, man may acquire the divine attributes and powers that lead to eternal life only on a subordinate principle, through Christ. Mortal man is a dependent being: he does not possess the powers of life independently within himself. In his present organization, he must be quickened by the Light of Christ in order to have life; he must obtain the powers and attributes that lead to eternal life through Christ who is the light and the life of the world; and, finally, he must be glorified in Christ in the resurrection.

But as has been discussed, Jesus was given the divine powers and attributes of eternal life independently, on the same principle that His Father who gave Him these divine powers and attributes possesses them. [^80] In order to satisfy the demands of divine justice and redeem fallen man, Christ sacrificed the attributes and powers of both physical and eternal life which He possessed on earth. In this way, Jesus made an "infinite and eternal"—not merely a sinless human—sacrifice. [^81] To this end, the powers of eternal life or glory which He possessed were withdrawn, by His consent, as He commenced His great ordeal. Though little has been revealed concerning this action and the consequences it produced, it appears from available evidence that the withdrawal of divine attributes and powers of life from Jesus commenced in Gethsemane and terminated with His death on the cross. [^82] In the absence of divine powers of life or glory, Christ was enveloped in the powers of spiritual darkness and death; and in this experience He suffered in body and spirit the full pain and agony of hell, descending to the very depths of spiritual darkness and death. Having experienced these things, along with the physical agony which He endured, Jesus then gave up His life on earth to complete the work of redeeming all that "the Father had put into his power and made by him." [^83]

Brigham Young explained that it was the withdrawal of spiritual powers of light and life from Christ that "made him sweat blood." The darkening and deteriorating powers of spiritual death then weighed so heavily upon Jesus and produced such anguish and pain that the normal functions of His body were critically disrupted, and blood came from every pore. As Brigham Young spoke of the agony which Jesus suffered beginning in Gethsemane, he explained: "If he had had the power of God upon him, he would not have sweat blood; but all was withdrawn from him, and a veil was cast over him." [^84] It was then that Christ desired the Father to remove the bitter cup. Later, He cried out in dramatic witness of the darkness that filled His soul, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" [^85]

Luke testified that while Jesus was in the Garden of Gethsemane the agony of soul which He experienced was such that "his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground." [^86] To King Benjamin, an angel declared that blood would come from "every pore" of the Redeemer's body, so great would be His agony for the wickedness and abominations of His people. [^87] A revelation to Joseph Smith also explained that the suffering which Christ experienced and in which He paid the debt of divine justice for all men caused Him "to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit." [^88]

The Lord explained to Noah in ancient times that the life of the physical body is in the blood. [^89] This Christ shed in giving up His life on earth; and the shedding of His blood became an integral part of His sacrifice in making the atonement. But something more than the shedding of blood and the giving of physical life was involved in Christ's infinite sacrifice. Blood may flow freely from an open wound so that the life of man ebbs away with no more suffering than ordinarily accompanies death. But the fact that blood came from every pore of the Savior's body while He was yet in Gethsemane—before His taunting and brutal oppressors came to afflict Him—evidences an inner agony, pain, and sorrow that mortal man can but little comprehend or appreciate. These inward agonies were undoubtedly produced by an inward cause; and that cause was spiritual rather than physical or mental in nature. In this ordeal, Christ was alone. There was no other person walking with Him on the path that led to the atonement. [^90]

Explanations Concerning the Infinite Atonement of Christ

When viewed in light of man and his mortal experience, the atonement appears to be an impossibility—something that no man could do and something that man has little basis for understanding in the natural world. No man, as man is known in this temporal state, has life and immorality in himself on an independent basis. No man of himself is the center of the divine powers of life and truth for another. No mortal man can by himself withstand all the trials and temptations of mortality without transgressing a single law of God. No man can take upon himself the debt of Adam's transgression and the sins of the world, suffer complete spiritual death, and pass through temporal death, with power to raise his body again to eternal life in an immortal state. Only by understanding that Jesus possessed the divine nature of His Father—the living powers of eternal life or glory that His Father possessed—can man comprehend in some measure how Christ was qualified to be the great Redeemer.

Jesus knew that He, alone, of all men since the fall of Adam had the powers of eternal life planted in Him by being divinely conceived in the flesh. This was the essence of His divine Sonship. He knew also of the demands of divine justice, and that He alone possessed the means of paying the demands of justice for erring man; and that the divine powers of life which He possessed would enable Him to break the bands of death and raise His body again from the grave. In these observations may be seen the nature of Christ and the issues that confronted Him during His ministry and as He went for the last time to Jerusalem and to Gethsemane. "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again," He explained. "No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father." [^91]

Christ's vicarious sacrifice may be understood better by noting that transgression of divine law results in a withdrawal of spiritual powers of life from the offending soul. This was true of Lucifer and his followers who, as a result of rebellion, were "thrust down from the presence of God and the Son." [^92] It was true of Adam and Eve in their fall from paradisiacal glory, for by transgression they suffered a spiritual death. [^93] It is also true of those in this mortal probation who procrastinate their repentance until the end. Amulek warned: "If ye have procrastinated the day of your repentance even until death, behold, ye have become subjected to the spirit of the devil, and he doth seal you his; therefore, the Spirit of the Lord hath withdrawn from you, and hath no place in you, and the devil hath all power over you." [^94]

Joseph Smith maintained that the powers of spiritual darkness which Satan controls are real. The Prophet wrote of the experience he had when he went to the grove to pray in 1820, before the glorious vision of the Father and the Son was opened to him:

. . . I kneeled down and began to offer up the desire of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such as astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pilar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. [^95]

Those who yield to the will of the adversary on earth and fail to repent become subject to his powers of spiritual darkness and death. The withdrawal of the Spirit of God, coupled with the power of spiritual darkness that presses heavily upon the unrepentant sinner, produces an inner burning and anguish that is as exquisite as fire and brimstone. [^96] Jacob therefore taught that "spiritual death is hell." [^97] Alma observed that following this life, disobedient spirits from whom the Spirit of God has withdrawn reside "in darkness, and a state of awful, fearful looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them." [^98] And King Benjamin explained of a wicked individual that "the demands of divine justice [which require a withdrawal of the Spirit of the Lord and permit the spirit of the Adversary to have power over him] do awaken his immortal soul to a lively sense of his own guilt, which doth cause him to shrink from the presence of the Lord, and doth fill his breast with guilt, and pain, and anguish, which is like an unquenchable fire." [^99]

In making the atonement, Christ "suffered the pain of all men," [^100] even that "of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam." [^101] This means that He suffered the consequences of sin for Adam and for every individual who is designated to come to this earth during its temporal state. By revelation to Joseph Smith, the Lord affirmed: "Behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent." [^102]

If divine law requires a withdrawal of the Spirit of God in its quickening and enlightening influence for transgression and if Jesus paid the total debt of sin for all men, it would seem that in making the atonement He experienced a withdrawal of divine powers of life or glory equivalent to that which otherwise would be withdrawn from Adam and his posterity if they were required to pay the full debt of their transgressions. To redeem man from spiritual death or hell, Jesus suffered the full powers of spiritual death or hell for all men. A revelation declared that He descended in spiritual darkness "below all things." [^103] He also suffered the full consequences of pain, anguish, and sorrow that result from the sins of all men. These things Christ did that He might bring all men back into the presence of God.

In a revelation given through Joseph Smith to Martin Harris, the Lord gave significant insight into the nature of His supreme act of mercy. Having declared that He suffered the pain of sin for all men if they would repent, Christ explained: ". . . but if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink." Having referred in pointed terms to the agonies which He suffered for sin, the Lord then declared, "Wherefore, I command you to repent, lest . . . you suffer these punishments of which I have spoken, of which in the smallest, yea, even in the least degree you have tasted at the time I withdrew my Spirit." [^104] The withdrawal of the Spirit from Martin Harris occurred when, as a result of his perfidity, he lost the manuscript Book of Lehi which Joseph Smith had translated as the first unit of the Book of Mormon. Others also felt in some measure the depressing anguish and torment that accompanied the Spirit's withdrawal on this occasion. The Prophet's mother later wrote:

I well remember that day of darkness, both within and without. To us, at least, the heavens seemed clothed with blackness, and the earth shrouded with gloom. I have often said within myself, that if a continual punishment, as severe as that which we experienced on that occasion, were to be inflicted upon the most wicked characters who ever stood upon the footstool of the Almighty—if even their punishment were no greater than that, I should feel to pity their condition. [^105]

As a result of the withdrawal of the Spirit, Martin Harris suffered to an infinitesimal degree the same kind of anguish and pain which Jesus suffered in making the atonement. How, then, did Jesus suffer except by experiencing an infinitely greater withdrawal of spiritual powers? Whether this withdrawal of spiritual forces can be measured in a quantitive sense is not for man to say. It is sufficient to state that Jesus descended spiritually below all things. [^106] From this fact it seems evident that in making the atonement Christ suffered eventually a total spiritual death. While He was on earth, He was by organization a composite of God and man. But in Gethsemane and on the cross He descended in darkness of mind and of soul to the lowest level of perdition and experienced the total pains of spiritual darkness and death for all men. But though He bore the full burden of sin while enveloped in the powers of spiritual darkness, He possessed integrity and dedication to obey the will of the Father unto death—both spiritual and physical.

To the inner darkness and agony which Jesus felt, there was added the great physical pain and the humiliation which He experienced in His crucifixion. Christ suffered in "both body and spirit," [^107] and both anguish of soul and pain of body were intermingled in the sacrifice which He made. In addition to the sacrifice of His divine nature which consisted of the attributes and powers of eternal life which He possessed, Christ sacrificed the endowments of physical life which He had received and subdued on earth, even His sanctified body and the precious blood therein.

Reasons for the Withdrawal of the Spirit from Christ

The withdrawal of the Spirit from Christ served three major purposes: First, as has been observed, eternal justice requires the withdrawal of spiritual powers of life because of sin. A state of hell is caused essentially by the withdrawal of the Spirit of God from organized life, as is illustrated by the first and the second spiritual death. [^108] For Jesus to take upon Himself the consequences of sin required that He suffer spiritual death for all men, and to this end the Spirit of God was withdrawn from Him.

Second, by the withdrawal of the Spirit, Jesus was tested in His integrity commensurate with the light and truth He had received from His Father. On this point, Brigham Young said:

. . . is there a reason for men and women being exposed more constantly and more powerfully, to the power of the enemy, by having visions than by not having them? There is and it is simply this—God never bestows upon His people, or upon an individual, superior blessings without a severe trial to prove them, to prove that individual, or that people, to see whether they will keep their covenants with Him, and keep in remembrance what He has shown them. Then the greater the vision, the greater the display of the power of the enemy. And when such individuals are off their guard they are left to themselves, as Jesus was. For this express purpose the Father withdrew His Spirit from His Son, at the time he was to be crucified. . . . At the very moment, at the hour when the crisis came from him to offer up his life, the Father withdrew Himself, withdrew His Spirit, and cast a veil over him . . . He then plead [sic] with the Father not to forsake him. "No," says the Father, "you must have your trials, as well as others." [^109]

Third, the withdrawal of spiritual powers enabled Christ to descend below all things so that He could comprehend all things, and thereby obtain experience and prepare Himself to receive the fulness of the Father's glory in the resurrection. Having acquired the fulness of the Father's glory, Jesus could then develop in their fulness the divine attributes and powers of truth, and light, and life in others. A revelation said of Christ: "He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth." [^110] In His earthly experience, Jesus learned by direct contact with mortal weakness and spiritual darkness how to succor His people, that, as has been discussed earlier in this chapter, He might lead to glory all who would believe on Him, wherever they might be in the depths of sin.

To these three major purposes which the withdrawal of the Spirit from Christ enabled Him to accomplish, a fourth purpose may possibly be added. The withdrawal of the Spirit from Jesus, with the influence which the powers of spiritual death and darkness then had upon Him, apparently caused a critical breakdown to occur in His bodily organs and tissues so that, when He willed that He should die, His spirit could readily depart into the spirit world. Jesus had divine powers of life within Himself, independently, on the same principle that the Man of Holiness possesses the powers of eternal life within Himself. Though Christ suffered total spiritual death, He still did not die physically, for He had power within Himself either to give up His life on earth or to retain it. But the effects of the withdrawal of the Spirit upon His body may have facilitated the departure of His spirit, when He willed that it should leave His body and go to the spirit world.

But death did not bring Christ's mission to an end. Nor did He then cease to manifest glory and power so that man might be redeemed. The Apostle Paul wrote that Jesus "was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father." [^111] Having descended as a sinless sacrifice into the spirit world, Christ was free to manifest His glory and the glory which His Father again gave Him to break the bonds of death. It took divine powers of life or glory manifest from within the spirit world by the God of heaven and of earth to break the bonds of death. Having matured these divine attributes and powers of life within Himself by obedience to the will of the Father, Christ was free to use them to institute the resurrection.

As He severed the bonds of death and came forth from the tomb, Jesus was crowned with the full glory and power of the Father. He was then the master of life and of death, possessing the right to use both the powers of life and the powers of death to fulfil the eternal purposes of the Father in the salvation of man. He had descended below all things that He might comprehend all things—the depths as well as the heights of life; He could then extend the remission of sins to man [^112] and develop His glory in its fulness in all things which the Father had placed in His power. Having paid the debt of sin for Adam and broken the bonds of death, He could also raise all men from the grave and bring the faithful into the kingdom of His Father to dwell in immortal glory.

Summary

According to the scriptures of the new dispensation, fallen man is condemned by divine law. He is in need of a savior to pay the debt of justice and to develop in him the attributes and powers of God's glory. The atonement becomes meaningful only when it is viewed in light of man's fall from glory. Adam lost spiritual life by transgression. Christ's purpose was to restore the spiritual life and power which were lost in the fall. When Jesus came to earth, He had life and immortality in Himself by means of His divine conception; and He had power either to manifest or to withhold the manifestation of His glory to others. This He did according to the faith which others had in Him. By the exercise of His divinity, Jesus could rise to direct communion with His Father. But by repressing the action of the glory He possessed, He could he as man, and become a man. In the exercise of His glory, He subordinated Himself to the will of His Father; and it was the will of the Father that He suffer the afflictions of mortality and submit to death, that He might pay the debt of sin for man, break the bonds of death, and attain the fulness of the Father's glory in the resurrection. As the appointed redeemer, Jesus was eminently qualified for the task which He was sent to earth to perform; and in His death, He made an infinite atonement. In doing so, He sacrificed both the powers of eternal life which He possessed and the powers of physical life which He had on earth. In this way, He paid the debt of sin. By the withdrawal of the spiritual powers which He possessed, Jesus was also tested commensurate with the light and truth He had received from His Father. Thereby, He descended below all things that He might comprehend all things and develop His glory in all things. Having fulfilled the will of the Father, Jesus came forth from the grave with power to redeem others and glorify them in His Father's kingdom.

Footnotes

It would appear that the translated residents of Enoch's city are under the direction of Jesus, who is the Creator of worlds; and that He, holding the keys of the government of other worlds, could, in His administrations to them, select the translated people of Enoch's Zion, if He thought proper, to perform a mission to these various planets, . . . to act as ambassadors, teachers, or messengers to those worlds over which Jesus holds the authority. We read in the Times and Seasons:

"Truly Jesus Christ created the worlds, and is Lord of Lords, and, as the Psalmist said, 'judges among the Gods.' . . . Our Father in Heaven, . . . with Jesus Christ His first begotten Son, and the Holy Ghost, are one in power, one in dominion, and one in glory, constituting the First Presidency of this system and this eternity . . . ."—Taylor, op. cit., p. 76.

. . . at length the time came when the Father said, You must succumb, you must be made the offering. And at this dark hour the power of the Father withdrew itself measurably from him, and he was left to be taken by his enemies, and, like a lamb, was led to the slaughter, but he opened not his mouth, because his hour had come. . . . It was necessary that the Father should thus measurably forsake his Son, leaving him to his enemies, otherwise they never could have fulfilled what had been prophesied concerning them.—Ibid., XXI, p. 26.

---
Notas:
[^1] 2 Nephi 26:24.
[^2] 3 Nephi 27:14.
[^3] "Joseph Smith Papers, 1839-1841," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TJPS, p. 190.
[^4] See 1 Peter 1:18-20.
[^5] This did not include the power of the resurrection, for Christ had not as yet broken the bonds of death. Nor did it include the power to develop in man in the resurrection the full glory and power of the Father, for Jesus did not receive the fulness of the Father until He was resurrected.
[^6] Moses 6:53-54.
[^7] Moses 7:45.
[^8] See the section in chapter ten entitled "The Light of the Sun, Moon, and Stars."
[^9] Mosiah 2:21.
[^10] D&C 93:9.
[^11] See D&C 11:28; 39:1-3.
[^12] See D&C 11:28; 39:1-3.
[^13] D&C 88:49-50.
[^14] D&C 29:42-43.
[^15] 2 Nephi 2:21.
[^16] Moses 6:53-54.
[^17] D&C 29:48.
[^18] D&C 93:38.
[^19] HC, V, p. 499.
[^20] Moroni 8.
[^21] Moroni 8:8-9.
[^22] D&C 29:46-48.
[^23] D&C 93:38-42.
[^24] D&C 93:38-42.
[^25] I. V., Genesis 17:11:
[^26] Mosiah 3:16.
[^27] D&C 29:47.
[^28] D&C 68:25-28.
[^29] Moroni 8:22. Mentally retarded individuals may also be classified in this area.
[^30] 2 Nephi 9:25-26.
[^31] Mosiah 3:11.
[^32] See Mosiah 3:20-22; Alma 29:5. For other related statements, see Mosiah 15:24-25; Alma 9:15-16; Helaman 15:14-15. A discussion of the future state of those who die without the law of Christ will be given in Volumes II and IV of this work.
[^33] As previously noted the powers of the Spirit are powers of life that lead eventually to eternal life.
[^34] See D&C 84:45-53.
[^35] 2 Nephi 2:26-29.
[^36] Modern tactics of brainwashing are efforts to control the inner impulses of man's life.
[^37] As will be shown in Volume III of this work, the divine intent is to extend these constitutional rights to all men.
[^38] D&C 101:78.
[^39] D&C 98:8.
[^40] D&C 88:86.
[^41] See the section in chapter six entitled "All Truth and Intelligence Independent."
[^42] D&C 93:30-32.
[^43] See the section in chapter ten entitled "Christ's Holy Spirit Leads Man Upward to God."
[^44] D&C 84:46-53.
[^45] D&C 29:26.
[^46] 2 Nephi 9:12-13, 15.
[^47] Idem.
[^48] Alma 11:41-44.
[^49] D&C 88:32, 35. From a statement made in another revelation it may seem that the wilfully perverse who sin against the Holy Ghost will not be redeemed from the grave. This statement declares of sons of perdition:
[^50] HC, VI, p. 317.
[^51] See D&C 29:41; Helaman 14:16.
[^52] Helaman 14:16-17.
[^53] 2 Nephi 9:11-12, 13, 15.
[^54] 2 Nephi 2:10.
[^55] 3 Nephi 27:14-15.
[^56] See Alma 11:26-44; 12:8, 15, with particular reference to 11:44.
[^57] Mormon 9:13.
[^58] Alma 42:23.
[^59] Alma 12:15.
[^60] Alma 12:13-15.
[^61] Alma 36:14-15.
[^62] See Alma 11:37.
[^63] 2 Nephi 9:38.
[^64] Helaman 14:18.
[^65] Alma 12:16-18. See also Jacob 3:11; Alma 36:14-15; Helaman 14:18; Mormon 9:13-14.
[^66] See HC, V, p. 391; VI, pp. 314-315, 317; D&C 132:27.
[^67] D&C 132:35.
[^68] Alma 42:13.
[^69] Alma 12:32.
[^70] Alma 12:34.
[^71] Alma 12:36.
[^72] Alma 34:15-16.
[^73] D&C 19:16-18.
[^74] Alma 42:22-26. See also Alma 12:27-37.
[^75] Taylor, op. cit., p. 167.
[^76] Moses 6:60.
[^77] Mosiah 4:2.
[^78] Alma 5:27.
[^79] Alma 13:11. See also Alma 34:36.
[^80] 3 Nephi 27:19.
[^81] Moroni 10:33.
[^82] D&C 76:41. The doctrines of justification and sanctification as they relate to the gospel of Jesus Christ will be treated in Volume II of this work.
[^83] D&C 88:17-21.
[^84] D&C 88:67-68.
[^85] D&C 93:19-20.
[^86] D&C 88:6.
[^87] Ether 3:14.
[^88] D&C 3:20. The doctrine of glorification will be discussed in greater detail in Volumes II and IV of this work.
[^89] Genesis 9:4.
[^90] Isaiah 63:3; D&C 133:50.
[^91] John 10:17-18.
[^92] D&C 76:24. That is, they died a spiritual death.
[^93] D&C 29:41.
[^94] Alma 34:35.
[^95] HC, I, p. 5.
[^96] Ibid., VI, p. 317.
[^97] 2 Nephi 9:12.
[^98] Alma 40:13-14.
[^99] Mosiah 2:38.
[^100] D&C 18:11.
[^101] 2 Nephi 9:21.
[^102] D&C 19:16.
[^103] D&C 88:6.
[^104] D&C 19:16-20.
[^105] Lucy Mack Smith, op. cit., p. 132. See also page 128-129.
[^106] D&C 88:6.
[^107] D&C 19:18.
[^108] See D&C 29:40-41.
[^109] JD, III, pp. 205-206.
[^110] D&C 88:6.
[^111] Romans 6:4.
[^112] See the section in chapter sixteen entitled "Atonement's Power Manifested from the Beginning."
