Hyrum L. Andrus, God, Man, and the Universe ( 1968)

16

The Power Of The Atonement

. . . by the law no flesh is justified; or by the law men are cut off. Yea, by the temporal law they were cut off; and also, by the spiritual law they perish from that which is good, and become miserable forever.

Wherefore, redemption cometh in and through the Holy Messiah; for he is full of grace and truth.—LEHI.

Joseph Smith taught that all aspects of the plan of life and salvation rest upon the power of the atonement. Christ's infinite sacrifice is the foundation from which all divine truth, life, light, mercy, and power are manifest to man. If it were not for that gracious act, mankind would be hopelessly lost without any means of redemption from either spiritual or physical death. But man is given life and mercy through Jesus Christ, who is the light and the life and the truth of the world. It is the purpose of this chapter to analyze the several benefits of the atonement which have been revealed to man in the latter-day dispensation.

Basic Concepts Of The Atonement

Christ to Draw all Men Unto Himself

By making the atonement, which brought to fruition the divine plan by which He is the light and the life of the world, Jesus rose to occupy in actual fact the central position in the plan of life and salvation. His act of love placed Him in a position to draw all men unto Himself, that He might give them the mercy, truth and power of God. Of Christ's divine purpose, Nephi said: "He doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world; for the loveth the world, even that he layeth down his own life that he may draw all men unto him." [^1] To the Nephites, Jesus explained: "My Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me." [^2]

Atonement's Power Manifested from the Beginning

Though Jesus did not make the atonement until many years after Adam fell from his paradisiacal state, He did exercise certain controls over the powers of life and death before His divine act of mercy was accomplished. Joseph Smith declared that before the earth was organized Jesus Christ, the great Redeemer, entered into an everlasting covenant with God the Father, the Creator, and the Holy Ghost, the Testator, relating "to their dispensation of things to men on the earth." [^3] The plan of life and salvation for man on earth had its basis in this covenant, and thereby Christ became the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world. [^4] It may be suggested that even as a promissory note enables the signatory to obtain immediate benefits on the pledge of future payment, so did this everlasting covenant permit Christ to exercise certain powers that derive from the atonement before He came to fulfil His earthly ministry. [^5] By this arrangement, the power of the atonement commenced to operate in behalf of man in the early ages of the world. Evidence in support of this statement is found in the Lord's declaration to Adam: "Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden." The saying then went abroad in that early day "that the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt." [^6]

Benefits of the Atonement Given both Unconditionally and Conditionally to Man

Certain powers and blessings of the atonement are given unconditionally to man, while others are given to him only on a conditional basis. Some blessings are given to man through the atonement without regard for his personal faith, worthiness, or knowledge of the plan of life and salvation, so that all men are recipients in some respects of the mercy and power of Christ. But there are other benefits which man may derive from the atonement which are conditionally given. The giving of these blessings to man depends upon his obedience to the principles and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ; and they open the way for man to receive the mercy of God unto the remission of his personal sins and to acquire the divine truth, light, and power that lead to celestial glory in eternity. Having this view of the plan of salvation, the patriarch Enoch inquired of God: "When shall the blood of the Righteous be shed, that all they that mourn may be sanctified and have eternal life?" [^7]

Universal Results Of The Power Of The Atonement

The Gift of Mortal Life

The first gift that is given unconditionally to all men through the power of the atonement is the gift of mortal life. Except for the atonement, life could not have existed upon the earth after the fall of Adam, for divine justice unmitigated by the atonement would have required that this fallen sphere be cut off completely from the presence of God and all life would have been subject to total spiritual death. In that event, the earth would have been severed completely from the quickening and sustaining spiritual powers of truth and light that come from God, so that the Light of Christ would not have been manifested in any of its expressions to benefit life on earth. Even the light of the sun as an elementary expression of Christ's glory could not legally have been made to shine upon the earth. [^8] Without the Light of Christ, perpetual darkness would have followed as a result of the transgression in Eden, and under such circumstances physical life could not have existed on earth. But having entered into an everlasting covenant to pay the debt of sin for Adam and his posterity, Christ could extend a measure of His divine truth and light to the earth without violating justice, to check in some degree the powers of spiritual death and to quicken and sustain life on earth. The earth and its inhabitants thereby were suspended above the power of complete spiritual darkness in a probationary state where the benefits of the atonement are many and varied. In reality, mortal man is dependent upon Christ for all that he is and for all that he possesses on earth.

King Benjamin stressed that life in mortality is dependent upon the atonement; he taught his people that God was "preserving" them from day to day by giving them power to "live and move" according to their own desires. [^9] A revelation to Joseph Smith said of Jesus: "In him was the life of men and the light of men." [^10] Because the quickening and sustaining powers of life for all things on earth center in Him, Christ is both the life and the light of the world, [^11] as has been discussed in previous chapters.

Statements indicating that Christ is the life and light of the world are not to be taken lightly for they declare that in Christ center the powers of life and of light for all things on the earth. Such statements indicate that the light which comes from Christ shines in darkness and the darkness does not comprehend it. [^12] They indicate that man in his fallen state is largely ignorant of his dependence upon Christ for the life and the light that is within him. But even though this state of spiritual darkness currently prevails, a revelation promises the faithful: "The day shall come when you shall comprehend even God, being quickened in him and by him." Of that future day, when the indwelling life and light within man will be intensified to a great degree, the revelation explains: "Then shall ye know that ye have seen me, that I am, and that I am the true light that is in you, and that you are in me; otherwise ye could not abound." [^13] To abound is to have life and being in an organized state.

By extending His divine truth and light to this sphere, Christ placed the mortal world under the control of God. Mortality is not an accident, nor is it a compromise. Instead, it is a pre-arranged and controlled state which has been established in the infinite wisdom and power of God to prove man is the spiritual and physical endowment of life. A revelation observed that "God gave unto Adam and his seed that they should not die" until specific actions were taken to allow fulfilment of the purpose of mortality. "And thus," the revelation concluded, "did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the day of his probation." [^14] Lehi also taught, in establishing this "state of probation," the lives of men "were prolonged according to the will of God." [^15]

Children Innocent in Christ

Not only does the atonement sustain life in mortality, but it affects the condition of man as he enters this sphere. By the power of the atonement, man in his infant state is absolved from some of the condemning effects of Adam's transgression that otherwise would bring him into bondage to broken law. During the lifetime of Adam the Lord said to the great patriarch: "Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden." As a result of this divine declaration, the saying went abroad among the people at that early age "that the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world." [^16]

The words in italics in the statement above indicated that God did not at that early date abolish all the effects of Adam's transgression (otherwise the earth would have been restored at that time to the full presence of God), but only those consequences of original sin that would cause the sin of Adam to condemn his children in a legal sense. Here again there is evidence that mortality is a controlled state. Of the condition of children as they enter mortal life, the Lord declared: "It is given unto them even as I will, according to mine own pleasure." [^17]

Children are made innocent by the atoning power of Jesus Christ. A revelation to Joseph Smith on their condition as they enter mortality states: "Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God." [^18] There are two times during the period of life referred to in this statement when man is innocent. The first of these is designated as "the beginning"; and since this period of innocence concerns the spirit of man, it evidently has reference to the time when man's spirit was organized in the preearth life. The second time man is innocent is when he enters this mortal world as an infant. Here his innocence is contingent upon the power of the atonement of Jesus Christ. Because God has brought about the redemption of man in this world, man becomes again, in his infant state, innocent before God. Infants therefore receive as a gift from Christ the innocence which they possess as they come into this world.

It is apparent that Latter-day Saint theology denies the dogma of original sin; not that the Saints deny Adam's sin and the legal consequences that would have been passed on to his posterity, but in Christ these condemning results are taken from children. Joseph Smith stated that "children have no sins," for they "are all made alive in Christ." [^19] Mormon, the Nephite prophet-general, declared that a contrary view denies the "mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption." [^20] Because the "curse of Adam" is taken away in Christ, Mormon condemned the practice of infant baptism as being "solemn mockery before God." [^21]

Little Children Preserved From the Tempter's Power

In addition to freeing infants from the condemning legal obligations of Adam's transgression, the atonement restrains the Tempter's power in their behalf until they can begin to choose intelligently between right and wrong. A revelation explained:

. . . behold, I say unto you, that little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten; wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before me; for it is given unto them even as I will, according to mine own pleasure, that great things may be required at the hands of their fathers. [^22]

The statement that great things are required of parents in relation to their children indicates the responsibility God has given to parents. Though little children enjoy a period of immunity from the direct temptations of the Adversary, another revelation observes that they may be influenced by environmental factors such as those that result from "the tradition of their fathers"; and in this way, it declared that the wicked one "taketh away light and truth . . . from the children of men." [^23] Parents have a major responsibility to their children; and, as indicated above, great things are required of them. By their failure to rear their children under the influence of the "light and truth" that is given through Christ, parents may teach their children to do wrong and to believe in soul-destroying dogmas. [^24]

Children Absolved from the Demands of Divine Justice

Closely correlated with the gift of initial innocence is another benefit which is extended to all little children. By the power of the atonement they are absolved from the demands of divine justice for personal transgression of law. To Abraham, the Lord declared: "Children are not accountable before me until they are eight years old." [^25]

There is a difference between being unable to sin and being unaccountable for sin. An angel informed King Benjamin that, because little children are alive in Christ, His blood "atoneth for their sins." [^26] This statement seems to imply that children may have sins for which Christ freely atones. Such a view is not contradictory to the revealed declaration that in early infancy children cannot sin in that power is not given to Satan to tempt them until they "begin to be accountable" before God. [^27] Two points should be considered: First, the time of mental accountability for children may not necessarily correspond to the time they become eight years of age, but is apparently predicated upon their ability to discern between right and wrong. That time may arrive in some areas of perception before the age of eight. There may therefore be a period between the time children begin to be accountable before the Lord and the time they arrive at the age of eight; and during this period, it is possible that they may not be totally immune to Satan's power to tempt. Second, as has been indicated, an absence of the Tempter's power during early infancy does not mean that there are no conditioning influences acting upon children. They can be influenced by environmental factors such as those found in the home and neighborhood. It is therefore possible for them to learn to do wrong and, in this sense, to have sins at the age of eight for which Christ atones. But in the event of parental negligence, the demands of justice may require that payment for their sins be made by the delinquent parents. On this point the law of God to the Saints states:

. . . inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents. For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized. And their little children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on of hands. And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord. [^28]

The fact that children are to be baptized for the remission of their sins at the age of eight implies that they may have personal sins which need remitting. And in order for parents to be absolved from the responsibility of those sins, they must teach their children the plan of life and salvation, and they must set a proper example of righteous conduct before them.

People Without Law not Subject to Divine Justice

There are those other than little children who are unconditionally alive in Christ in that He pays the debt of divine justice for them. Included are those who are "without law." [^29] When God's law is not made known unto man, man cannot be condemned for actions that violate that law. The Nephite prophet Jacob reasoned that "where there is no condemnation, the mercies of the Holy One of Israel have claim upon them, because of the atonement." [^30] King Benjamin explained: "For behold, . . . his blood atoneth for the sins of those who have fallen by the transgression of Adam, who have died not knowing the will of God concerning them, or who have ignorantly sinned." [^31]

This does not necessarily mean that it is desirable for man to be without the law of God. Man must be given divine truth and light if he is to acquire eternal life, and such truth is administered only as he obeys the law of God. When man is offered the truth and power that leads to eternal life or glory, he is placed in a position of responsibility before God and made accountable to the law which he receives. But unless or until man receives the celestial law, he is not held accountable in the same way as is he who has the law. [^32] Both challenge and reward therefore follow the promulgation of celestial law among men, and mercy is extended to those who are ignorant of the law.

Spiritual and Moral Freedom given by the Atonement

Spiritual and moral freedom consists of the right to choose between alternatives that are spiritual and moral in their nature. The right to do this is given to man by the atonement. Spiritually he has the right, through Christ's gracious act, to receive and respond to uplifting influences that lead him eventually back into the presence of God. Or he can follow those darkening influences in mortality that lead downward into greater depths of spiritual death. Morally man has the right through Christ to receive and obey laws of life that aid him to perfect himself so that eventually his every action will be consistent with virtue, truth, and respect for his fellow men. Or he can follow the opposite course in life. Being suspended by the power of Christ between a state of glory and full spiritual darkness, mortal man can take the upward path that leads to spiritual and moral excellence, or the downward path to greater spiritual darkness and to moral degradation.

Specifically, the freedom which man enjoys of a spiritual and moral nature rests upon the following assumptions: First, by bringing about the fall of man, Satan established a kingdom of spiritual darkness and death in the earth. Second, as a result of the fall, deteriorating forces that corrupt and pervert both the physical and spiritual nature of man have been introduced into the world; and by the continued transgressions of man, these corrupting influences have gained added power over life upon the earth. Third, the power of the atonement cushions the fall so that man in mortality is suspended between glory and perdition—between full spiritual life in the presence of God [^33] and total spiritual death. Fourth, as man enters mortality he is absolved from legal responsibility for Adam's transgression and the sins of his parents. This means that by the power of the atonement he is given the basis by which he may be free and by which he may choose the course he will follow in life. Finally, the Light of Christ is extended to man to enlighten his mind and to give him truth and power by which he may come unto God. [^34] By responding to the influence of this divine power, man may learn the ways of God and eventually come back into the presence of the Lord. But if man does not respond to the influence of the Light of Christ, he will be subject to the darkening powers of the Adversary. Both spiritual life and spiritual death, with moral goodness and moral degradation, therefore present themselves before man in his mortal state. Lehi explained to his sons:

. . . the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall. And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon, save it be by the punishment of the law at the great and last day, according to the commandments which God hath given.

Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great mediation of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself.

And now, my sons, I would that ye should look to the great Mediator, and hearken unto his great commandments; and be faithful unto his words, and choose eternal life, according to the will of his Holy Spirit;

And not choose eternal death, according to the will of the flesh and the evil which is therein, which giveth the spirit of the devil power to captivate, to bring you down to hell, that he may reign over you in his own kingdom. [^35]

For this statement it is apparent that the right to be free spiritually and morally—the freedom from which all other types of freedom spring—has its basis in the atoning mission of Jesus Christ. Because man is redeemed from the fall, he is free to choose liberty and eternal life or captivity and spiritual death. But man must seek for and respond to the influence of the Holy Spirit if he is to retain his freedom and achieve liberty and eternal life. Otherwise he will be brought down into captivity and spiritual death by the power of the Adversary operating upon him through the evil which is within his flesh.

The right to be free spiritually and morally is fundamentally distinct from the right to be free civilly and politically, though they are related in some respects. The first pertains to the functions of the inner man, while the latter relates to the outward expressions of his life. Political institutions that are tyrannical in nature may interfere rather easily with man's actions in civil and political matters; but such systems find it more difficult to control the inner impulses with man's life. [^36] In order for man in the last days to have the added freedom to act in spiritual and moral matters, God established the Constitution of the United States. [^37] A revelation explained that that great instrument had been established "that every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I [God] have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment." [^38] Other kinds of freedom are important to man, but the right to be free spiritually and morally is central to the purpose of his life on earth. Without it a major purpose of this mortal probation would be thwarted, and only with it as a foundation can other kinds of freedom successfully be achieved. "I, the Lord God, make you free," a revelation declared as it spoke of the freedom that is found only in Christ, "therefore ye are free indeed." With reference to freedom in the outward functions of society, the revelation then added: "And the law also maketh you free." [^39] Another revelation said of the way the Saints are required to continue in the use of moral and spiritual freedom: "Abide ye in the liberty wherewith ye are made free; entangle not yourselves in sin, but let your hands be clean until the Lord comes." [^40]

Freedom of a spiritual and moral nature is not a negative principle, but it requires man to act in positive acceptance of truth. An earlier chapter has discussed the fact that organized life must be independent in the sphere in which God has placed it if is to exist. [^41] The revelation disclosing this vital prerequisite to organized life indicates that to comply with it man must respond to the enlightening spiritual powers which come to him from God. It says:

All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence.

Behold, here is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man; because that which was from the beginning [i.e., the truth and light of life and redemption] is plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light.

And every man whose spirit receiveth not the light is under condemnation. [^42]

The fundamental issue of man's agency is spiritual; and the response he gives to the intelligent, enlightening, and uplifting powers that are extended to him from heaven determines the depth and breadth of his life and the degree of his righteousness on earth. When man rejects truth and comes thereby under condemnation, he loses the freedom in Christ which he initially possessed, and the underlying condition of independence upon which his organized existence depends is disrupted. He is in bondage to sin, and subject to divine justice.

As noted previously, Christ's Holy Spirit leads man upward to God. [^43] But though "the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit," a revelation states:

. . . the whole world lieth in sin, and groaneth under darkness and under the bondage of sin.

And by this you may know they are under the bondage of sin, because they come not unto me.

For whoso cometh not unto me is under the bondage of sin.

And whoso receiveth not my voice is not acquainted with my voice, and is not of me.

And by this you may know the righteous from the wicked, and that the whole world groaneth under sin and darkness even now. [^44]

The Spirit is extended by the grace of God unto all men, but its influence in their lives is made conditional upon a moral commitment on their part, according to the law of morality and righteousness they have been given. The higher the law, the greater man's moral commitment. But obedience to a higher law results in a greater manifestation of the Spirit with its several fruits, gifts, and graces. Thus the manifestation of the Spirit is directly related to the revelation of God's truth to man.

Resurrection Given to all Men by Atonement

By the power of the atonement, the bodies of all men will be raised eventually from the grave and reunited with their spirits in the resurrection. By paying the debt of Adam's transgression, Jesus gained the right to extend the resurrection to all men and thereby redeem all the posterity of Adam from physical or temporal death. Since none but Adam is responsible for the entrance of physical death into the world, it is consistent with the justice and mercy of God that redemption from the grave should be as inclusive and unconditional as the universal power of death.

Several statements in modern scriptures express the views that the resurrection will come eventually to all men, both righteous and wicked. A revelation to Joseph Smith declared that before the earth shall pass away, Michael the archangel "shall sound his trump, and then shall all the dead awake, for their graves shall be opened, and they shall come forth—yea, even all." [^45] There will be no exceptions. All who have not been redeemed previously from the grave will then come forth in this final resurrection.

The Nephite prophet Jacob taught the universality of the resurrection in the following statement:

. . . wherefore, death and hell must deliver up their dead, and hell must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of men will be restored one to the other; and it is by the power of the resurrection of the Holy One of Israel.

O how great the plan of our God! For on the other hand, the paradise of God must deliver up the spirits of the righteous, and the grave deliver up the body of the righteous; and the spirit and the body is restored to itself again, and all men become incorruptible, and immortal, and they are living souls. . . .

And it shall come to pass that when all men shall have passed from this first death unto life, insomuch as they have become immortal, they must appear before the judgment-seat of the Holy One of Israel. . . . [^46]

The fact that Jacob taught that hell as well as the paradise of God "must deliver up its captive spirits" in the resurrection [^47] indicates that both the wicked and the righteous will be resurrected by the power of Christ's atonement. In speaking particularly of the resurrection of the wicked, the Nephite teacher Amulek said:

. . . the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death; for behold, the day cometh that all shall rise from the dead and stand before God, and be judged according to their works.

Now, there is a death which is called a temporal death; and the death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death, that all shall be raised from this temporal death.

The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt.

Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but every thing shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body. . . . [^48]

The resurrection of the wicked includes those who become sons of perdition in this life. A revelation declared specifically of such individuals: "They . . . shall also be quickened [i.e., resurrected]; nevertheless, they . . . must remain filthy still." [^49] Having stated that in the resurrection "some shall rise to the everlasting burnings of God; for God dwells in everlasting burnings, and some shall rise to the damnation of their own filthiness, which is as exquisite as the lake of fire and brimstone," Joseph Smith said specifically of the resurrection of sons of perdition: "As they concoct scenes of bloodshed in this world, so they shall rise to that resurrection which is as the lake of fire and brimstone." [^50]

Redemption from First Spiritual Death Given to All by Atonement

A previous chapter has pointed out that as a result of Adam's transgression the earth and all life upon it suffered a spiritual death which is referred to scripturally as the first spiritual death. [^51] In redeeming all men from physical death, Christ will also bring them back into the presence of God, by the power of the atonement. All men, whether they are wicked or righteous, will then be brought back to a similar state of glory as that from which Adam fell by his transgression in Eden. At this point, the power of the atonement will be manifest to abolish every consequence of Adam's transgression so that all men will be as though there had been no fall, except that they will have acquired physical bodies in a probationary state and they will be required to give a just account of all their actions in the divine program which they accepted and pledged to sustain before the earth was created.

Like the resurrection, redemption from the first spiritual death which Adam brought upon himself and his posterity is universal and unconditional. All men will be brought back into the presence of God regardless of their personal faith or actions. As with physical or temporal death, so it is with the first spiritual death: no man but Adam is responsible for the earth's fall from its state of paradisiacal glory. It is therefore consistent with the justice and mercy of God that without regard for personal merit all men should be redeemed by the power of the atonement from the spiritual death which resulted from Adam's transgression. Samuel the Lamanite prophet said of the universal redemption of men from the first spiritual death:

. . . behold, this death [i.e., Christ's death] bringeth to pass the resurrection, and redeemeth all mankind from the first death—that spiritual death; for all mankind, by the fall of Adam being cut off from the presence of the Lord, are considered as dead, both as to things temporal and to things spiritual.

But behold, the resurrection of Christ redeemeth mankind, yea, even all mankind, and bringeth them back into the presence of the Lord. [^52]

The point should be stressed that the redemption of all men from the first spiritual death will not bring them back to the exact spiritual state that existed before the fall any more than their redemption from the power of temporal death will bring them back to the exact physical state that existed before Adam's transgression. The spirit of man will be reunited with his body and he will be brought back into the presence of God from whence Adam fell. This is the redemption, or restoration, that is spoken of in the scriptures concerning man. But the resurrected state will be a new state of being, different in many ways from the state which Adam was in before he fell.

The redemption of all men from the grave and from the power of the first spiritual death will consummate the plan of life and salvation so far as man's mortal probation is concerned, except for the final judgment which will then follow. Jacob, the Nephite prophet, explained:

. . . because of the way of deliverance of our God, the Holy One of Israel, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the temporal [death], shall deliver up its dead; which death is the grave.

And this death of which I have spoken, which is the spiritual death, shall deliver up its dead; which spiritual death is hell, wherefore, death and hell must deliver up their dead. . . .

On the other hand, the paradise of God must deliver up the spirits of the righteous, and the grave deliver up the body of the righteous; and the spirit and the body is restored to itself again. . . .

And then cometh the judgment, and then must they be judged according to the holy judgment of God. [^53]

All Men Judged by the Power of the Atonement

One of the most significant doctrines taught in the Book of Mormon is the doctrine that all men will be brought to stand before God in the resurrection to give an account of their deeds in the flesh, which judgment will be brought to pass by the power of Christ's atonement. Lehi observed that "because of the intercession for all, all men come unto God; wherefore, they stand in the presence of him to be judged of him according to the truth and holiness which is in him." [^54] "For this cause have I been lifted up," Jesus explained to the Nephites after His resurrection, ". . . that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil." [^55]

Except for the atonement of Jesus Christ, the justice of God would have consigned Adam and his posterity to be cut off forever from His presence. But because Jesus paid the debt of sin for Adam and his posterity, He has power to bring all men to stand before Him in the glory and power of the Godhead [^56] without robbing justice of its demands. All men will then be judged according to their actions, according to the truth and light they received during their probation. Moroni wrote: "Because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ, they are brought back into the presence of the Lord; yea, this is wherein all men are redeemed, because the death of Christ bringeth to pass the resurrection, which bringeth to pass a redemption from an endless sleep, from which sleep all men shall be awakened by the power of God when the trump shall sound; and they shall come forth, both small and great, and all shall stand before his bar." [^57] Alma, the son of Alma, also taught: "The atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and thus they are restored into his presence, to be judged according to their works, according to the law of justice." [^58]

Undoubtedly the sanctified will consider it a glorious privilege to be in the presence of God. Being filled with a knowledge of His love and mercy, and being aware that He made His great redemption on earth for them, they will not fear to stand before Christ to receive judgment at His hand. But to the wicked, this will be an awesome experience. Nevertheless, Amulek said: "We must come forth and stand before him [i.e., Christ] in his glory, and in his power, and in his might, majesty, and dominion, and acknowledge to our everlasting shame that all his judgments are just; that he is just in all his works, and that he is merciful unto the children of men, and that he has all power to save every man that believeth on his name and bringeth forth fruit meet for repentance." [^59] In admonishing certain wayward people, Alma spoke of that future time when the wicked will be brought to stand before the bar of God to be judged and said:

. . . if our hearts have been hardened, yea, if we have hardened our hearts against the word, insomuch that it has not been found in us, then will our state be awful, for then we shall be condemned.

For our words will condemn us, yea, all our works will condemn us; we shall not be found spotless; and our thoughts will also condemn us; and in this awful state we shall not dare to look up to our God; and we would fain be glad if we could command the rocks and the mountains to fall upon us to hide us from his presence.

But this cannot be; we must come forth and stand before him in his glory, and in his power, and in his might, majesty, and dominion, and acknowledge to our everlasting shame that all his judgments are just. . . . [^60]

The feelings of the wicked may be illustrated by the experience of Alma, the son of Alma, who had openly opposed the work of God among the Nephites prior to his dramatic conversion. He later said of his feelings as he was brought to contemplate that day when he would stand before the bar of God to be judged:

. . . so great had been my iniquities that the very thought of coming into the presence of God did rack my soul with inexpressible horror.

O, thought I, that I could be banished and become extinct both soul and body, that I might not be brought to stand in the presence of God, to be judged of my deeds. [^61]

The Second Death

Although the wilfully perverse will be returned to the presence of God by the power of the atonement, they will not have claim upon Christ's mercy for a remission of their sins; nor will they be endowed with His glory. The great Redeemer came not to save man in his sins, but from his sins. [^62] "They shall return to God," Jacob said of the wilfully perverse, "and behold his face, and remain in their sins." [^63] Since no unclean thing can dwell in the presence of God, it is the destiny of this class of men to be cast out again from His presence and suffer a second spiritual death. Their being brought back into the presence of God by the power of the atonement to be judged terminates the first spiritual death which Adam caused; they then suffer a spiritual death which is called the second death. This is the same kind of spiritual death that resulted from Adam's transgression, except that the first spiritual death is cushioned by the power of the atonement. Under the full and unmitigated power of the second spiritual death, no truth or light from God's presence will influence the wilfully perverse in their fallen state. They loved the works of darkness, and darkness will be their reward. Samuel the Lamanite prophet said of their destiny: "There cometh upon them again a spiritual death, yea, a second death, for they are cut off again as to things pertaining to righteousness." [^64] Alma also observed:

And now behold, I say unto you then cometh a death, even a second death, which is a spiritual death; then is a time that whosoever dieth in his sins, as to a temporal death, shall also die a spiritual death; yea, he shall die as to things pertaining unto righteousness.

Then is the time when their torments shall be as a lake of fire and brimstone, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever; and then is the time that they shall be chained down to an everlasting destruction, according to the power and captivity of Satan, he having subjected them according to his will.

Then I say unto you, they shall be as though there had been no redemption made; for they cannot be redeemed according to God's justice; and they cannot die, seeing there is no more corruption. [^65]

Unlike the first spiritual death, there is no termination of the second spiritual death. Those who partake of the second death in its full power are sons of perdition, who, after knowing the way to eternal life and partaking of the spiritual powers that lead to that goal, rebel against the truth and light of the Holy Ghost and crucify unto themselves the Son of God afresh, coming out in open rebellion against Him and His work on earth. [^66] All others who do not obey the gospel and its law of celestial redemption will endure the correcting judgments of God in the spirit world after death, after which they will be glorified by the law of life they are able to obey. These will be consigned by God's judgment to varying kingdoms of life or glory. But since they are glorified with lesser spiritual powers than those powers which the faithful, who are crowned with eternal life receive, they will suffer spiritual death to the degree they fail to receive the higher spiritual attributes and powers of life that constitute celestial glory. It may be said, therefore, that there are varying degrees of spiritual death, as well as of life or glory. "Broad is the gate, and wide the way that leadeth to the deaths," a revelation explained; "and many there are that go in thereat, because they receive me not, neither do they abide in my law." [^67] In the fall of Adam and by the atonement of Christ, each individual is given the means of determining his final destiny in eternity.

Conditional Benefits Of The Atonement Christ's Atonement

Justifies the Faithful

Though mercy is extended unconditionally to the uninformed, man is made responsible when he is given an opportunity to hear and obey the law of celestial redemption. Otherwise the justice of God would be disrupted or set aside. It is inconsistent for the atonement to pay the debt of wilful sin when man is given access to the law of celestial redemption and the blessings that may be obtained from that law. Alma explained: "According to justice, the plan of redemption could not be brought about, only on conditions of repentance of men in this preparatory state; for except it were for these conditions, mercy could not take effect except it should destroy the work of justice." [^68]

In order for mercy to be extended to man, an atonement had to be made. As indicated in the preceding chapter, God's justice had to be satisfied. The divine debt had to be paid in order that the forgiveness of sins might be given to man.

In the divine plan of life and salvation which was established by means of the fall of Adam and the atonement of Jesus Christ, God is both just and merciful. Justice and mercy have their claim, and both are satisfied. Having been made aware of the plan of redemption, man must either comply with the conditions by which the mercy of Christ is extended to him or be left to pay the debt of justice himself for his personal sins. These are the alternatives which confront enlightened man, and in them man is made free and responsible before God. He is free to qualify for the mercy of God; but should he fail to do so, he will be subject to the justice of God.

The role of justice and mercy in the plan of life and salvation is mentioned repeatedly in modern scripture. Having observed that by his transgression in the Garden of Eden man was placed in a position to act according to his will, whether to do evil or to do good, Alma explained: "Therefore God gave unto them commandments, after having made known unto them the plan of redemption, that they should not do evil, the penalty thereof being a second [spiritual] death, which was an everlasting death as to things pertaining unto righteousness; for on such the plan of redemption could have no power, for the works of justice could not be destroyed, according to the supreme goodness of God." [^69] Alma then cited the word of God which says: "Whosoever repenteth, and hardeneth not his heart, he shall have claim on mercy through mine Only Begotten Son, unto a remission of his sins; and these shall enter into my rest." [^70] But the Nephite prophet concluded: "If ye will harden your hearts ye shall not enter into the rest of the Lord; therefore your iniquity provoketh him that he sendeth down his wrath upon you as in the first provocation [i.e., Adam's initial provocation or transgression in Eden], yea, according to his word in the last provocation [i.e., the provocation of those who wilfully sin after being enlightened to the truth] as well as the first, to the everlasting destruction of your souls." [^71]

The Nephite teacher Amulek also explained the conditions that govern the extension of mercy and redemption to those who are given the law of God. Of the mission of Christ, he said:

. . . he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance.

And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice; therefore only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption. [^72]

In a revelation given through Joseph Smith to Martin Harris the Lord said: "Behold, I, God, have suffered these things [i.e., the demands of eternal justice for sin] for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent, but if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink." [^73] Enlightened man cannot be justified before the law of God except by obedience to the requirements of the gospel, for justice and mercy must each be given that which they can rightfully claim. In summarizing the balance of these two attributes of God in the divine plan and the effect they may have upon man, Alma said:

. . . there is a law given, and a punishment affixed, and a repentance granted; which repentance mercy claimeth; otherwise, justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law, and the law inflicteth the punishment; if not so, the works of justice would be destroyed, and God would cease to be God.

But God ceaseth not to be God, and mercy claimeth the penitent, and mercy cometh because of the atonement; and the atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and the resurrection of the dead bringeth back men into the presence of God; and thus they are restored into his presence, to be judged according to their works, according to the law and justice.

For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God. And thus God bringeth about his great and eternal purposes, which were prepared from the foundation of the world. And thus cometh about the salvation and the redempion of men, and also their destruction and misery. [^74]

In the atonement of Jesus Christ and the divine plan that has its basis in that great act of love, there is a perfect expression of God's attributes. On this subject, John Taylor also wrote:

Is justice dishonored? No; it is satisfied, the debt is paid. Is righteousness departed from? No; this is a righteous act. All requirements are met. Is judgment violated? No; its demands are fulfilled. Is mercy triumphant? No; she simply claims her own. Justice, judgment, mercy and truth all harmonize as the attributes of Deity. "Justice and truth have met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other." Justice and judgment triumph as well as mercy and peace; all the attributes of Deity harmonize in this great, grand, momentous, just, equitable, merciful and meritorious act. [^75]

By the Atonement the Faithful are Sanctified

The atonement of Jesus Christ is the foundation of the divine program by which the faithful are sanctified and prepared to abide in the presence of God. To Adam and his posterity the Lord declared: "By the blood ye are sanctified." [^76]

This doctrine is expressed repeatedly in the Book of Mormon. The people of King Benjamin desired God to "apply the atoning blood of Christ" in their behalf, that their hearts might "be purified." [^77] Alma asked the Nephites if they were sufficiently humble that their garments might be "cleansed and made white through the blood of Christ" [^78] And of those who became sanctified, he said: "Their garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb." [^79] To the Nephites, the resurrected Christ explained: "No unclean thing can enter into his [i.e., the Father's] kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end." [^80] Finally, the last testimony given of Christ in the Book of Mormon ends on this note. Before burying the ancient record that it might be brought forth in the latter days, Moroni declared: "If ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that ye become holy, without spot." [^81]

It is one thing for man to receive legal acquittal for personal sins, and it is quite another thing for him to be cleansed and renewed from the effects of sin. The doctrine of justification is concerned more particularly with the legal aspects of the divine plan of life and salvation, whereas the doctrine of sanctification is concerned primarily with the renewal of man and the purification of his soul. Both programs center in the atonement of Christ, and both are necessary before man can achieve celestial salvation. A revelation to Joseph Smith states that Jesus came into the world to be crucified, that He might not only "bear the sins of the world" but that He might "sanctify the world and . . . cleanse it from all unrighteousness." [^82]

Though Christ made the atonement that He might sanctify the world, the cleansing powers of His Holy Spirit are given to man only as he complies with the law of God. It is the destiny of the earth and its righteous inhabitants to be sanctified and crowned with celestial glory in eternity, that they might abide in "the presence of God the Father." But, continued the revelation that makes this disclosure, "they who are not sanctified through the law which I have given unto you, even the law of Christ, must inherit another kingdom, even that of a terrestrial kingdom, or that of a telestial kingdom." [^83] The process of purification that leads to this end requires man to be a recipient of divine truth and light. "If your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you," the above revelation continues; "and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things." It then admonishes: "Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the day will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will." [^84] To this end the atonement was made.

By the Atonement the Sanctified are Glorified

The final purpose of the atonement is to glorify the faithful who have been sanctified. In a revelation, Christ declared that it is the central design of the plan of life and salvation for man to "come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness." Continuing, the Lord promised: "For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father." [^85]

In making the atonement, Jesus descended below all things "that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth." [^86] That is, He offered Himself as an infinite sacrifice in order that He might extend His glory in and through all things which the Father had placed in His power, that they might be glorified in Him as He is glorified in the Father. In this way, He opened the door to eternal life to fulfil His promise: "In me shall all mankind have light, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name." [^87]

Like the gifts and blessings of justification and sanctification, the divine powers by which man may be glorified are given conditionally to him, according to his obedience to divine law. To attain the final blessing of celestial glorification, man must "rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ and be glorified through faith on his name." [^88]

Summary

The revelations given to Joseph Smith teach explicitly that all aspects of the plan of life and salvation rest upon the power which Christ gained by the atonement. Christ's act of love placed Him in a position to draw all men unto Himself. The powers of the atonement are given both unconditionally and conditionally to man. By the atonement man is given life on earth. Thereby children are innocent, preserved from the tempter's power, and absolved from the demands of divine justice until they reach the age of accountability before God. People who have not been given the law of God are also absolved from the demands of justice. Spiritual and moral freedom is given to man on earth. Finally, all are resurrected and brought back into the presence of God by the power of the atonement. Benefits of the atonement which are given conditionally to man are (1) the forgiveness of sin after repentance and baptism, (2) the sanctification of the obedient and, ultimately, (3) the glorification of those who are sanctified.

Footnotes

These are they who shall go away into the lake of fire and brimstone, with the devil and his angels—

And the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power;

Yea, verily, the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord, after the sufferings of his wrath.

For all the rest shall be brought forth by the resurrection of the dead, through the triumph and the glory of the Lamb, who was slain, who was in the bosom of the Father before the worlds were made.—D&C 76:36-39.

It should be remembered that this revelation is speaking of man's redemption to glory. Those mentioned in the statement are the only ones upon whom the second death (which is spiritual death) will have power after Christ's redeeming work is completed. In this sense, it can be said that sons of perdition are the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 93:38.
[^2] D&C 93:38.
[^3] JD, IX, p. 287.
[^4] Ibid., p. 305.
[^5] See Abraham 3:18-19.
[^6] JD, I, pp. 280-284.
[^7] Abraham 3:26.
[^8] D&C 93:33-34.
[^9] Pratt, Key to Theology, p. 98.
[^10] "Joseph Smith Papers, 1839-1841," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 190.
[^11] "Joseph Smith Papers," op. cit., found also in TPJS, p. 181.
[^12] HC, III, p. 403.
[^13] See, for example, 2 Nephi 9:7; Mosiah 16:10; Alma 5:15; 11:45; 40:2; 41:4; D&C 101:24; 1 Corinthians 15:42, 53-54.
[^14] 2 Nephi 2:29. Mosiah 3:19; 27:25-26.
[^15] 2 Nephi 10:24.
[^16] I. V., Romans 7:18-19.
[^17] Ether 12:27.
[^18] Moses 6:55.
[^19] Articles of Faith, No. 2.
[^20] As indicated in an earlier chapter, Adam was organized to endure forever, and except for his transgression he would still be living on earth in the Garden of Eden. See 2 Nephi 2:22.
[^21] JD, IX, p. 305.
[^22] 2 Nephi 2:22.
[^23] Alma 12:31.
[^24] Alma 12:26.
[^25] 2 Nephi 2:21.
[^26] Alma 42:10.
[^27] Alma 12:24.
[^28] Alma 40:11-14.
[^29] Alma 12:12.
[^30] Alma 12:20.
[^31] 1 Nephi 15:31, 35.
[^32] Alma 41:12.
[^33] Mosiah 2:41; Alma 28:12.
[^34] Alma 42:1.
[^35] Alma 28:11.
[^36] 1 Nephi 10:16; Mosiah 16:4; Alma 42:12.
[^37] Mosiah 4:2, 5. Without the divine powers that quicken and sustain the earth by means of Christ's atonement, neither the earth nor any form of life upon it could exist. Except for Christ, this would indeed be a worthless state.
[^38] Alma 22:13.
[^39] See Alma 31:35; 39:17.
[^40] Mosiah 3:16.
[^41] Alma 41:11.
[^42] Alma 26:21.
[^43] D&C 67:11-12.
[^44] D&C 84:46-53.
[^45] JD, X, p. 192.
[^46] Ibid., p. 105.
[^47] Ibid., IX, p. 287.
[^48] Ibid.
[^49] D&C 45:58.
[^50] See D&C 45:58-59; 101:23-24.
[^51] HC, IV, p. 358.
[^52] JD, VIII, p. 160.
[^53] Alma 42:10.
[^54] Alma 34:9. It is on this basis that the gospel of Christ is required as a renewing and cleansing power that is able to make man a new creature in Christ. All those who have arrived at the age of accountability and who would obtain salvation must be thus renewed. See Mosiah 27:25-26.
[^55] D&C 67:10.
[^56] D&C 67:11-12.
[^57] See 2 Nephi 9:9; Alma 34:35.
[^58] See Mosiah 16:3.
[^59] Moses 5:12-13.
[^60] Mosiah 16:3. See also Moses 5:13; 6:49.
[^61] D&C 20:19-20.
[^62] D&C 93:39.
[^63] Mosiah 16:5.
[^64] Ether 3:2. Jesus seems to have recognized the fallen nature of man when He said in the Sermon on the Mount: "If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him."—Matthew 7:11; 3 Nephi 14:11.
[^65] Helaman 14:16.
[^66] Helaman 14:16.
[^67] Helaman 14:16.
[^68] 2 Nephi 2:5.
[^69] 2 Nephi 9:10.
[^70] See 1 Nephi 15:33; Alma 12:16, 32; 40:26; Helaman 14:18. These statements are directed more specifically toward those who suffer the power of the second spiritual death. But since the first and the second spiritual death are alike in nature, the same principle holds true for mortal man if he does not utilize the light and truth of Christ which are extended to him on earth.
[^71] Helaman 14:18.
[^72] 2 Nephi 9:8-9.
[^73] Mosiah 4:2.
[^74] Helaman 12:7.
[^75] Mosiah 4:5.
[^76] See Matthew 19; 28; Titus 3:5-7; Mosiah 27:25-26.
[^77] Ether 12:27.
[^78] Ether 3:2.
[^79] Mosiah 4:11.
[^80] 2 Nephi 4:19-20.
[^81] 2 Nephi 4:31-34.
[^82] I.V., Romans 7:18-19.
[^83] Alma 42:12.
[^84] Mosiah 27:25-26.
[^85] Mosiah 3:18.
[^86] Mosiah 3:19.
[^87] Alma 26:17, 19-20.
[^88] D&C 1:19.
