Hyrum L. Andrus, God, Man, and the Universe ( 1968)

17

The Nature and Challenge Of Mortal Man

. . . men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children, and believe that salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent.

For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord. . . .—KING BENJAMIN.

Joseph Smith taught that man in mortality is at least a dual being—an organized spirit tabernacled in a body of flesh and bones. This fact must be considered in making an analysis of man on earth. Consideration should also be given to man's susceptibility to influences from God and the Adversary. In treating the nature of man in mortality, the questions should be asked: What is the condition of man's spirit as it enters mortality? What is the nature of his flesh in this fallen state? How is man's spirit influenced by the flesh? How may the flesh be influenced by man's spirit? What is the relationship of mortal man to the Adversary? And finally, what is the relationship of man to God in mortality? Answers to these questions help provide an understanding of the Latter-day Saint view of the nature of mortal man.

The Nature Of Man's Spirit As It Enters Mortality

Man is Innocent as He Enters Mortality

Man's spirit as it enters mortality is innocent. As indicated in the preceding chapter, the spirit of man was innocent as it commenced its existence as an organized spirit being, and by the power of the atonement "men become again, in their infant state [in mortality], innocent before God." [^1] It should be stressed that in the latter instance man's innocence is a result of the atonement of Christ. Because "God . . . redeemed man from the fall," [^2] man is innocent as he enters this mortal state. Otherwise, he would be born under the condemning stigma of original sin.

Man's Spirit Inclined to do Good

Another important factor in understanding the basic nature of man is that, as an organized spirit, he is inclined to do good as he comes to mortality. There are reasons why this is true: First, the organized spirit of man is a literal child of God and partook in its pre-earth birth of the nature and attributes of its divine parents. Unless or until it rebelled against its basic nature it would be inclined to do good. Second, before the spirit of man came to take a physical tabernacle on earth, it dwelt in the presence of God where it was able to partake of the influences of truth and light that exist in God's presence. Third, all spirits that are privileged to receive tabernacles of flesh and bones on earth kept their first estate by overcoming the opposition to righteousness that was raised by Lucifer and his rebellious hosts in the War in Heaven. To meet this challenge required that they possess and sustain a basic love of truth and a fundamental tendency to do good. Otherwise they would have followed Lucifer and his retinue of spirits in that pre-earth struggle. Finally, as has been indicated above, the atonement acts to make man innocent as he enters mortality so that there is no condemning influence that has power over him as a result of mortal birth. His spirit is innocent and inclined to do good as it commences its earthly probation.

Brigham Young spoke repeatedly of the nature of man in his mortal state. "When the spirit enters the body, it is pure and holy from the heavens," he declared; "and could it reign predominantly in the tabernacle, ruling, dictating, and directing its actions without an opposing force, man never would commit a sin." [^3] Again he stated:

It is fully proved in all the revelations that God has ever given to mankind that they naturally love and admire righteousness, justice, and truth more than they do evil. It is, however, universally received by professors of religion as a Scriptural Doctrine that man is opposed to God. This is not so. . . . We are the natural sons and daughters of our natural parents, and spiritually we are the natural children of the Father of light and natural heirs to his kingdom; and when we do evil, we do it in opposition to the promptings of the Spirit of Truth that is within us. Man is the noblest work of God, and was in his creation designed for an endless duration, for which the love of all good was incorporated in his nature. It was never designed that he should naturally do and love evil. [^4]

Spirits Vary in Acquired Abilities and Powers

Even though the spirits that come into mortality are innocent and possess a basic desire to do good, they do not possess equal capacities or the same spiritual and intellectual endowments. Nor do they have the same positive desires for righteousness, or the same allegiance to truth. Free agency was sustained during the period of man's first estate, and for this reason a gradation of spirits existed, with differing interests, desires, capabilities, etc., from the great Jehovah downward along the scale of organized intelligences. [^5] Some spirits have developed a great capacity to do good and a marked sensitivity to spiritual powers; they are therefore prepared to cope more effectively with the problems of the flesh, the lures of the world, and the enticements of Satan. But others, in failing to develop positive qualities of character to more than a minimal degree, are ill prepared to master the flesh and the world when they leave the presence of God where the standard of truth and righteousness prevails and His divine influence predominates. Still others, though lacking somewhat in spiritual sensitivity and in moral stability, may possess great endowments in other areas of achievement. Though they lack some important and desirable qualities of character, they are nevertheless able to leave their imprint in a variety of ways upon the world. For these and other related reasons spirits enter mortality with varied qualities and powers of character and with different deficiencies, to acquire physical bodies under conditions where their allegiance to truth will be proven against the baneful influences that exist in this fallen state.

Man's Spirit a Fallen Being at Mortal Birth

In entering mortality, the spirit of man becomes a fallen being in that it leaves its former state, where it was enveloped in the glory and power of God. Orson Pratt observed that it was with "both the body and the spirit" that our first parents transgressed the law of Eden, for, while the body partook of the fruit, "the spirit gave the will to eat." [^6] Adam and Eve thus entered mortality by the edict of a broken law. But with their posterity it is different. When they enter mortality, they become fallen beings in that they are cut off from the presence of God by the transgression of Adam. But this is a voluntary change of circumstances for which there is no legal condemnation under the law of God. In the pre-earth councils that were held to prepare man for his mortal probation, the spirits who were accounted worthy to come to this earth voluntarily sustained Adam's appointment to initiate the fallen mortal state. Thus by man's own free will and choice, and without condemnation, he enters this fallen state devoid of the glory and power which he once enjoyed in the presence of God.

The Nature Of Man's Physical Being

Physical Endowments Designed to Bless and Enhance Man's Life

Joseph Smith taught that the physical endowments man receives in mortality are given to him to bless and enhance his life. They are designed to elevate man in the divine scheme of life, by increasing his power and his scope of activity in eternity. As the noble and great spirits met in the Grand Council of the Gods, they were informed that all the Father's spirit children who kept their first estate would be "added upon"; that is, they would be given the endowments and attributes of physical life. It was also promised that they who kept their second, or mortal, estate would "have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." [^7] To this end the physical body is necessary. A revelation explained of man and the divine plan of life by which he may attain a fulness of joy and power in eternity: "Spirit [i.e., man's organized spirit] and element [i.e., man's physical body], inseparably connected [as in the resurrection], receive a fulness of joy; and when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy." [^8] As stated in a previous chapter, the work of clothing the Father's spirit children in bodies of flesh and bone was expected to be a part of a divine program to elevate the faithful to eternal glory and power.

Latter-day Saint thought holds that the basic physical endowments which man receives by birth into this temporal sphere are good. Man receives these endowments through Adam, who was the son of God. This means that in a literal sense, man is a descendant in the flesh of the Man of Holiness. Though man, as a result of the fall of Adam, now possesses a corrupt body, God is nevertheless the great head of human procreation. In the sanctified process by which Adam's physical body was organized, he was formed in the very image and stature of God, and thereby man was given the basic physical endowments and characteristics which the Father, Elohim, possesses. For this reason, Parley P. Pratt wrote:

An intelligent being, in the image of God, possesses every organ, attribute, sense, sympathy, affection, of will, wisdom, love, power and gift, which is possessed by God Himself.

But these are possessed by man, in his rudimental state, in a subordinate sense of the word. Or, in other words, these attributes are in embryo; and are to be gradually developed. They resemble a bud—a germ, which gradually develops into bloom, and then, by progress, produces the mature fruit after, its own kind. [^9]

Because Joseph Smith viewed the physical body as an added endowment that is designed to enhance the life and power of man, he said: "They who have [physical] tabernacles have power over those who have not." [^10] Again from the Prophet:

We came to this earth that we might have a body and present it pure before God in the celestial kingdom. The great principle of happiness consists in having a body. . . . All beings who have bodies have power over those who have not. [^11]

He also observed:

When those [spirits] have come into this world and received tabernacles, then died and again have risen and received glorified bodies, they will have an ascendancy over the spirits who have received no bodies, or kept not their first estate, like the devil. [^12]

Man's Physical Body Corrupted by the Fall

Though the physical body is designed to increase man's power and ascendancy in the scale of life, by the fall of Adam and through the subsequent transgressions of men, corrupt elements have become identified with the flesh. The mortal body is therefore designated scripturally as a "corrupt body." [^13] Lehi spoke of "the evil" which is in the flesh; [^14] and his son, Jacob, warned his brethren against yielding to "the will of the devil and the flesh." [^15] By revelation, Joseph Smith corrected some important items in the Apostle Paul's noted statement on the condition of mortal flesh. But the revised statement still reports Paul as speaking of "that sin which dwelleth in me," and it has the Apostle explain: "For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing." [^16]

In the Book of Mormon, the Lord stated to Moroni that He had given "unto men weakness" in their mortal organization. [^17] The weak and corrupt elements that are associated with man's mortal body have a definite influence upon him in his temporal state, as will be shown later in this chapter.

Man Conceived on Earth in Sin

Man enters this fallen state through birth, through which mortal corruption and its attending seeds of weakness and death are transmitted to each new physical embryo at conception. Mortal corruption tends to alter and divert the pure and innocent expressions of the flesh into vain and unlawful paths so that, unless it is checked, selfishness, greed, vanity, hatred, animosity, lust and a multitude of like perversions begin to creep into man's life. Hence God explained to Adam: "Inasmuch as thy children are conceived in sin, even so when they begin to grow up, sin conceiveth in their hearts, and they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good." [^18] This statement plainly indicates that because mortal man is conceived in sin, sin commences to conceive in his heart when his physical body begins to mature, and he tastes the bitter that he may know to prize that which is good. The bitterness of hell serves to teach man of the goodness of heaven and of the virtues that lead to the presence of God.

The statement that man is conceived in sin does not carry the same connotation in Latter-day Saint thought that it does in traditional Christianity. As indicated in the preceding chapter, Joseph Smith held that the legal effects of original sin are not visited in condemnation upon Adam's posterity. For this reason, the Prophet wrote: "We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression." [^19] Joseph Smith also taught that the sex act through which conception results, when participated in lawfully within the marriage covenant, is not sinful. To be conceived in sin therefore has reference to the state of mortal corruption into which man is conceived in the flesh, and to the fact that the mortal elements of corruption are transmitted to each new physical embryo at conception.

The point should be made that God said to Adam that his children were conceived in sin, not born in sin. For man to be born in sin implies that each new physical embryo partakes of mortal corruption as it enters this fallen state by birth. But the elements of mortal corruption are planted within the physical body and made part of its organization at conception, not at birth or after birth. It is also true that man is born into a sinful world, but it is in conception that mortal corruption is transmitted to each new physical embryo that is thereby formed.

It should also be noted that the fact that man is innocent at birth through the power of Christ's atonement has nothing to do with the inclination of his flesh. To be innocent merely means that man is free of obligation to divine law, and that he has not yet succumbed to the influence of mortal corruption in the flesh.

The Natural Man

The Natural Man Defined

The word "natural" is derived from the word "nature." The term "natural man" thus refers to man's nature or constitution—that which is innate or inborn within him; the character, constitution, or essential traits of man in mortality.

In defining the meaning of the natural man, it is necessary to identify the context in which the term is used. In the eternal sense, the natural man may be defined as the true man in his organization as an immortal being of dignity and power. Such a being was Adam before the fall, [^20] and such beings will the faithful be after the resurrection. "That which was, is, and will continue to endure is more natural than that which will pass away and be no more," Brigham Young explained. "The natural man is of God." [^21]

In this statement, President Young was speaking of the nature of man in a state other than mortality. Measured by this standard, fallen man is an unnatural man. Compared with Adam before the fall, mortal man is not a whole creature possessing all the powers and attributes of life which God planted in man in the creation. Man is not now organized as a physical-spiritual being with the powers of life to endure forever.

But in using the term "natural man," the scriptures usually have reference to man in his present, fallen, corrupt state—this state where spiritual and physical death exist and have their influence upon man. Here a natural man is one who is not filled with the spiritual powers of glory which Adam possessed before the fall, or which the faithful will possess in the resurrection. He is one, instead, who partakes of the basic character, constitution, or essential traits of man under the existing order of life; he is one who is organized according to the order of things on this fallen sphere—according to that which is natural to this fallen state of existence. Divested of the glory and power which Adam once possessed, the natural man also has within his physical body the corrupt elements and powers of the temporal world. The natural man is a mortal man unregenerated by the power of the Holy Spirit.

Mortal Man's Fallen State

To see and appreciate the nature of man in mortality, it is necessary to understand that there are several states of existence within the over-all scheme of life, one of which is man's mortal state. A state of existence is a prevailing order or situation in which life exists at a given time. Note, for example, how the term is used in the Book of Mormon: Lehi referred to the "state" of life that existed on earth after the creation and before the fall. [^22] By partaking of the forbidden fruit, Adam and Eve were placed in a different "state" where they could act according to their own wills. [^23] Had they been allowed to partake of the tree of life to counteract the corrupting elements which entered their bodies in the fall, they would not have died but "would have been forever miserable, having no preparatory state." [^24] Instead, mortality "became a state of probation," [^25] or a "probationary state"—"a state for them to prepare" [^26] for that "endless state" which is after the resurrection. [^27] The spirit world where disembodied spirits dwell is designated as the "state of the soul between death and the resurrection." There "the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace." Meanwhile, "the state of the souls of the wicked" in the spirit world is one of "darkness, and a state of awful, fearful looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them." [^28] In the resurrection, man is raised from the grave to "a state of immortality." [^29] Consequently, he is "changed from this mortal to an immortal state that the soul can never die." [^30] The judgment which then follows determines man's "final state." [^31] Man will then receive that which he merits, for, as Alma explained, it is unreasonable to assume that God will "take a thing of a natural state and place it in an unnatural state, or in a state opposite to its nature." [^32] The righteous will then "dwell with God in a state of never-ending happiness," [^33] while the wicked will be "consigned to a state of misery" [^34] which is "a state of endless wo." [^35]

Only by seeing the way the term "state" is used in the Book of Mormon can the student of Latter-day Saint thought understand how the Nephites viewed man in his mortal condition. As a result of Adam's transgression, Nephite prophets declared that man is "in a lost and fallen state," [^36] which they designated as a "carnal state" and, except for the redemption which Christ wrought, a "worthless state." [^37] To a Lamanite king, Aaron therefore expounded "the scriptures from the creation of Adam, laying the fall of man before him, and their carnal state." [^38]

Because man is in a carnal and fallen state, it does not necessarily follow that he is carnal and worthless as an individual, for these terms apply to the state in which he exists on earth and not necessarily to his desires or conduct as a person. The Nephite prophets considered the souls of men to be "precious" in their sight and in the sight of God. [^39] In making such statements as those that are cited above, they were not endeavoring to deny the value of the individual, but to explain the nature of his mortal organization and his state of life on this temporal sphere.

"In Adam, or by nature," men fall, [^40] for they receive in mortal birth a corrupt body that is devoid of the glory and power of God. Because the natural man is in a fallen state where the enlightening influences of the Holy Spirit are not manifest significantly in his behalf except as a result of his personal faith, he is largely without God in the world; and, as time goes on, he may become conditioned to his fallen state by the influences that prevail on earth. So long as he chooses to remain in his fallen spiritual state by his failure to reach up to God and acquire the regenerating powers of the Holy Spirit through personal faith, the natural man is subject in some measure to the spiritual weaknesses, deficiencies, and perversions of this temporal sphere. With this view of the matter, Alma declared: "All men that are in a state of nature, or I would say in a carnal state, are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; they are without God in the world, and they have gone contrary to the nature of God; therefore, they are in a state contrary to the nature of happiness." [^41] Because the natural man is in a state of spiritual darkness, without the Spirit of Truth to reveal the things of a higher order of life, Ammon exclaimed as he spoke of the mercy and goodness of God: "Behold, my brethren, what natural man is there that knoweth these things?" [^42]

The state of the natural man in mortality may also be seen by the fact that, unaided by divine power, he cannot stand in the presence of God. "No man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God," a revelation explained. "Neither can any natural man abide the presence of God." [^43] The natural man, being a fallen man, cannot of himself come into God's presence, for he is in a state of spiritual darkness and mortal corruption where the order of things is alien to God. To come unto God, he must "put off the natural man" by acquiring the regenerating power of the Holy Spirit. [^44] Being quickened by divine power, he can then come into the presence of God from whence Adam fell.

The Natural Man not Inherently Depraved

Though the scriptural works brought forth through Joseph Smith refer to man as being in a fallen and carnal state on earth, they do not sanction the view that he is by nature a depraved being. Brigham Young reasoned: "When our spirits took possession of these tabernacles, they were as pure as the angels of God, wherefore total depravity cannot be a true doctrine." [^45] Again, he explained:

The spirits that live in these tabernacles were as pure as the heavens, when they entered them. They came to tabernacles that are contaminated, pertaining to the flesh, by the Fall of man. The Psalmist says, "Behold, I was shapened in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me." (Psalms 51:5.) This Scripture has established in the minds of some the doctrine of total depravity—that it is impossible for them to have one good thought, that they are altogether sinful, that there is no good, no soundness, and no spiritual health in them. This is not correct, yet we have a warfare within us. We have to contend against evil passions, or the seeds of iniquity that are sown in the flesh through the fall. The pure spirits that occupy these tabernacles are operated upon [by the Spirit of God], and it is the right of Him that sent them into these tabernacles to hold the pre-eminence [by virtue of the power of the atonement], and to always give the Spirit of Truth to influence the spirits of men, that it [i.e., the Holy Spirit] may triumph and reign predominantly in our tabernacles the God and Lord of every motion. [^46]

All Men Succumb in Some Degree to Mortal Corruption

Mortality is a probationary state. In receiving a physical body, man is designed to be proven in his new endowments of life by opposing forces of mortal corruption that are associated with the flesh in this fallen state. Of the effect of the fall of Adam upon man, Brigham Young said: "The fall of man . . . has particularly affected the body but not the spirit." [^47] In this way, opposition and challenge are made to confront man. Continuing, President Young observed: "The tabernacle has to suffer the effects of the fall, of that sin which Satan has introduced into the world, and hence the spirit does not bear rule all the time." [^48]

The promise is made that during the millennium children will "grow up without sin unto salvation." [^49] But this promise will be realized only after "every corruptible thing" has been consumed by the manifestation of Christ's glory, when He comes to cleanse and renew the earth. [^50] Until then, the forces of mortal corruption will no doubt be manifest in the lives of men, so that even those who genuinely desire to do good may, by the influence of the fallen nature of man, fail to comply with the law of God in every detail. Joseph Smith observed:

All are subject to vanity while they travel through the crooked paths and difficulties which surround them [in this mortal state]. Where is the man that is free from vanity? [^51]

Brigham Young also said:

There are no persons without evil passions to embitter their lives. Mankind are revengeful, passionate, hateful, and devilish in their dispositions. This we inherit through the fall, and the grace of God is designated to enable us to overcome it. [^52]

When mortal man is measured by pure standards of virtue and innocence, it appears that the baneful effects of earth's fallen state have had a significant influence upon him. Alma referred to man in general as having "become carnal, sensual, and devilish, by nature." [^53] And Amulek declared in positive terms: "All are hardened; yea, all are fallen and are lost, and must perish except it be through the atonement which it is expedient should be made." [^54]

Carnal, Sensual, And Devilish Man

Though the natural man is in a corrupt and carnal state, there is a difference between a natural man and a carnal man. This distinction is implied in a revelation which promised the Saints that, inasmuch as they stripped themselves of their jealousies and fears and humbled themselves before God, the veil would be rent and they would see God—"not with the carnal neither the natural mind, but with the spiritual." [^55] Again the revelation declared:

. . . no man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the spirit of God.

Neither can any natural man abide the presence of God, neither after the carnal mind. [^56]

The natural man is not necessarily carnal, sensual, or devilish in his desires. A carnal man places emphasis upon fleshly or bodily appetites and excludes the influence of true spiritual values and powers in his life. He is worldly, and very often sexually perverse. Likewise, a sensual man is unduly indulgent to bodily appetites and sexual pleasures, and he exhibits a predominance of the animal nature, being lewd and brutish in his actions. To be devilish is to possess the characteristics of Satan—to become diabolical and malicious in nature. To be devilish is also to be miserable and to be critically devoid even of those enlightening and quickening powers of life that are given initially to man in his natural mortal state. [^57]

Although the fall of Adam opened the way for man to become carnal, sensual, and devilish, [^58] such tendencies did not prevail in the lives of men until Adam's posterity yielded to the further enticements of the Tempter and "loved Satan more than God." When this occurred, a revelation stated: "And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish." [^59] The same principle applies to all men; man's original innocence is destroyed only by his wilful transgression of the laws of God. It is only when men embrace the ways of the world that they become "carnal, sensual, and devilish, knowing evil from good, subjecting themselves to the devil." [^60] In a revelation, Joseph Smith wrote that by the transgression of God's holy "laws [not merely the law of Eden] man became sensual and devilish, and became fallen man." [^61] More than one broken law has contributed to the nature of those who are carnal and sensual.

Carnality and sensuality having been manifest in the world are perpetuated by the darkening influences of spiritual death and by false traditions and practices. Of opposition to righteousness and the means by which it is perpetuated, a revelation said: "That wicked one [i.e., Satan] cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the traditions of their fathers." [^62] Thus perverse and darkening influences are passed on to each new generation, making mortality a carnal state where man is challenged to rise above the influence of souldestroying forces within him and about him. In speaking of those who fail to meet this challenge, Abinadi warned: "Remember that he that persists in his own carnal nature, and goes on the ways of sin and rebellion against God, remaineth in his fallen state and the devil hath all power over him." [^63]

Man's Dependence Upon Christ

Man's Disposition Altered by the Power of the Fall

An earlier chapter shows that, as a result of Adam's transgression, the divine spiritual powers which had prevailed upon the earth during its state of paradisiacal glory were withdrawn. These divine forces were powers of life; they constituted the glory of God with its attributes and powers of life. The withdrawal of God's glory from the earth therefore resulted in the diminution of the powers and attributes of life that had prevailed on the face of the earth. Opposing spiritual forces that tend to darken man's mind and destroy his desire for righteousness were then allowed to manifest their influence.

The withdrawal of God's glory, therefore, caused a change to take place in the nature and disposition of the several forms of life upon the earth. The glory of God had endowed life with the attributes of peace, love, virtue, meekness, patience, etc. But in the fall, these positive influences were withdrawn and opposing spiritual forces replaced them to a significant degree. Spiritual death and deterioration began to exercise power upon the earth. The power of truth was diminished, and influences of love and light were replaced by spiritual powers of hatred and darkness.

Precisely how this change in prevailing powers and influences affected life on earth is not known. But some idea of the changes that apparently occurred in the nature and disposition of life may be seen by referring to the animal kingdom. Many animals, which before were peaceful, became ferocious, while others became overly timid and fearful. Nor does it appear that man was unaffected. To the Lord, the brother of Jared observed apologetically: "Because of the fall our natures have become evil continually." [^64] Though man is innocent as he enters mortality and though he is alive in Christ until he becomes accountable before God, he is nevertheless in a fallen state where baneful influences both within him and about him tend to destroy his initial innocence and modify his desire to follow after righteousness. Mortal man possesses a fallen nature against which his spirit must struggle in its day of probation.

Fallen Man Subject to Powers of Spiritual Deterioration

The fall of Adam placed man in a state where darkening forces that lead to spiritual deterioration act upon him. Samuel, the Lamanite prophet, declared that those who are cut off from God's presence by the fall "are considered as dead, both as to things temporal and to things spiritual." [^65] The deterioration of the physical body is inevitable as a result of man being cut off from the presence of God, and for this reason fallen man is "considered as dead . . . to things temporal." [^66] Being cut off from the presence of God has a like effect upon man spiritually; unless the darkening spiritual influences that exist upon the earth are checked, he cannot help but deteriorate in spiritual strength and goodness, for he is also "dead as to things spiritual." [^67] Lehi therefore explained: "By the spiritual law [which prevails in man's fallen, unregenerated state] they perish from that which is good, and become miserable forever." [^68] Jacob, the son of Lehi, called this "the death of the spirit." [^69]

Because the deteriorating forces of spiritual death cause a continual erosion of man's spiritual strength and goodness unless they are checked, several prophets in the Book of Mormon equate being cast out from God's presence with man dying "as to things of righteousness." [^70] Samuel, the Lamanite prophet, associated this death with both the first and the second spiritual death. He taught that by Adam's transgression man was cut off "as to things pertaining to righteousness," and those who die the second spiritual death "are cut off again" in this respect. [^71]

As the period of man's initial innocence in Christ draws to a close and as he is made accountable before God in his fallen state, man finds himself upon the reverse unit of a mortal escalator moving continually downward (as he yields by the weaknesses and corruption in his mortal organization to the powers of sin on earth) into greater and greater depths of spiritual darkness. Unless this course is checked by man availing himself of the enlightening spiritual powers that are extended to him through Christ, he cannot help but become hardened in a condition alien to God. Physical death must eventually come; and man's spirit in the spirit world, cut off from the presence of God, must continue to degenerate in spiritual strength and goodness until it becomes a devil. Jacob therefore observed that, except for Christ's redemption, man's physical body would be "laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more." Of the spirit of man after death, the Nephite prophet said:

. . . our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself. [^72]

These would be the results of the fall if the first judgment which God pronounced upon man went unmitigated by the atoning power of Christ. They reveal the nature of man in his mortal state, and the fact that, of himself, man cannot cope with his fallen condition. Without Christ, no good thing would come unto man.

Without Christ Man is Nothing

Without Christ and the mercy and power which He gives to others, mortal man could never become a creature of value. If the first judgment of God upon man were unmitigated by a plan of mercy and of life, there would be no resurrection, and no uplifting spiritual powers would be extended to bring man back into the presence of God. Without the intercession of the great Redeemer, man would become in the final analysis, either in this life or in the spirit world to come, a devil. He would have little or no ultimate value as an individual.

When King Benjamin taught his people concerning their fallen mortal condition, they "viewed themselves in their own carnal state, even less than the dust of the earth." [^73] With like understanding, Mormon exclaimed: "O how great is the nothingness of the children of men; yea, even they are less than the dust of the earth." [^74] These statements do not indicate that the Nephites considered man to be of little value, but they reflect the understanding of their prophets that without Christ man is nothing. For without mercy and power of the great Redeemer, no truth, light, life, or goodness could be given to man in his fallen state. King Benjamin thus observed that "the knowledge of the goodness of God" had awakened in his people a sense of their "nothingness" and of their "worthless and fallen state." [^75]

Man Must Rely upon Christ

As long as man remains in his fallen state, he is alien to God. Regardless of how moral or how pure he may be respecting those practices that are designated as carnal, sensual, and devilish, personal and social morality are not enough to extricate him from his fallen state. He must be a recipient of divine mercy and power. Having been absolved from responsibility to divine law by the power of the atonement, he must be regenerated and made a new creature in Christ. Otherwise, in the final analysis, all human efforts to attain the righteousness of God and return to His presence are useless. [^76]

As a fallen being in a corrupt state, man must recognize his dependence upon Christ if he is to be transformed to a state of spiritual life and if he is to develop in the attributes and powers of God's divine nature until, eventually, he is glorified in Christ. Having explained that He gives mortal "men weakness that they may be humble," Jesus declared to Moroni: "My grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me." [^77] Man alone is not sufficient to cope with his fallen nature and state, but by receiving the mercy and power of Christ he may come unto righteousness and attain immortal glory in the resurrection. Having observed apologetically that because of the fall, man's nature had become evil continually, the brother of Jared stated: "Nevertheless, O Lord, thou hast given us a commandment that we must call upon thee, that from thee we may receive according to our desires." [^78] With this view of the matter, King Benjamin exhorted his people:

. . . as ye have come to the knowledge of the glory of God, or if ye have known of his goodness and have tasted of his love, and have received a remission of your sins, which causeth such exceeding great joy in your souls, even so I would that ye should remember, and always retain in remembrance, the greatness of God, and your own nothingness, and his goodness and long-suffering towards you, unworthy creatures, and humble yourselves even in the depths of humility, calling on the name of the Lord daily, and standing steadfastly in the faith of that which is to come. [^79]

Nephi expressed the same view of man's need to rely upon Christ. While mourning as a result of the weaknesses of his mortal flesh, he explained: "Nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted. My God hath been my support." [^80] In true recognition of his dependence upon Christ, Nephi then prayed:

O Lord, wilt thou redeem my soul? Wilt thou deliver me out of the hands of mine enemies? Wilt thou make me that I may shake at the appearance of sin? May the gates of hell be shut continually before me, because that my heart is broken and my spirit is contrite! O Lord, wilt thou not shut the gates of thy righteousness before me, that I may walk in the path of the low valley, that I may be strict in the plain road!

O Lord, wilt thou encircle me around in the robe of thy righteousness! O Lord, wilt thou make a way for mine escape before mine enemies! Wilt thou make my path straight before me! Wilt thou not place a stumbling block in my way—but that thou wouldst clear my way before me, and hedge not up my way, but the ways of mine enemy.

O Lord, I have trusted in thee, and I will trust in thee forever. [^81]

True and lasting righteousness can be attained only in and through Jesus Christ and the divine power He extends to man. This point was emphasized by Joseph Smith when he corrected the Apostle Paul's famous statement on man's struggle with his flesh and the corruption therein to read:

. . . I seek to subdue that sin which dwelleth in me. For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing; for to will is present with me, but to perform that which is good I find not, only in Christ. [^82]

Human Life Must be Transformed by the Power of Christ

Except for the fact that Christ acquired power in the atonement to change the fundamental order of things on the earth in its corrupt condition, man could not be reclaimed "from his fallen state." [^83] The mere introduction of Christian ethics and ideals into the fallen world is not enough. Nor is it sufficient to reveal to man a great and meaningful system of theology, or an intelligent dietary code. All these things are vital and important in their respective spheres. But alone they are not capable of extricating man from his fallen state. A transformation of human life by divine truth and power is necessary. "Marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be . . . changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness," the Lord declared to Alma the younger. "And thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of heaven." [^84]

Unless man attains the enlightening, regenerating, and uplifting powers of the Holy Spirit to supplement his desire for righteousness, the corruption within his mortal body and the influences of the world will dominate his life to a significant degree on earth. In reporting the words of an angel of God, King Benjamin declared: "Men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children, and believe that salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent." [^85] Continuing, he explained: "For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." [^86] After he and his brethren had been transformed from their fallen spiritual state to one of union and power with Christ, Ammon exclaimed:

Who could have supposed that our God would have been so merciful as to have snatched us from our awful, sinful, and polluted state? . . . Why did he not consign us to an awful destruction, yea, why did he not let the sword of his justice fall upon us, and doom us to eternal despair?

Oh, my soul, almost as it were, fleeth at the thought. Behold, he did not exercise his justice upon us, but in his great mercy hath brought us over that everlasting gulf of [spiritual] death and misery, even to the salvation of our souls. [^87]

Man Should Not Trust in the Arm of Flesh

Man should recognize his present dependent state and place his trust in Christ. In his own wisdom, he should not "counsel his fellow man," neither should he "trust in the arm of flesh." [^88] To do so is to deny the fact that he is primarily dependent upon Christ. "I will not put my trust in the arm of flesh; for I know that cursed is he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh," Nephi declared. "Yea, cursed is he that putteth his trust in man or maketh flesh his arm." [^89]

This does not mean that man, properly authorized of God and inspired by the Holy Ghost, should not counsel his fellow man according to the rights of the priesthood and the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Nephi therefore qualified: "Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arm, or shall hearken unto the precepts of men, save their precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost." [^90]

Nevertheless, as a dependent being, man may become an independent creature in and through Jesus Christ; and in this relationship it is designed that every worthy man should "speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world." [^91] To recognize man's present dependent status is therefore to recognize the facts of his mortal existence. But to understand that man may become a truly independent being in and through Christ is to understand the hope of eternal life that the great Redeemer holds out to all who receive His law of truth.

Man's Alternatives In Mortality

Satan Entices Man Through the Flesh

It is through the mortal corruption within the flesh that the Adversary acts upon man with his powers of darkness and perversion. In those corrupt elements which are congenial to him, Satan establishes a base and plies his deadly trade. Having warned his sons against yielding to "the will of the flesh and the evil which is therein," Lehi observed that the evil or corruption within the flesh gives "the spirit of the devil power to captivate, to bring you down to hell, that he may reign over you in his own kingdom." [^92] For this reason, Jacob made both "the devil and the flesh" the common enemies of man in his quest for righteousness. [^93]

The Holy Spirit's Influence upon Man

Brigham Young reported Joseph Smith as teaching that as God extends His Holy Spirit to man to bless and enlighten his life, He "whispers to the spirit in the tabernacle the same as though it were out of it." [^94] The Prophet's statement is as follows: "All things whatsoever God in his infinite wisdom has seen fit and proper to reveal to us, while we are dwelling in mortality, in regard to our mortal bodies, are revealed to us in the abstract, and independent of affinity of this mortal tabernacle, but are revealed to our spirits precisely as though we had no bodies at all; and those revelations which will save our spirits will save our bodies." [^95]

From this explanation it seems that God's Holy Spirit acts essentially upon man's organized spirit. Nevertheless, by expressing living faith in Christ, the tabernacled spirit of man may acquire grace and power to sanctify the body and present it pure and subdued before the Lord in the resurrection. In this way, the physical endowment may be adapted by the gift of wisdom to their proper use and made to add to man's dignity and power on earth and in eternity.

Man May Obey God or the Devil

The fact that by the power of the atonement mortal life is sustained above the full force of spiritual death makes man a free individual in his spiritual and moral agency, as has been shown in the preceding chapter. His suspended condition also accounts for certain essential factors in his mortal nature and provides the basis for his freedom in mortality. Though man is a fallen creature, he is not depraved, for the basic life within him (his organized spirit) comes to mortality in a state of innocence and possesses a general desire to do good. The physical endowments are given to man from God with the intent that they should add to his dignity and power as an organized being. As man enters mortality, he is absolved from the legal demands of Adam's transgression and made immune to the temptations of the Adversary until he begins to be accountable for his actions. Nevertheless, man must come to earth in a fallen spiritual state, wherein corruption has become associated with the flesh and wherein the enticing influences of Satan and his hosts operate upon man through the flesh in an effort to contaminate his spirit and thereby destroy its initial innocence and its desire for righteousness. But to counterbalance the influence of these opposing factors, God acts through the spirit of man, according to its desire for righteousness, to sanctify the flesh and assist man to sanctify the physical endowments and adapt them to their proper uses.

Under these conditions, man is free to choose the influences he will follow in life. He is not bound or fettered as he comes to meet the challenge of his mortal probation; neither is he condemned under divine law for the acts of his forefathers, including Adam. Joseph Smith therefore observed: "There are three independent principles: the Spirit of God, the spirit of man, and the spirit of the devil." [^96] Again he said: "The devil has no power over us only as we permit him." [^97] A report of a discourse by the Prophet on the same subject states:

He . . . observed that Satan was generally blamed for the evils which we did, but if he was the cause of all our wickedness, men could not be condemned. The devil could not compel mankind to do evil; all was voluntary. Those who resisted the Spirit of God would be liable to be led into temptation. . . . God would not exert any compulsory means, and the devil could not; and such ideas as were entertained [on these subjects] by many were absurd. [^98]

Brigham Young explained the same point in light of the dual nature of mortal man:

Now I want to tell you that he [i.e., Satan] does not hold any power over man, only so far as the body overcomes the spirit that is in man, through yielding to the spirit of the devil. The spirit that the Lord puts into a tabernacle of flesh is under the direction of the Lord Almighty; but the spirit and the body are united in order that the spirit may have a tabernacle and be exalted; the spirit is influenced by the body and the body by the spirit. In the first place the spirit is pure and under the special control and influence of the Lord, but the body is of the earth and is subject to the power of the devil, and is under the mighty influence of that fallen nature that is on earth. If the spirit yields to the body, the devil then has power to overcome both the body and spirit of that man. [^99]

The Flesh Versus the Spirit of Man

The fall introduced a built-in dualism in man, in which the corrupting powers associated with his fallen mortal nature stand in opposition to the righteous desires which his spirit initially possesses on earth. Mortal man is thus identified with opposing forces that make neutrality on his part impossible. He is in the midst of a moving stream; and the forces of opposition within him and about him are not dormant, but active. "The moment we revolt at anything which comes from God," the Prophet explained, "the devil takes power." [^100]

The opposing forces within man maintain a constant warfare against him, contending for the mastery. No human being who has arrived at the period of accountability is exempt. While mortality lasts, the struggle is waged in the body of both the sinner and the saint. Nevertheless, by the power of the Holy Spirit, the saint may be sanctified so that he obtains, and by diligence thereafter retains, mastery over the flesh. But except where the power of the Holy Ghost sanctifies man as a result of his faith and thereafter predominates in his life by man's invitation and diligence, there is no place, however secluded or sacred, which is not a battleground for this inner struggle. The strife begins as the body commences to mature, and it continues until the body is sown in corruption in the grave. Only when the body is raised in the resurrection, in incorruption and power as a spiritual body capable of dwelling in the presence of God, is complete and final victory attained by the righteous.

Brigham Young expressed the Latter-day Saint view of man's mortal conflict in the following statement:

We have to fight continually, as it were, sword in hand to make the spirit master of the tabernacle, or the flesh subject to the law of the spirit. If this warfare is not diligently prosecuted, then the law of sin prevails. . . .

The rule of the flesh brings darkness and death, while, on the other hand, the rule of the [Holy] Spirit brings light and life. When, through the Gospel, the [Holy] Spirit in man has so subdued the flesh that he can live without wilful transgression, the Spirit of God unites with his spirit, they become congenial companions, and the mind and will of the Creator is thus transmitted to the creature. Did their spirits have their choice [uninhibited by the corruption in the flesh, etc.] there is not a son or daughter of Adam and Eve on the earth but what would be obedient to the Gospel of salvation, and redeem their bodies to exaltation and glory. But there is a constant warfare between them, still they must remain together, be saved and exalted together, or neither of them will be saved and exalted with the salvation and the exaltation which the Gospel offers. [^101]

For children who are born under the covenants of the Gospel, the descent into worldly darkness and sin may be checked to a significant degree, providing they are taught by the time they are eight years of age to receive the saving ordinances of the Gospel in the true expression of faith, and if they are reared thereafter in the truth and light of the Holy Spirit so that they learn to apply the principles and laws of salvation in their lives. Being initially alive in Christ by the power of the atonement, they may then continue in His grace and enjoy His power until they have sanctified the flesh and matured the attributes of the Holy Spirit in their lives.

Regardless of the conditions under which the individual comes to earth, he must come unto Christ in the way ordained of God if he is to overcome the weaknesses of his fallen nature. "Fools mock, but they shall mourn," Jesus said of those who shun the divine plan; "and my grace is sufficient for the meek." Continuing, the Lord explained:

If men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. Behold, . . . I will show unto them that faith, hope and charity bringeth [men] unto me—the fountain of all righteousness. [^102]

In this statement may be seen the purpose of mortal weakness and corruption. That purpose is two-fold: (1) to teach man dependence upon Christ, that thereby he might become an independent creature in eternity and, (2) through Christ, to make the faithful strong in overcoming the world. With the grace of Christ, man need not succumb to mortal weakness. "Need we in spirit bow down to this poor, miserable, decaying body?" Brigham Young inquired. "We will not." [^103] By coming unto Christ, man may acquire the truth, light, life, and power of God. Of the nature of these divine attributes and the basis upon which man must receive them, President Young said:

Truth, wisdom, power, glory, light, and intelligence exist upon their own qualities; they do not, neither can they, exist upon any other principle. Truth is congenial with itself, and light cleaves unto light, it seeks after itself, and clings thereto. It is the same with knowledge, and virtue, and all the eternal attributes; they follow after and attract each other. Mercy cleaves to mercy, because it is mercy; light to light, because it is light, and there is so darkness, no deception, no falsehood in it. Truth cleaves unto truth, because it is truth; and it is to be adored, because it is an attribute of God, for its excellence, or itself. It is upon this principle that these principles should be held, esteemed, practiced. Any persons, men or women, who do not receive these principles for the love which they bear towards them, because of their beauty, excellence, and glory; and because they are congenial to their feelings upon this principle, are not Saints. [^104]

The real test of man's probation is centered around the issue of his love for truth. The Spirit of Truth is given to all men who come to this fallen state; and by its divine influence, they may return to the presence of God, providing they genuinely love and sustain truth. [^105] Upon this issue their probationary challenge centers. [^106] Will fallen man choose to acquire and sustain truth, light, virtue, and charity against the weaknesses of the flesh, the lures of the world, and the enticements of the Adversary? If not, he cannot qualify to receive eternal life, the greatest of all the gifts of God, which consists of obtaining the divine endowments of truth, light, and life (or intelligence) that constitute the fulness of celestial glory and power.

As observed earlier, dependence upon Christ, when properly expressed, is not a principle of subserviance, for it leads to freedom, strength, and independence. By relying upon Christ, man may overcome the world and become an independent being on the exalted plane of eternal life and power. This is the goal which is set for him in the divine plan of life and salvation; and for this reason he must learn to act positively and affirmatively in support of truth, and in this way become an independent being. Man was not organized by God to be a robot, but to become the embodiment of eternal truth and power in their fulness. Brigham Young declared:

. . . those men, or those women, who know no more about the power of God, and the influence of the Holy Spirit, than to be led entirely by another person, suspending their own understanding, and pinning their faith upon another's sleeve, will never be capable of entering into the celestial glory, to be crownewd as they anticipate. . . . They never can hold sceptres of glory, majesty, and power in the celestial kingdom. Who will? Those who are valiant and inspired with the true independence of heaven, who will go forth boldly in the service of their God, leaving others to do as they please, determined to do right, though all mankind besides should take the opposite course. [^107]

The Perseverance of the Righteous in Mortality

Though the Gospel gives man power to overcome the world, obedience to its principles and ordinances does not bring an immediate cessation to his mortal conflict. To the contrary, Brigham Young explained: "When we receive the Gospel, a warfare commences immediately; Paul says, 'for I delight in the law of God, after the inward man, but I see another law in my members warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members.' We have to fight continually." [^108] Those who accept Christ are in continual need of His mercy and power until they are perfected in Him, for until then they are subject in some measure to the weakness of their fallen nature. Again Brigham Young said: "It requires all the atonement of Christ [that is, the atonement in all aspects of its power], the mercy of the Father, the pity of angels and the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ to be with us always, and then to do the very best we possibly can, to get rid of this sin within us, so that we may escape from this world into the celestial kingdom." [^109]

But if man establishes his life upon the rock of Christ, he need not succumb to adversity nor be overcome by the world, even though it may seem that all the forces of earth and hell are arraigned against him. Helaman thus admonished his sons: "Remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo, because of the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall." [^110]

Still mortality is a state where challenge confronts each individual until he reaches the end of his life on earth. Even those who become sanctified are still subject in some respects to mortal weakness while they remain in the flesh. All elements of mortal corruption are not eliminated from the flesh in this world by the sanctifying powers of the Gospel, for the power of the atonement does not act to this extent upon man in his mortal state. Consequently, vigilance is required at all times. Brigham Young explained:

Will sin be perfectly destroyed? No, it will not, for it is not so designed in the economy of heaven. . . . Do not suppose that we shall ever in the flesh be free from temptations to sin. Some suppose that they can in the flesh be sanctified body and spirit and become so pure that they will never again feel the effects of the power of the adversary of truth. Were it possible for a person to attain to this degree of perfection in the flesh, he could not die neither remain in a world where sin predominates. . . . I think we should more or less feel the effects of sin so long as we live, and finally have to pass the ordeals of death. [^111]

Because mortal weakness and corruption still seek to alienate man from God as long as he dwells in this fallen state, a revelation warned: "There is a possibility that man may fall from grace and depart from the living God; therefore, let the church take heed and pray always, lest they fall into temptation; yea, and even let those who are sanctified take heed also." [^112] Nephi is a classic example of one who became sanctified; and yet because his soul was sensitive and refined, he lamented:

O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities.

I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the sins which do so easily beset me.

And when I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins;

Nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted. My God hath been my support; he hath led me through mine afflictions in the wilderness; and he hath preserved me upon the waters of the great deep.

He hath filled me with his love, even unto the consuming of my flesh.

He hath confounded mine enemies, unto the causing of them to quake before me.

Behold, he hath heard my cry by day, and he hath given me knowledge by visions in the nighttime.

And by day have I waxed bold in mighty prayer before him; yea, my voice have I sent up on high; and angels came down and ministered unto me.

And upon the wings of his Spirit hath my body been carried away upon exceeding high mountains. And mine eyes have beheld great things, yea, even too great for man; therefore I was bidden that I should not write them.

O then, if I have seen so great things, if the Lord in his condescension unto the children of men hath visited men in so much mercy, why should my heart weep and my soul linger in the valley of sorrow, and my flesh waste away, and my strength slacken, because of mine afflictions?

And why should I yield to sin, because of my flesh? Yea, why should I give way to temptations, that the evil one have placed in my heart to destroy my peace and afflict my soul? Why am I angry because of mine enemy?

Awake, my soul! No longer droop in sin. Rejoice, O my heart, and give place no more for the enemy of my soul.

Do not anger again because of mine enemies. Do not slacken my strength because of mine afflictions.

Rejoice, O my heart, and cry unto the Lord, and say: O Lord, I will praise thee forever; yea, my soul will rejoice in thee, my God, and the rock of my salvation. [^113]

Nephi understood that as long as mortal corruption remains, it tends to divert man from the perfect standard of righteousness that is found in Christ Jesus; and the baneful powers of spiritual death in some measure affect man. Having been sanctified and made a partaker of the glory of God in part, he like other prophets upon the Western hemisphere, longed for that day when "this mortal shall put on immortality, and this corruption shall put on incorruption." [^114] Here was a cardinal hope within the Nephite faith. Jacob wrote that unless there should "be an infinite atonement, this corruption could not put on incorruption." [^115] Since the purpose of the atonement was to change ultimately the natural order of life on this fallen sphere to the divine state of eternal life, faith in Christ was inseparably associated with a hope for this final change. Alma therefore inquired of those who believed in Christ in his day: "Do you look forward with an eye of faith, and view this mortal body raised in immortality, and this corruption raised in incorruption?" [^116] Only then will the victory of the righteous be full and complete in Christ.

Such hope, however, is not without its present fruits. Of the blessings given to the righteous who continue to abide in the Gospel as mortal corruption exerts its power to bring the physical body down to the grave, Brigham Young said:

Our bodies are all important to us, though they may be old and withered, emaciated with toil, pain, and sickness, and our limbs bent with rheumatism, all uniting to hasten dissolution, for death is sown in our mortal bodies. The food and drink we partake of are contaminated with the seeds of death, yet we partake of them to extend our lives until our alloted work is finished, when our tabernacles in a state of ripeness are sown in the earth to produce immortal fruit. Yet it we live our holy religion and let the [Holy] Spirit reign, it will not become dull and stupid, but as the body approaches dissolution the spirit [of man] takes a firmer hold on the enduring substance behind the vail, drawing from the depths of that eternal Fountain of Light sparkling gems of intelligence which surround the frail and sinking tabernacle with a halo of immortal wisdom. [^117]

To obtain this earthly objective against the powers of corruption in the world is the greatest single achievement man can accomplish on earth, and it is the only way those who have the opportunity to receive the plan of life and the salvation and apply it to their lives in the flesh can rise to celestial glory and power in the world to come.

Summary

Revelations given to Joseph Smith indicate that man is a dual being; therefore a meaningful analysis of man's nature can be made only by understanding that he has both a spiritual and a physical organization. As man's spirit enters mortality, it is innocent and inclined to do good. Spirits vary in their acquired abilities and powers. In mortal birth the spirit of man becomes a fallen being in that it leaves its former state where it was enveloped in the glory and power of God. So far as man's physical nature is concerned, Joseph Smith taught that the endowments of the flesh are designed to enhance man's life and contribute to his exaltation in eternity. But corrupt elements and powers have been introduced into the flesh through the fall of Adam.

In mortality, a "natural man" is one whose nature is influenced by this fallen mortal state. Mortal man is in a lost and fallen state. He is not inherently depraved. All men succumb in some degree to the influence of mortal corruption, and by wilful transgression man often becomes carnal, sensual, and devilish. Because his disposition is altered to some extent by the fall, man is in need of being transformed by divine truth and power and in this way become a new creature in Christ. Of himself, man cannot cope with his fallen condition.

The fall of Adam introduced a built-in dualism into man. Satan, with his powers of darkness, acts upon man through the corruption within man's flesh. But the Spirit of God acts upon man as a result of the desires of his spirit. If man yields to the corruption within his flesh, his whole being is brought into bondage to Satan. But though he must struggle against the baneful effects of the fall so long as he is in mortality, man may gain mastery over the flesh and the world, and continually draw truth and power from the Holy Spirit to sanctify his body measurably and to sustain him in a righteous course unto the end.

END VOLUME I

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 93:38.
[^2] D&C 93:38.
[^3] JD, IX, p. 287.
[^4] Ibid., p. 305.
[^5] See Abraham 3:18-19.
[^6] JD, I, pp. 280-284.
[^7] Abraham 3:26.
[^8] D&C 93:33-34.
[^9] Pratt, Key to Theology, p. 98.
[^10] "Joseph Smith Papers, 1839-1841," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 190.
[^11] "Joseph Smith Papers," op. cit., found also in TPJS, p. 181.
[^12] HC, III, p. 403.
[^13] See, for example, 2 Nephi 9:7; Mosiah 16:10; Alma 5:15; 11:45; 40:2; 41:4; D&C 101:24; 1 Corinthians 15:42, 53-54.
[^14] 2 Nephi 2:29. Mosiah 3:19; 27:25-26.
[^15] 2 Nephi 10:24.
[^16] I. V., Romans 7:18-19.
[^17] Ether 12:27.
[^18] Moses 6:55.
[^19] Articles of Faith, No. 2.
[^20] As indicated in an earlier chapter, Adam was organized to endure forever, and except for his transgression he would still be living on earth in the Garden of Eden. See 2 Nephi 2:22.
[^21] JD, IX, p. 305.
[^22] 2 Nephi 2:22.
[^23] Alma 12:31.
[^24] Alma 12:26.
[^25] 2 Nephi 2:21.
[^26] Alma 42:10.
[^27] Alma 12:24.
[^28] Alma 40:11-14.
[^29] Alma 12:12.
[^30] Alma 12:20.
[^31] 1 Nephi 15:31, 35.
[^32] Alma 41:12.
[^33] Mosiah 2:41; Alma 28:12.
[^34] Alma 42:1.
[^35] Alma 28:11.
[^36] 1 Nephi 10:16; Mosiah 16:4; Alma 42:12.
[^37] Mosiah 4:2, 5. Without the divine powers that quicken and sustain the earth by means of Christ's atonement, neither the earth nor any form of life upon it could exist. Except for Christ, this would indeed be a worthless state.
[^38] Alma 22:13.
[^39] See Alma 31:35; 39:17.
[^40] Mosiah 3:16.
[^41] Alma 41:11.
[^42] Alma 26:21.
[^43] D&C 67:11-12.
[^44] D&C 84:46-53.
[^45] JD, X, p. 192.
[^46] Ibid., p. 105.
[^47] Ibid., IX, p. 287.
[^48] Ibid.
[^49] D&C 45:58.
[^50] See D&C 45:58-59; 101:23-24.
[^51] HC, IV, p. 358.
[^52] JD, VIII, p. 160.
[^53] Alma 42:10.
[^54] Alma 34:9. It is on this basis that the gospel of Christ is required as a renewing and cleansing power that is able to make man a new creature in Christ. All those who have arrived at the age of accountability and who would obtain salvation must be thus renewed. See Mosiah 27:25-26.
[^55] D&C 67:10.
[^56] D&C 67:11-12.
[^57] See 2 Nephi 9:9; Alma 34:35.
[^58] See Mosiah 16:3.
[^59] Moses 5:12-13.
[^60] Mosiah 16:3. See also Moses 5:13; 6:49.
[^61] D&C 20:19-20.
[^62] D&C 93:39.
[^63] Mosiah 16:5.
[^64] Ether 3:2. Jesus seems to have recognized the fallen nature of man when He said in the Sermon on the Mount: "If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him."—Matthew 7:11; 3 Nephi 14:11.
[^65] Helaman 14:16.
[^66] Helaman 14:16.
[^67] Helaman 14:16.
[^68] 2 Nephi 2:5.
[^69] 2 Nephi 9:10.
[^70] See 1 Nephi 15:33; Alma 12:16, 32; 40:26; Helaman 14:18. These statements are directed more specifically toward those who suffer the power of the second spiritual death. But since the first and the second spiritual death are alike in nature, the same principle holds true for mortal man if he does not utilize the light and truth of Christ which are extended to him on earth.
[^71] Helaman 14:18.
[^72] 2 Nephi 9:8-9.
[^73] Mosiah 4:2.
[^74] Helaman 12:7.
[^75] Mosiah 4:5.
[^76] See Matthew 19; 28; Titus 3:5-7; Mosiah 27:25-26.
[^77] Ether 12:27.
[^78] Ether 3:2.
[^79] Mosiah 4:11.
[^80] 2 Nephi 4:19-20.
[^81] 2 Nephi 4:31-34.
[^82] I.V., Romans 7:18-19.
[^83] Alma 42:12.
[^84] Mosiah 27:25-26.
[^85] Mosiah 3:18.
[^86] Mosiah 3:19.
[^87] Alma 26:17, 19-20.
[^88] D&C 1:19.
[^89] 2 Nephi 4:34.
[^90] 2 Nephi 28:31.
[^91] D&C 1:20.
[^92] 2 Nephi 2:29.
[^93] 2 Nephi 10:24.
[^94] JD, IX, p. 287.
[^95] HC, VI, p. 312.
[^96] "Joseph Smith Papers, 1839-1841," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 189.
[^97] Ibid.; found also in TPJS, p. 181.
[^98] HC, IV, p. 358.
[^99] JD, II, pp. 255-256.
[^100] "Joseph Smith Papers, 1839-1841," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 181.
[^101] JD, IX, pp. 287-288.
[^102] Ether 12: 26-28.
[^103] JD, IX, p. 289.
[^104] Ibid., I, p. 117. (Italics in the original.) See also D&C 88:40.
[^105] See D&C 84:45-48.
[^106] See D&C 93:30-32.
[^107] JD, I, p. 312.
[^108] Ibid., IX, p. 287.
[^109] Ibid., I, p. 301.
[^110] Helaman 5:12.
[^111] JD, X, p. 173.
[^112] D&C 20:32-34.
[^113] 2 Nephi 4:17-30.
[^114] See Mosiah 16:10; Alma 11:45; 12:28; 40:2; 41:4.
[^115] 2 Nephi 9:7.
[^116] Alma 5:15.
[^117] JD, IX, p. 288.
