James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

A Testimony to the World, April, 1935

1935-April-Improvement Era 38:194-195, April, 1935.

President Grant and his counselors, in this "Testimony to the World," refer to the close of the first century of the Church. The centennial of the Church was five years previous, in 1930. Could it be that in issuing this testimony they may have been thinking of other centennials closer to 1935, such as the centennial of the organization of the First Presidency itself, which fell on March 18, 1933; or the centennial of the organization of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, which fell on February 14, 1935; or the centennial of the organization of the First Council of Seventy, which fell on February 28, 1935; or the centennial of the giving of the great revelation on Priesthood (Doctrine and Covenants Section 107), which fell on March 28, 1935? It would seem from their reference to "a century of His holy restored Priesthood" that some such thoughts may have prompted the issuance of this Testimony.

A TESTIMONY TO THE WORLD century in the life of God's true Church has closed, a century of His holy restored Priesthood with the fulness of His everlasting Gospel, the first century of His authorized work on earth since the days of the Primitive Church established by the Master Himself almost two millenniums ago.

This restoration of Priesthood and Gospel in their fulness has poured out upon the peoples of the earth a divine bounty of saving spiritual truth-a gift free as air to every man, no matter how high or how low he might be, who would in humility seek and receive it, a gift that has brought courage to him that faltered, consolation to him that mourned, health to him that sickened, a living hope to him that was downtrodden and oppressed, the joy of a full life here, of exaltation and eternal progression hereafter to him that lived the word. The Lord has blessed His people beyond measure and beyond price.

Along with this glorious restoration of saving and exalting spiritual truths, God has given to His children a new universe of other and companion truths, the truths yielded by the realms of physical science, and these have come in a richness of measure never before equalled in the whole history of the world. The Lord has given these truths for the comfort, joy, and intellectual growth of His children while mortals, and for the upbuilding, perfection, and exaltation of their intelligences and souls in the world to come. These are the ends and purposes of all truth.

He has established on this continent a free people under a free government. To His Prophet He declared: "For this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood."

These are the achievements by and through His mercy and help; they are our divine heritage. May they be sacred to us. May He aid us that "neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and thieves do not break through nor steal" these our birthrights.

We stand at the beginning of a new century. The mists hanging low and dense around it may be pierced only by the light of the Spirit of Christ, which is the beacon of faith that shall lead to a better world. His hope, His promise, His salvation come in these messages of eternal and divine love and truth: "I am the light of the world." "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." "Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass away."

Two great truths must be accepted by mankind if they shall save themselves: first, that Jesus is the Christ, the Messiah, the Only Begotten, the very Son of God, whose atoning blood and resurrection save us from the physical and spiritual death brought to us by the Fall; and next, that God has again restored to the earth, in these last days, through the Prophet Joseph, His holy Priesthood with the fulness of the everlasting Gospel, for the salvation of all men on the earth. Without these truths man may not hope for the riches of the life hereafter.

We solemnly bear to all men of the earth our testimony that these are truths. We call the unrepentant to a forsaking of their sins. We ask all men to accept and live under and by these truths that their souls may be saved and exalted before Him. To this end we invoke the divine and bounteous blessings of the Father of all. HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
