James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Christmas Greeting, December 24, 1935

1935-December 24-Liahona, the Elders' Journal 3:313-315, December 24, 1935.

GREETINGS FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

At the passing of this another fleeting year, a worthy custom affords us another opportunity to express thanksgiving one to another for gifts and blessings received, and to herald anew the message of "peace on earth, good-will toward men." We greet you this season, however, with feelings mingled with appreciation and apprehension.

Reverently and gratefully we acknowledge the Lord's bounteous blessings, inspirational guidance and divine protection. Now as always when we turn to Him, our hearts are filled with a sense of perfect security.

Also, as we consider the record of the Church during the last nine months, we have cause for encouragement and gratitude. Increases in many phases of the work reflect the loyalty and integrity of Church members, as well as their strength and ability to face undauntingly shrinking incomes and economic disasters. Five new stakes, forty-six new wards, since January 1st; improvement in Priesthood quorums, in attendance at quorum and class meetings, and more responsiveness in duties of brotherhood, indicate a persistence of interest most commendable. Four hundred and seventeen more missionaries in the field on September 30, 1935, than on September 30, 1934, in the face of present financial difficulties, and the further fact that tithes and offerings show an upward climb, are favorable indications of the unwavering faith of members of the Church. Truly, from a Church standpoint there is just cause for thanksgiving.

Feelings of apprehension arise, however, as we perceive the unrest, confusion and distraction of the nations of the world. In the words of an eminent statesman-"Men may cry peace, peace, but there is no peace." Nor will there be until the spirit of righteousness dominates mankind.

Nineteen centuries have come and gone since the Christ child came to earth. His divine mission, as prophetically told, was "to give light to them that sit in darkness and the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace." Full well He knew that those who would persistently "sit in darkness" would be blind to the light He offers them; and, not content with turning therefrom themselves, would even persecute those who would desire to follow in the paths of peace. As He looked through the vista of centuries, He perceived millions who would deliberately reject the principles that promote harmony, fellowship, and good-will, and cherish instead those things which foster strife, sorrow and death.

Yet he also knew that some time in the far distant future men's eyes would inevitably be opened, and that they would eventually see that only in Christ and His teachings will the nations as well as men have peace.

Perhaps never was there a time in the history of the human race when the message of peace could be more appropriately heralded than at the present time. Today, contrary to the principles of Christianity, war is threatening the tranquility of nations. Clouds of strife and tribulation are gathering threateningly over civilization. To further such contention and strife, the Adversary of peace sends abroad his emissaries, Ambition, Greed, Envy, Intemperance, Hatred, Atheism, scattering seeds of misunderstanding, bitterness, and deadly conflict.

However, dark though the lowering clouds seem, we know that the sun of peace still shines, and that sentiment opposed to brute force and unrighteous conflict is gaining power and increased momentum with each passing year.

Millions of honest hearts bleed as they hear and see the achievements of science turned to the destruction of cities and the brutal extinction of human beings. These millions, and millions more, should hold aloft the light of the Christ life, and thereby hasten the day when men "shall beat their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks; (when) nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more."

The great need of the world today is peace-the "first of human blessings."

To consummate this achievement, and to refrain from the shedding of blood the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are enjoined by divine revelation. In the midst of persecution and affliction, the Church was called upon by the Lord to "sue for peace, not only the people that have smitten you, but also to all peoples:

"And lift up an ensign of peace, and make a proclamation of peace unto the ends of the earth;

"And make proposals for peace unto those who have smitten you, according to the voice of the Spirit which is in you, and all things shall work together for your good."

The harmony of the notes sounded by the heavenly hoot singing "peace on earth, good-will to men" has lingered throughout the intervening centuries, and still reverberates with increasing influence in the hearts of millions. True, selfishness, greed, intolerance, ambition, and other enemies to peace continue to prey upon humanity. But their depredations will be less potent as the spirit of the Christ life becomes more widely diffused, and the principles of the Gospel of the life abundant become more acceptable and adaptable as the guide to nations.

To this end we appeal to Latter-day Saints and to sincere men and women the world over to live for peace, for the brotherhood of man and the fatherhood of God. To achieve this, each one will cherish in his or her soul the ideal of truth. Honor, integrity, fair dealing, will be manifest in daily activities and duties; kindness and generosity will replace cruelty and selfishness; reverence for God and all things sacred will supplant disbelief and cynicism that shrivel the spirit and make sordid the soul; each will cherish as his life's ideal the divine sonship of Jesus Christ; will acknowledge His creative power, His perfect character, and supreme leadership, and accept what a distracted world must some day inevitably accept as a fact, that only through Him and by obedience to the principles of His gospel can there be established peace on earth and good-will toward men. HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
