James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Church Welfare Program, April 7, 1936

1936-April 7-Deseret News 342:1, 3, April 7, 1936; Improvement Era 39:305-306, May, 1936; Original circular, May, 1936, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This "Important Message" constituted the actual launching of the L.D.S. Church Welfare Program. However, this "Message" was not the beginning of the preparations for launching the program. The First Presidency in 1933, consisting of Heber J. Grant, Anthony W. Ivins and J. Reuben Clark, Jr., conducted, through the Stake Presidents and Bishops, a survey of "Church Relief Work" projected from July, 1933, to July, 1934. They stressed in their instructions for the survey that "The information herein called for by these surveys has entirely to do with Church matters and Church members."

In September, 1935, the First Presidency, then consisting of Heber J. Grant, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and David O. McKay, through the Presiding Bishopric "made a survey of relief conditions in the Church" as of September, 1935. This second survey was announced in the October 1935 General Conference, and some of its results are reported in this "Message," along with instructions and principles for the implementation of the L.D.S. Welfare Program.

AN IMPORTANT MESSAGE To the Presidents of Stakes and Bishoprics of the Church

Dear Brethren:

Pursuant to the statements made at the special Priesthood meeting of the Semi-Annual Conference last October, the First Presidency, through the Presiding Bishopric, made a survey of relief conditions in the Church as of last September.

Among the several distressing disclosures of that survey, the following may be mentioned:

That 17:9 per cent of the entire Church membership received relief, or a total of 88,460 persons; that 80,247 persons (16.3 per cent) received relief from the County and 8,213 (1.6 per cent) received relief from Church funds;

That 13,455 were on relief due to unemployment;

That approximately 11,500 to 16,500 persons received relief, who either did not need it or who had farms that might, if farmed, have kept them off relief;

Relief Cost Per Person

That County relief probably totalled more than five and a half million dollars and Church relief approximately a quarter of a million dollars during the year 1935; that County relief cost approximately $5.41 per person, and Church relief $2.48 per person, per month; and

That if those now on work relief should continue thereon, the cost of maintaining the balance of those actually needing relief and without means of self-help would, at Church relief rate, cost approximately $842,000 per year.

This makes clear the size of the problem which is involved in meeting the relief needs of Church members. The curtailment of Federal aid which is now forecast, makes it imperative that the Church shall, so far as it is able, meet this emergency.

Gives Guiding Principles

To enable the Church to do this, the following general principles are laid down as guides:

Placing Responsibility

The problem of Church relief is Church-wide; it is to be accomplished through local unit organizations and operations. It will be the business and responsibility of the Bishop and his Ward organizations-Priesthood quorum, auxiliaries, Relief Society-to see that the full relief collections of the Ward are made.

The Church itself will be prepared to assist to the utmost extent possible in providing work on its own properties for its unemployed members, as also in providing other work in wisely rehabilitating ranches, farms, gardens, and orchards that may be used to furnish foodstuffs for those in need.

No pains must be spared to wipe out all feeling of diffidence, embarrassment, or shame on the part of those receiving relief; the Ward must be one great family of equals. The spiritual welfare of those on relief must receive especial care and be earnestly and prayerfully fostered. A system which gives relief for work or service will go far to reaching these ends.

Quote from Doctrine and Covenants

Speaking to the Saints in the early days of the Church, the Lord said (Doctrine and Covenants, 56:14-20):

"Behold, thus saith the Lord unto my people-you have many things to do and to repent of; for behold, your sins have come up unto me, and are not pardoned, because you seek to counsel in your own ways.

"And your hearts are not satisfied. And ye obey not the truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness.

"Wo unto you rich men, that will not give your substance to the poor, for your riches will canker your souls; and this shall be your lamentation in the days of visitation, and of judgment, and of indignation: the harvest is past, the summer is ended, and my soul is not saved!

"Wo unto you poor men, whose hearts are not broken, whose spirits are not contrite, and whose bellies are not satisfied, and whose hands are not stayed from laying hold upon other men's goods, whose eyes are full of greediness, and who will not labor with your own hands!

"But blessed are the poor who are pure in heart, whose hearts are broken, and whose spirits are contrite, for they shall see the kingdom of God coming in power and great glory unto their deliverance; for the fatness of the earth shall be theirs.

"For behold, the Lord shall come, and his recompense shall be with him, and he shall reward every man, and the poor shall rejoice;

"And their generations shall inherit the earth from generation to generation, forever and ever. And now I make an end of speaking unto you. Even so. Amen."

Faithfully your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
