James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Stake Missionary Work, March 23, 1936

1936-March 23-Improvement Era 39:273, May, 1936.

The key document here is the letter of the First Presidency to the Council of the Twelve. However, the other documents reproduced have been included because they provide the best and most authentic setting for the launching of "A New Plan of Missionary Work in the Stakes of Zion" through the direction of the First Presidency and with the cooperation of the other two presiding councils of the Church.

A NEW PLAN FOR MISSIONARY WORK IN THE STAKES OF ZION

In response to invitation, on March 12, 1936, the First Council of Seventy transmitted a letter to the Council of the Twelve in which recommendations were made concerning the establishment and carrying forward of missionary work in the stakes of Zion. The recommendations contained in this letter were discussed and approved by the Council of the Twelve, and, with modifications, were forwarded to the First Presidency in a letter dated March 21, 1936, with a recommendation for approval, which letter was prefaced with this paragraph:

"We, the Council of the Twelve, respectfully recommend that the missionary work in the stakes of Zion be more fully organized than it is at the present time. We suggest the following program as a basis for said proposed organization, the First Council of Seventy concurring."

In response to this recommendation the First Presidency wrote to the Council of the Twelve, under date of March 23, 1936, as follows:

"March 23, 1936. "President Rudger Clawson, The Council of the Twelve,

"Dear President Clawson:

"The recommendations submitted in your letter of March 21, 1936, regarding missionary work in the stakes of Zion, which recommendations you say are concurred in by the First Council of Seventy, meet with our hearty approval, and you are hereby authorized to put into operation the program therein outlined.

"Referring to the third and fourth items in your letter, we recommend that the First Council of Seventy operate directly through the presidencies of stakes, and that the mission presidents be recommended by the stake presidency rather than by the 'stake president.'

"We feel assured that this plan, when fully operative, will give great impetus to the missionary work in the stakes of Zion.

"Sincerely your brethren, THE FIRST PRESIDENCY, "By HEBER J. GRANT, DAVID O. MCKAY."

Accordingly under date of March 24, 1936, the Council of the Twelve wrote to the First Council of Seventy a letter containing the slightly modified recommendations, which letter appears in full below, and constitutes the plan now approved by the First Presidency for conducting missionary work in the stakes of Zion:—

"To the First Council of Seventy,

"Dear Brethren:

"We have given consideration to your letter of March 12, 1936, concerning the establishment and carrying forward of missionary work in the stakes of Zion. We give our approval to the statement which you have made with reference to the organization and direction of the work, modified as hereinafter submitted.

"1. That the object of this work be to do missionary work within the stakes of Zion.

"2. That a mission be organized in each stake of Zion and that the general supervision thereof be given to the First Council of Seventy.

"3. That the First Council of the Seventy operate directly through the presidencies of stakes.

"4. That the immediate charge of the mission shall be given to a mission president who should preferably be a Seventy but may be a High Priest. In case the most desirable man for this position be an Elder, he must first be ordained a Seventy before appointment. The mission presidents shall be recommended by the stake presidency, after consultation with the local council or councils of Seventy, and approved by the First Council.

"5. That the missionaries to be employed preferably be Seventies but that High Priests and women may be called to serve. Also that prospective missionaries who are taking missionary training courses be used to give them experience.

"6. That the mission be divided into districts over which district presidents, preferably Seventies be appointed.

"7. That report forms be prepared by the First Council of the Seventy upon which the activities of the missionaries be reported weekly to the mission president who will report to the First Council and to the stake president monthly.

"8. That calls for missionary service be made by the presidents of stakes after consultation with Bishops and the local Council of Seventy upon forms prepared by the First Council. That all missionaries so called be made to understand that the call entails full compliance with all missionary regulations and cheerful and faithful response to all assignments.

"The stake mission presidents, after consultation with presidents of stakes, shall be authorized to grant releases to missionaries.

"9. That the further detail of the program be left to the First Council, who will of course collaborate with stake presidents, subject, however, to approval of the Council of Twelve Apostles.

"We desire to commend the First Council of Seventy on the comprehensive outline which they have prepared for the work. We should be pleased to receive reports of progress and shall make it a point to confer with the council periodically with reference to this important undertaking.

"With best wishes for success, we are "Very sincerely your brethren, THE COUNCIL OF THE TWELVE, By RUDGER CLAWSON, President."
