James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Annual Christmas greeting, December 19, 1942

1942-December 19-Improvement Era 436:10-11, January, 1943.

The annual Christmas message of the First Presidency which said in part: "Man, not the Lord has brought deadly conflict and subsequent misery. Wars spring from wickedness.

GREETINGS FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY The approaching Holiday Season finds our hearts filled with deep gratitude mingled with feelings of apprehension.

We are grateful for the outstanding progress the Church has made during the past year; for the united and unstinted support given by the General Authorities and officers of the Church; for the loyalty, faith, and devotion of the general auxiliary boards, the officers in stakes, quorums, wards, and missions, and of the Church membership in general. Most of all we are grateful for the assurance we have of the Lord's guidance and overruling power.

We are apprehensive of mankind's welfare in a world of tribulation and of false ideals. Two world wars within the short time of twenty-five years discredit the intelligence not to say the spirituality of the rulers of this supposedly enlightened century! With nations grappling at one another's throats, with millions of men engaged in a death struggle, with the precious principles associated with man's freedom threatened with repudiation, if not abandonment, men and women the world over should make this the most thoughtful, the most prayerful, the most sacred Christmas of all time, should more earnestly than ever seek the causes of this world's disaster, and bravely and heroically choose a better course of life.

This is a time when mankind should turn their thoughts to the teachings of the Christ; and in larger numbers than the world has ever heretofore witnessed conform thereto their attitudes and actions. Unless multitudes of men and women so change their hearts and lives, the world will continue to be drenched in blood and the present civilization be threatened with disintegration.

With the birth of the Babe of Bethlehem are associated three glorious principles, which if sought sincerely as motivating factors by individuals and nations, would themselves make this world an Eden instead of a threatened shambles. These were heralded by the heavenly hosts as "Glory to God," "Peace on earth," and "Good Will toward men."

More Godliness Needed

is a deplorable but recognizable fact that men's hearts all too generally are turned from and not toward God. Self-promotion, not God's glorification, is the motivating factor in most people's lives. Irreverence is all too manifest. The Lord's name is frequently "taken in vain," and profanity, particularly here in the United States, is so common as to pollute the air. The possibility "that man may fall from grace and depart from the living God," has become a sad reality. "Therefore, let the Church take heed and pray always, lest they fall into temptation."

The world needs more godliness, and less godlessness; more self-discipline, less self-indulgence; more power to say with Christ, "Father, not my will, but thine be done."

Peace

Christ came to bring peace. Rejection of His way of life has made strife and contention rampant. Man, not the Lord has brought deadly conflict and subsequent misery. Wars spring from wickedness. As a destructive fire devastates productive fields and growing forests, wars engulf the innocent and righteous as well as the wicked. Millions of hearts in homes on all continents are today yearning for the end of battles and the coming of peace. Under present conditions, however, the war will be ended only by superior armed forces, by increased number of swifter and stronger planes, by more shattering bombs and other weapons of destruction; but Peace will be maintained only by nobler men and by more Christ-like nations.

Before peace can reign, there must be manifest in human hearts more compassion and less hatred; more generosity, and less greed; more sanctity in the home, fewer divorces; more guardianship, less neglect of children; more temperance, less drunkenness; more chastity, less debauchery in a word, there must be more seeking first "the kingdom of God and His righteousness." This is not merely a quotation nor a trite platitude; it is the restatement of an eternal truth, which men must sooner or later accept if they would prevent the human race from further degeneration. The time has come when men's hearts must be changed, impossible though this seems to many. Man must be "born again," said Jesus the Christ, whose mission on earth was "to give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet in the way of peace."

Brotherhood

Not until Freedom triumphs, and a just peace comes may we hope for "good will among men." When a soldier sees his "buddy's" body torn and mangled beside him, he madly, desperately seeks revenge. Multiply that soldier by millions, and you readily see how hate, not good will, governs the hearts and actions of mankind. Thus war makes men vicious and arouses in them brutal instincts. It prompts the abrogation of all moral obligations.

Today when these facts are so strikingly manifest, let all sincere men recognize the evil conditions that have caused wars, and resolve with God's help to banish them forever. There must come a victory of Right and Freedom over Iniquity and Oppression; but war will never be vanquished until men change their hearts and establish new ideals. Not only individuals, but nations must say, "Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths."

Critically, dangerously, mankind stands at the Crossroads. When the present conflict is ended, will the children of men continue along the old highway stretching through the centuries and leading only to misery and destruction; or will they turn into the more rugged path and follow Him who said: "I am the way, the truth, and the life"? Most sincerely and humbly we declare that in Jesus Christ and Him alone may be found the peace and salvation of the human family.

To soldiers and to missionaries in their respective fields of duty, we send greetings and earnest prayers that God's protecting care and divine guidance may be yours.

To our fellow countrymen, we urge that in these perilous days we pray unitedly and strive earnestly and watchfully for the preservation of the Constitution of the land, and for the perpetuity of the free government for which our country stands. Aptly may we re-echo the words:

Humanity with all its fears, With all the hopes of the future years Is hanging breathless on thy fate.

To noble men and women who sacrifice and fight for the divine gift of Freedom and the right of self-government, we pray that God will give increased strength and a just victory.

To the loyal saints in Great Britain, on the continent of Europe, in Asia, South Africa, in the Islands and Commonwealths of the Pacific, and to the intrepid officers who preside over these various missions, we extend felicitations and high commendation. Your faithfulness under stress and trial is an inspiration to your fellow-members in all lands. May a kind and watchful Providence richly reward you and give to you and your loved ones consolation and peace.

To members of the Church everywhere we send with this Greeting our confidence, gratitude, and love. Your ready response to duty, your gratuitous contributions of time, ability, and means have given to the Church an efficiency, influence, and power to advance the work of the Lord never before achieved. May power from on High be given you to live in accordance with the teachings and principles of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, that thereby you may hasten the coming of that blessed day when men and women in greater numbers the world over will join the Heavenly Hosts in saying: "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men."

We wish to all of you a blessed and hallowed Christmas! HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
