James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

L.D.S. literature for military personnel, January, 1943

1943-January-Principles of the Gospel, 1943 edition, pp. i-iii.

In order further to provide for the spiritual and instructional needs of armed forces personnel, this special vest-pocket edition of the Book of Mormon and reference work was published.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah

Dear Brethren:

We have greatest joy in sending you a new edition of the Book of Mormon and this reference work setting forth principles of the Gospel. The incidents of the armed service do not permit our keeping in constant personal touch with you, either directly or by personal representation. Our next best course is to put in your hands such portions of modern revelation and of explanations of the principles of the Gospel as shall bring to you, wherever you may be, renewed hope and faith, as likewise comfort, consolation, and peace of spirit. The Savior, who died that we might be resurrected and live, said to His disciples and He says to us:

"Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.)

We bear you our testimony that God lives; that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, the Redeemer of the World, the First Fruits of the Resurrection; that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the Most High, and that by him and through him the Last Dispensation of the Fullness of Times was set up, the Holy Priesthood of God restored to the earth, the Gospel of Christ revealed in its fullness, and Christ's Church established in the last days.

We bear witness that God loves and cherishes His children who live righteously, even as He loved His Only Begotten Son, whom He suffered to endure the agony of death on the cross that we might be blessed by a resurrection from the dead and pass on to glory and eternal progression in His Service and Kingdom.

We further testify that the Father who lets no sparrow fall to the ground unnoticed, guards and protects those who live righteously in Him, and that we shall

"Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the souls but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell." (Matt. 10:28.)

We invoke the choicest blessings of the Lord upon all of you. We pray Him to deal with each of you as His judgment and wisdom and mercy shall seem best, to give to each of you the will and power to live righteously for that is to live gloriously. We pray that He will give you courage and fortitude to do your duty fully and to acquit yourselves honorably wherever your lot is cast. We pray that He will keep you from sin that your souls may stand pure before Him so that when you return home you will be able to take your places in the lives of your communities and in the service of your Church. Then when you and all of us have finished the allotted course having kept the faith, we shall die in Him, and merit the plaudit-

"Well done, good and faithful servant, thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord."

God bless and keep you always!

Faithfully your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
