James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Church Security Plan, October 2, 1936

1936-October 2-Conference Reports, October, 1936, pp. 2-6.

As announced in their message "Concerning Preparation for Relief Measures" of July, 1933, and their "Important Message" of April 7, 1936, the First Presidency was launching a program which is here designated as a Church Security Plan. According to this Message of the First Presidency, the Church Security Plan as outlined "contemplated no new Church machinery for this work." It later became known as the Church Welfare Plan.

THE MESSAGE OF THE FIRST PRESIDENCY TO THE CHURCH

As promised at the last April Conference, we inaugurated a Church Security Plan. To facilitate the putting into effect of the Plan, we organized a General Committee whose functions were to represent the Presiding Bishopric in the detailed administrative work of coordinating and supervising the labors of the various regularly established organizations in their large and important security operations.

The Security Plan contemplated no new Church machinery for this work, but provided for the use of all the existing Church organizations-the Stake and Ward organizations, the Priesthood quorums, the Relief Society, and the various auxiliary organizations -each of which was to render the maximum service it could furnish in the interest of the general welfare of the Church.

Objective to Provide Necessities

The announced objective set for the Church under this Program was to provide by October 1, 1936, by a wholly voluntary system of gifts in cash or in kind, sufficient food, fuel, clothing, and bedding to supply through the coming winter, every needy and worthy Church family unable to furnish these for itself, in order that no member of the Church should suffer in these times of stress and emergency.

Work to Replace Idleness

Our primary purpose was to set up, in so far as it might be possible, a system under which the curse of idleness would be done away with, the evils of a dole abolished, and independence, industry, thrift and self respect be once more established amongst our people. The aim of the church is to help the people to help themselves. Work is to be re-enthroned as the ruling principle of the lives of our Church membership.

Our great leader, Brigham Young, under similar conditions, said:

"Set the poor to work-setting out orchards, splitting rails, digging ditches, making fences, or anything useful, and so enable them to buy meal and flour and the necessities of life."

This admonition is as timely today as when Brigham Young made it.

Contributions in Labor The harvests not having been yet fully completed, it is not possible to make a final report upon our present situation under the Plan, but we are happy to make the following preliminary statement:

In accordance with the Plan, everything that has been done has been accomplished by the purely voluntary gift or labor of members of the Church as well as the gifts of many non-members who have contributed most generously of their substance to aid the Church in its efforts. We wish especially to thank these for their help.

More than 15,000 persons have performed labor on various Stake and Ward projects in connection with this Plan. Many of these have contributed their work gratis; others have received for their services, work certificates entitling them to help during the coming winter. Hundreds of thousands of work hours have been furnished by the people to this necessary and praiseworthy purpose.

The Church Security Plan contemplates that those now on WPA projects shall continue on these projects, making sure to give a full day's work for value received but they are expected to contribute of their time when not so employed to the carrying out of the plan.

The Church aims to help provide for the care and sustenance of those on direct relief-Federal, State and County, as also for those for whom the Church has heretofore cared. The exact number of such persons cannot now be certainly given but they may be as many as 15,000. We have strongest reasons for believing we shall be able to give these the aid they need.

Reports from Stakes

Oct. 1st, the date set on which reports were to be made, 98 stakes out of a total of 117 had reported on their organizations and achievements, and 83 answer that they are prepared to supply food, clothing, bedding, etc., to every person in need.

We commend the presidencies of stakes and bishoprics of wards for this outstanding record of promptness and efficiency.

It is also contemplated that under this plan work shall be sought and obtained for the unemployed in private industries, thus relieving both the government and the Church. To this time upwards of 700 persons have been so placed by the Security agencies. Efforts along this line will be steadily pursued.

Results Itemized As already stated the harvests are not yet completed and so returns are necessarily incomplete, but data available show as to foodstuffs actually now on hand the following items:

Wheat, over 4,000 bushels. Beans, over 13,000 pounds. Dried fruits, over 23,000 pounds. Meat, over 10,000 pounds. Vegetables, over 14,000 pounds. Potatoes, over 6,000 bushels. Shelled corn, over 3,000 pounds. Flour, over 62,000 pounds. Canned fruit and vegetables, almost 300,000 cans.

There are numbers of other items of foodstuffs of lesser amounts.

There are over 23,000 articles of men's, women's and children's clothing, including dresses, underwear, coats, suits, stockings, socks and shoes.

There are more than 2,000 quilts already made; and other bedding is being accumulated in substantial quantities.

Arrangements are under way for the supply of fuel as needed.

The foregoing partial summary will indicate what the people have done in the short space of time of five months only. It is a glowing promise of what the people are able to do when they put their wills and hearts to this work.

Wards and Stakes to Help Each Other

Every ward and stake is expected to face the necessity, not only of providing for its own, but of helping other wards and stakes. In no other way would it be possible to do the work which the Church is aiming to do. But few stakes and wards are in a position where they may be rightfully satisfied by merely caring for their own.

This great work must continue unabated during the winter months along all lines and activities possible in that inclement season. When spring comes, the measures taken to supply foodstuffs must be redoubled. We shall then easily be able to do better than this year because we can begin our work when the planting season begins. We must not contemplate ceasing our extraordinary efforts until want and suffering shall disappear from amongst us.

The responsibility of seeing that no one is hungry or cold or insufficiently clad rests upon the bishops, each one for the members of his own ward. He will use every Church organization of his ward to help him in his work. For help outside his ward, he will look for necessary assistance to his Stake Presidency, they to their regional organization, and these to the Presiding Bishopric of the Church whose primary responsibility it is to look after the poor of the Church as a whole.

Latter-day Saints Abundantly Blessed

For this great undertaking the Lord has abundantly blessed his people already, and he will continue to pour out his blessings so long as the people do their duty by the poor.

Generations and generations ago, the Lord said to Israel of old, urging them to pay their tithes into his storehouse:

"Prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it."

To this generation, the Lord has said:

"Inasmuch as ye impart of your substance unto the poor, ye will do it unto me."

And the Lord added this admonition:

"Therefore, if any man shall take of the abundance which I have made, and impart not his portion, according to the law of my gospel, unto the poor and the needy, he shall, with the wicked, lift up his eyes in hell, being in torment."

Jacob, speaking to the people of Nephi, said:

"But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God. And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good-to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted."

Appreciation for Service

We are grateful to our Heavenly Father for his goodness unto this people during this year, for the bounteous crops which he has given to them, and for the measure of prosperity which has come to our midst.

We have proved the Lord and he has opened the windows of heaven.

We are grateful to all those who have contributed of their substance to our achievement. We thank all those who have served so long and earnestly in the working out of this program and especially to those 15,000 and odd members of the Church who have been directly concerned.

We invoke the blessings of the Lord upon each and every one of you. We pray the Lord continually to inspire his people to the end that we shall once more be able to take care of all those worthy ones amongst us to whom hard times have come in these days of stress.
