James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Recommending of missionaries during the war, November 20, 1943

1943-November 20-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

These instructions are the follow-up directions and specific's for the letter of the First Presidency of July 26, 1943, calling for additional missionaries and expanding the clarifications of groups who could be called to serve during the war.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah November 20, 1943 To Presidents of Stakes and Bishops

Dear Brethren:

In re: Recommending of Missionaries during the War

To clarify the situation with reference to the eligibility of members of the Church to perform missionary service, other than in stake missions, in the present emergency, we issue the following statement:

a. Stenographers Sisters who have had practical stenographic experience, that is, those who have demonstrated their ability to take dictation with reasonable speed and accuracy, may be needed from time to time to take the places of released missionaries in the office forces of the mission. Such experienced stenographers should also be worthy and capable of representing the Church as missionary exponents of the Gospel. Sisters, if called for this purpose, will be expected to serve full-term missions, at least eighteen months. Those answering to these qualifications may be recommended in the usual manner with the understanding that their calls will be predicated upon the need for their service arising in the mission offices. If no need exists a call will not be issued.

b. Professional School Teachers Sisters engaged as professional school teachers, being personally fitted and having acquired through experience and training in the Church the ability creditably to represent the Church in the proclamation of the Gospel, may be recommended to spend their vacations in the mission field as short-term missionaries, paying their own transportation and other expenses. This exception is made because it is assumed that a sufficient number of such teachers may be secured in vacation time so that all may have companions. With the limited numbers of missionaries at present in the fields, companions for sister missionaries are not always available. Recommendations for such vacation short-term sister missionaries should always be sent sufficiently in advance of the vacation period so that the full time available may be given to missionary work.

c. Wives of Mature Brethren Sisters of mature age, wives of brethren beyond the draft age, may be recommended with their husbands to perform missions.

a. Health and Alertness Health, physical ability and alertness to undertake missionary labors should be considered. No one with the prospect of becoming a burden to the Mission President should be recommended.

b. Suitability to Represent the Church Personal appearance and suitability to represent the Church should be very carefully considered. Under present circumstances pronounced foreign accents in language are sometimes a handicap. A good knowledge of the Gospel in preparation to enter immediately into the missionary service is most desirable, especially with short-term missionaries. Prior missionary experience, of course, is always helpful.

c. Provision for Families Where men are to leave their families, investigation should be made to ascertain whether proper provision has been made for the care of families so that undue hardships will not ensue. Factors that enter into the preservation of proper domestic relations should also be considered.

Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY First Presidency.
