James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

V-Day suggestions, September 9, 1944

FIRST PRESIDENCY GIVES V-DAY SUGGESTIONS

We are informed that plans are under way looking to the observance by proper ceremonies of "V-Day."

We are quite in harmony with the thought that the observance of this day should be celebrated as a day of gratitude to our Heavenly Father for the cessation of this terrible European slaughter, which we are sure has deeply grieved our Heavenly Father.

Since the Church is worldwide with many thousands of our members citizens of the enemy countries-members who deeply love their homeland, and who individually are no more responsible for this terrible holocaust than we have been-we feel it is essential that the Church as such should make its observance of "V-Day" of a character that would not grieve or wound the feelings of those whose mother country is one of the enemy states.

The uncertainty as to the date of "V-Day," and the fact that if it comes soon those in our rural areas will be busily engaged in harvesting crops under circumstances which might render, because of lack of farm help, any cessation of work very detrimental to those who farm, seem to render it infeasible to attempt to provide any fixed program for the Church for the actual "V-Day."

But we suggest to our bishops that they have in their regular sacrament service on the Sunday following "V-Day," prayers and remarks that will express to our Heavenly Father gratitude that the terrible bloodshed in Europe has ceased; that will thank him for our Constitution and for the republic established thereunder with its liberty and free institutions, and that will solemnly implore the Lord mercifully to continue these priceless blessings to us; that will petition him to cause the spirit of peace to enter the hearts of the people and bring it about that the treaties of peace shall be drawn in such way as will greatly lessen, if not indeed forestall, the possibility of wars in the future; and that will humbly ask that arrogance, hate, and vengeance and the will for conquest shall be driven from the earth, and that gloating and triumph over victory shall be submerged in our hearts by gratitude for the ending of the conflict and by a love for our fellow men and a recognition of the common brotherhood of man. HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency. September 9, 1944
