James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Annual Christmas greeting, December 16, 1944

1944-December 16-Improvement Era 48:10-11, January 1945; also Deseret News, December 16, 1944.

Annual Christmas greeting from the First Presidency geared to war conditions in the world.

FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

As the day nears, made holy by tradition as the anniversary of the birth of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, we again give to all the Saints in whatever land they are, our greetings, our blessings, and our love in the fellowship of the gospel of Christ. May the Lord be with you always.

In this terrible hour of earthwide woe, misery, and death, with their weight of sorrow and grief that pour in upon the households of the people, we turn to the Lord as the source of the only true solace to aching hearts and weary souls. For He said to men of all times, "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest."

This is an hour of prayer.

Obedient to the occasion we especially send to you mothers who have lost your sons, to you wives whose husbands have been killed, to you orphans born of the slaughter of war-in whatever land you live and on whatever side your departed loved ones fought-the sympathy and sorrow of our hearts, and we humbly pray our Heavenly Father to send you comfort and an early surcease of your grief. With deep feelings of compassion we utter a like prayer to Him that He will sustain and enhearten you who are crippled and maimed, that He will close and make whole the wounds of you who are hurt, that He will heal you who are sorely racked with pain and disease. We pray our Heavenly Father to send to each and all of you, whoever and wherever you are, you who mourn and you who are plagued with affliction, the healing influence of His Spirit, to bestow upon you richly of His love and His mercy, that you may be made every whit whole in mind and body and spirit, even as in His wisdom shall seem best for the welfare of your souls.

We pray for the men and women now in the service of their country, in whatever land they serve, that they who are sinful may forsake their sins and that all may come to walk in paths of righteousness so that all may have claim upon the blessings and mercies of the Lord. We pray that all may so live that the comforting influence of His Spirit may be their constant companion even in their darkest hours of dread and awful experiences, to buoy them up, to help them to know as they suffer in the depths born of evil, that God is good and kind and loving, and that mankind bring, even upon themselves, through their wickedness the cruel afflictions that are poured out upon them.

We ask our Heavenly Father to bless those of us who are at home, who have our work to do to carry on in this world cataclysm, and especially those of us, the fathers and mothers, whose sons still fight in the battle lines of the world, and the wives amongst us whose husbands fight alongside those sons in their danger and hardship and sacrifice, and the children over whom the threat of orphanage hangs so heavy-we humbly pray Him to bless all and each of them that in the day-by-day dread that is always with them lest ill news shall come, they may feel near to Him, feel the tenderness of His mercy, and the warmth of His love.

So we pray our Heavenly Father to bind us His people, even as one, by the holy bonds of the gospel, that so united we may work for the establishment of righteousness in the earth. We ask Him to teach us the way quickly to spread the truth among the peoples of the world that the love of Christ may fill their hearts and rule their lives. We pray Him to make them to understand that to know Him and Jesus Christ whom He didst send is life eternal, to cause them to receive the word and blessing of His Son:

"Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid."

We beseech Him to plant in the hearts of the nations and of the leaders of nations, those sanctifying truths uttered by the Master on the Mount:

"Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy.

"But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you;

"That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.

"For if ye love them which would love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?

"And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not even the publicans so?

"Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect."

We pray our Heavenly Father to send peace, that this wicked and vain slaughter of His children, one by the other, may cease, that hate may leave the hearts of men, and that greed and avarice and ambition and lust for power and dominion by one over the other, may no longer abide amongst His children. We ask our Father in Heaven to bring all to understand the brotherhood of man and to seek to make it real, to fill all men with charity, forbearance, mercy, and love.

We pray Him to help us His people to spread the restored gospel that all men may know and understand that He is our Father, that Jesus, His only Begotten, is the Redeemer of the World, the First Fruits of the Resurrection, that by his atonement every one born on the earth is redeemed from the fall of Adam, and that every child of God "may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel."

We humbly pray Him to speed the accomplishment of His purposes, that this Satan-inspired slaughter of His children, innocent of the bringing on of this conflict, may cease, that the plans of the wicked shall come to naught, that Satan may soon be bound, and that "righteousness shall fill the earth, even as the waters cover the mighty deep."

Aware of the weaknesses of the flesh and the proneness to waywardness of His children, knowing our helplessness as we stand before Him save He shall guard and protect us as held in the hollow of His hand, we ask all these blessings in deep humility and we petition for His mercy and His love, in the name of His Beloved Son Jesus Christ, in whose name we are taught always to pray. HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
