James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Proposed unification of L.D.S. Church school system rejected, February 21, 1945

1945-February 21-Copy of original letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

A question had been raised as to whether the L.D.S. Church educational system might not be placed under one administrator on the model of the state educational systems of California, Oregon, and Montana. The First Presidency state reasons for not accepting this pattern of school administration.

February 21, 1945 Executive Committee Church Board of Education Building

Dear Brethren:

We have given careful consideration to the question you put at the conference of December 22, 1944, between yourselves and President Clark and President McKay, as to whether it would be wise to put our whole Church school system (the Brigham Young University, the Ricks College, the L.D.S. Business College, the Juarez Stake Academy, and the Institutes and the Seminaries) under the direction of one man, he being answerable to the Church Board of Education. We recall you pointed out that the public educational systems in California, Oregon, and Montana, are successfully operating under an analogous system, and we also recall that some of you pointed out certain advantages believed to be inherent in such a one-man controlled organization.

While apparently few States have adopted this plan we believe we can see there may be certain advantages thereto in a school system which is wholly secular and which, therefore, is itself autonomous in its own field of human knowledge and activity.

But we conceive the Church school system to rest on a wholly different foundation. The Church schools must, it is true, give instruction in secular fields of learning, but this instruction should be given in such manner and in such terms as will strengthen and build up the spiritual knowledge and experiences of the students. Furthermore, in addition to this secular instruction per se, so taught, there must also be given instruction, encouragement, and support in matters essentially relating to the spirit,-in the restored Gospel defined and understood in the fullest sense of the term. Indeed, the spiritual element, as revealed in the restored Gospel, should dominate all else in the Church school system.

To insure this, the system must be brought under the intimate control of the General Authorities of the Church, since from them only can come the authoritative determinations and pronouncements that must guide and control all spiritual instructions given in the system. Obviously, at the head stands the President of the Church, the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator of this dispensation.

From the foregoing it will appear that we feel that the direction of our Church school system may not be wisely placed in one man, with the inevitable relinquishing of direct responsibility of directing the schools by the Church Board of Education which would follow. We believe that the individual units of the Church school system,-the Brigham Young University, the Ricks College, the L.D.S. Business College, the Juarez Stake Academy, and the Institutes and Seminaries (the two latter constituting one unit)-should each be operated under a head and teaching staff that shall be independent of each and all of the others, and with supervision only from the Church Board of Education.

To accomplish this, it would seem advisable that the Board itself, through properly organized committees, assume the necessary detailed supervision of the activities of the whole system. To assist the Board in meeting this responsibility, we feel an executive secretary should be provided.

Moreover, we feel there should be appointed from the Board, at this time, the following committees, in addition to the Executive Committee already existing. Each committee should be headed by a member of the Executive Committee. Still other committees should be added as the need therefor appears.

A. A Committee on Curricula, which shall have and exercise the power of approval or disapproval of the courses offered in all parts of the system, and of the text books to be used therein, both secular and religious. This Committee will also act as a Committee of Visitors, who shall have the power and duty of inspecting the actual workings of all parts of the system to ensure the faithful following of the curricula.

B. A Committee on Personnel, whose duty it shall be to interview each teacher taken into the service before he or she is employed. No teacher should be employed who has not an affirmative testimony of the truth of the restored Gospel, with all that implies, who is not living conformably to the Church standards, who is in any way identified with any of the dissentient groups or apostate groups and who is not loyal to the General Authorities of the Church. College degrees should not be considered an absolute essential for employment as a teacher to instruct in the principles of the restored Gospel and in Church government and administration. For such positions, the essential qualifications besides sufficient educational attainments are,-high spirituality, a righteous life, a living testimony of the truth of the Gospel and of the mission of the Prophet Joseph, a sound understanding of the principles of the Gospel and a good knowledge thereof, together with loyalty to the Cause and the General Authorities, accompanied by a willingness to follow them.

The Executive Committee will act as a Budget Committee with the duty to consult with each of the heads of the various units of the system as to the budget requirements thereof, to make such adjustments therein as seem necessary and as shall bring them into a relative equality one with the other, and to report same to the Board, to be by them submitted to the Council on the Disposition of Tithes for their consideration and action.

Each of the two Committees designated A and B above, will be Committees of the Board, and will so function, but they will make their reports to the Board through the Executive Committee, which may request further investigation or additional information before submitting the matter to the Board, which it shall do with a recommendation.

The Executive Secretary to whom reference has already been made, will act as Secretary of the Board of Education and likewise of each of the Committees mentioned above. He will act generally under the direction of the Chairman of the Executive Committee, gathering such information and statistics, making such inspections and reports, keeping such records, conducting such correspondence, and carrying on generally such of the regular secretarial functions of the Board and its Committees, as the Chairman of the Executive Committee shall direct.

President Grant will designate the members of the Various Committees in due course, as well as the Secretary.

Respectfully yours, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
