James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Church Security, January, 1937

1937-January-Improvement Era 40:3, January, 1937.

THE FIRST PRESIDENCY SPEAKS ON CHURCH SECURITY Excerpts from Recent Public Expressions

This great work must continue unabated during the winter months along all lines and activities possible in that inclement season. When spring comes the measures taken to supply foodstuffs must be redoubled. We shall then easily be able to do better than this year because we can begin our work when the planting season begins. We must not contemplate ceasing our extraordinary efforts until want and suffering shall disappear from amongst us.

The responsibility of seeing that no one is hungry or cold or insufficiently clad rests upon the bishops, each one for the members of his own ward. He will use every Church organization of his ward to help him in his work. For help outside his ward, he will look for necessary assistance to his stake presidency, they to their regional organization, and these to the Presiding Bishopric of the Church, whose primary responsibility it is to look after the poor of the Church as a whole.

For this great undertaking the Lord has abundantly blessed His people, already, and He will continue to pour out His blessings so long as the people do their duty by the poor.

Generations and generations ago, the Lord said to Israel of old, urging them to pay their tithes into His storehouse:

"Prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it."

To this generation, the Lord has said:

"Inasmuch as ye impart of your substance unto the poor, ye will do it unto me."

And the Lord added this admonition:

"Therefore, if any man shall take of the abundance which I have made, and impart not his portion according to the law of my gospel unto the poor and the needy, he shall with the wicked, lift up his eyes in Hell, being in torment."

Jacob, speaking to the people of Nephi, said:

"But before ye seek for riches seek ye for the kingdom of God. And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them, and ye will seek them for the intent to do good-to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted."

We are grateful to our Heavenly Father for His goodness unto this people during this year, for the bounteous crops which He has given to them, and for the measure of prosperity which has come to our midst.

We have proved the Lord and He has opened the windows of Heaven.

We are grateful to all those who have contributed of their substance to our achievement. We thank all those who have served so long and earnestly in the working out of this program and especially to those 15,000 and odd members of the Church who have been directly concerned.

We invoke the blessings of the Lord upon each and every one of you. We pray the Lord continually to inspire His people to the end that we shall once more be able to take care of all those worthy ones amongst us to whom hard times have come in these days of stress. HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
