James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Apostates, unauthorized persons or dissentient members not allowed to instruct in official Church gatherings and classes, October 29, 1945

1945-October 29-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This warning against the dangers within the Church of allowing unauthorized persons, including dissentient members, apostates and excommunicants, to instruct members of the Church in official Church meetings takes on added significance when read in connection with a conference address of Elder Mark E. Petersen of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, as it appears in the Conference Report. October, 1945, pp. 88-92.

October 29, 1945

To Stake Presidencies and Bishoprics:

Dear Brethren:

It has come to our notice that dissentient members of the Church, as well as apostates and excommunicants, come into the wards of the Church and by dissembling and ofttimes by actual misrepresentation as to their real status and beliefs, work themselves into the good graces of the ward members, the officers of ward organizations, and of priesthood quorums, and even of the bishopric. These persons having so deceived the people, are sometimes called into active service in the ward as officers or teachers or both. Having secured this recognition, they immediately set about to spread their false doctrines which, because of the positions to which they have been called, are given consideration and credence by unsuspecting and partially informed adults but particularly by the youth who are sometimes thereby led astray. These people are the tools of the father of lies. They are wolves in sheep's clothing.

To destroy as far as possible the power of these emissaries for evil, we desire that presidents of stakes and bishops of wards, use no person in any Church activity whatever, whose membership is not formally recorded in the ward in which the person is to be used, or in some ward of the stake in which such person is to work. It is in effect from this date.

Furthermore, these same persons are known sometimes to visit classes in Sunday Schools, in Mutual Improvement Associations, and even in priesthood quorum meetings. Presiding officers of the auxiliary organizations and of priesthood quorums, will, if alert, readily detect these persons. They should immediately report them to the bishop, who will thereupon investigate their standing and membership, with a view to curtailing as to such individuals the privileges of class membership.

We should like presidents of stakes and bishoprics to regard the foregoing requests as mandatory and immediately effective.

Faithfully yours, GEO. ALBERT SMITH, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
