James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Writers who use official Church records and sources expected to write objectively and fairly about the Church, April 19, 1946

1946-April 19-Joseph H. Weston, These Amazing Mormons, c. 1948, Introduction.

Joseph H. Weston was a professional journalist who came into contact with the Mormons for the first time in 1940 during a tour of military duty. He returned to Utah early in 1946 to write a book about the Mormons and applied to the First Presidency for access to official Church sources. The reply of the First Presidency states more than a simple reply to the request of one author.

April 19, 1946

Dear Mr. Weston:

We have your letter of April 9, in which you tell us of your project to write a book which shall deal at least in part with the Latter-day Saints, and in which you indicate you would like some assistance with access to sources which are available to us.

We should like to say to you that we shall be happy to give you such assistance as may be feasible and will be glad to designate someone to whom you may go to help you in connection with your work.

We hope that you will pardon our saying that some untoward experiences which we have had in the past with those who have written books, sometimes scurrilous and defamatory against us, lead us to make bold to set out the following observations, though the tone of your letter indicates that you do not fall within the class whose members have given us the unfortunate experiences in the past. We do hope you will allow us to say that while we do not expect people to come here to make studies and to write their accounts to be propagandists for us nor to violate their own convictions in order to be kind in their statements concerning us, we think we have a right to expect that they should be fair and honest and not distort the truth in order to provide sensation and thus increase the saleability of their product. We have had experiences in the past in going out of our way to be obliging and courteous to writers and to cite them to materials and we have had our confidence greatly abused by their after words, either to facilitate sales or to satisfy the demands of their employers, garbling facts in such a way as to give altogether false impressions.

We are returning herewith the following papers which accompanied your letter. (A long list of enclosures follows.)

(Signed) GEO. ALBERT SMITH, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
