James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Arts of Homemaking, Storehouses, and Canning, May 4, 1937

1937-May 4-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

A natural consequence of the inauguration of the new Church Security Program, with its emphasis on individual and family economic responsibility, were these instructions in the arts of homemaking. The circular also contained instructions on storehouses and canning centers, which are now (1975) a central part of the Church Welfare Program

The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah May 4, 1937 Addressed to all Stake Presidencies

Dear Brethren:

The First Presidency are heartily in accord with the instructions given at the recent Relief Society Convention in which stress was laid on the necessity of giving individual attention to homes where there is an apparent need of teaching mothers in the arts of home-making, such as: sewing, baking, preserving, etc. This is a most laudable activity and one which certainly has our approval and encouragement.

Sewing and Canning Centers This, however, is not the commencement of a policy which would do away with sewing and canning centers where surpluses that would otherwise go to waste and be lost could be taken care of in sewing and canning centers established under the Church Security Plan. These centers are to be continued and should be directed by Relief Society officers cooperating with the Priesthood, utilizing, as far as possible, those who are unemployed in the community and who must thereby be assisted in their efforts to help themselves, and assisted also by Relief Society sisters who are willing to donate their services so that there will be no surplus produce that will go to waste where it is possible to preserve it.

In the work at these centers we urge that you make every effort so to organize and to distribute the work as to avoid burdening unnecessarily the officers of the Relief Society. Proper diligence should be exercised to bring into activity all those who would otherwise be idle and unemployed and other sisters who might reasonably be expected to lighten the burden of those in charge.

Individual Instruction in the Arts of Home-making

In carrying out the counsel of the General Relief Society officers in the teaching of mothers who need schooling in baking, sewing, preserving, etc., it is suggested that in addition to the home training you consider the advisability of bringing such mothers together in groups where under the instruction of a competent Relief Society worker, training can be provided with the least amount of effort on the part of the instructors.

It would seem that such training might well be done in conjunction with the operation of canning and sewing centers above mentioned, where sisters are called to work not only with the object in view of getting work receipts or to donate voluntarily their services, but to receive instruction in these essential arts.

Storage and Distribution from Storehouses

Instructions given recently by some bishops have been interpreted to encourage storage and distribution from ward storehouses rather than through stake or regional storehouses that have already been or that may be established.

Particularly in wards and stakes in congested areas, centralization of storage and distribution should be encouraged whenever possible to avoid a duplication of overhead expense, to promote efficiency of operation and to permit distribution to needy families at the lowest possible cost.

No ward storehouses should be established except in localities far removed from a central storehouse and where it is thought advisable by the Stake Presidency to keep emergency supplies on hand in the ward. Surpluses not needed in such rural wards should, upon advice from the Stake Security Committee, be stored at some storehouse provided for that purpose within the stake or the region.

Appreciation and Encouragement to Continue Production

May we take this opportunity to express our appreciation and thanks for the commendable efforts of the past year and for the remarkable results that have come therefrom, and may we urge you to every effort this year to the limit of your possibilities to produce those commodities which are practicable in your particular locality as well as to utilize the surpluses or contributions that may be given to the Church Security Plan from individual members of your community.

We must not relinquish our efforts at production and conservation until need and want shall have been entirely dissipated throughout the Church and until we have provided wisely toward future needs.

Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
