James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Universal compulsory military service, June 28, 1946

1946-June 28-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

As indicated in the notes to the statement of the First Presidency of December 14, 1945, on the subject of universal compulsory military training, to which the First Presidency was opposed, this letter was written because the First Presidency had been informed that Bishops and Stake Presidents in states other than Utah (the statement of December 14, 1945, had been sent to Utah's congressional delegation) were concerned as to whether ward and stake leaders should initiate petitions or other communications with "their representatives in Congress."

June 28, 1946 Presidents of Stakes

Dear Brethren:

So far as we understand the situation, there seems still to be an intention upon the part of certain national groups to impose universal compulsory military training upon the people of the United States. As you probably know, the First Presidency issued a statement under date of December 14, 1945 covering this matter. This statement has received approving commendation from a number of sources, and we believe it fairly covers the main grounds of objection which exist against universal compulsory military training.

Some stake presidents have felt that action should be taken upon the part of their stake organizations, and in some cases on the part of ward organizations, expressing disapproval of universal compulsory military training, the action taken in such cases to be in the form of petitions or other communications to their representatives in Congress. While we are not asking ward and stake authorities to take such action as this on this matter, nevertheless we have no objections to their so doing; and we feel that if such action is taken, it should be done in a suitable way and in as effective a manner as possible.

We therefore suggest that inasmuch as frequently there is not the time at the disposal of the brethren concerned to work out a well-rounded statement, and since further it is desirable, that so far as possible the representations on the part of Church organizations should be as nearly uniform as possible, any ward or stake desiring to express themselves on the question might appropriately do so by formally endorsing the statement made by the First Presidency on this matter, and that any communication sent by the ward or stake to the Congressman or Senator involved might appropriately include a copy of the First Presidency's statement as indicating the views of the voters of the ward or stake involved.

Faithfully yours, GEO. ALBERT SMITH, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
