James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Organization of elders quorums in missions, June 20, 1947

1947-June 20-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

In the April 2, 1947, meeting of the General Authorities of the Church with Mission Presidents, "Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Council of the Twelve made a few remarks concerning the organization of elders quorums in the missions. This question was discussed by those present and in many of the larger missions where there were sufficient number of elders to organize an elders quorum, it was felt that it would be to the advantage of all elders to have a quorum organized within the mission. Brother Kimball assured the mission presidents that further research would be made on the question and that they would be advised as to the final decision concerning this matter." This letter of the First Presidency gives that decision.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, utah June 20, 1947 To Presidents of Missions

Dear Brethren:

You will recall that in the past consideration has been given to the feasibility of organizing Priesthood quorums within the missions.

It is our feeling that stronger Priesthood organization and a well correlated Priesthood activity would be of benefit to the missions and the cause of the Church.

This letter does not presuppose immediate quorum organization in all of the missions, but is your notice that as conditions may warrant possible quorum organization may be studied and perhaps effected.

In your consideration of this important matter, it should be kept in mind that there will be no particular advantage in quorum organization where conditions do not warrant or permit of quorum function. In other words, before an Elders quorum be organized, there should be sufficient number of Elders within a close proximity to comprise a quorum, or at least a majority (49 members) of a quorum, with the prospects favorable to continued growth and quorum function.

The details incident to Priesthood quorum organization and supervision with the missions, under the direction of the General Priesthood Committee, will be worked out and further appropriate notice given. In no case, however, is a quorum organization to be undertaken without specific authorization in each instance from the First Presidency of the Church.

We think that this is an appropriate time for a careful study of Priesthood matters within each mission, and suggest that such study be made promptly.

Sincerely your brethren, GEO. ALBERT SMITH, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY First Presidency.
