James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

All Church building operations postponed, May 21, 1948

1948-May-21 Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

May 21, 1948 To Presidents of Stakes and Presidents of Missions

Dear Brethren:

The high cost of building materials and building construction has led the brethren immediately in charge of Church building operations and ourselves carefully to consider the matter of Church building operations in general, and particularly in the wards, branches and stakes where the people must furnish their proportionate share of construction costs.

As a result of our study we have reached the conclusion, because of the present excessive costs, that it would be wise to postpone all building operations, either of construction or repair, subject to the exceptions noted below.

Building costs have practically trebled in the last few years. The present building burden upon the people is almost backbreaking where construction work is now in progress. Furthermore, there is here and there a spirit of extravagance that often greatly adds to the increased cost of normal building.

In view of these considerations we urgently recommend that no further building or extensive repairs be undertaken at this time, except (1) where the repairs or construction have already begun (and then it should be carried forward as economically as possible, and the completion delayed where practicable, consistent with use), or (2) where there is a positive need, either as to repair or construction, as for example where (a) the repair is necessary to save the building, or (b) the ward or branch is actually without a meeting place.

Where halls or other buildings are now in use and are still available, the wiser course would be to continue to use them until the situation changes.

We urgently request your cooperation in carrying forward this program, not only to the immediate relief of our people from great burdens, but also to the helping to stay the rising tide of inflation which can hardly progress much further without a serious hazard of economic disaster.

Sincerely yours, GEO. ALBERT SMITH, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
