James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Working agreement between L.D.S. Church and Selective Service on calling L.D.S. missionaries, November 18, 1948

1948-November 18-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Notification of a working agreement reached between the First Presidency of the Church and Colonel Oscar W. Gray of the Selective Service relative to young men of draft age who are or may he called for missionary service by the Church.

November 18, 1948 To All Stake and Mission Presidencies

Dear Brethren:

We have just held a meeting with Colonel Oscar W. Gray of the Selective Service relative to young men of draft age who are and may be called for missionary service. The following working agreement was reached:

First: That all young men who have already received their "Notice of Acceptability" from their local selective service draft boards and have been classified 1A or 1AP will not be recommended by the bishops of the Church for missionary service. If, however, a young man has received his "Notice of Acceptability" and does not receive his "Notice of Induction" within five months after being classified 1A or 1AP, he may be recommended by his bishop for missionary service. All young men of draft age may be recommended for missionary service if they have received any other classification than 1A or 1AP, providing, of course, that they are willing and worthy and meet all standards of missionary service.

Second: All young men of draft age who have already received their missionary calls and who are waiting to report to the Mission Home will be considered under the old rule that if "Notice of Induction" is received before entrance into the Mission Home, that the missionary is to be excused from missionary service. If "Notice of Induction" is not received before entrance into Mission Home, then the missionary is deferred from the draft until his mission is terminated." We recommend that if there are any missionaries now called who receive their "Notice of Acceptability" a reasonable time before they are to report to the Mission Home and they have not already planned their farewells and made such arrangements to go on missions that reasonable changes can be made, that they should notify the Missionary Committee and they will be excused from missionary service and make themselves available to their local draft boards and await their "Notice of Induction." We consider a reasonable time to be ten days. We are most anxious to cooperate with the Selective Service, and we believe the above procedure will avoid border-line cases and thus avoid embarrassment to the missionary and will render assistance to the Selective Service.

Will you give this matter your careful attention and see that all bishops in the stake over which you preside are fully notified immediately. The above procedure becomes effective December 1, 1948.

With best wishes, we are Sincerely your brethren, GEO. ALBERT SMITH, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
