James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Church Security Program, September 30, 1937

1937-September 30 Relief Society Magazine 24:737, November, 1937.

Commendation to the Relief Society for the way they were meeting their assignments in the new Church Security Program.

MESSAGE FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

World-wide publicity has been given to the Church Security Program, but practically all has been complimentary and laudatory.

There is considerable hesitancy and apathy on the part of some Ward workers to meet the problems squarely and to assist distressed families towards the goal of permanent independence. Upon the Relief Society Presidents rests the responsibility for searching out the needy and under the direction of the Bishop, to administer to the needs of unfortunate families.

We appeal to the Relief Society officers of each Ward to work in the closest of harmony with the brethren of the Priesthood, first to see to it that every needy person within the Ward is supplied from the commodities produced within the Ward for that purpose or from the surpluses that may be had by the Church generally or from mercantile establishments as may be necessary, and, second, to see to it that opportunities are provided for such persons assisted to work on some project within the Ward or the Stake so as to give those who are to be assisted a feeling of independence and a desire to be self-sustaining.

To the great Relief Society organization as a whole we extend our thanks and appreciation for your efforts in the Church Security Program in providing food, clothing, bedding, and other necessities. We compliment you and bless you for your efforts, but remind you of the greater need of teamwork within each Ward that the greater and more permanent objective of this program might be realized, namely: That each individual family shall be helped in its efforts to help itself. HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. McKAY, September 30, 1937. First Presidency.
