James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Christmas Message, December 9, 1937

1937-December 9-Improvement Era 41:6-7, January, 1938.

The annual Christmas message of the First Presidency.

With satisfaction and thanksgiving for achievements of the past year, we join the Christian world in another Yuletide celebration. In doing so, however, we express the sincere hope that with commemoration of Christ's birth there be connoted, as never before, the significance of the life and teachings of the Man of Galilee.

"Behold the man!" said Pontius Pilate, Roman governor of Judea, as Jesus, platted with a crown of thorns and mockingly bedecked with a purple robe, stood before the mob who cried, "Crucify him, crucify him!"

Blinded by ignorance, bigotry, and jealousy, the crowd saw in the condemned man only a malefactor, a violator of traditional law, a blasphemer; one whom they madly and unjustly condemned to the cross. Only a comparatively small group of men and women beheld Him as He really is-the Son of God, the Redeemer of mankind!

For nineteen centuries Christ's birth has been celebrated by nations that call themselves Christian. Annually the pealing of bells, the harmony of music, and the declaration of voices have united in heralding anew the angelic message "on earth peace, good will toward men."

However, as on the occasion of that historic trial, so through the ages, men have beheld Him from different viewpoints. Some, who reject Him as venomously as did the rabble, see in Him and His disciples "inventors of a Christian moral system that has undermined and sapped the vigor of the modern European world." Others with clearer insight, begotten by experience, behold Him as the originator of a system that "promotes industry, honesty, truth, purity, and kindness; that upholds law, favors liberty, is essential to it, and would unite men in one great brotherhood."

Many behold Him as the "one perfect character-the fearless personality of history," but deny His divinity.

Millions accept Him as the great Teacher, whose teachings, however, are not applicable to modern social conditions. A few O how few!-of the approximately 2,000,000,000 inhabitants of the globe, accept Him for what He really is-"the Only Begotten of the Father; who came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness."

True, the present age is entirely different from that in which Jesus lived. People among whom He associated could not even imagine the many conditions, problems, and perplexities of this modern world. Science has brought to light discoveries scarcely ever before dreamed of. The automobile, the radio, the airplane practically annihilate time and distance, and make nations on opposite sides of the globe next-door neighbors. Jesus' message and personality reached only groups around the shores of Galilee, but today even an ordinary voice may be heard by millions! Intercommunication is almost instant, and transportation barriers are practically surmounted. A letter posted in Honolulu on Monday noon is read in Salt Lake City the following Wednesday morning.

Yet, notwithstanding all these achievements, dissatisfaction with existing social and political conditions is becoming more and more manifest. Mistrust and misunderstanding between capital and labor continually bring distress and destruction of property. The liquor evil is still an unsolved problem. Wars for expansion in which the innocent are mutilated and killed are carried on today as in the days of barbarism. Arbitration as a means of settling international questions is even now stifled by outbursts of ancient brute force. The question of taxation, the production and proper distribution of the products of the soil and of the factory are perplexing the wisest minds. Men need a beacon light to guide them as they grope in the midst of these perplexities.

That light is He whose birth the Christian world is celebrating at this Yuletide. It is He who in the bloom of perfect manhood, and with the inspiration of divinity said, "I am come that ye might have life, and that ye might have it more abundantly."

Men say His teachings are not applicable to modern-day conditions. How do they know, since true Christianity has never been actually tested by any nation or nations?

Fundamental in all Christ's teachings was the crime of wrong thinking. He condemned avarice, enmity, and jealousy in the mind almost as vehemently as He did the results that avarice, enmity, and jealousy produce. Can anyone in this modern world truthfully gainsay the practicability of such teaching? Equally applicable to present conditions are His teachings regarding the value and sacredness of human life, the virtue of forgiveness, the necessity of fair dealing, the crime of hypocrisy, the sin of covetousness, the saving power of love, universal brotherhood, the immortality of man, and many other vital principles.

Today civilized nations are sitting on a mountain of explosives, accumulated in defiance of Christ's teachings. Let the heat of hatred, suspicion, and greed become a little more intense and there will be such an international explosion as will greatly retard if not forcibly drive from the midst of mankind the hoped-for peace heralded by the heavenly hosts when the Son of Man was born. The good will that was to usher in universal brotherhood will be replaced by envy, greed, and hate with resultant misery and death.

To members of the Church throughout the world, and to peace-lovers everywhere, we say, behold in this Man of Galilee not merely a great Teacher, not merely a peerless Leader, but the Prince of Peace, the Author of Salvation, here and now, literally and truly the Savior of the World!

Most heartily we commend faithful Latter-day Saints for their manifestations of devotion to Christ's principles during the past year, and for their outstanding achievements in Church projects instituted for the benefit of our fellow men.

Chief among these is the Church Security Plan, which calls for unselfish devotion by every member, and for much time, energy, and leadership especially on the part of general, regional, and stake committees. The first and immediate objective has been achieved-that of supplying sufficient food, clothing, and shelter for every needy person during the winter months. In response to the appeal of the leaders of the Church, two hundred twenty-one regional and stake storehouses have been established in which are stored thousands of pounds of foodstuffs, articles of clothing, bedding, etc., ready for proper distribution under the direction of ward bishoprics and Relief Society sisters.

But giving something for nothing is contrary to the fundamental teachings of the Church. The real purpose of the Church Security Plan is to assist each individual to secure independence to help make him self-supporting, to replace idleness with thrift and productivity. Here again Jesus' teachings are applicable. His plan was to make the individual right, and then the group of many such individuals, or society, will be right. Make the individual contented, and social unrest with its attendant evils will be greatly minimized.

To accomplish these things may require many years, but what has already been achieved by cooperative effort of the people is most encouraging. God bless you for your united response, and your willing service as evidenced in your contribution of time, energy, and means!

And now may your efforts directed through the ecclesiastical groupings, the quorums, and the auxiliaries, carry Christmas cheer to every person in your communities; and when that shall have been done, let it not be said that-

We ring the bells and we raise the strain, We hang up garlands everywhere And bid the tapers twinkle fair, And feast and frolic-and then we go Back to the same old lives again.

But rather let us resolve to behold in His true light the only Man through whose name and teachings the world can find "on earth peace, good will toward men." HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency. Salt Lake City, Utah, December 9, 1937.
