James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Instructions on calling of missionaries, September 27, 1950

1950-September 27-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Instructions governing the calling of missionaries into service of the Church.

September 27, 1950 To Stake and Mission Presidents and Ward Bishops:

Dear Brethren,

We wish to call to your attention the following information in connection with the calling of missionaries:

Age: Young men should be twenty years of age before they depart for their missions unless they have had two years of college or military service, in which event the age requirement is waived. Young women should be twenty-three before they are recommended for missionary service. However, because of special requests from mission presidents for more experienced help, the age limit has temporarily been lowered to twenty-one.

Selective Service: Inasmuch as young men called for the ministerial service must make extensive preparations such as securing permission to enter countries, obtaining passports and visas, notifying employers, arranging farewell testimonials, securing space on steamships, and planning well in advance their educational programs the following arrangement has been worked out with the officials of Selective Service:

If young men of draft age have received their Certificate of Acceptability they should not be recommended for missionary service. If young men who have been called by the Church to serve as missionaries receive their Certificate of Acceptability ten days before they enter the Mission Home, the Church will excuse these young men from ministerial service. If, however, the Certificate of Acceptability is not received ten days before entrance into the Mission Home is scheduled, the young men will be deferred from military service for the duration of their mission terms. This plan will avoid borderline cases. If a young man who has received his Certificate of Acceptability be not inducted within a period of five months, he may be recommended for ministerial service.

We urge Bishops to cooperate in every way with the members of the Selective Service who in turn will cooperate with the Bishops, that the needs and well being of all concerned will be best served. At the conclusion of a missionary's mission he will be expected to report to his draft board within five days after he returns home, and failure to do this makes him delinquent and subject to immediate induction.

Military Reserves: Young men holding commissions in any of the military reserves should not be recommended for missionary service. Young men who are members of the enlisted reserves should first discuss with their commanding officers the possibility of their being released and secure permission to be released before they are recommended for missionary service. Such young men now serving as ministers for the Church already in the mission field have been deferred from military service for the duration of their mission terms and will be expected to report to their reserve units within five days after their return home.

National Guards: Young men holding commissions in the National Guard and belonging to units that have been activated should not be recommended for missionary service. Young men who are members of the National Guard, but on the inactive listing, should first discuss with their commanding officers the possibility of their being discharged and permission assured before they are recommended for ministerial service.

We believe the foregoing will be helpful to you in the selection of young men and women to assist in carrying forward the program of the Church.

With best wishes we are Sincerely your brethren, GEO. ALBERT SMITH, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
