James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Proper wearing of temple garments by men in military service, October 2, 1950

1950-October 2-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The renewed calling of men into military service for the Korean War rendered it desirable, on the part of the First Presidency, to reaffirm certain observations in the matter of wearing the temple garment.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah October 2, 1950 To Presidents of Stakes and Bishops of Wards

Dear Brethren:

The renewed calling of men into military training renders it desirable to reaffirm certain observations heretofore made during the last World War in the matter of wearing the temple garment.

Where military regulations require the wearing of two-piece underwear, such underwear should be properly marked, as if the articles were of the normal pattern. If circumstances are such that different underwear may be turned back to the wearer from that which he sends to the laundry, then the marks should be placed on small pieces of cloth and sewed upon the underwear while being worn, then removed when the underwear is sent to the laundry, and resewed upon the underwear returned.

The wearing of the normal garment should be resumed at the earliest possible moment.

A certain amount of curiosity and light comment may be frequently expected, wherever, for one cause or another, the garments are brought into view, but this is not the "hindering" of which the Lord spoke as excusing obedience.

The blessings flowing from the observance of covenants are sufficiently great to recompense for all mere inconveniences.

The wearing of the garment is the subject of direct covenant between the Lord and the covenant maker, who must determine to what extent he will keep his covenants. To break our covenants is to lose the protection and blessings promised from obedience thereto.

Faithfully yours, GEO. ALBERT SMITH, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
