James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Church Improvement and Beautification Program, February, 1938

1938-February-Improvement Era 41:103, February, 1938.

Unemployment was one of the main problems which called for the inauguration of the Church Security Program. With a reservoir of idle laborers, much could be done to beautify Church buildings, grounds, and the communities. The Church Improvement and Beautification Committee was charged with this responsibility. Stake and Ward improvement and Beautification Committees were also appointed.

The same appeal to members of the Church to beautify Church buildings, homes and communities was made by President Spencer W. Kimball in his keynote address in the October 1974 General Conference of the Church, and repeated in the April 1975 Conference.

The aim of the Church through the Improvement and Beautification Committee, is to encourage throughout the Church the "harnessing" of labor that would otherwise go idle, in the repair and the beautification of Church buildings. Nothing is more embarrassing to the Church than to have dilapidated, tumble-down churches, when at the same time able-bodied men and women in the ward would be delighted to improve them.

Stake presidents, investigate the situation in each ward; appoint a competent committee to give the work intelligent and immediate direction in your stake.

Bishops, investigate! See what can be done! Call in your Ward Church Security Committee, which consists of a member of the ward bishopric as chairman, chairman of the welfare committee of High Priests, Seventies and Elders quorums, leader of adult Aaronic Priesthood class, ward Relief Society president, and ward work directors.

Now, Bishops, add to this committee representatives from the Sunday School, Young Men's Mutual, Young Women's Mutual, and Primary. Make a careful survey. Decide what you are going to do and divide the work. In some small wards a committee of this size may be too large and cumbersome. In this event, Bishops, use your best judgment. Sometime you will find a worthy man or woman in your ward who has a hobby of raising flowers, someone who is apt at interior repair or decoration. Put responsibility on them and let them carry it through. One of the most outstanding examples of leadership in our Church has been shown by a member of the Relief Society, whom the Bishop chose to carry the responsibility. Our women have leadership! If a bishop is handicapped in a ward for want of a person who is adapted for this type of work, feel free to call on the president of the stake for assistance and suggestions. Some of the colleges and universities of our state have special courses in landscaping and the beautification of grounds. The professors and teachers in these schools will assist us if we will but contact them. A little "touch" by someone schooled in this work is sometimes the difference between harmony and discord in the surroundings.

Several members of the Beautification Committee are experts in this line of work and are delighted to be of assistance when requested.

Let us wake up to the opportunity before us.

The appearance of Church and community buildings and homes mirrors the pride and industry of a people. We urge that Latter-day Saints become conscious of the need for improvement and beautification to properly reflect to the observer the ideals and high standards of our people. Such a program will stimulate industry and independence and improve the appearance and utility of Church edifices and individual homes. Every stake president and every bishop should be responsible for the activity of each officer and member in this program. HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
