James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Restrictions on calling missionaries due to obligations for military service, January 30, 1951

1951-January 30-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

January 30, 1951 To Presidents of Stakes and Bishops of Wards

Dear Brethren:

We recently sent to Stake Presidents a telegram reading as follows:

"Due to National Emergency and a recent understanding between State Directors of Selective Service will you please instruct Bishops not to recommend young men for ministerial service who have not first secured clearance in writing from local draft boards. This applies also to missionaries called but not in Missionary Home."

We now ask you not to make recommendations for the calling of young men for missions who are classified as I-A-physically fit, I-D-military student, I-A-P-college student deferred until June 1951, II-A-civilian deferment, II-C-agricultural deferent, III-A-dependents, or who have not received notice of classification and who are not otherwise expressly exempt from call under the draft. This instruction to be operative as of January 31, 1951. In all instances where exemptions are claimed, the young man recommended must produce for the inspection of the member of the General Authorities conducting the interview a classification card showing his status under the Selective Service.

You are also requested to inform young men within the above mentioned designations who have heretofore received calls for missions to enter the missionary home subsequent to January 22, 1951, that the calls so issued to them are withdrawn and that they will not be expected to come to the missionary home with any companies called for a time later than January 22, above mentioned. This however shall not apply to those registrants who have received missionary calls and have filed with the mission secretary written clearance from their draft boards prior to January 31.

You will observe that under these instructions young men within the designations mentioned will not solicit clearance from their draft boards as mentioned in our previous telegram since no further missionary calls will he issued to them during the period for which these instructions shall be operative.

With respect to the young men subject to the draft who are in the missionary home with the company entered January 22, 1951, you are advised that the instructions in the telegram above quoted will be applicable and that they will be permitted to leave for their missions only upon clearance from their draft boards. Some modifications of the usual procedure in the missionary home have been made to permit those who have not been cleared to make further effort to obtain clearances from their boards.

These instructions will govern for the present and until further notice from us.

Sincerely your brethren, GEO. ALBERT SMITH, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.

P.S. The assignment of missionaries eligible under the foregoing to enter the missionary home February 5 has been postponed until February 19, 1951.

To Stake Presidents and Bishops in the State of Utah only:

Selective Service officials in the State of Utah are contacting draft boards within the state to clarify some uncertainties and possible misunderstandings arising out of previous negotiations and directives which clarification may modify the decisions of some draft boards in acting upon individual applications for clearance.
