James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

L.D.S. Girls Program, February 19, 1951

1951-February 19-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The L.D.S. Girls Program to receive the support of both the Aaronic Priesthood and the YWMIA.

February 19, 1951 To the Bishoprics of the Church

Dear Brethren:

It is unanimously recommended by the Presiding Bishopric, the Presidency of the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association, and the Advisors to the General Mutual Improvement Board that the close cooperation of the Bishoprics of Wards, the Sunday School and the Mutual Improvement Association leaders of the Girls' Program be continued as heretofore, even though the Girls' Program is now placed under the direct supervision of the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association.

In order to make more effective the Girls' program, as well as the Aaronic Priesthood, including that of the Adult Aaronic Priesthood, it seems not only advisable but essential that the Bishopric of each Ward hold at least two meetings each month-one with the officers and teachers of the Aaronic Priesthood, and another with the officers and teachers of the girls of corresponding age. We are informed that the meeting with the Aaronic Priesthood is already being held.

We now recommend that the Bishopric of each Ward arrange to hold a monthly meeting with the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association Presidency, and attendance secretary, Sunday School secretary, and the class leaders of the Bee Hive, Mia Maid and Junior Cleaner groups. The Sunday School Superintendency and class leaders of these groups in Sunday School might also be invited to attend, especially on specific occasions when their advice and counsel will be helpful.

The Bishopric of the Ward should aim to set the meeting at an hour most convenient to the majority expected to be in attendance. The day suggested by the Presidency of the Young Woman's Mutual Improvement Association is the fourth Sunday in each month. Reports of the six months ending December, 1950, inclusive, indicate an excellent record made by the girls between the ages twelve to nineteen in their attendance at Sacrament meeting, at Sunday School, at the Mutual Improvement Association, and in other Church activity. We commend these young women and their officers and teachers for their desires to maintain the ideals and standards of the Church, knowing full well that as they continue thus to conduct their lives that joy and peace will be their ultimate reward.

We assure you members of Bishoprics that in winning the confidence of the young men and women of your wards, in leading them to participate in Church activities and duties, you are exercising one of the most important functions of your presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood.

May the Lord bless you and inspire you in this leadership.

Sincerely yours, GEO. ALBERT SMITH, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency. 1975
