James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Young People Away from Home, February 1938

1938-February-Improvement Era 41:70, February, 1938.

A MESSAGE FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY Concerning the Welfare of Young People Leaving Home For Study or Employment

To all Church Members:

Many of our young people are leaving the intermountain country and going away to distant and generally to larger communities, for the purpose of further study or employment. In too many cases the parents and the ward bishoprics fail to take the opportunity to advise these young people to associate themselves promptly and actively with the ward or branch in the place where they expect to locate. The spiritual welfare and the temporal safety of all young people are always greatly enhanced by making themselves acquainted with the bishopric or branch presidency, giving them their addresses, and keeping in close touch with these officers. Some sad stories could be told as a result of the failure of young Church members to seek the counsel of Church officers in localities where they are strangers, and to take active part in Church activities.

We take this occasion, therefore, earnestly to advise all families having sons or daughters who are away from home for study or employment, and all ward bishoprics who know of such young people, to write these young people promptly and impress upon them the importance of affiliating themselves actively with the Church organization in those localities; and of keeping closely in touch with the Church officers, who can give them safe counsel and encouragement.

Furthermore, where the bishoprics know of such young people in any such localities, they are urged to write to the ward bishoprics or branch presidents in the cities where these young people have gone, giving to these officers the names and, if possible, the addresses of the young people and encouraging the officers to meek the young people out and do what they can for them.

Realizing that the spiritual progress of all the young men and women in the Church is of the greatest concern and value to all of us, we remain, with cordial wishes, Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
