James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Deseret Industries, August 10, 1938

1938-August 11-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Deseret Industries, inaugurated in the Salt Lake Region of the Church Welfare Plan, was by this letter recommended and expanded to a Church-wide program, wherever applicable.

The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah August 11, 1938

Dear Brother:

In a further effort to provide opportunities for individuals to become self-sustaining, there has been organized in the Salt Lake Region of the Church Welfare Plan a project to be known as Deseret Industries.

This project may roughly be described as essentially a salvaging project in which useable materials such as clothing, papers, magazines, articles of furniture, electrical fixtures, metal, glass ware, etc. are solicited from each home-owner in our communities within the Salt Lake Region. This organization will make periodic collections of these materials from homes within the Region, and employ (at a building located at 342 West Second South, Salt Lake City) men and women workers to sort, process, and repair the articles collected for sale and distribution among those who desire to obtain useable articles thus provided at a minimum cost. It is the intent that first consideration on this project will be given to brethren and sisters who might find it difficult to qualify for employment in private industry.

We see great promise for this project if Stake and Ward workers will cooperate fully in stimulating an interest on the part of every homeowner within each Ward, member and non-member, to such an extent that they will be willing to give liberally of those articles that might have value in the Deseret Industries but of little value to the present owner. We desire that this letter be read in your Sacrament Meeting on August 14, 1938, and that you give opportunity for a representative of your Stake or Ward Welfare Committee, or other designated person, to explain fully this proposed activity and that you do your utmost to give encouragement and enthusiastic support to this meritorious movement.

Sincerely yours, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
