James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Temple Recommends, October 17, 1938

1938-October 17-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This letter set forth a new ruling or regulation on the issuance of temple recommends to wives whose husbands were either not members of the L.D.S. Church, or who had not and were not taking the opportunity to go to the temple for their endowments.

The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah October 17, 1938 To President of Stakes and Presidents of Missions

Dear Brethren:

Some unfortunate and untoward incidents following the giving of endowments to wives of Church members who have not been through the temple, and to the wives of non-members, have brought this matter again in review by the Council of the First Presidency and the Twelve. After fully considering the whole matter the following decision has been reached:

Hereafter you will not give a recommend, under any circumstances, to a wife whose husband is not a member of the Church. You may use your own good judgment and wisdom in explaining to those who apply that our experience has shown that the results of giving endowments to women whose husbands are not members of the Church have led to regrettable and unfortunate conditions, which frequently have made most difficult the lives of the women receiving their endowments. You will give recommends to wives of members of the Church who have not had their endowments only if the husband is absolutely willing that the endowment should be given to his wife. You will therefore be expected personally to interview the husband in order to assure yourself that he has no objection whatever, and, in addition, he must express his willingness and consent in writing. This written consent must be attached to the recommend itself, which must be signed by the Bishop of the Ward and the President of the Stake, or, in the case of people living in the missions, by the President of the Branch and the President of the Mission. Unless these requirements are fully complied with, it will not be possible for the woman so recommended to go into the Temple.

In order to avoid all embarrassment, we must ask you to carry out these instructions explicitly.

Faithfully yours, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.

P.S. Please convey this message immediately to your Bishops and Branch Presidents.
