James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Greeting and Prayer for a War-Torn World, December, 1939

1939-December-Improvement Era 43:9, January, 1940; also draft copy, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.

This message, drafted by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., was an invocation and prayer for a war-torn world.

GREETING FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

We send to the Saints in all the earth our greetings and blessings.

We call upon the peoples of the world to follow the example and the teachings of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.

We invoke upon all in war-ridden countries the spirit of love, forbearance, and forgiveness, for the Master speaking on the Mount declared:

"For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you:

"But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses."

We pray the Lord to heal all those who are stricken with disease and not appointed unto death. May He soften the pain of the wounded and bring to them health and strength.

We ask Him to bless all those who are bereft-the lonely orphan, the sorrowing widow, the heart-wrung mother.

May the hungry be fed; the cold, warmed; and the naked, clothed.

May anger and hate pass from the hearts of men, and peace and love be enthroned instead.

May all men who scheme and plot for unholy dominion and power be speedily brought low in the dust of contrite humility and dire abasement.

May He frustrate the designs of the wicked and bring to naught their plottings.

May the spirit of repentance fill the hearts of all men, for none is free from error.

May He soon bring to an end the war now waging; may that day soon come when men shall have paid the price of their avarice, greed, and ambition, and the earth cease to moan and suffer for the iniquities of her children.

May His spirit of peace clothe the earth as with a mantle, that war may not longer find an abiding place thereon.

May He bring to pass the time when "righteousness shall cover the earth as the waters cover the mighty deep," when "every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ."

May there come to every man that walks the earth the testimony that was Martha's. Said Jesus:

"I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:

"And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this?

"She saith unto him, Yea Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world."

For Jesus said in the Garden:

"This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
