James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

America's Divine Destiny, June 9, 1940

1940-June 9-Deseret News, Church Section, June 22, 1940, pp. 1, 3, 6-7.

President Heber J. Grant was ill. On the advice of his physicians he did not attend the June MIA Conference where these messages of the First Presidency were delivered. President David O. McKay, second counselor, read the brief message from President Grant and President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., delivered the main message.

These messages should be read in light of the following historical circumstances:

Under these circumstances the messages, especially that delivered by President Clark, take on added significance.

FIRST PRESIDENCY MESSAGE-JUNE CONFERENCE

The following message by President Heber J. Grant was read by President David O McKay at the June Conference session under the direction of the First Presidency, Sunday afternoon, June 9, 1940.

It is a real pleasure to me, and my heart is full of gratitude for having that pleasure, to sit here and see this vast audience.

As you have been informed, I had hoped at least to attend on Friday and Saturday the morning meetings of the Mutuals and the Primary for an hour or more each, but my doctor and associates thought it would be unwise for me to do so

I am grateful beyond expression to the latter-day Saints for their faith and their prayers in my behalf during my recent sickness. I feel sure that only through the blessings of the Lord and your faith and prayers am I permitted to be with you today.

The Saints have my constant faith and prayers that peace, prosperity and happiness may be their portion, and I pray with all the earnestness of my heart that our country may not get into the war. There is nothing so devastating, so terrible and so inhuman as war. I pray, and I am sure all of you do, that God will overrule this war and all others for the good of humanity.

For the prosperity of the Saints and the success that is attending their labors I am grateful beyond expression. My love and blessings go out not only to the Saints but to all the honest the world over, and I pray that the wicked may see the error of their ways and repent.

AMERICA'S DIVINE DESTINY

The following address by President J Reuben Clark, Jr., was delivered at the closing session of the forty-fifth annual M.I.A. Conference, Sunday, June 9, 1940.

My brethren and sisters of this great audience-the Mutual Improvement workers of the Church: What I shall say tonight has been prepared with a thought in my heart that it might be of use to you in guiding the youth of Zion.

I am grateful to Sister Pardoe for her eloquent reading of the scriptures which lie behind what I shall say. With her permission I shall repeat some of them in the course of my address for emphasis and to give point.

I am grateful, as always, for this great Choir of ours with their beautiful music. I pray that what I am to say will not be out of harmony with the spirit they have given us.

I speak tonight to the youth of the Church.

The Subject

Out of the ancient past has come to us the wisdom which is to lead you in your work for the next year:

"My son, keep thy father's commandment, and forsake not the law of thy mother." (Prov. 6:20.)

Your presiding officers have asked me to say something to you about that particular aspect of these words of wisdom which touches us in our association together as a civil government.

While the scripture text itself comes from ancient Israel and Palestine, yet it has a deep and vital meaning to and for us of this land-the land of Zion, the American hemisphere. (DHC 6:318.)

The Law of the Hemisphere From the very beginning of man's life on earth, there have been commandments for our fathers and laws for our mothers that were basic to the peace, prosperity, happiness, and indeed existence, of those who possess the Americas.

One of the great motifs running through the whole Nephitic and Jareditic records is that this land of ours "is a land which is choice above all other lands," consecrated to the blessing of those dwelling thereon while they shall live righteously, but plagued with a curse for them when they shall become ripened in iniquity. This is the law by which God measures His bounties and metes out His punishments to the peoples dwelling in this land.

A first great consecration for blessing came when God planted hereon the Garden of Eden, and placed therein our first parents. The primal curse came to it when 'Adam having fallen that man might be,' (2 Ne. 2:25), God said to him: " cursed shall be the ground for thy sake." (Moses 4:23.)

A Mighty Land

This has always been a mighty land in God's plan. It was in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman that Adam, prior to his death, called the great high priests together and there bestowed upon them his last blessing. The Lord appearing there, his posterity proclaimed Adam to be Michael, the Prince, the Archangel. (D&C 107:53, 54.) It is to that same spot that Adam, as the Ancient of Days, shall come to visit his people (D&C 116), when judgment shall be set and the books opened. (Dan. 7:9 ff; Rev. 20:4.)

It is here on this land that the New Jerusalem shall be built "unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph"-ourselves and those others, the literal descendants of Lehi. (Eth. 13:5 ff; 1 Ne. 14:1, 2; 2 Ne. 10:18.) And finally, it is here on this hemisphere that Zion shall be built. (Tenth Article of Faith.) It is this fact and purpose, the building of Zion on this hemisphere, which is Zion, which seem to be the dominant elements in all of God's dealings with them who possess this land, for Isaiah, speaking more than 2,500 years ago, declared that "out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:3.)

America's Destiny

Thus America's ultimate God-given destiny, planned by the Creator and testified by ancient and modern prophecy and revelation, is that out of her shall go forth the law.

Time and time again, God has brought to this land His choicest seed and has tried to raise up from them a people that would worship Him and would not depart from the ways of His righteousness-a people that would work towards this God-given destiny. For thousands of years Satan has impeded this purpose. But God's plan will finally prevail.

After the Flood and "the waters had receded from off the face of this land," the Lord declared through His prophet His dedication that this had become a "choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of the Lord; wherefore the Lord would have that all men should serve Him who dwell upon the face thereof." (Eth. 13:2.)

The Jareditic Civilization

The first attempt to set up a righteous people after the Flood, came when, at Babel (Om. 22), the Lord "swore in His wrath that they should be scattered upon all the face of the earth," (Eth. 1:33), and Jared and his brother, he to whom the Lord said, "for never has man believed in me as thou hast," (Eth. 3:15), were guided to these shores. They came with a blessing and an overhanging judgment. The promised blessing was this:

The Blessing

"Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus ChristÂ�. " (Eth. 2:12.)

The overhanging judgment was this:

The Judgment

"Wherefore, he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God. And it is not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land, that they are swept off." (Eth. 2:10.)

From that day until now, the price of the promised blessing has always been, and will ever be, the serving of Jesus Christ, the God of this land. There is no other way to get the blessing nor to escape the judgment. This fact must never be forgotten.

While Jared and his brother were among them, their families and posterity lived for the promised blessings. The land was tamed, the herds and flocks multiplied, the earth yielded its riches, the people "did wax strong in the land," (Eth. 6:18), "they became exceedingly rich." (Eth. 10:28.)

Fulness of Iniquity Then came dissension, then wars, then wickedness, and finally a "fulness of iniquity." The record recites:

"And now there began to be a great curse upon all the land because of the iniquity of the people, in which, if a man should lay his tool or his sword upon his shelf, or upon the place whither he would keep it, behold, upon the morrow, he could not find it, so great was the curse upon the land.

"Wherefore, every man did cleave unto that which was his own, with his hands, and would not borrow, neither would he lend; and every man kept the hilt of his sword in his right hand, in the defense of his property and his own life, and of his wives, and children." (Eth. 14:1, 2.)

The prophet Ether warned them that if they did not repent, all but the leader should be destroyed. (Eth. 13:20 ff) Repentance did not come.

We are not given the step-by-step backsliding of this Jareditic civilization till it reached the social and governmental chaos the record sets out, but those steps seem wholly clear from the results. Put into modern terms, we can understand them. First there was a forsaking of the righteous life, and the working of wickedness; then must have come the extortion and oppression of the poor by the rich; then retaliation and reprisal by the poor against the rich; then would come a cry to share the wealth which should belong to all; then the easy belief that society owed every man a living whether he worked or not; then the keeping of a great body of idlers; then when community revenues failed to do this, as they always have failed and always will fail, a self-helping by one to the goods of his neighbor; and finally when the neighbor resisted, as resist he must, or starve with his family, then death to the neighbor and all that belonged to him. This was the decreed "fulness of iniquity."

Then came the end; the Jaredites were wiped out in accordance with "the everlasting decree of God." A nation had been borne it had grown to maturity, then to a powerful manhood, had hen gone on to sin, decay, and destruction, and all because its people had refused to heed the promises and commandments of Him who is their Creator and Father, all because the people who possessed the land had failed "to serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ." (Eth. 2:12.)

Before God's first effort had come to its final tragedy, He had begun His second.

In the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah, and just before the great Babylonish captivity, two groups left Jerusalem, under the Lord's direction, to escape the fate then pending for Israel, and to make a new effort to build a righteous people in the promised land. Of one-that which founded the people of Zarahemla-we know little, save that they were later absorbed by the people of Mosiah. (Om. vs. 14-19.) We do not have their records (Om. vs. 18). But of the other, the family of Lehi and their descendants, the bulk of the Book of Mormon gives us a full account.

The Lehi Colonization

Lehi, with Ishmael, and their families, came to this "a choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of the Lord," with the same promised blessings and the same overhanging judgments that were made to Jared and his brother.

Beginning with an angelic rebuke to Laman and Lemuel who were smiting their younger brethren with a rod (1 Ne. 3:28, 29), down through a thousand years of recurring days of righteousness and boundless blessings, intermixed with repeating days of sin, turmoil, war, down to final destruction, the Lord took every occasion to show these peoples the proper way, to lead them back to a repentant life, to bring them to righteousness. In one of their moods of righteousness, prepared thereto by a prophet of God, the Master Himself, having finished His work in Palestine, visited them and in person taught and ministered unto them. Over and over again He blessed them when they were righteous. Over and over again He warned them of the evils and destruction that followed unrepented sin. Over and over again He punished their wickedness. But to no avail.

Another "Fulness of Iniquity"

The recounting of the history of this people is unnecessary, because you know it. Beginning with mere disputes, there grew bickerings, then quarrelings, then ruptures, then two peoples, then one cursed for its iniquities, then wars and counterwars, while this people marched steadily towards their "fulness of iniquity."

Finally there had come to all the people the same wickedness that was among the Jaredites. Mormon says:

"And these Gadianton robbers, who were among the Lamanites, did infest the land, insomuch that the inhabitants thereof began to hide up their treasures in the earth; and they became slippery, because the Lord had cursed the land, that they could not hold them, nor retain them again.

"And it came to pass that there were sorceries, and witchcrafts, and magics; and the power of the evil one was wrought upon all the face of the land . . ." (Morm. 1:18, 19.)

". . . For behold, no man could keep that which was his own, for the thieves, and the robbers, and the murderers, and the magic art, and the witchcraft which was in the land." (Id. 2:10.)

"And there never had been so great wickedness among all the children of Lehi, nor even among all the house of Israel, according to the words of the Lord, as was among this people." (Id. 4:12.)

"And if they perish it will be like unto the Jaredites, because of the wilfulness of their hearts, seeking for blood and revenge." (Moro. 9:23.)

Then came the final war and one people was exterminated on the same spot that had witnessed the extinction of the Jaredites-the hill Ramah to the Jaredites (Eth. 15:11), to the Nephites, Cumorah (Morm. 6:6). For the utter beastliness of the final struggle, I refer you to the record. I should shock and horrify you if I were to recount it, but it matches God's decrees to the last word and act, in every jot and tittle.

Through their whole record, every word of it, through their whole history, every day and every hour of it, there had run the mastery of the divine decree: Serve God or be swept off-which ]t may be again said is the law of this land. The record shows that whenever God was served, He showered upon them such a richness of His blessings as taxed them to gather and enjoy; whenever they sinned, He warned them with afflictions.

So a thousand years after the colony of Lehi had been founded, the Nephite branch had been wiped out because of their iniquities as had been revealed to Lehi while the colony was founding. The Lamanitish branch remained, but under a condemnation that has followed them now for more than 2,400 years.

Choice peoples have thus been tried twice, and each failed to live the law and obey "the everlasting decree" governing this land.

The Lord took every precaution to see that nothing might interfere with this posterity of Joseph in working out their God-given destiny and the destiny of America. He provided, and so told Lehi at the very beginning of his settlement, that:

". . . it is wisdom that this land should be kept as yet from the knowledge of other nations; for behold, many nations would overrun the land, that there would be no place for an inheritance." (2 Ne. 1:8.)

The Lord so kept the land for a thousand years after Lehi landed. He so kept it in his wisdom for another thousand years after the Nephites were destroyed, perhaps to give the Lamanitish branch another chance.

"Choice Land" and "Land of Liberty" But the Lord knew beforehand the outcome of the Lehi migration and informed Nephi, even before Lehi and his family left the home shores. He declared to Nephi an era of the Gentiles who should flee their captivity and come to this land (1 Ne. 13), that the Gentiles should here scatter the seed of Nephi's brethren, (Id. 13:14), that the Gentiles had come out of their captivity because "delivered by the power of God out of the hands of all other nations," (Id. 13:19), that they had "been lifted up by the power of God above all other nations, upon the face of the land which is choice above all other lands, which is the land that the Lord God hath covenanted with thy father that his seed should have for the land of their inheritance; . . ." (Id. 13:30, 31); and that the "wrath of God was upon all those that were gathered together against them (the Gentiles) to battle" on this land. (Id. 18.)

The Lord further declared to Lehi:

"And it shall come to pass, that if the Gentiles shall hearken unto the Lamb of God

"And harden not their hearts against the Lamb of God, they shall be numbered among the seed of thy father; yea, they shall be numbered among the house of Israel; and they shall be a blessed people upon the promised land forever; they shall be no more brought down into captivity; and the house of Israel shall no more be confounded."

"Therefore, wo be unto the Gentiles if it so be that they harden their hearts against the Lamb of God." (1 Ne. 14:1, 2, 6.)

Just before Lehi died, he declared:

"Yea, the Lord hath covenanted this land unto me, and to my children forever, and also all those who should be led out of other countries by the hand of the Lord.

". . . that there shall none come into this land save they shall be brought by the hand of the Lord.

"Wherefore, this land is consecrated unto him whom he shall bring. And if it so be that they shall serve him according to the commandments which he hath given, it shall be a land of liberty unto them; wherefore, they shall never be brought down into captivity; if so, it shall be because of iniquity; for if iniquity shall abound cursed shall be the land for their sakes, but unto the righteous it shall be blessed forever." (2 Ne. 1:5-7.)

Later Lehi's son Jacob, teaching the people, declared:

"But behold, this land, said God, shall be a land of thine inheritance, and the Gentiles shall be blessed upon the land.

"And this land shall be a land of liberty to the Gentiles, and there shall be no kings upon the land, who shall raise up unto the Gentiles.

"And I will fortify this land against all other nations.

"And he that fighteth against Zion shall perish, saith God.

"For he that raiseth up a king against me shall perish, for I, the Lord, the king of heaven, will be their king, and I will be a light unto them forever, that hear my words." (2 Ne. 10:10-14.)

"Wherefore, I will consecrate this land unto thy seed, and them who shall be numbered among thy seed, forever, for the land of their inheritance; for it is a choice land, saith God unto me, above all other lands, wherefore I will have all men that dwell thereon that they shall worship me, saith God." (2 Ne. 10:19.)

These were the promises and the predictions made about the era of the Gentiles 2,000 years before America was discovered.

Panic of Fear

Youth of the Church! With these God-given promises and prophecies before you, do not let yourselves be stampeded into this panic of fear that is now sweeping over the country, deliberately propagated by those who wish to get us into the war on any pretext-this fear that if we do not enter this war we face subjugation by a foreign foe. If subjugation shall come, it will come because we have reached a "fulness of iniquity," and not because we fail to take on the horrors of this war. It is righteousness, not the hates of human slaughter, of which this nation stands now in need

Columbus and Settlement of America

A thousand years after the Nephites were destroyed, Columbus came, and the existence of America became known among the nations. For a hundred years thereafter the Lamanites, who had never climbed upward from the plane where the destruction of the Nephites and the horrors of that conflict had left them, were plagued by the Spanish conquistadors, who did 'afflict the seed of Lehi.' (2 Ne. 10:18.) The visions and prophecies of Lehi, Nephi, and Jacob were fulfilled. Then in the seventeenth century came the English, the French, and others, and the actual settlement of America by the Gentiles began. Soon commenced the actual scattering of the Lamanites which those same ancient prophets saw and predicted, a scattering which may not yet be fully finished. (1 Ne. 15:17.)

These Gentile settlers, many of whom came to the New World either to escape religious persecution in the Old or to have liberty of conscience and freedom of worship in the New-the Puritans in New England, the Quakers in Pennsylvania, the Catholics in Maryland, the Huguenots in Virginia and the Carolines, the Lutherans in Georgia and other colonies-these Gentile settlers and their associates began to prosper in this "chosen land of the Lord;" the land became indeed to them a "consecrated" land. They prospered financially, they grew religiously, but they went farthest and fastest in the development of their political doctrines. As if driven forward by an unseen power, they planned and worked towards making this just what Jacob of old had said it was to be, "a land of liberty unto the Gentiles." (2 Ne. 10:11.)

God Himself was moving the minds and souls of those whom Lehi said would be "led out of other countries by the hand of the Lord," (2 Ne. 1:6), moving them towards unmeasured blessings.

Our Colonial Experiences

I shall not attempt to trace the history of Colonial America; every of our youth and maidens knows that. Out of our embroilment in the Colonial French and Indian wars-fought over here without any other reason and excuse than that our mother countries in Europe were fighting for something purely European and wholly foreign to America-out of these came later the wisdom of Washington and Jefferson that we had no business mixing in European affairs-wisdom as vital today as when they first uttered it. We had been brought out, separated from, the Old World, to build a mighty nation, a land of liberty, we had come to a land consecrated to this purpose; how vain for us to join with those against whom we are to be fortified, with those who shall perish if they fight against us.

Independence

Militarily trained in the Colonial wars, we fought and won, with the aid of France, our War of Independence. Thus we of the United States were, as Nephi foretold and saw in vision, "delivered by the power of God out of the hands of all other nations." (1 Ne. 13:19.)

This prophecy was to have a completer fulfillment later, but God was moving us towards our ordained destiny, towards unnumbered blessings.

Washington and Kingship

At the end of the Revolution, guided by the principle of which he had no conscious knowledge-I speak of Jacob's prophecy, "there shall be no kings upon this land," (2 Ne. 10:11)—Washington declined a crown that might have been his for the reaching out, thus setting the God-ordained precedent that there should be no kings here.

God had pushed us forward another step in our destiny. Another blessing had come to us.

From then till now kings and emperors have not prospered on this land.

Then came a period of near-chaos under the Confederation, a period that until now was the most critical period in our national life.

The Constitution

We had won our freedom but we were near to losing it. The Constitutional Convention met and out from it came our God-inspired Constitution-"the most wonderful work," said Gladstone, "ever struck off at a given time by the brain and purpose of man."

The Lord Himself has declared as to this great document of human liberty, "I established the Constitution of this land by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose." and He added, referring to the war it cost to gain us our liberties: "and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood." (D&C 101:80.)

The Lord declared the purpose of this Constitution when He said that it "should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh." (D&C 101:77.)

Thus we had set up, under the guidance of God Himself, a government that made of this land the kind of land Lehi and Jacob had foreseen and prophesied-"a land of liberty."

Again the Lord had moved us forward towards our destiny. He had bestowed upon us another blessing.

What was this plan of the Lord which had been established by the hands of wise men whom He had raised up for this very purpose? May I tell you a few of the elemental principles.

Three Branches of Government

It gave us, for perhaps the first time in all history, a republic with the three basic divisions of government-the legislative, executive, and judicial-mutually and completely independent the one from the other, under which it is not possible for any branch of government legally to set up a system by which that branch can first conceive what it wants to do, then make the law ordering its doing, and then itself, judge its own enforcement of its own law, a system that has always brought extortion, oppression, intimidation, tyranny, despotism,-a system that every dictator has employed and must employ.

Local Self-Government

Under this plan which the Lord established, we have a dual jurisdiction-State and Federal. The Federal Government may do only what we the people have authorized it to do; if it does more, it is guilty of usurpation. The people have reserved to themselves or to their State Governments every right and power they have not delegated to the Federal Government, which must always look to the Constitution and its Amendments to find its rights, for it has none others. This system puts the great bulk of our daily life activities in the hands of our own' neighbors who know us and our surroundings, and not in the hands of a bureaucrat in a far away national capital, who, to all intents and purposes, is an alien to us and our affairs. His plan gives us the largest possible measure of local self-government. Liberty will never depart from us while we have local self-government controlling and directing matters pertaining to our personal liberties and to the security of our private property; it will not abide with us if we shall lose this local self-government.

Equality of Men

The Lord's plan so given us was founded on the universal truths "that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."

Freedom of Speech, Press, Conscience

The inspired plan provides that we might write what we wish and send to our friends, without danger of being jailed, that we might speak our minds unrestrained, free likewise from any such danger; that we might print the truth and our comment thereon, without let or hindrance, provided in all cases that we were not libeling or slandering our fellow citizens. These rights are fundamental to freedom, and to a society of freemen. They are flouted by governments not established under the Lord's plan.

Due Process of Law

His plan we rely, as we rely on the coming of day, upon the security that comes from the principle that government shall not "deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws." Yet none of these things are sacred in other countries. There, men go to bed at night seemingly secure in the fruits of long labors and awaken in the morning shorn of the savings of a lifetime, taken to enrich some favorite of government; there, men are ruthlessly cast into prison, having committed no offense other than, by some careless word or act, to have offended the sensibilities of some petty official. These things are happening where God's system is not in force.

Since under the Lord's plan He must be served by the people under the penalty of otherwise being swept off, there must be in the land complete freedom of worship and so the Lord set up His plan that men might follow and worship Him. Under His plan it is not possible for some government official to come into our Sunday Schools, or our Mutuals, or our Relief Societies, or our Sacrament Meetings, and tell us what we may say, or prescribe what we may teach. This guarantees to us our most precious gift. Yet this kind of supervision, direction and control is being exercised in other countries today where these God-given rights of men are being trampled underfoot.

Our Allegiance

God provided that in this land of liberty, our political allegiance shall run not to individuals, that is, to government officials, no matter how great or how small they may be. Under His plan our allegiance and the only allegiance we owe as citizens or denizens of the United States, runs to our inspired Constitution which God Himself set up. So runs the oath of office of those who participate in government. A certain loyalty we do owe to the office which a man holds, but even here we owe, just by reason of our citizenship, no loyalty to the man himself. In other countries it is to the individual that allegiance runs. This principle of allegiance to the Constitution is basic to our freedom. It is one of the great principles that distinguishes this "land of liberty" from other countries.

Thus God added to His priceless blessings to us.

Encroachments upon Free Institutions

I wish to say with all the earnestness I possess that when you youth and maidens see any curtailment of these liberties I have named, when you see government invading any of these realms of freedom which we have under our Constitution, you will know that they are putting shackles on your liberty, and that tyranny is creeping upon you, no matter who curtails these liberties or who invades these realms, and no matter what the reason and excuse therefor may be.

In the whole history of God's dealing with men, He has never urged, counseled, nor advised any nation or people to set up autocracies, tyrannies, despotisms, or dictatorships. His prophet pleaded with ancient Israel not to crown a king. (1 Sam. 8.) He has always condemned that which takes away man's free agency. This is His way. You may judge every proposal for human government by this principle.

But the same visions which showed to Nephi the age of the Gentiles on this promised land, also showed God's purposes for the ushering in of the last dispensation, for the re-establishment of His Church in the last days.

The Restoration

But how could the people of "the chosen land of the Lord," serve Jesus, "the God of this land," if they did not have His statutes with them, and yet if they did not serve Him they were to be swept off. God's eternal justice required that Christ's Gospel should be known that men might live it. So after our fathers had fully established their new government after they had again fought the mother country and made secure their independence, the Father and Son appeared to the young boy praying in the woods and told him of the work he was to do in bringing back to earth not only the fulness of Christ's Gospel in its simplicity and purity, but also in restoring to the world God's Holy Priesthood. In the due order of the Lord, the Gospel was revealed and the Priesthood bestowed through the instrumentality of the young Prophet.

God thus provided that the Gentiles of this land should have the truth they were to live. He was moving forward again on His appointed way. He was setting up "a land of liberty" not only, but He was revealing His truth also.

He had now given us the greatest blessing, and without price to the nation, however heavy the toll to this people.

Blessings for Whole Hemisphere

Clearly, if the people of this land, this whole land of America, all of it, must serve Jesus Christ, "the God of the land," or be swept off, and this is the very gist of all and every blessing promised for, and every judgment uttered against this land, then God must so provide that men in all the Americas could serve Him. The era of the Gentiles must be an era of freedom of worship throughout the Hemisphere else Zion could not be established. This was God's plan and must be brought about.

But our Revolution and Constitution had brought their blessings of freedom and liberty to the people of the United States only. The great territorial bulk of the Hemisphere was still in bondage; still unprepared to take part in our God-given destiny.

Freeing Spanish America

Then in the early decades of the last century, both before and after Joseph's First Vision, God moved upon the other peoples, one by one, to assert and win their independence, and as fast as they won it, they one by one-I am speaking with historical accuracy-set up their new governmental systems in the framework of our Constitution, sometimes in the first instance, practically copying it word for word. Different juridical traditions have led them to develop their governmental systems along diverging lines from ours, but in great principles their fundamental document is a replica of our God-given instrument. Thus the hemisphere-Zion in its full area-was becoming "a land of liberty."

Monroe Doctrine

As these nations began to throw off their foreign yokes, a European alliance was planned to help hold them in subjection to their European overlords. Then came our great Monroe Doctrine which placed us of the United States squarely behind the efforts of Latin America to gain freedom and against those European states who would thwart it.

God again moved us forward towards the destiny He has planned for us. He was preserving the blessings He had given to us.

British North American Act

This work for all the Americas (except a few small areas) was completed in 1867 when the great British North America Act brought to a united Canada a status of practical independence and almost complete local autonomy.

Our Leadership

If I have made clear the course of events to this point, it is apparent that in the era of the Gentiles, it has been the United States that has always been called to carry forward the banner of human liberty and religious freedom.

Human Slavery

But there was amongst us here a heinous sin of which we must cleanse ourselves-I mean human slavery, the curse of every people and of every civilization that has ever harbored it God moved the hearts of men to its extinction. It cost the live of a million of our fathers. But sin and iniquity always exact their penalty. The martyred Lincoln, the Great Emancipator visioned the underlying principle of God's justice when He said in his Second Inaugural: "Fondly do we hope fervently do we pray that this scourge of war may speedily pass away. Yet, if God wills that it continue until all the wealth piled by the bondsman's two hundred fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid by another drawn with the sword, as was said three thousand years ago, so still it must be said, 'The judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether.'"

Human slavery passed. All men within the United States were free.

Thus God had almost finished His fashioning of this land to meet His purposes, to make of this a land of liberty and a place where God may be worshiped without let or hindrance. He had bestowed upon us all the essentials needed to earn His fullest blessings.

The South Sea Commonwealths

Furthermore, this leaven of local self-government, of division of independent governmental functions, of realms of freedom and liberty beyond the reach of government, is working in the far-off corners of the earth. The commonwealths of the South Seas, basically framed along the lines set up by our Constitution are bringing other lands to enjoy our blessings.

Our Destiny

And this is the mission and the destiny of America, of Zion, decreed thousands of years ago, for, I repeat, Isaiah declared: "Out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:3.)

And this destiny of ours is to come not through bloody conquests of war and the oppression and enslavement of our fellow-beings, but by conquests of peace and the persuasion of righteous example and Christian endeavor.

Thus far God has wrought out His plan. He will carry it through-with us, if we are faithful, if we work not iniquity, if we repent of our sins; but if we shall fail Him, as did the Jaredites and Nephites of old, then He will work it through with some other people. For the divine edict has gone forth, and God will not be laughed at, nor mocked, nor thwarted.

To Youth I appeal to you-youth and maidens of the Church, of the Nation-in these great and vital matters of free government "keep thy father's commandment and forsake not the law of thy mother." Hold fast to the blessings which God has provided for you. Yours is not the task to gain them, they are here; yours is the part of cherishing them.

We, your fathers and mothers, have brought to you some woes; they have been largely an incident of our progress and prosperity which you have fully shared; they have resulted in most part from our failure fully to observe God's commandments, fully to live the Gospel plan. Be ye not as weak as we have been. In our aging years we admit our failings, we repent our sins; we confess them to you, and humbly and with all the power we possess we beseech you not to repeat our follies, not to duplicate our transgressions, because we of the Gentile era live under the God-declared law of this land as fully as did the ancient inhabitants hereof

The Judgment and Blessing to Us

Moroni, a thousand years after the arrival of the Nephites and a thousand years before the era of the Gentiles, with a full knowledge of the fate of the Jaredites and the Nephites, for he had either read, witnessed, recorded or transcribed the full and terrible record, looked down to the day of the Gentiles on this land and declared:

"And this cometh unto you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the decrees of God-that ye may repent, and not continue in your iniquities until the fulness come, that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of God upon you as the inhabitants of the land have hitherto done.

"Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by the things which we have written." (Eth. 2:11, 12.)

Our Hope

Thus there comes to us a healing balm to our fears and dreads in this war-commotioned world, that great benediction of the ancient prophet who had read so much and had seen so fully what iniquity brought to this land, and what blessings followed the living of the divine commands.

Listen at last to what Nephi of old said of an American Zion that kept the laws of God:

"And all the nations that fight against Zion, and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a night vision; yea, it shall be unto them, even as unto a hungry man which dreameth and behold he eateth but he awaketh and his soul is empty; or like unto a thirsty man which dreameth, and behold he drinketh but he awaketh and behold he is faint, and his soul hath appetite; yea, even so shall the multitude of all the nations be that fight against Mount Zion." (2 Ne. 27:3.)

Should you ask, what can the youth of the Church do to make this blessing secure, the youth of a handful of people amongst a many- millioned multitude, I will reply: If the youth of this Church and if the Church membership shall serve God and Jesus Christ who is the God of this land, if they shall serve Him fully in spirit and in truth, and I ask you to remember this is the price demanded for the blessing promised-there is no righteous achievement which they may not reach.

Furthermore, if we be fully righteous we shall stand before the Lord as did Abraham of old, when he pleaded for Sodom and Gomorrah which had been doomed for destruction because of their wickedness.

"Wilt thou also," said Abraham to the Lord, "destroy the righteous with the wicked?" Would you, asked Abraham, destroy the cities if fifty righteous would be destroyed also. No, said the Lord, I will spare the place if there are fifty righteous there.

Then Abraham began bargaining with the Lord; would He destroy it if there were forty-five righteous, then forty, then thirty, then twenty, and finally ten, and the Lord said He would not destroy it if there were ten righteous. But ten could not be found. Only Lot and his family four in all were found worthy of succor and they were warned by an angel to flee before the fiery destruction came, and an angel delivered them. (Gen. 18, 19.)

This same great law of the saving power of a leavening righteousness was declared by Jesus, when He spoke of the last days and their terrors and devastation:

"And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved; but for the elect's sake (Matt. 24:22) whom he hath chosen, he hath shortened the days." (Mark 13:20.)

Thus if we, the youth and the parents of the Church, shall become fully righteous, may we not be the ten in this great land to save it? May we not be the elect, chosen of the Lord, to shorten the days of God's vengeance?

So to live that this might be, is clearly our duty and our responsibility also.

I thank the Lord for this great body of workers with the youth of the Church. I thank them for their valiant service of the past. I cannot overstate your duties and your responsibilities for the future. I pray that God will bless you in your labors that you may be able to reach the hearts of the children of this people and to guide and direct them in the way which God would have them go.

Our Prayer

And may God bless this nation of ours, keep out of our hearts the hate that is ruling so much of the civilized world. May God preserve our liberties and keep us in the land of our inheritance, maintain our free institutions, preserve our Constitution. May we, His chosen people, be instrumental in preserving America, which may God bless, I ask in the name of Jesus. Amen.
