James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Recommending Prospective Missionaries, September 26, 1940

1940-September 26-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah September 26, 1940 To All Stake Presidents

Dear Brethren:

The purpose of this letter is to explain more fully than heretofore the procedure which is to be followed by Stake Presidents in recommending prospective missionaries to the First Presidency.

Once again, and frequently, will you please instruct your Bishops to choose only worthy young men and women to represent the Church as missionaries. The Mission Field must not be looked upon as a reformatory.

After the Bishop has personally interviewed a prospective missionary and found him or her in all respects worthy, he should complete and sign the regular missionary recommendation blank, and send it with the medical examination blank to the Stake President. Upon the receipt of the missionary recommendation, the Stake President should interview the prospective missionary, and, if he approves by finding the missionary a trustworthy representative of the Church, he too should sign the recommendation.

Prospective missionaries so chosen should be instructed to be present at the regular Stake Quarterly Conference at which time they will be interviewed by one of the General Authorities.

Immediately following the interview, the General Authority will report confidentially to the Stake President either favorably or unfavorably upon the fitness and preparedness for a mission of each of those interviewed. The Stake President will then forward without delay the approved recommendation.

If this procedure be followed carefully, the receipt of missionary recommendations, medical examination blanks, and reports of interview will be expedited, and early consideration of prospective missionaries for missionary service can be given by the First Presidency.

There are some Bishops and Stake Presidents who have retained the missionary recommendation and medical examination blanks in their possession after the prospective missionary has been interviewed, expecting that they would receive some further definite word from the General Authority visiting their Stake Conference. This misunderstanding has caused considerable delay in the calling of missionaries.

Anticipating your ready cooperation in this matter, and soliciting your careful observance of the procedure as given, we remain with best wishes,

Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, The First Presidency.
