James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

To a World at War, October 4, 1940

1940-October 4-Improvement Era, 43:712, December, 1940.

On September 27, 1940, Japan joined the Axis powers by signing a ten-year tri-partite pact in Berlin. There were members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints resident in participant countries in what was fast becoming World War II. The statement by the First Presidency stated that "The Saints on either side have no course open to them but to support that government to which they owe allegiance. God is not pleased with war, or with the wickedness which always heralds it."

TO A WORLD AT WAR

A statement to all men from the First Presidency of the Church, presented at the opening session of the 111th Semi-Annual Conference, October 4, 1940.

The meeting of the Saints in this General Conference finds the world still war torn. Millions of the Lord's children are suffering and mourning. All the woes and misery that attend armed conflict are spending their force upon them.

From these afflicted peoples comes the prediction that the approaching winter will bring famine. If famine shall come, the history of the past shows it will likely bring plagues with it.

Our brethren and sisters are found on both sides of this terrible struggle. On each side they are bound to their country by all the ties of blood, relationship, and patriotism.

As always happens in such cases, each side claims to believe it is in the right. Each claims to feel it is fighting for its very existence. As the war progresses in its cruelty and horror, each may come to aim at the complete subjugation or extermination of the other.

This would be an inhuman and unrighteous purpose. God's way requires that nations shall live in peace and amity, one with another. The Master's command was:

"Love your enemies, do good to them which hate you,

"Bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despitefully use you." (Luke 6:27-28.)

The Saints on either side have no course open to them but to support that government to which they owe allegiance. But their prayers should go up day and night that God will turn the hearts of their leaders towards peace, that the curse of war may end.

God is not pleased either with war, or with the wickedness which always heralds it. When He uses war, it is to wipe out sin and unrighteousness.

The hearts of all the Saints are torn with grief over the sufferings of their brethren and sisters who are taking part in this struggle. So, for the Saints this is a fratricidal conflict. They so mourn over it. Their prayers ascend to our Heavenly Father that the war may come to a speedy end.

To those Saints who are stricken by this great tragedy, we say live righteously, pray constantly, and the Lord will answer as your faith and works and His all-wise purposes allow Him.

To those whose wickedness has brought this strife and turmoil, we say repent lest the Lord shall smite you in His wrath. He will not hold you guiltless of the innocent blood of your fellow men.

To all the nations, we say adjust your differences by peaceful means. This is the Lord's way.

To our nation we repeat the Master's admonition:

"Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God." (Matt. 5:9.)

How infinitely greater it is to lead nations to peace, than to subdue a nation to chains. Let America put her house in order, forsake selfishness, greed, and avarice, abolish unrighteousness, wipe hate from her heart, hold in loyal friendship the good and upright of all nations and peoples. Then to her shall come the high destiny of the peacemaker.

We humbly pray our Heavenly Father, that He will send to the earth His messengers of peace, that this terrible war shall afflict no more nations and spread no farther over the face of the land, that fear and frenzy shall be driven out from their place among the peoples, that hate shall be banished from the souls of men, for where hate abides, there righteousness cannot live, that sanity shall again assert its sway, and that love shall fill the hearts of men even to overflowing. HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, The First Presidency.
