James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Death of Elder Reed Smoot, February 9, 1941

1941-February 9-Liahona, the Elders' Journal 38:432, February 25, 1941.

Elder Reed Smoot was born January 10, 1862, in Salt Lake City. He was the son of Abraham O. Smoot, leader of one of the original 1847 pioneer Mormon companies and later President of the Board of Trustees of Brigham Young Academy. He grew up in Provo, Utah. His mother was Anna Kristine Mouritsen. Elder Smoot had been spending the winter of 1941 in St Petersburg, Florida, and after an extended illness he died on Sunday, February 9, 1941. He had had a distinguished career of thirty years as United States Senator from Utah until his defeat for re-election in 1932. He served in seniority in the Council of the Twelve until his death. For additional background see the bibliographical essay in the Introduction to Messages of the First Presidency, Volume 4, pp. xii-xvi.

TRIBUTE OF THE FIRST PRESIDENCY OF THE CHURCH

In the passing of Elder Reed Smoot the Church, the nation, and we personally suffer a great loss.

Elder Smoot was stalwart in his faith, courageous in his advocacy of truth, and steadfast in his obedience to the doctrines and principles of the Gospel of Christ of whose truth he had a living, enduring testimony. For the Church, he was one of the greatest missionaries of his time. His integrity and devotion to his work as a Senator of the United States, broke down prejudice and gave his people a standing for uprightness throughout the whole world.

In the Senate of the United States, Senator Smoot made a record of which his people are justly proud. Fearless, forthright, able, with indefatigable industry, and a body and mind that seemed never to know weariness, he served his country with patriotic devotion and uncorruptible integrity. His name is written large in national legislative annals.

In all his work he feared the Lord and sought always for Divine inspiration to guide him. The Almighty blessed him in his work. His outstanding ability and stalwart service will loom constantly larger as the years lengthen. He was in truth one of the mighty ones of the nation.

The Church and the nation mourn his passing. HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
