James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Assistants to the Quorum of Twelve Called, April 6, 1941

1941-April 6-Improvement Era 44:269, May, 1941.

An historic announcement of the First Presidency made by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr, during the sustaining of General Authorities and general officers of the Church in April 1941 General Conference of the Church.

The rapid growth of the Church had made necessary the revival of a former feature of Church organization in the calling of "Assistants to the Council of Twelve Apostles." There would be no fixed number of Assistants. As the message itself indicated, there was precedent for this decision. There had been, in the history of the Church, Assistant Presidents of the Church: Assistant Counselors in the First Presidency; and now Assistants to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. For lists of those who had served and were to serve in these capacities, see Essentials in Church History, 1969 edition, pp. 568, 573-574. Five men were sustained as Assistants to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles on April 6, 1941, namely Marion George Romney, Thomas Evans McKay, Clifford Earl Young, Alma Sonne and Nicholas Grosbeck Smith. Ten years later on October 6, 1951, an additional five Assistants were sustained: George Quayle Morris, Stayner Richards, ElRay LaVar Christiansen, John Longden and Hugh Brown Brown.

Sunday morning, during the sustaining of the general authorities and general officers of the Church, President Clark announced:

In the past history of the Church, especially in President Brigham Young's time, it was found necessary for the First Presidency or the Twelve, or both, to call brethren, frequently designated as counselors, to help carry on their assigned work in the Church.

The rapid growth of the Church in recent times, the constantly increasing establishment of new wards and Stakes, the ever-widening geographical area covered by wards and stakes, the steadily pressing necessity for increasing our missions in numbers and efficiency that the Gospel may be brought to all men, the continual multiplying of Church interests and activities calling for more rigid and frequent observation, supervision, and direction, all have built up an apostolic service of the greatest magnitude.

The First Presidency and Twelve feel that to meet adequately their great responsibilities and to carry on efficiently this service for the Lord, they should have some help.

Accordingly it has been decided to appoint assistants to the Twelve, who shall be High Priests, who shall be set apart to act under the direction of the Twelve in the performance of such work as the First Presidency and the Twelve may place upon them.

There will be no fixed number of these assistants. Their number will be increased or otherwise from time to time as the necessity of carrying on the Lord's work seems to dictate to be wise.

It is proposed that we sustain as assistants to the Twelve, the following named High Priests, who will labor under the supervision and direction of the First Presidency and of the Twelve:

Marion G. Romney, president of Bonneville Stake.

Thomas E. McKay, former president of Ogden Stake and acting president of the European Mission.

Clifford E. Young, president of the Alpine Stake.

Alma Sonne, president of Cache Stake.

Nicholas G. Smith, president of Northwestern States Mission.
