James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Church Opposed to Federal Payments for Not Raising Crops, Especially on Welfare Program Farms, June 13, 1941

1941 June 13 Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah; also Improvement Era, 44:490, August, 1941.

A law of May 12, 1933, administered by the Agricultural Adjustment Administration, attempted to persuade producers of cotton, wheat, corn, hogs, rice, milk, and tobacco to take some 30 percent of their acreage out of cultivation. In return they would receive payments from a tax on goods processed from those commodities. In 1936, the Supreme Court held the measure unconstitutional, as a misuse of tax power and as an invasion of an area reserved to the states.

The federal government continued the same policy, however, under cover of various acts for soil erosion and conservation until 1938, when Congress passed the second AAA in a form that survived the scrutiny of the courts. That law retained the principle of price parity, permitted the allocation of quotas to growers, and created an "ever-normal granary" within which surplusses would be accumulated. (Oscar Handlin, America, p. 883.)

The First Presidency of the Church was unalterably opposed to the principles behind this "New Deal" legislation and were disturbed when at least one Bishop and perhaps more had accepted federal money for not raising crops on a Church Welfare Program farm.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah June 13, 1941 Presidents of Stakes and Bishops of Wards Dear Brethren:

It has come to our attention that in at least one case-and the suggestion is made that it has happened in others-one of our Bishops in carrying on a farming project for the Welfare work has taken from the Government money for not raising crops on the Welfare Project, the land belonging to the Ward.

We are not able to approve of this practice. We do not believe the economics behind this practice are sound, nor do we feel that they are consistent with that civic integrity which should be among our people. We have constantly declined, as the First Presidency, to receive gratuities from the Government, and this receiving of money for not raising crops is a pure gratuity or dole. The Church is making every effort to avoid the necessity of later facing a charge that it has accepted governmental gratuities to carry on its work, and it has no desire to accept such gratuities.

We must, therefore, ask all Presidents of Stakes and Bishops of Wards strictly to forego any such practice in the future, and we request that they return to the Government any moneys which they have heretofore received on this account. This should be done at the earliest practicable moment.

Faithfully your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
