James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Church Not Opposed to Rebates from Sugar Companies to Sugar Beet Growers, June, 1941

1941-June-Improvement Era, 44:490, August, 1941.

The letter of the First Presidency of June 13, 1941, sent to Presidents of Stakes and Bishops of Wards had elicited a further inquiry from one stake president inquiring whether the instructions of that letter applied to moneys received by growers of sugar beets. The reply of the First Presidency draws a distinction between moneys received under AAA which in the eyes of the First Presidency were government gratuities or doles and the rebate to sugar beet growers of the processing tax they had previously paid.

FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

Your letter of June 22 has been received, in which, acknowledging our letter of June 13, 1941, concerning Government payments to farmers for not growing crops, you raise the question whether or not we intend to cover by our observations the payment which is made to the growers of sugar beets of $1.80 per ton received last year and incidentally we may say we understand it will be approximately $1.90 a ton this year.

We had not intended to include those payments in our observations for the reason that the sugar industry itself through the processing tax provides all the funds which are paid back to the farmer. Incidentally, we are advised that of the $1.90-which it is estimated will be the average price per ton paid back to the farmers-the farmer will himself have paid $1.70, so we are told, as a processing tax. So as to that amount he is merely getting back what he himself has paid to the Government, and the other 20c comes from the processing tax (again as we are advised) levied against Cuban cane sugar. We are also told that the farmer does not get back all that is paid as a processing tax on sugar but that over and above what is repaid to him there is covered into the Treasury of the United States somewhere in the neighborhood of thirty million dollars, the same being the residuum of the processing tax which is not paid to the farmers.
