James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Care in advancing men in the priesthood, August 21, 1941

1941-August 21-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah; also Improvement Era 44:616, October, 1941.

Greater care should be exercised in ordaining or advancing young men to offices in the priesthood.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah August 21st, 1941 Presidents of Stakes,

Dear Brethren:

For a long time the General Authorities of the Church have felt that there has not been enough care in advancing and ordaining men to offices in the Priesthood. There are in the Church today thousands of men holding the Melchizedek Priesthood who are inactive. Many of these men never understood the full significance of the meaning of Priesthood and what the obligation is upon them to magnify their callings when ordained. The Lord has made very clear in several revelations, notably sections 20:38-66, 84:32-42, and the entire revelation known as section 107, the importance of faithfulness and cleanliness of life on the part of those who are ordained to the Priesthood.

This laxness has resulted in many men who have received the Priesthood, and who are not really worthy, returning to their evil habits and indifference, if these were ever forsaken. Because of this, it has been deemed wise to ask care and diligence on the part of presiding officers in the Wards and Stakes, in seeing that men who are candidates for ordination are men of faith, living in full accord with the principles of the Gospel and the doctrines of the Church. Moreover these presiding officers should faithfully impress upon all candidates for ordination the seriousness and responsibility which ordination to the Priesthood entails, and the dreadful consequences of disobedience or the violation of the covenants which are received when offices in the Priesthood are accepted. (See D&C 84:32-42.)

The candidate will first be notified to meet with and be interviewed by the Stake President, or a counselor in the Stake Presidency, who will question carefully the candidate and require him to fill in the questions on the back of the certificate. The endorsement of the Bishop of the Ward in which the candidate lives and that of the President of the quorum to which he belongs, are required, as also the approval of the High Council before the name is presented to the Priesthood of the Stake for approval.

The new "Recommendation for ordination in the Priesthood" is to replace all other forms and each candidate is required to answer all the questions in person and sign the recommendation as indicated on its back.

These recommendation blanks will be kept by the Stake Clerk and the stubs will be retained by him in the Stake office, as indicated on the stub.

Very sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
