James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Uncertainty of employment in government defense programs, December 3, 1941

1941-December 3-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

In the preceding letter, counsel was given on the care of youth during war years in defense plant employment. This letter cautions against families giving up their homes to move to defense plant areas because of the uncertainty of such employment. It states that home ownership, agriculture and stockraising are still the safest bases for Latter-day Saints in the intermountain region.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah December 3, 1941 Presidents of Stakes and Bishops of Wards

Dear Brethren:

There are coming to Salt Lake City and to other areas where there are Government Defense Programs in progress, a considerable number of families who are without funds and who count upon securing work in some of these places in order to provide sustenance for themselves. They come with an apparent thought that if they fail to get work at these defense plants they can go either upon Government relief or be taken over and cared for under the Church Welfare Program. Too frequently these families have sold the few belongings they had at their own places of residence and on and by which they could have lived in their home towns, they have spent most of their money coming to Salt Lake City, and have arrived here almost destitute of the necessaries of life. Too frequently these are people who are wholly unskilled and of course unable to do any of the skilled labor jobs which may be available at these various places.

We wish to advise you that according to information which comes to us-we believe from credible sources-the contractors are nearing a completion of their job on the Munitions Plant near Salt Lake City. It is said that by mid-February all but perhaps eight hundred persons will be laid off the job and that the balance will not be retained for any great length of time. Those who may continue on during this additional period are said to be plumbers, electricians, steamfitters and asbestos workers, and this work will last apparently for only some months after the great bulk are laid off.

It is our understanding that a similar situation arises wherever these great construction programs are undertaken and that under the best of circumstances there will be on these projects no more than a very few months of such construction work even for those who are able to find employment thereon.

There are certain difficulties connected with obtaining work on these construction projects, upon which we shall not elaborate, but which, it is reported here, usually result in an unskilled laborer securing employment for a month or six weeks or two months at the most, when he is laid off and someone else is taken on in his place.

We earnestly urge you to bring this whole situation to the attention of the people of your Wards and Stakes and ask you to endeavor to present it to Church members in a way that will lead them to understand the hazards that those who are unskilled take in coming to places where such construction projects are carrying on unless they certainly have their employment positively arranged for before they leave. Otherwise they may find themselves in a position where they will have sold and spent the little they may have theretofore accumulated and will become practically public charges.

We regard this as very important and trust that you will each take immediate steps to forestall so far as you may be able, the migration of families who would not be able to support themselves in new places to which they come unless they should find immediate and remunerative employment.

All the foregoing applies primarily to work in the construction of Government plants, the construction period of which is necessarily of relatively short duration, a few months at most, because employment thereon can, of course, be only for a like short time.

The public press recently carried an announcement that to operate these governmental plants located in Utah, effort will be made to secure people from the adjoining areas with the view of obviating the influx thereto of great groups of strangers from other places. It is said this new employment for operating the plants will be more or less as long as the present international situation exists.

It has also been announced in the press that a census will be taken in Utah, of both men and women, for the purpose of locating those who have sufficient training and skill to operate such plants. It is stated that federal and state employees will make this census.

It is understood that when this census is taken and the information is obtained, a plan will be set up by which it will be possible for those having the necessary training and skill to get in touch with those charged with the employment of persons to run these plants in order that arrangements for such employment may be completed.

In cases of such employment we earnestly wish to urge upon the people the necessity of carefully considering whether it would be wisdom at the present time for those who plan to take on such employment to dispose of their local interests and permanently move to the place of the new employment, or whether it would not be well for them to consider retaining the homes they now have and make a temporary home in the new place, preserving the old home to return to when the defense employment ceases.

We look with great anxiety upon the readjustment which is to come at the close of the present war We are sure that those who then have homes, along with the means of a fair livelihood connected therewith, will be able to live through the difficult times to come more easily and happily than those who do not have these things.

We would particularly urge those who have homes with little farms attached, not to dispose of those properties but to retain them even though they temporarily move to the city for other employment.

We should never forget that an essential part, perhaps the most essential part, of our national life is agriculture and stock-raising. These are the essential parts of any community in our intermountain region particularly, and we therefore urge our people to keep their farms and then to farm them and bring them to the highest productivity possible.

If the foregoing simple principles are observed it will avoid much hardship and suffering in the days to come.

We urge you brethren to go forward on this matter at once and to use your utmost efforts to have the people shape their courses in accordance with the principles hereinbefore set out.

Faithfully your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
