James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Cruelty, hate, murder to be avoided even in war December 13, 1941

1941-December 13-Improvement Era 45:10, January, 1942; also Deseret News, December 13, 1941.

The Congress of the United Stated of America had declared war on Japan five days before this Christmas greeting was published. Germany and Italy had declared war on the United Stated on December 11, 1941.

God's hand is over all. He rules the world. May His peace comfort the righteous everywhere."

GREETING OF THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

In these times which are trying men's souls, we bring to our people everywhere greetings and blessings.

In the living of the Gospel of Christ, and in the joy which flows from service in His cause, comes the only peace that lives forever.

To the multitude Jesus said:

"Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

"Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

"For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light."

To His Apostles in the Passover chamber He said:

"Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid."

His peace will ease our suffering, bind up our broken hearts, blot out our hates, engender in our breasts a love of fellow men that will suffuse our souls with calm and happiness.

His message and the virtue of His atoning sacrifice reach out to the uttermost parts of the earth; they brood over the remotest seas. Wherever men go, there He may be reached. Where He is, there may the Holy Spirit be found also, with its fruit of "love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith."

He will be our comfort and solace, our guide and counselor, our salvation and exaltation, for "there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved."

Out of His divine wisdom comes the eternal truth: "For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" "For" said Paul, "the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and joy in the Holy Ghost."

Just before He offered up the divine prayer, Jesus, teaching the apostles, said: "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world."

We exhort men in the service of government everywhere, ever to have in mind the life and teachings of the Master; hour by hour to keep out from their hearts, in the camp and on the battlefield itself, all cruelty, hate, and murder; always to have in their thoughts the few short years of time as against the unnumbered cycles of eternity; never to forget that the gross pleasures of the flesh lead always to destruction, while the lofty joys of the spirit build everlasting joy and progression. We urge them so to live that whether in health or in sickness and distress whether in sound body or afflicted with wounds, they may call upon the Lord with the faith and knowledge that they are entitled to His help and succor, in such measure and at such time as shall meet the dispensations of His mercy, His wisdom, His purposes. We ask them to light their souls with Job's divine wisdom: "The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord." We promise them that living according to the eternal truths of the gospel, "the peace of God shall rule their hearts," "the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus."

God's hand is over all. He rules the world. May His peace comfort the righteous everywhere. HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
