James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

1941-December 23-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

With the United states now at war, adjustments had to he made in the missionary program of the Church. Missionary work was now being confined to the continental Americas and the Hawaiian Islands. Instructions in former letters were now updated by thin letter on rules and regulations governing the calling of missionaries.

Calling of missionaries with United States at war, December 23, 1941

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah December 23, 1941 Presidents of Stakes and Bishops of Wards

Dear Brethren:

Inquiries are coming to us from a number of Bishops and Stake Presidents as to whether or not in the present emergency they should discontinue calling young men on missions.

It is apparent to all who understand the nature of our missionary work that it is highly advisable to have in the Mission Field a sufficient number of missionaries to maintain the Branches and Districts up to at least a partial degree of efficiency. In order to do this, it will be necessary to call men in sufficient numbers to replace those who are regularly released after having rendered their normal term of service, and who will then, of course, be subject to military service.

During the World War, we continued to call the brethren on missions and at that time maintained missions not only in the United States and adjacent countries, but also in foreign countries.

As you know, during this present war, we have had to withdraw our missionaries from foreign countries except in this Western Hemisphere, and we have continued until recently to send missionaries to the Continental Americas where we have missions, and to the Hawaiian Islands.

We have given the matter very careful consideration, and we see no reason why, for the present at least, we should not continue to call missionaries in sufficient numbers to maintain the missions as now manned. We do not have in mind increasing our present missionary force. However, in this connection, we again call your attention to our previous letters to you of December 31, 1940, July 10, and August 15, 1941, with their enclosures These will continue to be your guide in recommending our young brethren for missionary service. We particularly call your attention to the following paragraph in our letter of July 10:

"Young men in your Wards who have registered under the Selective Act, and who have received their notice of induction for military service, should not be recommended for missionary service. If, however, you have any young men who have registered and have not received their notice of induction and are not likely to receive it within a short time, and who have a desire to do missionary work, it is perfectly proper to recommend them in the regular way. However, no young man should be recommended for a mission for the purpose of evading military service."

We are making the foregoing ruling upon two principles: In the first place, we feel that the building of righteousness among the peoples of the earth was never more necessary than at the present moment. The great need of the world today is spirituality and righteous living, based upon a belief in and a following of the laws and commandments of our Savior Jesus Christ. We shall advance and endure as we live righteously in accordance with His Gospel.

In the next place, the Church was established for the purpose of preaching righteousness, and of leading men to live righteous lives obedient to the commandments of the Lord. We feel that we must go forward upon this divinely commanded mission to the fullest extent of our ability, and particularly in this great emergency.

If circumstances develop that make it necessary to change this course and policy we will advise you.

In view of this existing emergency, and of the exceptional hazards which will now be incident to missionary service, we ask you to discontinue the recommendation of lady missionaries until you receive further instructions.

Praying that the Lord will bless you in your labors, and give you added vision and wisdom in these times of stress and strain which are going to test the faith of many, we are, Faithfully your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
