James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Day of prayer proclaimed by President of the United States supported by the Church, January 2, 1942

1942-January 2-Deseret News, 365:4, January 3, 1942.

As indicated in the notes for the two previous Messages, the United States was now at war. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with its far-flung, worldwide missionary system was immediately affected. It was also affected in its domestic Church programs because of the war-time restrictions on travel that began to be inaugurated.

During the year 1942 the First Presidency issued at least thirty-six official messages of instruction and counsel. Understandably nearly one-half of them dealt with war and the relation of Church members to national defense and military service. An additional seven documents dealt with modifications in Church auxiliary programs as a result of war emergency.

The key documents for 1942 are probably those for January 17, March 12, April 6, April 22, April 25 and October 3, 1942. The messages for April 6 and October 3, announced in General Conferences of the Church are noteworthy as detailing the position of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints towards war and military service. One of the first public acts of the First Presidency in 1942 was to call for the support of Church members in the United States for the day of prayer announced by the President of the United States.

NOTICE TO BISHOPS OF WARDS

On December 22 the President of the United States declared January 1 "a day of prayer, of asking forgiveness for our shortcomings of the past, of consecration to the tasks of the present, of asking God's help in days to come."

Inasmuch as the Church has no regular and very few special services on New Year's Day, and inasmuch as the Sunday following, January 4, is the regular monthly Fast meeting, the first of the year 1942, we request that all Bishops of Wards, in their Fast meetings, have prayers offered obedient to the request of the President of the United States.

By making this prayer a part of the regular Fast day meetings we shall add to the spirit of prayer which would obtain in a special meeting, the further humility and spiritual uplift which would come from a day of fasting.

In addition to this service on Fast day, we urge all members of the Church to ask the Lord in their family and secret prayers for the blessings for which the President has asked us to petition our Heavenly Father.

HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
