James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

The Church's Part in Defense, April 6, 1942

THE CHURCH'S PART IN DEFENSE Message from the First Presidency

Read by President David O. McKay at the General Conference on Monday, April 6, 1942, in the Assembly Hall.

These are days of so much confusion and misunderstanding, that we think it well to give some statistics covering matters not directly touched in the regular annual report. In considering what follows it should be remembered that the Church-in its wards and stakes-has only some 736,000 members, including men, women, and children.

The Church is trying to do its full share in supporting quasi-governmental charitable and semi-charitable institutions. For example, the Church is one of the largest if not the largest single contributor to the Community Chest in the Salt Lake area and has been for years. It has on occasion taken a similar position in other areas.

We are the largest single contributor in this area to the Red Cross. In addition to our Red Cross local contributions, we have given to the national Red Cross in Washington very large sums, and expect to add to these from time to time.

In so far as contributions towards foreign sufferers in war-ridden countries is concerned, we have sent considerable sums (running into thousands of dollars) to those countries to help our needy Church membership there and have made available for charitable purposes considerable local funds in those countries.

We were arranging to bear the expense of bringing here refugee children from Europe, and of caring for them after their arrivals but the hazards of war stopped the movement of children to this country.

We have made a sizable contribution in furtherance of the effort to stamp out social diseases in and around our army camps.

We have made contributions (also running into thousands of dollars) direct to foreign governmental agencies to assist them in caring for the war-distressed.

Our women are aiding, through our Relief Society, in sewing and other activities, in behalf of our soldiers and our poor and needy.

So far as looking after the poor and needy of the Church, a problem that promises to become increasingly difficult because we must face the possibility soon of adding many to that unfortunate class, the record and achievement of our Welfare plan speak with no uncertain voice. These reports have just been read and it is unnecessary to repeat them here, more than to say that, for these welfare purposes-many of which are usually called charitable by others-we expended during 1941 a total of almost $2,000,000, of which sum $290,828 was raised by purely welfare projects, that is, by gratuitous service to welfare agencies. This does not include the really large amount furnished in neighbor to neighbor help, nor the aid given through the Priesthood quorums to their members.

In the matter of public-that is national-financing, the Church is doing at least its full, even to a bounteous, share.

The Church itself and the three banks and one insurance company which it controls, own outright more than $17,500,000 worth of government bonds, long and short term, which is more than $23.77 for every man, woman, and child in the wards and stakes of the Church. This takes no account of the private holdings of the people which will run into considerable figures, though as the bulk of our people are moderately circumstanced, their private holdings will likewise be moderate. We feel this is a very large contribution, but anticipate it will be somewhat increased later. In saying this, we wish to emphasize that the Church is not only not enormously wealthy but is, on the contrary, as moderately circumstanced as its members. It has no holdings of railroad bonds or stocks, nor of national industrial stocks. Its bond and stock investments, moderate as they are, are almost exclusively confined to local industries which it helped to establish, and which are almost wholly owned by local people.

The Church membership has furnished at least its full quota to the armed service of the United States, if the newspaper estimates of the present size of our army are even approximately accurate.

A survey just now completing shows that out of a total Church membership of 531,626, concerning which we have complete returns, there have been 3,847 inducted into the service through local boards; 5,335 have volunteered into the United States army and navy, and 395 into the armed forces of other countries. 2,161 have entered our own armed service as members of national guard units; 488 have entered the service as reserve officers; while 13,578 are employed in defense industries. This gives a total of 12,226 Church members for the armed service, and for both armed service and defense work a total of 25,804 Church members.

A disturbing factor in our returns is this-they seem to show that a disproportionate number are being taken from rural communities for the fighting service. A survey of certain rural wards shows that out of a Church population of 389,178 some 9,131 were taken into the army and navy. Out of an urban population of 113,280, there were 2,273 who went into the armed forces.

This disparity between rural and urban participation will probably be eliminated as time goes on.

There appears to be a like disparity between the numbers engaged in defense works, the cities contributing more than the country. It may be assumed that this difference will also disappear.

From any point of view, it may be confidently stated that the members of the Church and the Church itself are making their full proportionate contribution in the present emergency.
