James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 6 ( 1975)

Purpose of sacrament meetings, April 25, 1942

1942-April 25-Original circular letter, L.D.S. Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This letter to Presidencies of Stakes, Bishops of Wards, Presidents of Missions and Branches reinforced earlier revelations on the purpose of sacrament meetings. It stated that farewells for missionaries should not be held on Sunday, "but some appropriate weekday."

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah April 25, 1942 To Presidencies of Stakes Bishops of Wards Presidents of Missions Presidents of Branches

Dear Brethren:

In one of the earliest revelations given at the time of the organization of the Church the Lord declared:

"It is expedient that the church meet together often to partake of bread and wine in the remembrance of the Lord Jesus." (D&C 20:75.)

In a revelation given about a year thereafter the Lord said:

"But notwithstanding those things which are written, it always has been given to the elders of my church from the beginning, and ever shall be, to conduct all meetings as they are directed and guided by the Holy Spirit." (D&C 46:2.)

A few months later the Lord again spoke regarding this matter:

"And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day;

"For verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High;

"Nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times;

"But remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord.

"And on this day thou shalt do none other thing, only let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting may be perfect, or, in other words, that thy joy may be full.

"Verily, this is fasting and prayer, or in other words, rejoicing and prayer.

"And inasmuch as ye do these things with thanksgiving, with cheerful hearts and countenances, not with much laughter, for this is sin, but with a glad heart and a cheerful countenance

"Verily I say, that inasmuch as ye do this, the fulness of the earth is yours, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the trees and walketh upon the earth." (D&C 59:9-16.)

A few months later the Lord said:

"And the inhabitants of Zion shall also observe the Sabbath day to keep it holy." (D&C 68:29.)

The Lord has thus made clear the character and sacredness of the Sacrament meeting and of the Sabbath day on which this meeting is to be held. This is the one meeting of the ward which the Lord Himself has prescribed and provided for. His revelations do not authorize even by implication that the holding of the Sacrament meeting should be given up to the holding of any other, nor that the time thereof should be used except as the Lord has indicated in the revelations.

There has gradually crept into the Church a growing tendency for various subsidiary and auxiliary organizations to take over the time of the Sacrament meeting. This has in some areas grown to such proportions that the Bishop has difficulty in finding a Sunday on which he can hold a regular Sacrament meeting. This situation does not accord with the revelations of the Lord and is therefore not right.

Sacrament meetings are the ward meetings. They are for the ward membership as a whole and not for any special group, however important the group may be. There should be one Sabbath Sacrament meeting each week in every ward, and the Bishops of the wards will be expected so to arrange Auxiliary Organization and other meetings as to leave this regular Sacrament meeting each week for the wards.

This matter recently had the very careful consideration of the Council of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve, who unanimously reached the following conclusions, which we pass on to the Bishops of wards and Presidents of stakes for their guidance in this matter:

(1) In the wards the Relief Society, the Sunday School, the Mutual Improvement Associations, the Primary Association, and the Genealogical Society will hold all their special meetings and annual conferences on the evenings of Fast Sundays. The assignment of these evenings to the various Auxiliaries will be made by the Bishopric of the ward after consultation with the Auxiliary Organizations.

(2) During the emergency the several Stake Auxiliary Organizations will share in the use of the evenings of the Stake Quarterly Conference Sundays for their Stake Auxiliary Conferences and other programs under the assignment, direction, and discretion of the Stake Presidency.

(3) Ward missionary farewells should not be held on Sunday but on some appropriate weekday, and all such farewells are to be tendered to the missionary by the Bishop, who will supervise the preparation of the program and who will conduct the meeting.

(4) Where civic, charitable, and like organizations desire to use the ward facilities for holding meetings in the interests of their particular group or cause, these meetings are to be fixed for some day or evening of the week. The time of the Sacrament meeting should not be used for these purposes. But Bishops should always keep in mind that our meeting houses are houses of worship, and the amusement halls connected therewith are impressed with the same character. The buildings should not be used for non-ward activities that are not compatible with their character of houses of worship.

(5) We take occasion to repeat the instructions heretofore given, that Ward Sacrament meetings should be held either on Sunday afternoons or Sunday evenings. They should not be held immediately following Sabbath School, except as to Fast meetings which may be held immediately after Sunday School.

Instructions recently issued covering curtailment of travel for the Auxiliary and other organizations do not affect in any way the ward activities which are to be carried on with just as much intensity as heretofore.

Faithfully yours, HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY, First Presidency.
