Banay, aiga, perhe, famiglia, rodina, fjolskylda, familia, csalad—these words look different, but they all mean the same thing—FAMILY! All families are different. Some have many children, and some have a few children or one child or no children. Some families have children, parents, grandparents, aunts, and uncles all living together. Some children have two parents, and some have one. Some children live with grandparents or other adults.

An important part of living the gospel is showing love for your family. You can show your love for your parents by being helpful and obedient (see Eph. 6:1). The scriptures teach us to be “kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving” (Eph. 4:32).

Prophets teach us the importance of families. President Spencer W. Kimball (1895–1985) said, “The family is the basic unit of the kingdom of God on earth” (“Strengthening the Family—the Basic Unit of the Church,” Ensign, May 1978, 45). President Ezra Taft Benson (1899–1994) said, “Your most important friendships should be with your own brothers and sisters and with your father and mother” (“To the ‘Youth of the Noble Birthright,’” Ensign, May 1986, 43). President Gordon B. Hinckley tells us, “The greatest joys of life are experienced in happy family relationships” (“I Believe,” Tambuli, Mar. 1993, 6).

Heavenly Father has established families to bring us happiness and to prepare us for eternal life.

Trace the circle on page F5 onto heavy paper or felt; then cut out two ovals. Thread a large needle with yarn or embroidery floss, and tie a knot at the end. Whipstitch (bring the needle from underneath, up through the ovals, around the edge, and up through again and again) the ovals together except at the top (see p. F5). Insert one of the messages (or a message of your own) into the ovals. Do something kind for a family member, and leave the ovals on his or her bed afterward.

I love you!
You’re the greatest!

1.  Explain that Heavenly Father blessed us with families to help us return to Him. Give the children a copy of “The Family: A Proclamation to the World” (see Liahona, Oct. 1998, 24). Tell them that it contains the Lord’s teachings regarding the family and that you will be referring to it throughout the year. As you read the first paragraph of the proclamation, have the children listen for what is at the center of His plan for His children. Read together the first two lines of paragraph 7 of the proclamation. Help the children understand that “ordained of God” means Heavenly Father designed marriage and family to last forever. Write these sentences on pieces of paper, and cut out each word. On one side of the board, rearrange the words from paragraph 1. On the other side, rearrange the words from paragraph 7. Divide the children into two groups. Choose children to arrange the words in the correct order as their group repeats the sentences. Scramble the words again, and see if they can do it without the groups repeating it. Encourage the children to keep their copies of the proclamation to use throughout the year.

2.  Divide the children into groups. Assign each group a song or hymn about home and family. Give them a few minutes to read the words to find ideas that help us to show love. Have each group sing their song or hymn and then share their ideas. Have the children draw pictures of ways they can show love for family members. Have as many children as possible explain their picture. Encourage the children to show love for family members during the week.
