H Why Forgive? EALING R ELATIONSHIPS REQUIRES FORGIVENESS F THE ORGIVER FORGIVENESS H EALING R ELATIONSHIPS IS A T ESTIMONY R EQUIRES OF G OD FORGIVENESS ’ S L OVE FORGIVENESS

Often the key to healing relationships begins with forgiveness. God is working in The world tells us to “get even” or “make them sorry!” God says something quite How to Forgive Often the key to healing relationships begins with forgiveness. God is working in The world tells us to “get even” or “make them sorry!” God says something quite

the world to reconcile fallen humans to himself through Christ, and he calls us to be different. God’s love for all people motivates us to love others as well—even the most different. God’s love for all people motivates us to love others as well—even the most

F F ORGIVENESSREES

ministers of reconciliation in this broken world.

unlovable! When we forgive, we demonstrate God’s love for a sinful world.

ministers of reconciliation in this broken world.

A runner who fi nishes a marathon has gotten into the habit of running long before the

Anyone who has been wronged knows that forgiveness is not easy. However, resentment the world to reconcile fallen humans to himself through Christ, and he calls us to be PRACTICE unlovable! When we forgive, we demonstrate God’s love for a sinful world.

start of the race. In the same way, if we want to be able to forgive the big stuff, we have

and bitterness are damaging. If anger is allowed to fester it will spill over into other

areas of life, destroying relationships and leading to a path of revenge.

“Without forgiveness, there’s no future.” —Desmond Tutu, Anglican

“Without forgiveness, there’s no future.” —Desmond Tutu, Anglican

to get into the habit of forgiving the small stuff. Forgiveness, like other virtues, takes

“We forgive with no strings attached; that may require us to forgive

Archbishop who opposed apartheid (racial segregation) in South Africa

Archbishop who opposed apartheid (racial segregation) in South Africa

repeatedly. When we do, we shock the world with God’s power at work daily cultivation. “We forgive with no strings attached; that may require us to forgive

repeatedly. When we do, we shock the world with God’s power at work

Make every effort to live in peace with everyone

within us.”

and to be holy; without holiness no one will “Resentment is like a glass within us.” —Rebecca Nichols Alonzo, who, at age seven, witnessed her mother’s murder Get rid of all bitterness, rage and anger, brawling and slander, along with every form

All this is from God, who reconciled us to himself through Christ and gave us the ministry

see the Lord. See to it that no one falls short of poison that a man drinks; All this is from God, who reconciled us to himself through Christ and gave us the ministry of malice. Be kind and compassionate to one another, forgiving each other, just as in

of reconciliation: that God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ, not counting of reconciliation: that God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ, not counting Christ God forgave you.—Ephesians 4:31–32

of the grace of God and that no bitter root then he sits down and waits But I tell you: Love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, that you may But I tell you: Love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, that you may

people’s sins against them. And he has committed to us the message of reconciliation. people’s sins against them. And he has committed to us the message of reconciliation. Above all, love each other deeply, because love covers over a multitude of sins. We are therefore Christ’s ambassadors, as though God were making his appeal through be children of your Father in heaven. He causes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. If you love those who love you, —Hebrews 12:14–15 grows up to cause trouble and defi le many. for his enemy to die.”

We are therefore Christ’s ambassadors, as though God were making his appeal through

—Author Unknown

us. We implore you on Christ’s behalf: Be reconciled to God.—2 Corinthians 5:18–20 and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. If you love those who love you, —1 Peter 4:8 us. We implore you on Christ’s behalf: Be reconciled to God.—2 Corinthians 5:18–20

(See also Romans 5:6–11)

Finally, all of you, be like-minded, be sympathetic, “Forgiveness is unlocking what reward will you get? Are not even the tax collectors doing that? And if you greet EXAMINE (See also Romans 5:6–11)

love one another, be compassionate and humble. the door to set someone free only your own people, what are you doing more than others? Do not even pagans do that? Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect.—Matthew 5:44–48

Once you were alienated from God and were enemies in your minds because of your do that? Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect.—Matthew 5:44–48 Recognizing our own need for God’s forgiveness enables us to see our offender’s need

Do not repay evil with evil or insult with insult. and realizing you were the Once you were alienated from God and were enemies in your minds because of your

evil behavior. But now he has reconciled you by Christ’s physical body through death evil behavior. But now he has reconciled you by Christ’s physical body through death for mercy. The practice of the Lord’s Supper (Communion) reminds us that we are

On the contrary, repay evil with blessing, because prisoner!” —Author Unknown to present you holy in his sight, without blemish and free from accusation—if you all fl awed and sinful people in need of forgiveness. Self-righteousness will breed an

to present you holy in his sight, without blemish and free from accusation—if you

to this you were called so that you may inherit a

continue in your faith, established and fi rm, and do not move from the hope held out continue in your faith, established and fi rm, and do not move from the hope held out unforgiving heart, but through humility we can learn to extend mercy to others. blessing.—1 Peter 3:8–9

DEALING WITH ANGER in the gospel.—Colossians 1:21–23a

F in the gospel.—Colossians 1:21–23a T HAT O Y OU W ILL BE FORGIVEN

ORGIVE S

If anyone has caused grief, he has not so much grieved me as he has grieved all of you, Sometimes anger and bitterness prevent us from

If we want to be forgiven ourselves, we must extend that same forgiveness to others, If anyone has caused grief, he has not so much grieved me as he has grieved all of you, “That is the whole lesson: the sins of others you see, but your own sin

to some extent—not to put it too severely. The punishment infl icted on him by the experiencing the freedom of forgiveness. The following

steps can help us break free from the chains of anger.

allowing forgiveness to triumph over the desire to extract retribution.

majority is suffi cient. Now instead, you ought to forgive and comfort him, so that he to some extent—not to put it too severely. The punishment infl icted on him by the you fail to see. In repentance, recognize God’s mercy toward you; in

will not be overwhelmed by excessive sorrow. I urge you, therefore, to reaffi rm your majority is suffi cient. Now instead, you ought to forgive and comfort him, so that he this way alone will you be able to forgive.”

For if you forgive other people when they sin against you, your heavenly Father will will not be overwhelmed by excessive sorrow. I urge you, therefore, to reaffi rm your pastor and theologian who was imprisoned and executed for his opposition to Nazism

love for him.—2 Corinthians 2:5–8

grace (Col. 1:13–14).

also forgive you. But if you do not forgive others their sins, your Father will not forgive love for him.—2 Corinthians 2:5–8 your sins. —Matthew 6:14–15

I am forgiven by the grace of God!

He who conceals their sins does not prosper, but the one who confesses and renounces

DOES FORGIVENESS MEAN RECONCILIATION?

D 2. Be willing to confess your bitterness and MEAN R ECONCILIATION?

them fi nds mercy.—Proverbs 28:13

And when you stand

A common reason people withhold forgiveness is that they think that forgiveness OES FORGIVENESS resentment to God (Ps. 51:10–12).

praying, if you hold anything

God, forgive my bitter attitudes and my

against anyone, forgive them,

requires immediate and total reconciliation with the offender. People who have been A common reason people withhold forgiveness is that they think that forgiveness But who can discern their own errors? Forgive my hidden faults.—Psalm 19:12

requires immediate and total reconciliation with the offender. People who have been

so that your Father in heaven

hurt ask: If I forgive, does that mean I have to put myself back in the abusive situation? anger toward .

hurt ask: If I forgive, does that mean I have to put myself back in the abusive situation? Then he took the cup, gave thanks and offered it to them, saying, “Drink from it, all of

may forgive you your sins.

Must I force myself to be best friends again with the person who wronged me? Am 3. Recognize that your anger is a violation of God’s Must I force myself to be best friends again with the person who wronged me? Am you. This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness

—Mark 11:25

Word (Matt. 6:14–15) and choose to release the

I required to give the betrayer my full trust?

I required to give the betrayer my full trust?

of sins.”—Matthew 26:27–28

anger (Heb. 12:14–15).

Do not judge, and you will not

No, forgiveness is not the same as reconciliation. Forgiveness involves letting go No, forgiveness is not the same as reconciliation. Forgiveness involves letting go GIVE With the Holy Spirit’s help, I choose to

be judged. Do not condemn,

of vengeance and hatred for being wronged. Reconciliation can be described as of vengeance and hatred for being wronged. Reconciliation can be described as Anger is a natural response when we are harmed. But God’s Word says to be careful lay down this anger. I release my desire for

and you will not be condemned.

“restoration to harmony in relationship.” One person can forgive, but it takes two “restoration to harmony in relationship.” One person can forgive, but it takes two that our anger does not result in taking revenge. We should not add sin upon sin, but revenge on .

Forgive, and you will be

people to restore a broken relationship. Forgiveness alone neither guarantees nor people to restore a broken relationship. Forgiveness alone neither guarantees nor leave the situation where it belongs—in God’s hands. (See also 1 Thess. 5:15) forgiven.—Luke 6:37

demands reconciliation. Often much more is needed before reconciliation can (or demands reconciliation. Often much more is needed before reconciliation can (or

you need to speak to the person you need to

Speak and act as those who

should) take place, for example: repentance, restitution of the wrong, gaining back should) take place, for example: repentance, restitution of the wrong, gaining back Do not say, “I’ll pay you back for this wrong!” Wait for the L forgive (James 2:12–13).

are going to be judged by the

trust, or evidence of genuine change. If forgiveness is taken to mean “going back” to trust, or evidence of genuine change. If forgiveness is taken to mean “going back” to and he will avenge you.—Proverbs 20:22

God, I ask for your Spirit to guide me into

law that gives freedom, because

the offender as if nothing ever happened, then people will end up only with a cheap the offender as if nothing ever happened, then people will end up only with a cheap In your anger do not sin: Do not let the what I should do next.

judgment without mercy will be

imitation of reconciliation, far unlike the genuine harmony in a restored relationship imitation of reconciliation, far unlike the genuine harmony in a restored relationship sun go down while you are still angry, Go through these steps repeatedly until words

shown to anyone who has not

described in Scripture (1 Thess. 5:11; Rom. 12:10).

been merciful. Mercy triumphs

become experience. described in Scripture (1 Thess. 5:11; Rom. 12:10).

and do not give the devil a foothold.

over judgment.—James 2:12–13

—Ephesians 4:26–27

This free eChart is taken from the pamphlet 9 8What the Bible Says About Forgiveness ISBN 9781596364400. The full-color pamphlet 109 © 2014 Rose Publishing You may print 10 copies, but do not post on the will teach you key biblical principles about forgiveness. Answers questions including: What is forgiveness? Why do we need forgiveness? internet or send via email.Your friends may sign up for these Free Rose

Why do we need to forgive others? Save $5 on your $25 order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com.

Bible eCharts & Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

-2-
