Revelation 4

Contents

The Revelation of John the Apostle: A New Rendition: A New Rendition

Page 5

Things Which Must Come Hereafter (4:1)

1 After this, I looked, and there was a door opened in heaven, and the first voice that I heard was like a trumpet speaking with me, saying, “Come up here, and I will show you the things that must happen after this.”

The Throne in Heaven (4:2–3)

2 Immediately I was in the spirit, and there was a throne placed in heaven, and someone was sitting on the throne. 3 And the one sitting there was similar in appearance to a stone of jasper and carnelian, and there was a rainbow surrounding the throne similar in appearance to an emerald.

The Twenty-Four Elders and the Sea of Glass (4:4–6)

4 And surrounding the throne there were twenty-four thrones, and on the thrones twenty-four elders were sitting, dressed in white clothing, and on their heads were golden crowns. 5 And from the throne came lightnings and rumblings and thunderings, and seven lampstands of fire were burning before the throne, which are the seven spirits of God. 6 And in front of the throne was like a sea of glass similar to crystal. And in the center, that is, around the throne, there were four animals full of eyes in front and back.

The Four Living Creatures (4:7–8)

7 And the first animal was like a lion, and the second animal was like a calf, and the third animal had a face like a man, and the fourth animal was like a flying eagle. 8 And the four animals each had six wings, and were filled with eyes all around on the inside. And day and night they never ceased saying, “Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who was and who is and who is coming.”

The Scene of Praise (4:9–11)

9 And whenever the animals give glory and honor and thanks to him who sits on the throne, who lives forever and ever, 10 the twenty-four elders fall down before him who sits on the throne and worship him who lives forever and ever, and throw their crowns in front of the throne saying: 11 “You are worthy, our Lord and God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and by your will they came into existence and were created.”

The Revelation of John the Apostle: A New Rendition: A New Rendition

Page 5

More from this book

The Revelation of John the Apostle: A New Rendition: A New Rendition