Revelation 16

Contents

The Revelation of John the Apostle: A New Rendition: A New Rendition

Page 19

The Bowl Plagues Begin (16:1)

1 I heard a loud voice from the temple saying to the seven angels, “Go and pour out the seven bowls of God’s wrath on the earth.”

The First Three Bowls (16:2–7)

2 The first angel departed and poured out his bowl onto the earth, and a foul and painful sore appeared on those people who had the mark of the beast and who worshipped his image. 3 Then the second angel poured out his bowl into the sea, and it turned into blood like the blood of a dead man, and every living thing that was in the sea died. 4 And the third angel poured out his bowl into the rivers and springs of water, and they became blood. 5 And I heard the angel of the waters saying, “You are just, you who are and were, the holy one, because you have imposed these punishments. 6 Because they shed the blood of saints and prophets, you have given them blood to drink, which they deserve.” 7 And I heard the altar saying, “Yes, Lord God Almighty, true and just are your judgments.”

The Fourth and Fifth Bowls (16:8–11)

8 Then the fourth angel poured out his bowl on the sun, and it was allowed to scorch people with fire. 9 And they were severely burned, and cursed the name of God who had control over these plagues, and would not repent to give to him glory. 10 And the fifth angel poured out his bowl onto the throne of the beast, and its kingdom turned dark, and they were gnawing their tongues in agony. 11 They cursed the God of heaven because of their afflictions and because of their sores, and yet they did not repent of the things they were doing.

The Sixth Bowl (16:12–16)

12 And the sixth angel poured out his bowl into the great river Euphrates, and its water dried up to prepare the way of the kings of the east. 13 Then I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. 14 For they are demonic spirits who perform signs, who go forth to the kings of the whole world to gather them together for battle on the great day of God Almighty. 15 See, I come like a thief. Blessed is he who watches and takes care of his clothing so that he does not have to walk around naked, and people see his shame. 16 And the spirits gathered the kings together at a place called in Hebrew Armageddon.

The Seventh Bowl (16:17–21)

17 And the seventh angel poured out his bowl into the air, and a loud voice came out of the temple from the throne, saying, “It is done!” 18 And there were lightning bolts, and rumblings, and thunder claps, and also a great earthquake. Such a great earthquake had not happened since people had been on the earth. 19 The great city split into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell. God remembered Babylon the great to give her the wine cup of the fury of his wrath. 20 Every island disappeared and no mountains were found. 21 Large hail stones weighing about ninety pounds fell from the sky on people, and they cursed God because the plague of hail was so severe.

The Revelation of John the Apostle: A New Rendition: A New Rendition

Page 19

More from this book

The Revelation of John the Apostle: A New Rendition: A New Rendition