Revelation 19

Contents

The Revelation of John the Apostle: A New Rendition: A New Rendition

Page 24

In Praise of a God of Judgment (19:1–5)

1 After these things I heard a loud sound like a large crowd in heaven saying, “Hallelujah! Salvation, glory and power belong to our God. 2 For his judgments are true and just. For he has judged the great whore who corrupted the earth with her fornication, and he has taken vengeance on her for the blood of his servants.” 3 And a second time they said, “Hallelujah! The smoke goes up from her forever and ever.” 4 And the twenty-four elders and the four animals fell down and worshipped God who sat upon his throne, saying, “Amen. Hallelujah!” 5 And a voice came forth from the throne, saying, “Praise our God all you who are his servants and who fear him, both small and great.”

The Marriage of the Lamb (19:6–10)

6 And I heard a sound like a large crowd and like the sound of many waters and like the sound of loud thunder saying, “Hallelujah! For the Lord God Almighty has begun to reign. 7 Let us rejoice and be glad, and let us give glory to him, for the marriage of the Lamb has come, and his wife has prepared herself. 8 And to her it has been granted to be clothed in splendid, pure linen. For the linen is the righteous deeds of the saints.” 9 And he said to me, “Write. ‘Blessed are those who have been invited to the marriage feast of the Lamb.’” And he told me, “These words are true and of God.” 10 And I fell at his feet to worship him. And he said to me, “Look, do not do that! I am your fellow servant and one of the brethren who have a testimony of Jesus. Worship God. For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.”

The Rider on the White Horse (19:11–16)

11 And I saw the heavens opened, and there was a white horse, and he who rode on it is called faithful and true, and in righteousness he judges and makes war. 12 His eyes were a flame of fire, and on his head were many diadems, and he had a name written which no one but he himself knows. 13 And he was dressed in a robe dyed with blood, and his name is called “The Word of God.” 14 And the armies in heaven followed him on white horses, clothed in pure, white linen. 15 And out of his mouth went forth a sharp sword,2 and with it he will strike down the nations, and he himself will shepherd them with a rod of iron,3 and he treads the winepress of the fury and wrath of God Almighty. 16 On his cloak and on his thigh he has a name written, “King of kings and Lord of lords.”

The Battle of the Warrior-king (19:17–21)

17 And I saw an angel standing in the sun, and he cried with a loud voice speaking to every bird that flew high in the sky, “Come, gather for the great feast of God, 18 so you can eat the flesh of kings and of generals and of mighty men and of horses and of those who ride them, even the flesh of all, both slaves and freemen, both small and great.” 19 Then I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies gathered together to make war against the rider on the horse and against his army. 20 And the beast was captured, and the false prophet with it who performed miracles on its behalf, by which he deceived those who had received the mark of the beast and those who worshipped its image. These two were cast alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulfur. 21 And the rest were killed by the sword that came out of the mouth of the rider on the horse, and all the birds gorged themselves on their flesh.

The Revelation of John the Apostle: A New Rendition: A New Rendition

Page 24

More from this book

The Revelation of John the Apostle: A New Rendition: A New Rendition