Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Preface

The author takes pleasure in presenting to the public the third volume of the Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia, which, like its predecessors, contains life sketches of faithful and active members of the Church. The original plan has been carried out in almost every detail. The three volumes, for which a common index has been prepared, may be considered the foundation of a great literary work which ultimately may contain sketches of all faithful men and women who have devoted their lives to establish once more upon the earth the Church of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. As we have proceeded with our labors of compilation, we have been pleased to note on the part of intelligent readers an increased interest and appreciation of a publication of this kind, and we feel assured that the next decade (as we approach the centennial year of the organization of the Church) will witness still greater interest in the same as a work of reference. The three volumes now published, containing a vast amount of original matter which cannot be found elsewhere, will be valuable as a source of information for future historians and biographers.

The Encyclopedia is also valuable to Latter-day Saints from a genealogical standpoint, as each sketch is practically a link in the great genealogical chain, which reaches as far back into the mysterious past as there are records and traditions, and points indefinitely to the great future; the author has endeavored in each sketch to give the names of both parents and children.

The three volumes of the Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia now in print contain about 3,000 biographical sketches, 2,500 pages of closely printed matter and 2,147 portraits. It includes all the general authorities of the Church, a large percentage of the presidents of Stakes and Missions, Bishops of Wards, martyrs of the Church, missionaries dying abroad, members of Zion's Camp and the Mormon Battalion, pioneers, prominent members of auxiliary organizations, etc. We have on hand at least ten thousand more sketches in manuscript form, which may be made parts of future volumes.

In selecting material for the Encyclopedia, merit and not money has been the basis of operation; those entitled to notice, rich or poor, living or dead, have been considered alike in the writing of sketches. The literary work has been done as a labor of love, the means realized from the sale of books having all been expended for printing, binding, making half-tone portraits, traveling, etc.

Through the generosity of President Heber J. Grant and counselors, Elders Jesse Knight, Jos. W. Taylor, P. W. Madsen, Thos. E. Jeremy, Wm. N. Williams, Stephen L. Chipman and others we have been enabled to defray the expenses of printing biographical sketches of many faithful men and women, long since gone to the "great beyond," who seem not to have been remembered by their relatives.

Trusting that our efforts in compiling and editing the Biographical Encyclopedia have not been in vain, we now dedicate the three volumes of the work to the Latter-day Saints and their friends who are students of Church history.

ANDREW JENSON.
