Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Biographies

Adams, John Quincy

Adams, John Quincy, Bishop of the Logan Fifth Ward, and a prominent and influential citizen of Cache valley, Utah, was born in Logan, Utah, Dec. 16, 1866, where he has resided during his whole life. He attended the common schools and the B. Y. College at Logan and was among the first to attend the now famous winter course of the Agricultural College. He was blessed April 4, 1867, by his father, Hugh Adams; baptized July 5, 1877, by C. L. Olsen, and confirmed on the same day by Counselor Robert Henderson. He was ordained a Deacon Jan. 25, 1879, by Andrew King; ordained an Elder Dec. 14, 1891, by Bishop Wm. Hyde; ordained a Seventy March 23, 1898, by Apostle John Henry Smith, and a High Priest Jan. 20, 1901, by Stake president Joseph Morrell. Bishop Adams has filled many positions of trust in the Church. As a boy he was president of a Deacon's quorum for three years and later served for one year as president of the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Logan Fifth Ward. On Jan. 20, 1901, he was set apart as second counselor to Bishop Wm. Hyde of the Logan Fifth Ward, and on July 27, 1902, he was set apart by Apostle Marriner W. Merrill as first counselor to Bishop Hyde. On March 24, 1907, he was sustained as Bishop of the Logan Fifth Ward and on April 28, 1907, he was ordained and set apart to that position by Apostle George Teasdale. During the administration of Bishop Adams the Logan Fifth Ward has grown in all of its divisions, and is now one of the most prosperous Wards in the Church. It is fully and completely organized and a good spirit prevails among the people, who are loyally devoted to their untiring and self-sacrificing Bishop, who devotes practically all of his time to his labors in behalf of the people. Bishop Adams has also been successful in his temporal affairs. As a young man he was one of the pioneers of dry-farming in Cache county, and in the face of much doubt on the part of his neighbors he has successfully developed and now operates one of the best farms in Cache valley. His example has been followed by many to their great temporal good. Bishop Adams also took an active part in the construction of the West Cache Irrigation Canal, which has brought under irrigation many thousands of acres of land which formerly could only be dryfarmed. He served as director of the canal for two terms. In 1907 (March 14th) Governor John C. Cutler appointed Bishop Adams a trustee of the Utah Agricultural College, to which position he has been reappointed each succeeding term since that time. He has worked untiringly as a trustee and has been an important factor in helping onward the work of the Utah Agricultural College. On March 23, 1898, he left for a mission to the Northwestern States, from which he returned March 23, 1900. From Jan. 16, 1913, to May 29, 1913, he also filled a short mission to the Central States. Bishop Adams is an active and energetic worker in behalf of the Church and the State, and enjoys the confidence and respect of all who are acquainted with him, whether in religion, business or politics. He is an excellent representative of the young men of "Mormonism."
