Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Anderson, Alice Brooks

Anderson, Alice Brooks, wife of Andrew Anderson, was born Feb. 16, 1835, at Bolton, Lancashire, England, the daughter of Samuel Brooks and Sarah Ashley. Her father was a painter by trade and she was one of three children. When seventeen years of age, she became a convert to "Mormonism" by hearing Elders preach at Bolton and she was baptized June 26, 1849. Her parents being highly prejudiced against the saints, she labored hard to get the consent of her parents to be baptized. By working as a steam weaver in a cotton mill she earned means wherewith to emigrate to Zion, but experienced great difficulties in getting away from home, as her father and mother objected seriously to her going to Utah, but she finally succeeded in getting away and crossed the Atlantic in the ship "Horizon," together with nine hundred other saints. From Boston the journey was continued to Iowa, whence she crossed the plains in the ill-fated Capt. Edward Martin's handcart company. She writes concerning this journey: "Some days we traveled from ten to fifteen miles and one day we journeyed thirty miles. Two persons were assigned to each handcart and only seventeen pounds of baggage was allowed each passenger. Two ox teams accompanying the handcart company carried tents and rations. We usually pitched our tents at night near water and gathered buffalo chips for fuel. Having left most of our clothes behind, we were compelled to spread gunny-sacks on the snow for bedding. We often sat and held our feet in our hands at night to keep them from freezing. Our eatables consisted chiefly of flour, tea and sugar, and we had to depend upon the killing of buffaloes for meat. We had to wade rivers, and finally in a very exhausted condition we were helped to the Valley by teams sent out to meet us, but we had spent three weeks in the snow before relief came. During that time, when our cattle gave out, we boiled their bones for soup, as there was no meat. We also roasted raw hides and ate them. At last we found ourselves encamped in a ravine near Devils Gate with just four ounces of flour to each person per day for four days. A great number of our people died, sometimes half a dozen a day, and on one occasion sixteen persons were buried in one grave. People would walk until exhausted and then drop down by the wayside dead, leaving their bodies to be eaten by wolves, as the survivors, on account of the frozen ground, were not able to dig graves deep enough to secure them from ravenous beasts. In their starving condition both men and women seemed to become devoid of all human feeling and lost all affection for each other. The children's faces sometimes assumed the appearance of monkeys, and they would frequently grab pieces of food out of each others mouths and die crying for bread. We climbed mountains to get icicles off the sage brush and melted snow to obtain water wherewith to mix our flour. At Devils Gate the people were called together for prayer and asked if they were willing to die if the Lord so willed it, or if they were sorry they had come. They all answered that they were willing to die if the Lord so willed it, but they were not sorry they had come. Almost at the same moment was witnessed the approach of Joseph A. Young on a white horse. He was hailed by us as the arrival of an angel. Men and women surrounded him, weeping and holding onto him, pleading with him to save them from death. Elder Young went back and reported, and the next night we received a pound of flour each. In traveling through Echo canyon, camp fires were built every quarter of a mile to thaw out those who lingered behind. At last we arrived in Salt Lake City, Nov. 30, 1856." In Dec., 1856, Sister Brooks went to East Weber, Utah, where she met Andrew Anderson, to whom she was married March 9, 1857, in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City. Together with her husband she participated in the "great move" south in 1858 on account of Johnston's army. They had piled straw around their homes before leaving them with a view to setting fire to them, if necessary. After "the move" the family located at Hyrum, Cache Valley, Utah, where they frequently were exposed to Indians. Sister Anderson is the mother of ten children, five boys and five girls; four boys and three girls are now living (1918). While in a starving and freezing condition on the plains, and also later when passing through great difficulties, Sister Anderson felt encouraged in remembering a prophecy uttered by a brother speaking in tongues in England, who blessed her and said she should gather to the land of Zion and become a mother in Israel. This prophecy was literally fulfilled. Sister Anderson died a faithful Latter-day Saint Aug. 24, 1915, at Hyrum, Cache county, Utah.
