Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Earl, Sylvester Henry

Earl, Sylvester Henry, one of the original Utah pioneers of 1847, was born August 16, 1815, in Ohio, the son of Joseph Earl and Dorcas Winom. He was baptized Feb. 29, 1837, by Elder Chas. C. Rich. Immediately afterwards he migrated, in company with Elder Rich and Geo. M. Hinkle and others to Far West, Mo., arriving there April 1, 1837. Soon afterwards he purchased a tract of land and several cows and prepared to make a home. He was ordained an Elder by Hyrum Smith at a conference at Far West in November, 1837, and started on a mission through Illinois, Ohio and Indiana, Feb. 15, 1838. On the way he met the Prophet Joseph Smith (at Jacksonville) who gave him a blessing, promising him that he should never lack for words when preaching the gospel. After raising up a branch of the Church in Schuyler county, Ill., he continued his journey eastward into Ohio, preaching and baptizing by the way. His mother died Sept. 15, 1838, and was buried by him by the side of his father who had died sixteen years before. He then returned to Illinois, bringing his two younger brothers (Wilmer J., and James E. Earl) with him to a place, where he had previously raised up a small branch of the Church. In 1839 (Jan. 28th) he married a young lady by the name of Lois Caroline Owen, whom he had previously baptized. By this time the Saints were settling in Illinois. In April, 1841, he was sent on a mission to Indiana and Ohio, and after his return from this mission he purchased a farm (near the city of Nauvoo) onto which he moved his family in the fall of 1842. In the spring of 1844 he spent several weeks preaching the gospel in the southern part of Illinois. Being impressed by the spirit of the Lord he returned home and found that the mob had begun their depredations against the Saints near Nauvoo, his family being threatened that if they did not move away in three days they would be burned out. The next day he went out to assist in keeping the mob out of Nauvoo and returned to his family in two weeks. Bro. Earl, as a member of the Nauvoo Legion, was present when the Prophet Joseph Smith made his famous speech before the Legion, just prior to his martyrdom. Soon after the death of the Prophet he moved his family into the city of Nauvoo. In the fall of 1844 he was ordained a Seventy and became a member of the 10th quorum of Seventy. Later he was set apart as one of the presidents of the 20th quorum. During the summer of 1845 he worked on the Nauvoo Temple and in the winter of 1845-46 he was one of the guards of the Temple and also assisted in guarding the homes of the leading men of the Church, sharing with the Saints in all the trials and afflictions of these days. Finally, on Feb. 10, 1846, he took his family and, together with many others, crossed the Mississippi, starting on their long journey to the West. They all suffered much, and many being destitute of food, Bro. Earl, together with nineteen of his brethren, was sent into Missouri, in March, 1846, to work for food. He returned two months later to the camps of Israel. He then moved on westward, crossed the Missouri river and prepared for the winter, during which many of the Saints lost their lives through exposure. In April, 1847, he left Winter Quarters as one of the original band of pioneers for the Rocky mountains, arriving in Great Salt Lake Valley in July, 1847. In August, 1847, together with a company of about forty men, he started back to the Missouri river. The company being very destitute of food, he on one occasion traded his shirt to the Indians for buffalo meat; afterwards he made himself another shirt out of his wagon cover. The company continued the journey and arrived at Winter Quarters Oct. 21, 1847. In May, 1848, together with a company of Saints, he again took his journey across the plains, and on his arrival in the valley he built a home for his family in the Nineteenth Ward, Salt Lake City. In October, 1852, he was called on a mission to England. He started on this mission Sept. 15, 1852, and arrived in Liverpool Jan. 5, 1853. After laboring faithfully as a missionary in Great Britain, he returned to Salt Lake City in September, 1855, having been absent from home about three years. Soon after his return he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as first counselor to Bishop Alonzo H. Raleigh of the Nineteenth Ward. In October, 1855, he married Margaret Emily Jones. Together with his eldest son, Wilbert B. Earl, he spent part of the winter of 1857-58 in Echo canyon, together with others who were sent out to prevent Johnston's army from entering the Valley. In the fall of 1861 he was called to take his family and move into the southern part of Utah; he settled in Pine valley where he engaged in saw mill business and stock raising. In December, 1871, he moved part of his family to Middleton, near St. George, where he died, July 23, 1872. He was buried in the St. George cemetery the following day. Elder Earl was a stalwart defender of the eternal truths revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith. He yielded obedience to the principle of plural marriage, and with his two wives became the father of thirteen children; seven of his children survived him.
