Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Kunzler, Arnold J.

Kunzler, Arnold J., an Elder who died in the missionary field, was born March 2, 1896, in Switzerland, the son of Jacob Kunzler. His parents left their native country for the gospel's sake in 1873. Arnold J. was educated in the public schools of Rosette and the Weber Stake Academy at Ogden. Utah. From his earliest youth he took an active part in Church affairs and was a diligent worker in the local Sunday school and Y. M. M. I. A. His father was engaged in agricultural pursuits all his life and was ever ready and willing to act in any religious capacity to which he was called. For two years he acted as Bishop of Rosette Ward. The steadfastness of the father was reflected in the lives of his children, another son having honorably filled a mission in Switzerland. Arnold J. was set apart for a mission to the Central States, and after his arrival in the mission April 13, 1917, he labored a short time in Kansas City and St. Joseph, Mo., and later in Springfield, Mo. From the first he displayed much earnestness in the work of the Lord and up to the time he became ill in the middle of August, 1917, he won many friends and made a good impression on those whom he met, by his humble testimony. When it was found that he had typhoid fever, he was removed to a Springfield hospital, where the best of medical attention was given him. His father arrived at his bedside Oct. 6, 1917, and for some time hopes were entertained for his recovery, but he grew worse and finally passed away Oct. 8, 1917. His body was accompanied home by his father and funeral services were held at Rosette on Sunday, Oct. 15, 1917. Elder Kunzler was always jovial and kind, but there was no frivolity in his nature. He looked for the best in mankind and gave his best in return. Obedient to those in authority over him in the Priesthood, he was always ready to do his duty and could be depended upon in any emergency. He left many friends and investigators as evidence of his diligence as a missionary in Springfield, Missouri.
