Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Lamoreaux, Andrew L.

Lamoreaux, Andrew L., president of the French Mission, was born in Scarborough, Upper Canada, in 1813, the son of John McCord Lamoreaux and Ann Losley. He joined the Church in Canada and migrated to Nauvoo, Illinois, where he became well acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith, and migrated to the mountains at an early day. At a special conference held in Salt Lake City Sept. 15, 1852, he was called and appointed to preside over the French Mission. After his arrival on the Island of Jersey in April, 1853, he entered immediately upon the duties of his mission, and during the short period of his presidency he labored indefatigably to promote the interest of the mission. He translated and published some very valuable and useful works into the French language, assisted by Louis Alphonzo Bertrand. Among the works translated were the "Voice of Warning," "The Book of Doctrine and Covenants," extracts from "The Seer," treating upon plural marriage, etc. He selected some two hundred hymns, which with other manuscript copy and publications were placed in the hands of the presidency of the British Mission. Returning from his mission, Elder Lamoreaux crossed the Atlantic with a company of saints from the French Mission numbering seventy-four souls, most of whom had been brought into the Church through his perseverance and indefatigable energy. Going inland Elder Lamoreaux arrived in St. Louis, Mo., June 2, 1855, with several hundred passengers, who had crossed the Atlantic in the ships "Chimborazo" and "Samuel Curling," including the French company. On arriving at St. Louis he took up his residence with James H. Hart, his co-adjutor and counselor during the first twelve months of his presidency of the French Mission. Elder Lamoreaux spent Sunday, June 10th, at the camp, instructing and counseling the saints under his charge. In the evening he addressed the congregation in a large church with considerable spirit and energy and every soul appeared to rejoice under his spiritual and excellent remarks. Elder Lamoreaux had been suffering several days with the diarrhoea and remarked that what on all former occasions had relieved him appeared to have no effect upon him this time. He continued to grow worse, sickness and cramps seizing upon his robust frame, causing a gradual and certain decline. The Elders and some of the sisters were very attentive to him during his sufferings and administered to him repeatedly, but his spirit finally took its flight on Wednesday, June 13, 1855, the immediate cause of his death being the so-called Asiatic cholera. The St. Louis "Luminary," a periodical published in the interest of the Church at St. Louis, Mo., at that time, spoke very highly of the faithfulness and integrity of Elder Lamoreaux, who was held in great esteem by all who knew him. The following is quoted from a letter written to George A. Smith by Erastus Snow In Salt Lake City Sept. 3, 1865: "I have just learned from the family of the late Andrew L. Lamoreaux that Joseph Smith, during his tour to Washington in 1839, stopped with them in Dayton, Ohio, and before leaving laid his hands on Elder Lamoreaux and blessed him, and prophecied upon his head, that he would go on a mission to France, learn another tongue and do much good, but that he would not live to return to his family, as he would fall by the way as a martyr. The Prophet wept,, as he blessed him and told him these things, adding that it was pressed upon him and he could not refrain from giving utterance to it. Elder Lamoreaux talked with his family about it when he left them in 1852, and endeavored to persuade them that this was not the time and mission upon which he should fall, but to believe that he would at this time be permitted to return again. When the "Luminary" brought the tidings of his death, they exclaimed, 'Surely, Brother Joseph was a Prophet, for all his words have come to pass.' Thinking this an incident that should not be lost, I have penned it from the mouth of his eldest daughter and submit it to you and would add that his excessive labor and toil in providing for the company under his charge during the hot weather in June, in the unhealthy climate of St. Louis, predisposed him to that terrible scourge that laid him low, and thus he fell a sacrifice for his brethren."
