Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Layton, John H.

Layton, John H., a prominent Utah pioneer and Church member, was born Dec. 6, 1855, at Grantsville, Tooele county, Utah, the eldest son of Christopher Layton and Isabelle Golightly. He was baptized by Edward Phillips, Nov. 4, 1866, and was afterwards ordained to the Priesthood. While yet a youth he came to Davis county, with his parents, and resided there the remainder of his life. At the age of nineteen he was sent to Church Island in the Great Salt Lake to take care of large herds of sheep and cattle, a part of which belonged to the Church. He owned a 160 acre farm and a house on that island. Later he became one of the pioneers of the northern part of Davis county, having moved to Layton in 1879 with his wife, Hannah M. Phillips (daughter of Edward Phillips and Hannah Simmons), who was born April 5, 1859, at Kaysville, Utah, and who was married to Bro. Layton, by Daniel H. Wells, Jan. 23, 1879. This union was subsequently blessed with thirteen children, namely, Heber John, Hannah Isabel, Delbert P., Lottie Jane, Chloe Louise, Edward P., Luella and Leo (twins), Leona, Harold Christopher, Richard Glenn, Frankie Josephine and Norma Gladys. Bro. Layton purchased a portion of that barren desert land of sand hills and sage brush for which the so-called Sandridge was noted, but his land became one of the finest farms in that section of Davis county, Utah. Being a man of forceful character, he wielded an influence among his neighbors and did perhaps as much as any one man in that part of the State to make a home for himself and others, thus following in the wake of his illustrious father. From the beginning of his early boyhood and throughout life John H. Layton understood that it required patience, perseverance and hard work to establish himself in the desert, but he seemed to grow greater as the years rolled on and became equal to every task placed upon him. He was not a believer in theory but in works, and he was indeed a man of action. Thus he became both a successful farmer and business man. He was a director and one of the organizers of the First National Bank of Layton, and director in the Ellison Ranching Company of Nevada, being a stockholder in both companies; he was also a stockholder in the Taylor Sugar Company, the Farmers' Union, Davis and Weber County Canal Co., and Kay's Creek Irrigation Co. Bro. Layton was ordained a Seventy Dec. 20, 1907, and was active in that calling until the time of his death, which occurred at Layton Feb. 3, 1920. Bro. Layton was a whole-souled and congenial man, who made scores of steadfast friends. He was uncompromising on the lines of honesty and equity. His word was as good as his bond, and his promises could always be relied upon. One of his main characteristics was his love for his fellow-men. His daughter Leone was filling a twenty-two-month mission in California at the time of her father's demise, on which account she was called home. Bro. Layton left a wife and ten living children, besides ten grandchildren. Three children ( Hannah Isabel, Leo and Richard Glenn) preceded him into the Great Beyond.
