Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Lee, Severin N.

Lee, Severin N., Stake clerk of Box Elder Stake and a resident of Brigham City, Utah, was born March 31, 1852, in Vreilev sogn, Hjörring amt, Denmark, the son of Christian N. Lee and Inger Mogensen. He was baptized Aug. 31, 1864, by Ove C. Oresen and confirmed a member of the Church the same day by Niels P. Lee. Two years later he emigrated to America, with his widowed mother, crossing the Atlantic in the sailing vessel "Kenilworth," which arrived in New York July 17, 1866. He traveled by freight trains to St. Joseph, Missouri, thence by boat up the Missouri river to the village of Wyoming, Neb., and crossed the plains in Captain Lowry's ox train, but arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 6, 1866, with a mule train, sent out to meet the emigrants. He located in Milton, Morgan county, where he learned the cooper's trade. In 1868 he drove one of the Church teams which were sent out to fetch poor emigrants from Fort Benton, the western terminus of the Union Pacific Railroad at that time. After his return, he started to manufacture furniture and later became an expert turner. Having a good voice and considerable talent for music, he became a member of the Milton Ward choir and also a member of the Morgan City brass band. In 1872 he moved to Brigham City, where he immediately joined the choir and also the band and soon became leader of both organizations. He joined the United Order, which had been recently organized in Brigham City, and remained in that organization as long as it continued active. In 1874 Bro. Lee married Emma L. Ensign and three years later he married Olivia Forsgren. Twenty children were born as a result of these marriages, thirteen of whom are still (1920) living. For this so-called infringement of the Edmunds Tucker law Bro. Lee served three months in the State penitentiary and paid a fine of $100. In 1885 (April 25th) he was called to the position of Stake clerk in the Box Elder Stake and was ordained a High Priest by Rudger Clawson. He was also made a member of the High Council, but finding it impossible to hold the two positions, he was released from the High Council; he still retains the important position of Stake clerk. He held the position of choir leader at Brigham City for thirty-two years and at his own request was released March 31, 1912, on the occasion of his sixtieth birthday. Bro. Lee has always filled with the utmost fidelity any position to which he has been called in the Church, and his musical ability has made him friends everywhere. The names of Bro. Lee's children by his first wife, Emma L. Ensign, are Severin Norman, Mary Lovinia, Martin Luther, Camilla Georgiana, Rawson Adams, Emma Adaline, Effie May, Amy, Florence, Karl Christian, and Joseph Lloyd. His second wife (Olivia Forsgren) bore him the following children: John Adolph, Oscar Severin, William Nelson, Charles Peter, Eli Forsgren, Olivia, Lula and Lola (twins), and Victor.
