Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Lewis, Phillip Bessore

Lewis, Phillip Bessore, the second president of the Hawaiian Mission, was born Jan. 16, 1804, at Marble Head, Essex county, Mass. He became a convert to "Mormonism' at an early day and presided over a branch of the Church in Massachusetts. When the first Latter-day Saint missionaries were called to the Society islands in 1843, he donated liberally to pay their passage across the ocean. He gathered with the saints to Nauvoo, Illinois, where he boarded with the Prophet Joseph Smith and was ordained a Seventy. After the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith he was one of those trusted brethren who buried the remains of the martyrs when they were removed from their first burial place in the cellar of the Nauvoo House. Being a tinner by trade he covered the Nauvoo Temple tower with tin. He passed through the persecutions of the saints in Illinois and was among the exiles of 1846. While encamped at Garden Grove, Iowa, his wife, Maria Theresa Bonney, died June 17, 1846. She was born March 17, 1817, at New Bedford, Bristol county, Mass., and was married to Brother Lewis June 27, 1837. From Garden Grove Brother Lewis continued the journey westward, and while residing at Winter Quarters, he married Jane Amanda Stevens, who was born June 8, 1826. She bore her husband two children, namely, Philip Edmund and William Henry. Two days after his marriage to Jane Amanda Stevens Brother Lewis and his wife started from Winter Quarters for the Rocky Mountains, in Zera Pulsipher's company. While crossing the plains Brother Lewis accidentally broke his arm, but it was reset, and he arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 20, 1848, sitting in a rocking chair and carrying his arm on a pillow. In December, 1850, he was called to assist George A. Smith in making a settlement in Iron county and thus became one of the founders of Parowan. In 1851 he was called on a mission to Hawaii, together with Francis A. Hammond, John S. Woodbury and Wm. G. Perkins, taking his wife with him. On his arrival in California Bro. Lewis was appointed president of the Hawaiian Mission by Parley P. Pratt. He lost a child going out, and his wife, who returned before him from Hawaii, died near San Bernardino in 1855. The Hawaiian Mission being still in its infancy, Brother Phillips opened a tin shop in Honolulu and by his earnings assisted the mission financially. Thus he raised most of the means needed to buy a press to print books in the Hawaiian language. He was released from his Hawaiian mission in 1855 and after re-crossing the Pacific he reached San Bernardino Nov. 17, 1855, where his wife had died a few months previously. With a wagon and two spans of mules Bro. Lewis crossed the desert and arrived in Salt Lake City in the spring of 1857. During the winter of 1857-1858 Elder Lewis married Mary Scott, who was born Oct. 29, 1817. They removed to St. George, Utah, and thence to Kanab, Kane county, Utah, where his wife died Nov. 14, 1875. Subsequently he married Emily Lewis, a daughter of James and Emily Lewis, of Kanab, who bore him one son, when he was seventy-three years of age. Elder Lewis died at the age of seventy-four years, from an attack of billious fever, Nov. 13, 1879, in Kanab, Kane county, Utah. He was an active and energetic man, a noble worker and honest in all his dealings. Before his death he was ordained a Patriarch.
