Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Malin, Elijah jun.

Malin, Elijah jun., an Elder who died while returning home from a mission, was born March 11, 1808, in Chester county, Penn., the son of Elijah Malin and Catherine Essick. In 1830 (Feb. 4th), he married Sarah McQuicken, in Chester county. She bore her husband four children, namely, John McQuicken, Margaret Ann, Catherine, and James Elijah. The parents having become converts to "Mormonism," Elijah and his family also joined the Church, he being baptized Jan. 2, 1841. Soon afterwards he was ordained to the office of an Elder by Lorenzo D. Barnes. Brother Malin assisted to fit out the ship "Brooklyn," which in February, 1846, sailed from New York with a company of saints, bound for California by way of Cape Horn. By this ship he sent some very valuable goods, part of which was lost on the voyage or after the arrival in California; yet he had sufficient left so that his family could secure an outfit for crossing the plains. With his family Brother Malin joined the saints in their general exodus from Nauvoo in 1846. On the journey westward he lost most of his livestock and suffered with the rest of his co-religionists during those perilous times. He resided at Winter Quarters in April, 1848, when he was called on a mission to the Eastern States, together with Henry Kearns. His principal field of labor was Chester county, Pennsylvania, where he looked after some property which had been left there unsold at the time he first moved west. After laboring faithfully as a missionary, according to his appointment, he left Philadelphia in April, 1849, to travel to the headquarters of the Church on the frontiers, together with Wm. I. Appleby and others. On the journey, while traveling on a river steamer near Louisville, Kentucky, Brother Malin was stricken with cholera and suffered severely on the rest of the journey to St. Louis, where he died May 5, 1849. His family subsequently (1851) emigrated to Utah, being partly assisted to the Valley by the Church. His son, John M. Malin, drove the family team across the plains and mountains.
