Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Markham, StephenPPMarkham, Stephen

Markham, StephenPPMarkham, Stephen, one of the original Utah pioneers of 1847, was born Feb. 9, 1800, in the town of Avon, Ontario (now Livingston) county, New York, the son of David Markham (born at Avon) and Dinah Merry. His father was a revolutionary soldier and was accidentally shot while training, when Stephen was two years old. His mother afterwards moved to the State of Ohio and the family settled in Chester, Geauga county, where Brother Markham first heard the gospel and was baptized by Elder Abel Lamb in July, 1837. He was a well-to-do farmer at the time and sold all his possessions in Ohio by the counsel of the Prophet Joseph Smith and furnished most of the means to fit out sixty souls and took charge in emigrating them from Kirtland, Ohio, to Far West, Missouri. After arriving in Far West he was appointed an agent for the Church to raise means and assist the poor saints in the days when trouble and persecution were heaped upon his people by the mobs in Missouri and Illinois. He was appointed colonel in the Nauvoo Legion and rendered efficient aid in 1843, when the Prophet Joseph was in danger of being kidnapped by his enemies and taken to Missouri. Prior to this he had assisted the family of the Prophet to escape from Missouri into Illinois, and he afterwards acted as a body guard to the Prophet. At a time in Nauvoo, Illinois, when the Prophet was perplexed with vexatious law suits, Stephen Markham sold his only house, which was newly built, gave Joseph the proceeds, $1200, and then moved his own family into a tent until a cabin could be built. This was in 1844, about the time that Joseph and his brethren were imprisoned in Carthage jail. Only a few hours before the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum the bloodthirsty mob put Bro. Markham on a horse and drove him out of Carthage; the mobbers probed his legs with their bayonets until his boots were filled with blood. The scars of these bayonet thrusts he bore to his grave. When the saints were being driven from Nauvoo, Bro. Markham was appointed, by President Brigham Young, captain of two hundred pioneers and led them thence to Council Bluffs, Iowa. In the spring of 1847 he was chosen as one of the pioneers and appointed captain of the first hundred. He was also appointed captain of the guard to select out of the camp fifty men in whom he could place implicit confidence. Bro. Markham attended to his duties faithfully and well during the journey to Great Salt Lake Valley, and after his arrival in the Valley he became one of the most active among the pioneers. He returned to Winter Quarters the same fall (1847) and then spent upwards of two years on the frontiers. In October, 1850, he returned to the Valley in charge of a company of fifty wagons. His first wife, Hannah Hogelboon, who was born April 1, 1813, at Manchester, Bennington county, Vermont, shared with him in all the early trials of the Church in Missouri and Illinois. Some time after the arrival of the family in Utah she left her husband and, together with her three sons (Warren, Whiting and David), went to California to the gold diggings. She and her sons became permanent residents of California, where they all subsequently died. Brother Markham was ordained to the Priesthood in an early day and was honored with the ordination as a High Priest March 30, 1842. Soon after his arrival in the Valley he located in Utah county, and in 1853 he was ordained a Bishop by Geo. A. Smith and set apart to preside over the infant settlement of Palmyra, near the present town of Spanish Fork. He served as a colonel in the Walker Indian war. In 1856 he was sent on a colonization mission to Fort Supply, near Green river, and assisted in establishing the first express line across the plains. Beloved and respected by all who knew him he died at Spanish Fork March 10, 1878. Bro. Markham was one of the greatest pioneers of this western country, a practical advocate of religious liberty and a friend of humanity. He was ever charitable to the poor and unflinching in his integrity to the cause of the great Latter-day work. Having lived a most active and useful life, he passed away in peace in the midst of his family and friends. In 1850 (Oct. 5th) Brother Markham married Mary Curtis (daughter of Jeremiah Curtis and Ruth Strutton of Michigan and widow of Ornon Houghton ), by whom she had one child (Edgar Strutton). She was born Nov. 15, 1832, and her children by Stephen Markham were the following: Orville Sanford, Mary Lucy, William Don Carlos, Sarah Elizabeth, Atta Ruth, Hosmer Merry, Emily Aurelia, Margaret Eliza, Joseph, Charlotta, Julina, Ira Mitcham, Clarissa Maretta, and Caroline Louisa. About 1853 Bro. Markham married Jane Boyce Wyott, a widow, who bore him one son, who was named Stephen. Bro. Markham engaged in farming and stock raising most of his life.
