Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Maughan, Hyrum

Maughan, Hyrum, an Elder who died while filling a mission, was born Dec. 17, 1871, in Weston, Oneida county, Idaho, the son of John H. Maughan and Sarah Maria Davenport, and was baptized April 8, 1881, by D. L. Hoops. In obedience to call he was set apart Dec. 1, 1897, for a mission to the Northern States, arriving at Chicago Dec. 5th. He was appointed to labor at Anderson, Indiana, together with Elder Jonathan H. Hale jun., and these two Elders labored unitedly together and made many friends. In March, 1898, Bro. Maughan met in conference at Indianapolis with the Elders of Indiana, after which he was assigned to labor in the same place with Elder W. R. Andrew. Elder Maughan labored with a zeal, cheerfulness and love for his fellowmen that was highly commendable. His great faith in the Lord was fully maintained to the last moment. As early as April 20, 1898, he felt unwell and steadily grew worse with cramps until he was advised by his brethren to consult a doctor, which he did. Other doctors were called in and all agreed that his trouble was a case of appendicitis and advised an immediate operation, to which Bro. Maughan willingly submitted, feeling he was in the hands of the Lord, in whose service he was laboring. Accordingly he was taken to St. John's hospital, April 22, 1898, and the operation performed by five skilled surgeons. Through the blessings of the Lord he rallied successfully from the operation and began to improve rapidly. Most of the Elders of the mission made special mention of Brother Maughan in their prayers that, if it be the will of the Lord, he speedily recover from his affliction. He so far recovered that on May 28th the doctors advised him to leave the hospital and go back to his room. Here he ate heartily and had great faith in his recovery. He was advised by many to return home, but his answer was, "I did not come here to return home until the Lord calls me there." June 1, 1898, after eating a hearty meal, he was taken with cramps, and though everything possible was done to relieve him, he died Friday, June 3, 1898. A premonition by a dream was given him a short time before his sickness, of his end, but he took no particular notice of it. "Elder Maughan was an energetic laborer in the Lord's vineyard and did as much as lay in his power for the advancement of the cause. He laid down his life in bringing salvation to his fellowmen. He stood at his post a true hero and faithful servant of God. His reward is that of a martyr; his future hopes are great; his mission of love is now in the eternal worlds." The remains of Elder Maughan were accompanied to Chicago from Anderson by Elders Joseph E. Cardon and W. R. Andrew, and, after proper arrangements with the railroads, were accompanied to Weston, Idaho, by President Lewis A. Kelsch.
