Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

McGregor, Joseph Franklin

McGregor, Joseph Franklin, president of the Beaver Stake of Zion and a resident of Beaver, Beaver county, Utah, was born Aug. 16, 1868, at Parowan, Iron county, Utah, the son of William Campbell McGregor and Sarah Fish. He attended the district school and worked on the farm until nineteen years of age, during which time he acted as an officer in the Ward Primary Association, Sunday school and Y. M. M. I. A., having been baptized when about eight years old and later ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood. In the fall of 1887 he went to Provo, where he attended the Brigham Young Academy for two years, and in the winter of 1890-1891 he acted as principal of the Beaver Stake Academy. In the fall of 1892 he entered the law department of the University of Michigan, graduating from this institution in June, 1894, with the degree of L. L. B. Returning to Parowan, he practiced law there until the spring of 1896, when he married Isabella Durham, and left in April of that year for a mission to the Southern States, where he remained nearly two years and a half, acting nearly all of this time as president of the North Alabama conference. Returning to Utah in the fall of 1898, he was elected county attorney of Iron county and appointed city attorney of Parowan city. During the winter of 1898-1899 he acted as a counselor to the Stake superintendent of Y. M. M. I. A. in the Parowan Stake, and in the spring of 1899 he was ordained a High Priest by Francis M. Lyman and chosen to act as superintendent of the last named organization. In the fall of 1899 he was elected a representative to the State legislature from Iron county, and in the fall of 1901 he entered the Barns Medical College at St. Louis, Mo., continuing his medical studies summer and winter until he graduated from the Illinois Medical College in Chicago in April, 1904. Returning home he located at Richfield, Utah, where he received the appointment of surgeon for the R. G. W. Ry. Co. and was also made county physician of Sevier county. In July, 1909, he returned to Parowan, where (in September) he was chosen as a member of the High Council of the Parowan Stake and as first assistant in the Stake superintendency of Sunday schools. He also acted as city physician and city attorney of Parowan city. In 1914 (October) he moved to Beaver, where he has acted as city physician for the last three years. He was also a member of the local draft board and the county council of defense during the late war, and at present is local medical examiner for the Government for Beaver county. In 1916 (April 23rd) he was chosen and set apart as president of the Beaver Stake by Apostle Rudger Clawson, which position he still holds. His wife, Isabella Durham, was the daughter of Thos. Durham and Caroline Mortonsen and was born March 12, 1875. She has borne her husband nine children, namely, Franklin D., Marie, Ronald D., Claude Eldon, Dean L., Arden D., Marvin D., Helen and Julia.
