Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

McKay, Thomas Evans

McKay, Thomas Evans, president of the Ogden Stake, Weber county, Utah, was born Oct. 29, 1875, in Huntsville, Weber county, Utah, the son of David McKay and Jennette Evans. He was raised and schooled in Huntsville and graduated from the University of Utah in 1899. After being baptized by his father Oct. 23, 1883, he was ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Teacher, Priest, Elder and Seventy. He labored on the Weber Stake Sunday School Board, together with Supt. Thomas B. Evans, and in 1900 he filled a mission to Switzerland and Germany. After laboring in Stuttgart three months and in Munich three months, he presided over the Frankfort conference thirty months. Before going on his mission he was principal of the Pingree School in Ogden, and after his return to Utah he taught two years in the Weber Academy; later he taught two years in the Agricultural College, after which he served as superintendent of the Weber county schools. When the original Weber Stake was divided into three Stakes in 1908, Elder McKay was ordained a High Priest and chosen to act as second counselor to President Thomas B. Evans. In 1909-1912 he filled a second mission to Europe, this time presiding over the Swiss and German Mission, with headquarters in Zurich, Switzerland. After returning from that mission he again acted as second counselor to Pres. Evans of the Ogden Stake and later as first counselor, and when President Evans died in March, 1919, Bro. McKay was chosen as president of the Ogden Stake, which position he still holds. President McKay has also been active in secular matters and has held many positions of honor and responsibility. Thus he served for some time as recorder of Weber county and in 1919 he represented Weber county in the Utah State legislature. In 1912 (Sept. 11th) Brother McKay married Faun Brimhall, daughter of Geo. H. Brimhall and Flora Robertson. Mrs. McKay was born May 16, 1889, in Spanish Fork, Utah. Three children have blessed this marriage, namely, Flora Jennette, Faun and Thomas B. Pres. McKay is a farmer and stock raiser.
