Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Muir, David M.

Muir, David M., an Elder who died while filling a foreign mission, was born April 26, 1862, in Beaver, Beaver county, Utah, the son of John Walter and Grace Muir. He was set apart for a mission to Great Britain Aug. 26, 1898, by Elder Heber J. Grant, and arrived in Scotland, where he had been appointed to labor, Sept. 17, 1898. After staying in the city of Glasgow eight days, making some preliminary preparations for active missionary work, he addressed the saints in the Glasgow branch on Sunday, Sept. 25th, taking for his subject "The Atonement of Christ." On the Tuesday following, according to his appointment, he went to Fifeshire, his field of labor. He stayed in Dunfermline about a week, visiting the saints and attending to other duties in company with Elders Robert McKinlay and Joseph Wickens. From here he wrote a letter to Glasgow, stating that he had arrived safely and ordering several hundred tracts. This, it is believed, was the last letter he ever wrote. When he, accompanied by Elder Wickens, went to Lochgelly on the 7th of October, he was ill, and on the following day he was compelled to go to bed. As soon as his condition became known, Elder McKnight, laboring in the neighboring field, went to render assistance, and two days later Elder Edward went from Glasgow. The seriousness of Brother Muir's condition then became fully known, but after the administration and prayers of the Elders, his condition seemed to become somewhat improved, until Wednesday, Oct. 19, 1898, when another change came, and, "that night his spirit took its flight from this world of care and sorrow to dwell in peace with the righteous who have gone before." The attending physician, Dr. Frank Dendle, did all in his power to give relief, on several days making two or three visits; and after all was over tendered his services gratuitously, refusing any remuneration, save the thanks and appreciation of the fellow-laborers and friends of the deceased. Bro. Muir's mission in Scotland was short; but during the time he was there, he won the love of every one who had the pleasure of meeting him. His quiet, unselfish manner and generous, uncomplaining nature won him immediate friends. Previous to his mission to Scotland he filled a three years' mission in New Zealand (1887-1890). At home he was an active worker in the local Sabbath school and Improvement Association, and once presided over the Y. M. M. I. A. of Beaver. He was also one of the seven presidents of the 12th quorum of Seventy in the Beaver Stake.
