Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Phelps, William Wines

Phelps, William Wines, a prominent Elder in the early days of the Church, was born Feb. 17, 1792, at Hanover, Morris county, New Jersey. He received a good education for those days and in 1815 (April 28th) he married Sally Waterman, at Smyrna, Chenango county, New York; she bore her husband several children. Early in life Mr. Phelps was somewhat active in politics. While a resident of the State of New York he was the editor of a partisan newspaper and aspired to be a candidate for the office of lieutenant-governor of New York. Wm. W. Phelps is first mentioned in Church history in connection with a letter which he, under date of Jan. 15, 1831, wrote at Canandaigua, New York, to E. D. Howe, in which he says that he had read the "Book of Mormon," which he "could not detect as being an imposition," and he had had a ten hours' conversation with Sidney Rigdon, who declared that he knew by the power of the Holy Ghost that the book was true. Wm. W. Phelps appeared in Kirtland, Ohio, about the middle of June, 1831, just as the Prophet Joseph was preparing for his journey to Missouri. Brother Phelps came, as he said "to do the will of the Lord," hence Joseph inquired of the Lord concerning him and received a revelation which constitutes the 55th section of the Doctrine and Covenants. That revelation reads in part as follows: "Behold, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant William, yea even the Lord of the whole earth, thou art called and chosen, and after thou hast been baptized by water, which if you do with an eye single to my glory, you shall have a remission of your sins and a reception of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, and then thou shalt be ordained by the hand of my servant Joseph Smith jun., to be an Elder unto this Church, to preach repentance and remission of sins by way of baptism in the name of Jesus Christ, the son of the living God, and on whomsoever thou shalt lay your hands, if they are contrite before me, you shall have power to give the Holy Ghost. And again you shall be ordained to assist my servant Oliver Cowdery to do the work of printing and of selecting and writing books for schools in this Church, that little children also may receive instruction before me as is pleasing unto me. And again, verily I say unto you, for this cause you shall take your journey with my servants Joseph Smith jun. and Sidney Rigdon, that you may be planted in the land of your inheritance to do this work." Soon after that W. W. Phelps was baptized and traveled as he had been commanded to the western country, where he arrived in July, 1831. In the History of Joseph Smith, the following is recorded: "The first Sabbath after our arrival in Jackson county, Bro. William W. Phelps preached to a western audience over the boundary of the United States, wherein were present specimens of all the families of the earth, Shem, Ham and Japheth. Several of the Lamanites or Indians (representatives of Shem), quite a respectable number of negroes (descendants of Ham, and the balance was made up of citizens of the surrounding country and fully represented themselves as pioneers of the West." In a revelation given in July, 1831, Brother Phelps was commanded to locate as a printer for the Church in Jackson county (Doc. & Cov. 57:11), and was present when Joseph the Prophet dedicated the Temple lot at Independence, October 3, 1831; he also attended the first conference held in the land of Zion Aug. 4, 1831, left Independence Aug. 9, 1831, and arrived in Kirtland, Ohio, Sept. 1, 1831. At a conference held in Kirtland Sept. 12, 1831, he was instructed to stop at Cincinnati, Ohio, on his way to Missouri, and purchase a press and type for the purpose of establishing and publishing a monthly paper for the Church at Independence, Jackson county, Missouri, to be called the "Evening and Morning Star," and he attended several special conferences held, at Kirtland and Hiram, Ohio, in August. In November, 1831, Wm. W. Phelps and others were appointed custodians of the revelations to be printed in Missouri. In June, 1831, he was ordained an Elder by Joseph Smith, and later the same year he was ordained a High Priest. We find Wm. W. Phelps back in Missouri as early as January, 1832, attending a conference in Jackson county. At a session of a conference held Jan. 24, 1832, he, together with Oliver Cowdery and John Correll, were appointed to superintend schools in the branches of the Church in Jackson county. Soon Brother Phelps issued a prospectus for a monthly paper, "The Evening and Morning Star," the first number of which appeared in June, 1832. He took an active part in a special conference held in Independence April 26, 1832, where the Prophet Joseph, then on his second visit to Missouri, was present. At a council held May 1, 1832, it was decided that two thousand copies of the Book of Commandments should be printed, and Wm. W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer were appointed to revise and prepare such revelations for the press as should be deemed proper for publication, and print them as soon as possible at Independence. Bro. Phelps was attending to the duties connected with the printing office in Jackson county, when the mob on July 20, 1833, attacked his house, which contained the printing establishment; the house was partly pulled down, the printing materials taken possession of by the mob, many papers destroyed and the family and furniture thrown out of doors. When the mob renewed their depredations July 23, 1833, Wm. W. Phelps and other of the brethren offered themselves as a ransom for the saints, being willing to be scourged, or to die, if that would appease the anger of the mob against the saints. The mob would not accept the sacrifice of the brethren, however, but renewed their threats of violence against the whole Church. In September, 1833, Wm. W. Phelps and Orson Hyde were dispatched as messengers to Jefferson City, with a petition to Gov. Daniel Dunklin, in which the saints prayed for protection against the mob. They presented the petition Oct. 8, 1833, and the governor in answer said that the attorney general of the State was absent, but that on his return he would inform them of his conclusions by mail. The brethren then returned to Independence. Under date of Oct. 19, 1833, the governor wrote an encouraging letter to Wm. W. Phelps, in which he gave the saints hope of redress and future protection, whereupon the saints resumed their usual labors in Jackson county and engaged lawyers to defend them in the courts. This led to renewed hostilities on the part of the mobbers, who in November, 1833, drove the saints away from their homes in Jackson county. On that occasion the mob leaders advised Brother Phelps and others to flee for their lives, or they would be killed. Under date of Dec. 6, 1833, Wm. W. Phelps with others signed another petition to Governor Daniel Dunklin, asking for protection against mob violence-a prayer which practically went unheeded. Brother Phelps, as one of the leaders of the Church in Missouri, continued to take a most active part in pleading with the authorities in that State for the rights of the saints, but without the desired result; the governor's answers were favorable, yet evasive. In April, 1834, Bro. Phelps, with 114 others, signed a petition of the President of the United States, asking for protection against mob violence in Missouri, but no such protection was ever given. Brother Phelps and the brethren associated with him in Missouri kept the Prophet Joseph and others in Kirtland, Ohio, posted in regard to what took place in Missouri. After the arrival of Joseph the Prophet, with Zion's Camp, in Clay county, Missouri, a special meeting of High Priests was held July 3, 1834, on which occasion the saints in Missouri were organized into a Stake of Zion, with David Whitmer as president and Wm. W. Phelps and John Whitmer as assistants or counselors. After that Bro. Phelps took a prominent part in the meetings where matters of importance were discussed pertaining to the welfare of the saints in Missouri. In the early part of 1835 Wm. W. Phelps and his son, Waterman, made their home with the family of Joseph the Prophet in Kirtland and assisted a committee which had been appointed for compiling the "Book of Doctrine and Covenants." About this time Brother Phelps subscribed $500 toward the erection of the Kirtland Temple. When the Church in 1835 purchased the Egyptian mummies and papyrus from Michael H. Chandler, Joseph employed Wm. W. Phelps as one of his scribes in translating the Book of Abraham. At the general assembly of the Church held in Kirtland Aug. 17, 1835, Presidents Wm. W. Phelps and John Whitmer arranged the Missouri High Council of the Church, in Order to vote for the acceptance of the "Doctrine and Covenants." On this occasion Brother Phelps bore record that the book presented to the assembly was true. When Emma Smith, the Prophet's wife, in September, 1835, was appointed to make a selection of sacred hymns, for the use of the members of the Church, Bro. Phelps was appointed to revise and arrange these hymns for printing. During 1836 Elder Phelps met frequently with the heads of the Church in Kirtland, taking an active part as a representative of the saints in Missouri in all matters pertaining to the Church. At the time of the dedication of the Kirtland Temple he occupied a prominent seat in the building and took part in the proceedings. He received the ordinance of the washing of feet March 29, 1836, in the Kirtland Temple. In April, 1836, Brother Phelps left Kirtland on his return to Missouri. On his arrival in that State he resumed his duties as one of the presidents of the Stake, wrote a number of letters and directed the affairs of the Church in Missouri, together with his brethren who were associated with him. He also formulated and signed petitions and letters to Gov. Daniel Dunklin of Missouri, pleading continually for the rights of the saints, who had been driven from their homes in Jackson county and were about to be expelled from their possessions in Clay county. In the latter part of 1836 the majority of the saints, including Brother Phelps, left Clay county and located on the prairies in what soon afterwards became Caldwell county, Missouri. When steps were taken to build a Temple in Far West in 1837, he subscribed $1000 towards its erection. On Saturday, May 27, 1837, Brother Phelps was appointed postmaster at Far West. He acted as postmaster until Aug. 6, 1838, when he resigned. When the excavation for the Temple in Far West was commenced July 3, 1837, Bro. Phelps was present and took a prominent part in the proceedings. In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Sept. 4, 1837, W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer were chastised for having done things which were not pleasing in the sight of the Lord. At a meeting held in Far West, Missouri, Feb. 6, 1838, Wm. W. Phelps and his colaborers in the presidency were rejected by the saints in the Carter settlement, Missouri. Other branches of the Church subsequently voted the same way. During the sessions of the court of inquiry held at Richmond, Mo., in November, 1838, Wm. W. Phelps, who had become bitter in his feelings, was among those who testified against the Church leaders. He was finally excommunicated from the Church at a conference held at Quincy, Illinois, March 17, 1839, but early in 1841 he was received back into fellowship in the Church and was sent on a mission to visit the branches in the Eastern States. After that he again took an active part in the affairs of the Church, and he wrote a number of poetical compositions during his residence in Nauvoo, and was frequently used by the Prophet as a special messenger to carry important communications to the governor of Illinois and other State officials. Brother Phelps also served on committees, drafting resolutions, etc. The history of the Church shows that he frequently drafted and signed important documents. When Joseph the Prophet issued his "Views of the Powers and Policy of the General Government," Bro. Phelps was active in presenting the document to the public. In a letter written Feb. 23, 1844, Willard Richards explains that Wm. W. Phelps owned no property in Nauvoo, but that he labored diligently for the Church and, like all other righteous men, scarcely received enough compensation to make a comfortable living. In the difficulties leading up to the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum, Bro. Phelps was active in his defense of the rights of his people. He was also elected a member of the Nauvoo city council, and as a member of that body he became mixed up in the destruction of the Nauvoo "Expositor," for which he was arrested, tried and acquitted. After the death of the Prophet, Bro. Phelps remained loyal to the Twelve Apostles and expressed his views to that effect in the memorable meeting held in Nauvoo Aug. 8, 1844, when Brigham Young was acknowledged as the head of the Church. When the case of Sidney Rigdon was brought before the meeting Oct. 8, 1844, Wm. W. Phelps moved that Elder Sidney Rigdon be excommunicated from the Church. The motion was carried and Sidney Rigdon rejected. At the general conference held in Nauvoo Oct. 7, 1844, Brother Phelps moved that the saints "uphold Brigham Young as the president of the quorum of the Twelve, as one of the Twelve and first presidency of the Church," which motion was also carried. In the latter part of 1844 we find Wm. W. Phelps assisting Willard Richards in gathering material for the history of the Church. At a special conference held at Nauvoo April 7, 1845, Wm. W. Phelps moved that "we accept the labors of Joseph Smith as Prophet, Seer and Revelator to the nineteenth century and that the conference accept . the Twelve as the First Presidency and leaders of the Church," which votes were carried unanimously. In September, 1845, Brother Phelps and others of the brethren were summoned to Carthage to be tried for treason. They were promptly discharged. At a council meeting held at Nauvoo Oct. 4, 1845, Wm. W. Phelps and others were appointed a committee to write a pointed document relating to the treatment the saints had received from the government. Brother Phelps and his wife were among the first to receive their endowments in the Nauvoo Temple, in December, 1845, and afterwards Brother Phelps became an ordinance worker in that sacred edifice. He was ever active during the exodus of the saints from Nauvoo in 1846 and suffered much persecution together with his co-religionists. Traveling west with the saints, he spent the winter of 1846-1847 at Winter Quarters. In April, 1847, he was sent on a special mission to the saints in the East, carrying an important letter of recommendation from the Twelve Apostles. Part of his business on that occasion was to procure a printing press and type to be used by the saints in their exodus. We find Wm. W. Phelps in the early part of 1843 petitioning the legislature of Iowa for a county organization in the Pottawattamie lands. He took an active part in the meetings held in the log tabernacle at Council Bluffs, and was among the petitioners for a post office in the Pottawattamie country. He crossed the plains to Salt Lake Valley in 1848, and on the journey he composed a song entitled "The Saints Upon the Prairie." After his arrival in the Valley he became as active as he had been in the East. When the Provisional Government of the State of Deseret was organized March 4, 1849, Wm. W. Phelps was appointed to serve on a number of important committees, and was also one of a committee appointed to draft and report to the convention a constitution under which the inhabitants might organize and govern themselves until the Congress of the United States should otherwise provide by law. He also served on a number of canal committees and was apointed surveyor-general and chief engineer of the Provisional State of Deseret, April 5, 1849. At the celebration held in Salt Duke City July 24, 1849, Brother Phelps read twenty-four toasts, given by the twenty-four Bishops in the Valley. When Parley P. Pratt's exploring company was organized in November, 1849, to explore what is now southern Utah, Wm. W. Phelps was chosen as first counselor to Parley P. Pratt, and on the journey he rendered efficient aid to the expedition, taking a most active part in every important matter. Thus, together with Dan Jones, he made astronomical observations in regard to latitude, longitude, etc. When the expedition was overtaken by snow storms, Bro. Phelps was among those who were frequently sent ahead to break the road. When the University of Deseret was organized in Salt Lake City, Wm. W. Phelps was chosen one of the regents in that institution of learning, and when the Parents School opened on Monday, Feb. 17, 1851, Bro. Phelps announced that forty scholars were enrolled at the opening. After that Bro. Phelps took great interest in the school and was one of the most active members on the board of regents. In 1851 he was elected a representative of the Utah legislature. He also practiced law and on several occasions defended the brethren in their legal rights. When the blessings of the endowments were first administered to some of the faithful saints in the Valley as early as January, 1852, we find Wm. W. Phelps taking part as an ordinance worker. He frequently addressed the assemblies of the saints in the old tabernacle in Salt Lake City and was with the presidency of the Church in many of their important conferences and council meetings. In August, 1852, he was again elected to the Utah Legislature as a representative from Salt Lake county. On that occasion he served on the committee on education and election. One of the enterprises which made the name of Wm. W. Phelps famous in the early days of Utah was the publication by him of the so-called "Deseret Almanac,'' the first of which was issued in 1851. This meritorious publication gave astronomical observations suitable for the latitude and longitude of the Territory of Utah and much other valuable information. Brother Phelps continued the issuance of this almanac until about 1865. In 1853, 1854, 1855, 1856 and 1857 Wm. W. Phelps was again elected a member of the Utah Legislature. He was present when the Endowment House in Salt Lake City was dedicated, May 5, 1855, and afterwards worked for many years as an ordinance worker in that edifice. He was a prominent member of the Deseret Theological Institute, which was organized in Salt Lake City in 1855. He also became prominently associated with the Deseret Horticultural Society organized in 1855. In the Utah legislature of 1859 and 1864 he served as chaplain in the lower house, and for several years he acted as a notary public in Salt Lake City. Elder Phelps was a prominent member of the High Priests quorum, and died March 7, 1872, at his home in Salt Lake City, Utah.
