Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Phillips, Edward

Phillips, Edward, a prominent Elder in the Church, was born April 2, 1813, in Oxenhall, Gloucestershire, England, the son of Wm. Phillips and Mary Ann Presdee. Edward worked with his father on a farm at Credley in Herefordshire and also learned the blacksmithing trade. At the age of twelve years he was left to the care of his mother. Like his mother he was religiously inclined and associated himself with the United Brethren under Father Thomas Kingston. They remained members of that congregation until the event of the "Mormon" Elders into the neighborhood. Edward was the only male member of his father's family to receive the gospel. He first heard Wilford Woodruff preach at Ridgeway Cross in March, 1840, and was baptized by that Apostle a few days later. His mother and his sister, Susan, followed him into the Church. Almost immediately he was ordained a Priest and placed in charge of two branches (Ashfield and Crocrut) in Worcestershire. In the fall of the same year he was ordained an Elder and, in company with Elder John Galley, preached in the forest of Dean, Gloucestershire, England. In 1841 he emigrated to America, sailing from Bristol for Quebec Aug. 8, 1841, with a company of about one hundred saints under Elder Thomas Richardson. By way of Montreal, Niagara Falls, Buffalo and Chicago they reached Nauvoo, Ill., in October, 1841. Here Elder Phillips became well acquainted with the Prophet Joseph. He quarried rock for the Nauvoo Temple, and made the acquaintance of Miss Hannah Simons, who became his wife Aug. 2, 1842. Brother Phillips was a member of the Nauvoo Legion, and took part in the movements of that body during the perilous times at Nauvoo. During the exodus in 1846 the Phillips family came west, and after residing temporarily at Council Point they came to the Valley in 1849. In the spring of 1850 Brother Phillips became the first settler on Kays Creek (now Kaysville), which place he helped to survey. He participated in the "general move" of the saints south in 1858, but soon afterwards returned to Kaysville, where he acted as first counselor to Bishop Wm. Kay from 1850 to 1856. It was at a meeting held in his home that the Kaysville Ward was first organized. He helped to build the first meeting house at Kaysville (which still stands in good condition), and also the wall which was built around a quarter section of land for protection against Indians. Bro. Phillips was chosen president of the local High Priests Feb. 27, 1859. This office he held up to the day of his death, which occurred at Kaysville Dec. 1, 1896. At the time of his demise he was the oldest resident of Kaysville and a highly respected citizen. (See History of Utah, by Orson F. Whitney, page 385.)
