Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Pratt, Addison

Pratt, Addison, one of the Elders who introduced the fulness of the gospel on the islands of the South Pacific Ocean, was born Feb. 21, 1802, in the town of Wincester, Cheshire county, New Hampshire, the son of Henry and Rebecca Pratt. He married Louisa Barnes, who bore him four daughters, namely, Ellen Sophronia, born in February, 1832, in Ripley, Chautauqua county, New York; Frances Stevens, born Nov. 7, 1834, in Ripley; Lois Barnes, born March 6, 1837, in Ripley, and Ann Louisa, born April 6, 1840, in Clay county, Indiana. Together with Noah Rogers, Benjamin F. Grouard and Knowlton F. Hanks, Addison Pratt was called on a mission to the Pacific Islands. He was ordained a Seventy by Brigham Young May 23, 1843, and leaving Nauvoo June 1, 1843, he traveled, together with his missionary companions, to the Atlantic coast, preaching the gospel on the way, till they arrived at New Bedford, Mass. Here, being unable to find a ship going to the Sandwich Islands, they engaged their passage on the whalingship "Timoleon" and sailed from New Bedford Oct. 9, 1843. Elder Hanks, who was suffering severely from consumption, died at sea Nov. 3, 1843, being the first Latter-day Saint missionary who was assigned to a watery grave. Elders Pratt, Rogers and Grouard landed on the island of Tubuai April 30, 1844, and while his two missionary companions proceeded to Tahiti, Elder Pratt commenced a most successful missionary labor on Tuhuai where he soon raised up the first branch of the Church organized on the islands of the Pacific Ocean. Subsequently Bro. Pratt assisted Elder Grouard in his missionary labors on the Tuamotu group, where a number of branches of the Church were raised up. For many months the Elders heard nothing from their families in America and they met with much opposition on the part of the missionaries sent out by the London Missionary Society. Noah Rogers soon returned to America, but Elders Pratt and Grouard continued their labors. In May, 1847, Elder Pratt sailed for America, leaving Elder Grouard in charge of the mission on the Society Islands. On his arrival in California Brother Pratt met a number of the saints from the Eastern States who had doubled Cape Horn in the ship "Brooklyn" and landed where San Francisco now stands. He also met members of the Mormon Battalion and was appointed by Samuel Brannan to preside over the San Francisco branch of the Church. In 1848 he crossed the Sierra Nevada mountains and the deserts in what is now the State of Nevada and arrived in Great Salt Lake City Sept. 28, 1848. Here he met his family who had arrived in the Valley a few days before his own arrival. Elder Pratt reported his mission on the Pacific Islands to the president of the Church and now spent about one year with his family at the headquarters of the Church. During the winter of 1848-1849 he taught a school in the Tahitian language in his own house. He was soon called on another mission to the Society Islands, but before starting he was taken by his brethren onto the top of Ensign Peak July 21, 1849, and given his endowment. Together with other missionaries he left the Valley on his second mission to the Islands, Oct. 8, 1849, and traveled the southern route to California, whence he embarked for Papeete, Tahiti, where he arrived May 24, 1850. His wife and four daughters followed with a company of Elders six months later. Bro. Pratt now resumed his missionary labors on the islands, but met with much opposition on the part of the French authorities, the islands, through diplomatic negotiations between Great Britain and France, having become a French colony. As "Mormonism" was not known or tolerated in France, the French officials on the Society Islands decided that it could not be recognized in a French colony; hence all the American Elders were banished from the Islands in 1852. Elder Pratt and his family sailed from Papeete May 16, 1852, and reached San Francisco in safety July 1, 1852. Soon after his arrival in America Bro. Pratt became disaffected and never made his home in Utah after that. He was won over by the Spiritualists and after spending the remainder of his days in California, he died at Anaheim, Orange county, California, Oct. 14, 1872, seventy years and eight months old. His wife, Louisa Barnes, was born Nov. 10, 1802, in Franklin county, Massachusetts, and died in Beaver, Utah, in 1879. His daughter Ellen Sophronia married William McGarry and died at Anaheim, California, Aug. 9, 1885. His daughter Frances Stevens married James Dwyer and died in California. His daughter Lois Barnes married John Hunt and died in Snowflake, Arizona, March 9, 1885. His daughter Ann Louisa married Thomas Tilman Willis and lived in Idaho several years ago.
