Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Richards, Alma Pascal

Richards, Alma Pascal, an Elder who died in the missionary field, was born March 7, 1858, in Riverdale, Weber county, Utah, the son of John Richards and Martha Pascal. He was baptized by Elder George Criddle in the spring of 1869, later ordained to the Priesthood and set apart for a mission to the Southern States by Elder Seymour B. Young, Oct. 10, 1887. After arriving in the mission field the following month, he was assigned to labor in the Mississippi conference, to travel in Jasper county, Mississippi, and Sumpter county, Alabama, which belonged to the Mississippi conference. He and his traveling companions labored assiduously in this field with varying success, during the winter of 1887 and 1888, making a few converts and many friends, with the usual number of enemies who spring up around an Elder's pathway. Elder Richards was possessed of a social disposition and readily made many friends wherever he went; confiding, frank and gentle, he won the hearts of all he came in contact with, and was especially a favorite among the saints, who placed the utmost confidence in him and relied implicitly on every statement he made. In June of 1888 his traveling companion, Elder Harmon, was released to return home, which left Elder Richards alone, but with the prospect in the near future of a companion to take Elder Harmon's place. Owing to the demand for Elders it was found impossible to supply the vacancy at once and Elder Richards was counseled by President Wm. Spry to continue his labors and report through the president of the conference to the office at Chattanooga regularly. In the latter part of June he left Sumpter county, Alabama, to visit the saints in Mississippi, with the promise to return and take dinner at Brother Odums on the 5th of August, the anniversary of the latter's birthday. Visiting the saints in Mississippi occupied his time during July. All the saints that he came in contact with testified to his joyous and jubilant feelings. His letters to his wife and parents were full of encouragement and good advise, and bore evidence of the spirit that actuated him in his labors. On the night of July 31st he stayed at Sister Tucker's in Jasper county, Miss., going from there to Brother Kemp's, a distance of seventeen miles, in the direction of Meridan, Miss., en route to Brother Odums, to make the promised visit. Leaving Brother Kemp's on the morning of August 1st in fine spirits, he followed the main traveled road toward Enterprise on the line of the New Orleans & Northeastern Railway, stopping at a colored man's house to get a drink, and wash his face and hands, doubtless to alleviate the fatigue caused by the extreme heat then prevalent. As was his custom, he frankly stated who he was, where he was from and his destination. Thence he evidently made his way to the town of Enterprise, and was seen standing on the platform of the depot. Next he was seen stepping into the door of the Ragsdale Hotel at Meridian, on the morning of Aug. 2, 1888, between daylight and sunrise, and handed a package containing his Bible, hymn book, two photographs, and a clean shirt, to A. D. Blank, the colored porter, with the request to retain them for a couple of weeks, and he would call for them. Here all trace of Elder Richards disappeared. President Wm. Spry and the Elders in the Southern States Mission immediately instituted a diligent search for the missing man and finally learned that a man had been killed a few miles up the railroad track from Meridian during the past summer. Following this clue they called on Squire J. W. Deerman of Toomsuba, from whom they learned that such an accident had really taken place and that Mr. Deerman had served as coroner at the inquest. He readily recognized the photograph of Brother Richards as the man killed, as also did five of the jurymen who had served at the inquest. They had all seen the mangled remains of the dead man and pointed out where he was buried. The brethren now secured a casket, which was shipped from Meridian to Toomsuba station, twelve miles distant. The grave was opened and the box containing the body brought to the surface; the lid was removed and the body identified, and though in an advanced stage of decomposition it was transferred to the casket, which was then hermetically sealed. The supposition is that Brother Richards was murdered by brutal hands for the sake of plunder Aug. 2, 1888, and that his body was intentionally placed on the railway tracks to cover up the deed. The place where he is supposed to have lost his life is an isolated section of the country, eight miles east of Meridian, and four miles west of Toomsuba in Lauderdale county, Mississippi. Elder Richards was a good and exemplary young man.
