Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Richards, John A.

Richards, John A., one of the Elders of the Church who died in the missionary field, was born in England in 1892. He emigrated to the Rocky Mountains during the early years of Utah's settlement and at the general conference of the Church held in April, 1855, he was called, with four other Elders, to labor among the natives inhabiting the Indian Territory. On the way to their destination they were joined by four Elders from St. Louis, Mo., and all arrived in the territory in the fall of the same year. The mission opened up encouragingly and in a short time a branch of the Church was organized on Grand River, in the Cherokee Nation. Elder Richard's wife having died in Utah, he married a Cherokee lady named Manhui, thus becoming a citizen of the nation. The lady being a widow and owning a large plantation and about sixteen slaves, convenient and permanent headquarters were established for the Elders. Just prior to the assassination of Parley P. Pratt in 1857, near the boundary line between Arkansas and the Cherokee Nation, Elder Richards was in his company. When they parted, Apostle Pratt started on his way to the States, to the place where he was murdered, while Elder Richards returned to his home. He was consequently fully acquainted with all the details of Apostle Pratt's death. In the spring of 1859 all the Elders laboring in the Indian Territory returned to their homes, excepting John A. Richards and one or two other Elders who died later in the field. When the War of the Rebellion broke out, the Indian Territory shared its horrors and the branch of the Church was broken up and the members scattered. When peace was again restored between the North and the South, and the Indians had returned to their country, Elder Richards turned his attention to the cultivation of a farm, and when Elders Matthew W. Dalton and John Hubbard were sent to the Indian Territory to labor as missionaries in 1877, they found Bro. Richards a regular Cherokee in his customs and ways. He was re-baptized, but after a short mission by these Utah Elders, they returned, leaving him alone in the field. His Cherokee wife (a high class woman who was very kind to the Elders) died, and he afterwards married a Choctaw woman, and Brother Richards thus became a member of the Choctaw Nation. This wife also died, after which he returned to the Cherokees with his only son by the Cherokee woman, for whom he provided a liberal education, both in English and Cherokee, with a view to making him an efficient Latter-day Saint missionary; but the young man took sick and died just before the advent of President Andrew Kimball in the mission in 1887. Elders Andrew Kimball and James G. West re-baptized Brother Richards and ordained him a Seventy. After this he did some missionary work with Elder Kimball, but was occupied mostly on his farm. The Elders often endeavored to induce him to return to Utah to spend his remaining days with his daughter, who resided in Cache county, but for some time he would not entertain the idea. He was then advancing in years, being upwards of sixty years old. During the summer of 1889 he mingled with the Indians in all their feasts, festivities and political labors, by which he probably exerted and exposed himself too much. In the spring of 1889 he also met with a serious accident. His wagon overturned while crossing a stream, inflicting upon him such injuries that he never fully recovered. He died Sept. 21, 1889, and was buried the following day near his ranch on the Verdiges river in Western Cherokee Nation. Among all his acquaintances, whites and Indians, Bro. Richards was held in the highest esteem, and the Elders who had shared his hospitality will never forget him.
