Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Ellerbeck, Thomas Witton

Ellerbeck, Thomas Witton, a prominent Elder in the Church, was born Sept. 14, 1829, at Pendleton, Lancashire, England, the son of Thomas Ellerbeck and Mary Witton. He received in England only a common school education, but showed a - wonderful aptitude for mathematics. His unusual mental alacrity placed him practically on a par wilh those - men of unususal attainment in mental arithmetic who exploited their ability for a livelihood. Between the ages of twelve and sixteen, while in England, as a mere boy, he had charge of the bookkeeping of a large wooden shoe manufactory. During the industrial war in England this manufacturing concern, failing to adopt modern devices for the production of its ware, became insolvent, and upon examination of the books, an old-time judge or justice, who had been on the bench for more than thirty years, claimed that the books of the company were clearer and better kept than any set of books that had ever been presented before the court. He was immediately given a responsible position with a railroad company in England, but choosing to cast his fortunes in America, he came to Utah, arriving in Salt Lake City Oct. 15, 1851. His splendid business aptitude was soon discovered by President Brigham Young, who used his services to very great advantage in the business affairs of the Church. Bro. Ellerbeck became chief clerk in President Brigham Young's office, and was largely instrumental in outlining a splendid system of accounting. During the building of the Union Pacific Railroad into Utah he had charge of all the business affairs incident to the contracts taken by Pres. Brigham Young for the construction of three hundred miles of that railway. Bro. Ellerbeck had charge of the construction of the first waterworks system for Salt Lake City, and in 1872, without any previous experience, he took charge of the then important enterprise of establishing a gas plant for Salt Lake City, of which he was general superintendent until 1890, being of course also largely interested in the financial affairs of the company. To Mr. Ellerbeck much of the credit must be given for the development of the early horticultural and agricultural efforts in Utah, he having started the first nursery for the sale of trees, shrubs and vines in Utah Territory. His sterling business honesty and great foresight, slid his unusual natural capabilities as an engineer, made his counsel of great value to President Brigham Young, and, for that matter, to the people of the Territory at large, because of his contributing influences in the early development and material growth of various enterprises, and the agriculture of the territory, which were of vital moment. Bro. Ellerbeck died April 2, 1895, leaving a large family of children, all of whom have excelled in the various professions which they have followed, such as science, literature, art, etc.
