Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Sirrine, Mephibosheth

Sirrine, Mephibosheth, a faithful Elder in the Church, who died in the missionary field, was born Oct. 27, 1811, in Phillipstown, New York. He was among the early converts to "Mormonism," and after his baptism he was ordained to the Priesthood and became an efficient and diligent missionary, performing a number of missions for the Church. As early as August, 1838, he raised up a branch of the Church in Lenawee county, Michigan, in which State he subsequently had great success as a missionary. Thus we find him presiding over a number of conference meetings. In February, 1841, he presided over a conference held in Brownsville. In 1843 he was still in Michigan, and presided over a conference meeting held in Briton, Michigan, where nine branches of the Church were represented. In 1844 he continued his labors in Michigan, attended a conference in Brownsville in January and another in Southfield in August, 1844. At the latter conference fourteen branches of the Church were represented. He appears to have returned to Nauvoo shortly after that, but was called on another mission to the Eastern States, together with many others, and in January, 1845, we find him presiding over a conference held at Hartford, Conn. At a council held at Nauvoo Oct. 11, 1845, he was appointed captain of the 24th company of hundreds, the Church leaders looking forward to the migration of the saints to the West. He was in Nauvoo in April, 1846, to attend a conference, and was thence called on a mission to Great Britain. While in England he contracted a violent cold, from which he never fully recovered. He returned to America in the fall of 1847 and became president pro tem. of the branches in the Eastern States, succeeding Wm. I. Appleby, who went West to join the camps of the saints on the frontier. During the winter of 1847-1848 Brother Sirrine traveled extensively as a missionary in the Eastern States. In the spring of 1848 he started for the West and while traveling on the steamboat "Niagara" he died with consumption April 29, 1848, at the mouth of the Ohio river. His remains were brought to Winter Quarters for interment. Under date of May 21, 1848, the following is recorded in the Historian's Office journal kept at Winter Quarters: "The remains of Mephibosheth Sir rine were taken up to the burying ground on the hill. In the procession following the remains were Sister Sirrine and children, President Brigham Young and lady, Ezra T. Benson, Erastus Snow and lady, Phinehas Richards, Franklin D. Richards and others. While the grave was being dug, Ezra T. Benson delivered a short but appropriate address, Erastus Snow prayed, after which the remains were interred and the people left the ground a little before noon."
