Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Sjodahl, Janne M.PPSjodahl, Janne Mattson

Sjodahl, Janne M.PPSjodahl, Janne Mattson, editor and author, was born Nov. 29, 1853, in Karlshamn, Blekinge lån, Sweden, the son of Jobart Mattson and Petronella Suneson Mattson. After first receiving a good common school education he entered the Bethel Seminary in Stockholm in 1870 and in 1875 the Regent's Park College in London, England. He associated himself with the Baptists early in life and acted for several years as general secretary of the Norwegian Baptist Union, with headquarters at Trondhjem, Norway. In 1886 he emigrated to Utah, where he became a convert to "Mormonism" and was baptized in Manti by Hans Westenskov Oct. 7, 1886. Soon after his baptism he was ordained to the office of a Teacher and subsequently to that of an Elder. and in 1886-1887 he translated the Doctrine and Covenants into the Swedish language. He was ordained a Seventy Nov. 15, 1888, by Moses Thatcher, being called on a mission to Palestine and Switzerland. While on this mission he compiled the music of the German Latter-day Saint hymn book. After his return he was appointed to preside over the Scandinavian meetings in Salt Lake City, which position he held for a number of years. In 1897 he was chosen by the Church authorities to present on behalf of the Scandinavians in Utah a copy of the Book of Mormon to King Oscar II at His Majesty's 25 - year jubilee. He went to Sweden for the purpose and was granted an audience at the palace Sept. 22, 1897. In 1890 he became connected with the "The Deseret News," the official church organ, which position he held until 1914. In 1908 (July 27th) he was ordained a High Priest by Pres. Wm. McLachlan and set apart as an alternate member of the High Council of the Pioneer Stake; he acted in that position about three years or until he moved to the Ensign Stake. In 1906, when Elder Charles W. Penrose went to Liverpool to preside over the European Mission, Elder Sjodahl was appointed editor-in-chief of the "Deseret News" and held that position until 1914, when he was called to go on a mission to Great Britain. He arrived in Liverpool Sept. 22, 1914, and was appointed assistant editor of the "Millennial Star." He discharged the duties of that office until May 10, 1919, when he returned home, having been honorably released. During this period, Europe was convulsed with the most terrible war on record. The missionaries from Zion were called home, except a few who could make it convenient to remain; the branches of the Church were deprived of their male members, who were needed for military service, and the work was handicapped by the spirit of militarism that domineered the world. In order to keep the "Millennial Star" going, it became necessary for Elder Sjodahl to do a great deal of type-setting, in addition to his editorial work, and he cheerfully met every emergency. In addition to his work on the "Millennial Star" and his frequent visits to the various conferences in the British Mission, he compiled, under the direction of Elder Hyrum M. Smith, the president of the Mission, a Commentary on the Doctrine and Covenants, and, in accordance with instructions from the late President Joseph F. Smith, superintended the printing of it at the Liverpool office. The work has received very favorable comment by the Church authorities who have examined it. President Charles W. Penrose, in an article in the "Deseret News," characterizes it as evincing "patient and scholarly research and remarkable diligence" and showing "long and persistent literary labor and great ability." Elder Sjodahl regards this work as his chief effort of a mission extending over almost five years. On his arrival home he was called, by President Heber J. Grant, to assist Elder Edward H. Anderson in his work on the "Improvement Era."
