Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Sorensen, Hans Christian

Sorensen, Hans Christian, fourth Bishop of the Mount Carmel Ward (Kanab Stake), Kane county, Utah, was born Nov. 30, 1864, at Döstrup, Aalborg amt, Denmark, the son of Mads Sörensen and Kirsten Larsen. His parents having become converts to the restored gospel, he emigrated to America with two of his elder brothers and his sister, in charge of his uncle, Anders C. Sörensen. They crossed the Atlantic in the steamship "Wyoming" and arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 29, 1873. For about three months Hans made his home with his uncle (Borregaard), at Fillmore, Millard county, thence went to live with a family at Holden, where he attended school. A year later (1874) his parents emigrated to Utah and settled at Mill Creek. His father was so anxious to see his boy that he walked to Holden, a distance of about 125 miles, to get him; the return journey was made by team in company with the friends in whose home Hans had been staying. While living in Mill Creek, Hans was baptized May 2, 1875. In 1879 the family moved to Orderville, Kane county, where they lived in the United Order. Here Hans was ordained a Deacon. His mother was an ardent Temple worker in the St. George Temple, and in order that he might assist her in this work, Bro. Hans Sörensen, by permission of Pres. Wilford Woodruff, was ordained an Elder when only fifteen years of age, by John L. Winder. In 1887 he was called on a mission to Scandinavia and on his arrival in Copenhagen he was appointed to labor in the Aalborg conference; he was the youngest Elder in said conference. Being honorably released after two years and a half of service, he returned home, arriving in Orderville Sept. 13, 1889. The following day (Sept. 14th) he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as an alternate member of the High Council of the Kanab Stake. Returning home from his mission he took seven young emigrating saints to the home of his parents, who were always trying to assist in the emigration of their friends by finding homes for their boys and girls in Utah. In 1890 (March 18th) Bro. Sörensen married Miranda Esplin (daughter of Bishop John Esplin and Margaret Webster), who was born in Mount Carmel Jan. 25, 1872. With his young wife Bro. Sörensen settled in Mount Carmel, where he acted for some years as superintendent of the Ward Sunday school. In 1900 (Aug. 30th) he was ordained a Bishop by Francis M. Lyman and set apart to preside over the Mount Carmel Ward, a position which he still holds. Bishop Sörensen's marriage with Miranda Esplin has been blessed with ten children, namely, Binnie H., Kirsten, Evelene, David, Earl J,, Loyd, Marie, Vilate, Joseph and Doyle. All of these children are living except Kirsten and Joseph. Bishop Sörensen is a farmer and stock raiser by avocation and has held many positions of trust and responsibility in civil affairs.
