Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Standing, Joseph

Standing, Joseph, one of the martyrs of the Church, was born Oct. 5, 1854, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of James and Mary Standing, was baptized in September, 1862, by Edward Snelgrove, and still resided with his parents Oct. 11, 1875, when he was set apart by Apostle Joseph F. Smith for a mission to the Southern States. He returned Sept. 15, 1876, after filling an honorable mission. In March, 1878, he was again set apart for a mission to the Southern States and after arriving in the missionary field he was appointed to labor in the State of Georgia, where he accomplished a good work in Whitfield county, particularly in the neighborhood of Varnells Station, where he had succeeded in raising up a branch of the Church. Early in the year 1879, Elder Rudger Clawson arrived in the mission and became associated with Brother Standing, who was then the president of the Georgia conference. In July, 1879, these two brethren were laboring in Union and Fannin counties. About the middle of the month they left their field of labor to attend a conference to be held in Haywood Valley, Chattooga county, Georgia. On the way they called at Varnells Station to visit the Saints, arriving there on the night of Saturday, July 19, 1879. A short time before their departure for Haywood Valley, Elder Standing had the following dream, which made a powerful impression upon his mind and caused him to have forebodings of approaching trouble: "I thought I went to Varnells Station, when suddenly clouds of intense blackness gathered overhead and all around me. I visited a family who were connected with the Church. The moment I entered their house the most extreme consternation seized them, and they made it clear beyond any possibility of doubt that my presence was objectionable. They appeared to be influenced by a sense of great fearfulness. There was no clearing away of the clouds nor abatement of the restlessness of the people, when I suddenly awoke, without my being shown the end of the trouble." The Elders had called at the home of the family, seen by Bro. Standing in his dream, on the evening of their arrival at Varnells, and were received with great coolness. The inmates of the home appeared to be in a state of great excitement and said that threats had been made against the brethren and the feeling toward them in the neighborhood was very bitter and murderous. They declined to allow them to stop over night, because if anything happened they would have to share the trouble. This reception chilled the feelings of the Elders and Brother Clawson said to himself: "This is the fulfillment of Joseph's dream." "What shall we do?" said the missionaries. "It is now nine o'clock and getting quite dark. Can you tell us of a place where we can find shelter?" The answer was that if they went to Mr. Henry Holston's, a mile and a half further on, he would doubtless entertain them, This the brethren decided to do and were kindly received by Mr. Holston, who was not a member of the Church, but friendly to the Elders. Here they stayed over night and Sunday, where the day was quietly spent in singing and conversing on the gospel. After breakfast Monday morning, July 21, 1879, they walked over to a Mr. Loggins, a distance of about one mile, to look after their clothing. While on their way back, as they were walking along the public road, near the line of Catoosa and Whitfield counties, they were suddenly surprised by an armed mob consisting of the following twelve persons, all of whom were citizens of the surrounding territory: Jasper N. Nations, Hugh Blair, David Nations, Mac McClure, Andrew Bradley, Joseph Nations, James Faucett, Benjamin Clark, David Clark, Jefferson Hunt, William Nations and A. L. Smith. With many threats of violence, these armed ruffians compelled the Elders to accompany them through the woods to an isolated place. As they were walking along, one of the mobbers, Benjamin Clark, a Baptist deacon, struck Elder Clawson a heavy blow with a club from behind, nearly felling him to the ground. This cowardly act he attempted to repeat a few minutes later, but was prevented by another member of the gang. While passing a spring of water, Elder Standing requested to be permitted to get a drink, which was granted him. He was very pale, his features rigid and overspread with an expression of deep anxiety. While at the spring, James Faucett addressed the Elders as follows: "I want you men to understand that I am the captain of this party, and that if we ever find you in this part of the country, we will hang you by the neck like dogs." The space of about one hour was consumed in conversation when three of the mobbers, who had left the party a few minutes before, rode up andone of them exclaimed: "Follow us." Brother Standing, undoubtedly expecting that to follow him meant certain death, made some resistance, when a man who was near him pointed his pistol at him and fired. Elder Standing fell mortally wounded. Suddenly a member of the party, pointing to Elder Clawson, said, "Shoot that man." Every gun was leveled at him and he calmly folded his arms and said with apparent deliberation, "Shoot." The murderous wretches paused a moment, when the man who gave the first order suddenly changed his mind and shouted, "Don't shoot." Elder Clawson then walked over to his marryred companion, raised his head and placed his hat under it for a pillow. Turning to the murderers he said indignantly, "It is a burning shame to shoot a man down in this way and leave him to die in the woods; either go and get help, or let me go." The mob permitted him to go, which he did with the greatest speed. After his departure the gang fired a number of shots into the body of Elder Standing, no doubt to cover the trails of the actual murder. In the preparation of the body, Elder Clawson was left almost entirely alone, but secured a casket and had the body encased, after which it was taken to Dalton, Georgia, by wagon and thence to Salt Lake City, accompanied by Elder Clawson. The news of the tragedy had created a deep sensation in the community of the Latter-day Saints. In Ogden a brass band, an organized body of members of the Young Men's Improvement Association, and a multitude of other people awaited the arrival of the remains in that town. The obsequies were conducted in the Tabernacle at Salt Lake City on Sunday, Aug. 3, 1879, in the presence of about 10,000 persons. The speakers on that occasion were Presidents John Taylor and George Q. Cannon. The body was interred in the Salt Lake City cemetery, where a handsome monument of Italian marble, with data pertaining to the tragedy inscribed upon it, was erected. At the time his life was taken, Brother Standing had already served sixteen months of a second mission to the Southern States, and had been for some time in daily expectation of being notified of an honorable release to return home. He had been indulging in gleeful anticipations of meeting soon with valued friends and loved ones, but these were cruelly cut short of realization by the bullet of the cowardly assassin. Bro. Standing was of a mild and gentle though firm disposition, one who would suffer wrong rather than do wrong, and it was because of his kind and wise manner of conducting himself that Pres. John Morgan left the hostile district of Georgia under his watchful care.
