Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Ellison, Ephraim Pete

Ellison, Ephraim Peter, first counselor in the presidency of the North Davis Stake, was born June 10, 1850, in St. Louis, Mo., the son of John Ellison and Alice Pilling. He was baptized when about eleven years old by his father. His parents settled at Nauvoo, Ill., early enough to become participants in the exodus of 1846. They went to St. Louis at that time, where they remained until 1852, when they crossed the plains and mountains to Utah. They settled on Heber C. Kimball's farm "over the Jordan," and the next year (1853) moved to Kaysville, Davis county, where Ephraim was baptized by his father and subsequently ordained an Elder, a Seventy and a High Priest. The latter ordination took place in 1897 under the hands of president Joseph F. Smith, and he was also set apart as an alternate, and later as a regular member of the Davis Stake High Council. He acted in that capacity until June 20, 1915, when he was chosen as first counselor to President Henry H. Blood of the North Davis Stake. For many years Brother Ellison acted as Ward superintendent of the Sunday school at Layton. He served as county commissioner three years, has been manager of the Farmers Union of Layton since its organization in 1882; was manager and vice president of the Knight Sugar Company, in Alberta, Canada, for ten years; has served as president of the Ellison Milling Company of Alberta, Canada, since its organization in 1902; has been president of the Davis & Weber Counties Canal Company since 1900; is a director and manager of the Layton Milling & Elevator Company, of Layton; was a director of the Amalgamated Sugar Company from its organization until the year 1914; acts as vice president of the Pingree National Bank of Ogden, Utah, the First National Bank, of Layton, Utah, and the National City Bank of Salt Lake City, Utah; is also a director of the Winnemucca State Bank, of Winnemucca, Nevada, vice president of the Utah Ore Sampling Company, director in the Knight Woolen Mills, vice president and general manager of the Ellison Ranching Company, vice president of the Layton Sugar Company, and is also a director of the Beneficial Life Insurance Company and the San Joaquin Valley Sugar Company of Visalia, California. In January, 1873, he martied Elizabeth Whitesides (daughter of Lewis Whitesides and Susan Perkins), who was born Nov. 13, 1851. This marriage has been blessed with nine children.
