Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Sundwall, Peter

Sundwall, Peter, president of the Scandinavian and later of the Swedish Mission, was born June 11, 1848, at Aspas, Jemtland, Sweden, the son of Olof and Katrina Nilson. As a convert of the restored gospel he was baptized Feb. 27, 1866, and was soon afterward ordained to the Priesthood and appointed to labor as a local missionary in Sundsvall, and in the fall of 1867 he was sent to Gotland, and subsequently he again labored in Sundsvall, and in Ostersund, Eskilstuna, and Stockholm. He emigrated to Utah in 1872 and made his home in Fairview, Sanpete county. In 1881-1884 he filled a mission to Scandinavia, laboring in the mission office in Copenhagen, Denmark, as an assistant to the president of the mission, and, again, in 1894, he wascalled on another mission to Scandinavia, this time to act as president of the mission, which he did with wisdom and success. In the spring of 1908 he was called on his third mission to Europe, this time to preside over the Swedish Mission, returning in November, 1910. At home Bro. Sundwall has filled various positions of trust and responsibility, serving as manager of the Co-op Store in Fairview for several years. In 1886 he was appointed postmaster of Fairview and served in that capacity for nearly three years. in a business capacity he has been actively identified with nearly every business enterprise of importance in the community. At the present time he is serving as president of the Fairview State Bank, with which institution he was previously connected as cashier from the time of its organization in 1914. At home he has always taken an active part in any calling that has been assigned to him in a Church capacity. For many years he was president of the 26th quorum of Seventy. In 1901 (Jan. 5th) he was ordained a High Priest, and set apart to act as a High Councilor in the North Sanpete Stake of Zion. In 1916 he was released from this position and ordained a Patriarch, under the hands of Presiding Patriarch Hyrum G. Smith. In 1875 (Feb. 1st) he married Anna K. Johanson (daughter of Lars Johanson), who was born in Grava, Vermland, Sweden, March 17, 1848. This marriage has been blessed with five children, namely, Peter, Annie, John, Mary I., Olof, and an adopted son (Carl).
