Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Taylor, Thomas Nicholls

Taylor, Thomas Nicholls, president of the Utah Stake of Zion. (Continuation from Vol. 1:493.) In 1889 (Sept. 18th) Brother Taylor married Maud Rogers (daughter of Isaac Rogers and Unice L. Stewart). This marriage has been blessed with ten children, eight of whom (five boys and three girls) are still living. The oldest son has spent three years on a mission in Germany, the second son has labored two years as a missionary in New Zealand, and the third son has filled a mission to the Southern States. While acting as Bishop of the Provo Third Ward, Bro. Taylor supervised the erection of an amusement hall in that Ward, including a dance hall and a gymnasium. This building, which cost $20,000, is practically all finished, except the lower floor. After serving successfully and faithfully as a Bishop of the Provo Third Ward, Bro. Taylor was chosen and set apart as president of the Utah Stake of Zion, Oct. 26, 1919, Apostle Stephen L. Richards officiating. Bro. Taylor's commercial activities are as follows: In 1885 he entered into a partnership with Julius Jensen, under the firm name of Jensen & Taylor, and started the first exclusive jewelry store in Provo. When the Taylor Bros. Company was incorporated in 1890, Thomas N. was chosen as one of the directors and manager, which position he still holds. In 1904 he and others organized the Provo Building and Loan Society, an organization which has at the present time an authorized capital of $2,000,000 and has been the means of making it possible for hundreds of young men to own their own homes. The society is not organized for selfish motives, as no officer belonging to it receives remuneration for his services, except the secretary. Bro. Taylor has been its president and trustee since its organization. In 1907 Bro. Taylor and others organized the Farmers and Merchants Bank, which institution has an authorized capital of $100,000, and is a member of the Federal Reserve System. Bro. Taylor has been its president since its organization. In 1910 the Jesse Knight interests bought the old Provo Woolen Mills, and at Bro. Knight's request, Bro. Taylor became a director of that institution and is still serving in that capacity. When the Springville, Mapleton Sugar Company was organized in 1917, he accepted a position as a director in that company. He has been a director of the Beneficial Life Insurance Company since its organization and is president of the Maiben Glass and Paint Company. At the convention held in Logan June 22, 1918, the Utah Bankers' Association honored Bro. Taylor by electing him president for the ensuing year. When the Utah State Council of Defence was organized at the outbreak of the war, Bro. Taylor was appointed a member of that board and was elected vice-president and a member of the executive committee. Recently he was appointed a member of the Mormon Battalion Monument Commission, for the purpose of raising $100,000 towards the erection of a monument in honor of the battalion. Bro. Taylor is one of the leading business men in Utah county, being associated with nearly every enterprise which represents progress and activity.
