Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Tuttle, Luther Terry

Tuttle, Luther Terry, a member of the Mormon Battalion and for many years one of the leading citizens of Manti, Sanpete county, Utah, was born Nov. 19, 1825, in New York City, the son of Terry Tuttle. a shipbuilder in good financial circumstances, who died when Luther was an infant of fourteen months. His mother, Ellen Tuttle, reared him well and superintended his limited education. Up to the age of thirteen his boyhood was passed in his native city, but in the fall of 1838 he left with his mother for Missouri, where they experienced the vicissitudes caused by the persecution of the Latter-day Saints by the Missourians. About that time Luther went to live with his uncle, a hotel-keeper in St. Louis. The Tuttle family, consisting of a mother, three sons and a daughter, were also in Illinois, where Luther, the youngest in the family, engaged in farming. Being with his people at their exodus from Illinois in 1846, he enlisted in the famous Mormon Battalion, being then in his twenty-first year. Three days before his enlistment, or on July 13, 1846, he married Abigail Haws at Council Bluffs, Iowa. He served eighteen months in the Battalion and held the rank of orderly sergeant. After receiving his discharge in California, he returned to Council Bluffs, Iowa, where he engaged in mercantile business and other pursuits. He was in the fur trade as agent for Peter A. Sarpy of the American Fur Company. Next he engaged in the lumber business at Macedonia, twenty-five miles east of Council Bluffs, where he built a saw mill, and afterwards a flouring mill. He continued in the milling business at Macedonia until he emigrated to Utah in 1863. With his family and teams he left Iowa, without any company, June 10, 1863, but fell in with some travelers along the road, namely, Thos. Clark, Robert Caldwell and others (later residents of Provo, Utah), whose teams were loaded with stoves and other goods for the home markets Bro. Tuttle and his family arrived in Salt Lake City Aug. 25, 1863. They settled at Manti, where Bro. Tuttle resided until his death. Elder Turtle was for many years one of the leading business men of Manti, being a successful banker and merchant, and participated as a leader in nearly every business enterprise of importance in Sanpete county. He took an active part in the Indain wars caused by Black Hawk and his band, and held a colonel's commission under Gen. Warren S. Snow. He was more or less connected with all social and political movements in that part of the country ever since his arrival in Utah, acted as mayor of Manti for two terms and represented his county in the Utah legislature four terms, three in the Council and one in the House. Ecclesiastically he acted for years as a member of the High Council of Sanpete Stake. Elder Turtle was twice married. His first wife had no children. His second wife was Lola Ann Haws, his first wife's sister, whom he married Jan. 22, 1850. His children were twelve in number, namely, Louise, Luther, Charlotte, Albert, Terry, Frank J., John Henry, Louis E., Lola Ann, Lilie Belle, Ethela C., and Alpheus H. Bro. Tuttle died Dec. 23, 1917, at his home in Manti, Utah, ninety two years old.
