Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Vetterli, John

Vetterli, John, Bishop of Emigration Ward (Liberty Stake), Salt Lake City, Utah, was born May 6, 1865, at Schaffhausen, Switzerland, the son of John Vetterli and Ursula Spengler. He was baptized May 8, 1884, by Carl Schmid, emigrated to America in 1884, crossing the Atlantic in the steamship "Arizona," located in Logan and afterwards in Smithfield, Cache county, Utah, and then moved to Tooele, where he resided three years and attended school, after which he moved to Salt Lake City. He married Annie Naeff Dec. 3, 1890, and filled a mission to Germany and Switzerland in 1892-1894. He first labored eight months in Wurttemberg and Bavaria, and was then appointed to labor in the provinces of Brandenburg and Silesia, Prussia, succeeding the late David H. Cannon, who had died in the field. While laboring in the city of Sorau he was cited to appear in the court several times for preaching the gospel and finally banished from the kingdom of Prussia. At home Bro. Vetterli has labored as a Ward Sunday school superintendent, president of the Ward Y. M. M. I. A., president of the 10th quorum and afterwards of the 138th quorum of Seventy. When the Liberty Stake was organized in 1904, he was ordained a High Priest by Angus M. Cannon and set apart as a High Councilor in that Stake, which position he held until 1909. He was ordained a Bishop June 13, 1909, by Hyrum M. Smith and set apart to preside over the Emigration Ward, which had just been organized. Having served his apprenticeship as a machinist in Switzerland, he followed that occupation in his native land, and after his arrival in America he worked in the Union Pacific Railroad mechanical department and in the Silver Brothers Iron Works for nearly fifteen years. He then took up the life insurance business and acted as an agent for the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company one year and as local assistant superintendent seven years. In 1918 he entered the real estate and fire insurance business with offices in the Ness building. The names of Bishop Vetterli's children are as follows: Oscar John, Annie Mary, Lydia Margaret, Ruth Mabel, Francis Leroy, Ralph Herbert, Reed Ernest, and Dora Lucille.
