Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Valentine, Hyrum Washington

Rose Ellen B. Valentine.

Valentine, Hyrum Washington, president of the Swiss and German Mission (1912-1916), and now Bishop of the Brigham City Third Ward (Box Elder Stake) Box Elder county, Utah, was born March 4, 1873, in Brigham City, Utah, the son of Valentin Valentinsen and Hannah Bensen. He was baptized May 22, 1881, by Christian J. Nielsen and became an active member of the Church in his early youth. After receiving a common school education, he graduated from the Box Elder High School in its first graduating class and afterwards studied in the Agricultural College at Logan, Utah. Having previously been ordained a Deacon, he was ordained an Elder by Charles Kelly in February, 1900, and took a missionary course in the Brigham Young College at Logan the same year. In October, 1900, he was called on a mission to Europe, being ordained a Seventy and set apart for his mission by Abraham O. Woodruff Oct. 9, 1900. Being assigned to labor in the German Mission, he spent the first few months in Erfurt, later in Leipzig, and still later in Meissen. After that he presided over the Dresden conference and returned home in July, 1903. Soon after his return, he was chosen superintendent of the Brigham City Second Ward Sunday School. For three successive seasons he taught school with phenomenal success at North Elwood, Box Elder county. Brother Valentine has also been busy in other matters pertaining to the upbuilding of the community in which he has lived. In 1905 (Aug. 17th) he married Rose Ellen Bywater (daughter of James Bywater and Hannah Jensen), who was born Sept. 17, 1875, in Brigham City. For several years Bro. Valentine acted as chairman of the Board of Horticulture in Box Elder county; he was also the moving spirit in the organization of the Valentine Fruit Company and was its continuous manager until 1911, when he was called on his second mission to Europe. In January, 1909, he was elected clerk of the Board of Education, and four months later he became superintendent of Box Elder county schools, having the distinction of being chosen the first superintendent of said schools after the county consolidation of schools into a district of the first class. In 1906 he was made a member of the Box Elder Stake Sunday School Board and some time later chosen as first assistant to Justin D. Call, Stake superintendent of Sunday schools. In 1911-1917 he filled his second mission to Europe, this time presiding over the Swiss and German Mission. In that position he succeeded Thomas E. McKay in February, 1912, and presided until December, 1916, when he turned the presidency of the mission over to Angus J. Cannon. On this mission Brother Valentine was accompanied by his wife (Rose Ellen Bywater Valentine ), who was set apart as president of the Relief Societies of the Mission by Pres. Rudger Clawson, March 8, 1913. On this mission Brother Valentine traveled 64,039 miles, held 963 meetings and preached 805 times. Soon after his return home he was called to act as Bishop of the Brigham City Third Ward, being ordained and set apart to that position June 3, 1917, by Apostle David O. McKay. He had previously been ordained a High Priest by Niels Madsen. Bishop Valentine is noted for his devotion to his Church duties, his business ability and his special gifts as a leader among men.
