Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Warren, Louis Albert

Warren, Louis Albert, an Elder who died in the missionary field, was born Dec. 16, 1866, in Spanish Fork, Utah county, Utah, the son of William James Warren and Sarah Jane Simmons. He was baptized by Allen Adamson Oct. 4, 1875, and later ordained to the Priesthood. Elder Warren was set apart for a mission to the Southern States by Apostle Frances M. Lyman June 15, 1898, and arrived in his field a few days later. He labored with zeal until February, 1899, when he was taken sick with a cold, which finally turned to pneumonia. At the time he was laboring in Richland parish, Louisiana, with Elder Orson C. Raymond. While in this condition, he, with Elder Raymond, started to attend a conference to be held Feb. 14, 1899, at Victoria, Louisiana, where they were to be met by President Ben E. Rich. The weather was exceptionally cold and in this delicate condition Elder Warren was greatly weakened. The Elders arrived at a Mr. Fredericks in due time and were kindly received. When the time came for them to continue their journey, Elder Warren felt so poorly that he decided not to go, but would remain where he was until he was better. Elder Raymond reported his condition at conference, but not feeling easy, he suggested that Elder Warren be transferred to the office at Chattanooga. Three days later Elder Warren wrote to Elder Cornwall, president of the Alabama conference, stating that he was worse and that the doctor said he had contracted a bad case of pneumonia. He was carefully moved to a hotel in Coushatta, where he could receive better care. Here every attention was given him, but he gradually grew worse and died Feb. 19, 1899. The body was given prompt attention and under the care of Elder Cornwall was taken to his home in Price, Carbon county, Utah. Elder Warren left a loving wife and one child, besides a fond mother and brother to mourn his departure. He had never complained, but stuck manfully to his duties until the fatal disease prostrated him and carried him off.
