Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Widtsoe, Anna Karine Gaarden

Widtsoe, Anna Karine Gaarden, a faithful member of the Church and a woman of literary ability, was born June 14, 1849, at Titran, on the island of Frojen, Trondhjem amt, Norway, the daughter of Peder O. Gaarden and Beret Martha J. Haavig Her father was the chief royal pilot of that part of Norway. Her mother was the daughter of a wealthy real estate owner. Anna received a liberal education and was known in her circle of acquaintances as an elocutionist. In 1870 (Dec. 29th) she married John A. Widtsoe, a prominent educator, by whom she had two sons, namely, John A. and Osborne J. P. She was left a widow Feb. 14, 1878. After the death of her husband, she was engaged as a teacher in the Namsos Industrial School. While thus employed she was converted to "Mormonism" and was baptized April 1, 1881, by Elder Anthon L. Skanchy. She at once became a diligent worker in the Church and acted as counselor and secretary in the Relief Society of the Trondhjem branch, Norway. She emigrated to Utah in 1883, together with her two sons, and settled in Logan, Cache county, where she became a teacher of domestic arts and acted as a teacher and afterwards as a counselor in the Logan First Ward Relief Society. She put forth every effort to give her sons a thorough education, often denying herself almost the necessaries of life in order to accomplish her object. After moving to Salt Lake City she labored as a teacher in the Relief Society of the Thirteenth Ward. She also took an active part in the interest of women's franchise and was prominent among her Scandinavian sisters. She was for many years an active member and for one year the president of the Utah Women's Press Club. Being possessed of considerable literary ability she wrote quite extensively in poetry and prose; some of her work was published, but much of it was left in manuscript form. From 1902 to 1907 she served as a missionary for her Church, together with her sister Petroline J. P. Gaarden, laboring chiefly in Norway. She died at her home in Salt Lake City July 11, 1919, as a faithful member of the Church and highly respected by all who knew her.
