Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Widtsoe, John A.PPWidtsoe, John A.

Widtsoe, John A.PPWidtsoe, John A., president of the University of Utah. (Continued from Vol. 1:768.) Professor Widtsoe acted as director of the Utah Experiment Station from 1900 to 1905, director of the Department of Agriculture in the Brigham Young University at Provo from 1905 to 1907, president of the Utah Agricultural College from 1907 to 1916, and president of the University of Utah since 1916. He organized and conducted the first farmers' institutes in the State of Utah, served as president of the International Dry Farming Congress at a session held at Lethbridge, Canada, and was chosen as an officer at various times of the Irrigation Congress. He is now the senior member of the State Board of Education, is a member (and was for several years president) of the State Board of Horticulture, was a member of the Utah State Conservation Commission from the time of its organization, acted as chairman and member of the Utah Committee to Commemorate irrigation. During the World War he was a member of the Utah State Council of Defense, chairman of the Food Production Committee of Salt Lake City and of the Irrigation Committee of the Food Administration. Dr. Widtsoe has contributed much to literature; thus he is the author of "Principles of Irrigation Practice," 'Concordance" to the Doctrine and Covenants (published in 1906), "Joseph Smith as a Scientist" (published in 1908), "Dry Farming" (published in 1911), and "Rational Theology" (published in 1915). He has written several manuels and popular articles on gospel subjects, besides numerous technical and popular articles on scientific subjects, upwards of forty bulletins on irrigation, dry farming, soils, etc. In a Church capacity Dr. Widtsoe has acted as secretary of a Priests quorum, counselor in the presidency of an Elders quorum, Stake secretary of Elders, member of a Stake Sunday school board, president of local Y. M. M. I. A., teacher, officer and superintendent of Ward Sunday schools and teacher and president of a Seventies quorum. For many years he has acted as a member of the General Board of Y. M. M. I. A. Dr. Widtsoe ranks as one of Utah's foremost educators, and is one of the best informed Elders in the Church on doctrine and Church organization. Elder Widtsoe married Leah Eudora Dunford (daughter of Alma Dunford and Susa Young), who was born Feb. 24, 1874, in Salt Lake City, Utah, and is a grand-daughter of President Brigham Young. Seven children have been born to them, namely, Anna G., John Andreas, Karl Marcel, Mark Adriel, Helen, Mary and Leah Eudora. Of these Anna G., Karl Marcel and Leah Eudora only survive.
