Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Wilson, Guy Carlton

Wilson, Guy Carlton, president of the Latter-day Saints University and one of the foremost educators of Utah, was born April 10, 1864, in Fairview, Sanpete county, Utah, the son of Lycurgus Wilson and Lois Ann Stevens. The parents came to Utah in 1851, crossing the plains with mule team, and the father figured prominently in the industrial circles as a cooper and carpenter. He afterwards went to Old Mexico on a colonizing expedition and died at Colonia Juarez in 1911, having for two years survived his wife, who died in 1909. They had a family of eight children. Guy C. Wilson, raised as a Latter-day Saint, was baptized when about eight years old and ordained successively to the offices of Teacher, Priest and Seventy. To the latter office he was ordained in 1882 by Seymour B. Young. In 1886-1888 he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring in West Virginia and Kentucky, and presiding over the West Virginia conference one year. About 1890 he was ordained a High Priest by Canute Peterson and set apart as second counselor to Bishop James C. Peterson of Fairview. Prior to this he had acted as Ward president of Y. M. M. I. A. and as secretary of the 26th quorum of Seventy. He attended the elementary schools of Fairview and Pleasant Grove and the Brigham Young University at Provo, from which he was graduated in 1900, and afterwards attended the University of Utah. After doing post graduate work in the Chicago University in 1902, he went to the Columbia University of New York for post graduate work in 1912 and 1913. Taking up the profession or teaching, he was thus connected with the schools at Fairview for ten years and subsequently became a teacher in the Brigham Young University at Provo. In 1897 he was made principal of the Juarez Stake Academy and superintendent of the Church schools in Mexico, serving thus from 1897 to 1912. In the meantime he promoted his own education through attendance at summer school and assemblies throughout the United States. In 1912 he left Mexico, at the time of the exodus, to become a student of the Columbia University Teachers College, and upon his return to Utah he taught in the first theological seminary of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in connection with the Granite High School. In 1915 he was appointed president of the Latter-day Saints University in Salt Lake City. Under his direction that school has made steady and substantial progress and now ranks high among the educational institutions of the West. Also in secular matters Elder Wilson has held a number of important offices. He has served on the general board of Religion Classes and as a member of the Board of Examiners of the Church schools. He is a member of the National Religious Education Association, a member of the National Education Association and a member of the association of the secondary school principals. In 1885 (Sept. 25th) Bro. Wilson married Elizabeth Hartsburg, who was born Oct. 8, 1864, in Stockholm, Sweden. Later he married Malissa Stevens (daughter of David H. Stevens and Agnes Johnson), who was born Sept. 2, 1883, in Fruitland, New Mexico. She became the mother of six children,. namely, Elizabeth, Guy C., Steven, Owen M., Mabel and Woodrow. Bro. Wilson also married Anna Ivins (daughter of Anthony W. Ivins and Elizabeth Snow), who was born Oct. 20, 1882, in St. George, Utah. This marriage has been blessed with seven children, namely, Anna, Marguerite, Florence, Rachel and Rebecca (twins), Antonette and Ruth.
