Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Woolley, Hugh Roberts

Woolley, Hugh Roberts, an Elder who died while filling a foreign mission, was born Oct. 7, 1890, at Centerville, Davis county, Utah, the son of Lorin Calvin Woolley and Sarah Ann Roberts. He was baptized by his father Oct. 7, 1898, was partly educated at Centerville and in the L. D. S. University in Salt Lake City, and later graduated from the Bountiful High School in Bountiful, Utah. He took an active part in Church matters from his early youth, and was ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Teacher, Priest, and Elder. When quite young he went to Nevada as an employee of a railroad company to build bridges and do other work. Later he located temporarily in San Francisco, where he labored faithfully in the branch of the Church, assisting the Elders from Zion in the Sunday school and Y. M. M. I. A. While in the employ of the Eastman Kodak Company, he traveled extensively on the Pacific Coast. After his return home he was called on a mission to the Netherlands, being set apart for that mission Oct. 13, 1911. After his arrival in Europe, he labored at different places in Holland, and later was sent to Antwerp, Belgium, where he spent eight months, re-opening a field where no Elder had labored with success for many years. He seemed to have a special gift for learning languages, for during his sojourn in Holland and Belgium he acquired a good knowledge of the German, French, Dutch and Flemish languages, mastering these to such a degree of perfection that it astonished all his associates. He had just been appointed to go to Amsterdam, Holland, to preside over the conference there and to build a meeting house for the saints, when he was stricken with heart trouble, through having caught a severe cold. He died suddenly at Rotterdam, Holland, Feb. 7, 1914. His body was embalmed and shipped to his home in Centerville, Utah, where impressive funeral services were held March 4, 1914. Elder Woolley was a most diligent Elder and by his good nature and courage he gained the hearts of all his associates, by whom he was regarded as a most conscientious and able Elder, willing to undergo any sacrifice for the we1fare of the Church. He died an unmarried man, being only twenty-three years of age when he passed away.
