Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Wotherspoon, James

Nora Farr Wotherspoon.

Wotherspoon, James, president of the North Weber Stake of Zion and a resident of Ogden, Weber county, Utah, was born June 14, 1856, in Millarston, Paisley, Scotland, the son of John M. Wotherspoon and Agnes Walker. His parents being converts to "Mormonism" (his father being baptized in 1846), James was baptized when about eighteen years old in Paisley and emigrated to America with his parents in 1874, locating in Ogden. His father died a few months after the arrival of the family in Utah, which left James to provide for his mother and three younger members of the family, until his elder brother and sister arrived from Scotland a year later (1875). James Wotherspoon was a diligent worker in the Church from the beginning and held many positions in the Priesthood, to which he was ordained early. In 1893 (Dec. 17th) he was ordained a High Priest by Lewis W. Shurtliff and set apart as first counselor to Bishop Barnard White of the Ogden Third Ward, which position he held until 1901, when he was ordained a Bishop by John Henry Smith and set apart to preside over said Ward, succeeding Bishop White. He held that position until Aug. 2, 1908, when Weber county was divided into three Stakes and he was called to act as president of North Weber Stake, which includes all the Bishops Wards in Weber county north of Twenty-fourth Street and west of Washington Avenue and extending to the Box Elder line on the north and the Great Salt Lake on the west. The Stake also includes all the settlements of the saints in Nevada, east of the Humboldt range of mountains, including Metropolis, McGill, Preston and Lund, with a branch at Ely. President Wotherspoon made his initial step in the business world by securing employment in a grocery store in Scotland when eleven years old, and through the intervening period he has been associated with merchandising and manufacturing interests. After locating in Ogden he served as a clerk in a store for five years, and then (having carefully saved his earnings until his industry and economy had brought him sufficient capital to embark in business on his own account) he established a general merchandise store in Ogden in September, 1879, in connection with A. G. Fell, under the firm style of James Wotherspoon and Company. This undertaking proved a financial success and he continued active therein until called on a mission to Scotland in 1889, where he labored for two years. On his return to Ogden from that mission he again engaged in mercantile business and in 1896 became identified with John Scowcroft and Sons Company, with which he acted as salesman, buyer, etc., until 1908, when he became interested in the Shupe Williams Candy Company, of which he became a director, secretary and sales manager. In this capacity he visited nearly all places of importance from the Missouri river to the Mexican line. Aside from all this he has made for himself a prominent place in business circles and has always taken an active interest in the building up of Utah's manufacturies He has been honored with the presidency and the directorship of many of the leading industries in Ogden. His entire life has been actuated by a benevolent and helpful spirit, and he has given support to every project and measure which he deemed of worth, in promoting the material, intellectual and social welfare of the community at large. In 1883 (Oct. 26th) President Wotherspoon married Nora Farr, daughter of Hon. Lorin Farr and Nikoline Eriksen), who was born April 2, 1865, in Ogden, Utah. This marriage has been blessed with seven children, namely, Clyde, Birdie, Ruby Viola, James Bryan (who is now laboring as a missionary in the Southern States), Glenna, Helen Shirley and Victor Hugo.
