Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Young, Feramorz Little

Young, Feramorz Little, an Elder who died at sea while returning from a foreign mission, was born Sept. 16, 1858, the son of President Brigham Young and Lucy Decker. He was baptized by Elder Karl G. Maeser Sept. 11, 1866. His childhood was passed at home, attending school, at first at his father's private school house and afterwards at the Deseret University, where he prepared himself for the appointment to the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Maryland, which he received from Delegate George Q. Cannon. He entered the academy in September, 1874, and continued there, pursuing his studies very successfully for two years, when he resigned. He then entered the Raensslaer Polytechnic Institution at Troy, New York, in January, 1877. Passing a successful examination, and taking up his studies with the class in the third year of the college course, he graduated with honor in June, 1879. He was set apart for a mission to Mexico by Apostle Wilford Woodruff Nov. 13, 1880, and accompanied Elder Moses Thatcher to that country, arriving in the Mexican capital December 5th, following. He entered at once upon the duties of his calling and made rapid progress in the acquirement of the Spanish language. On the 6th day of April, 1881, he accompanied Elders Moses Thatcher, James Z. Stewart and several native brethren in their ascent of the volcanic Mt. Popocatepetl, where conference was held and the General Authorities of the Church and those of the Mexican Mission were unanimously sustained by all present, and the republic of Mexico dedicated to the work of the God of Israel. On the morning of September 6th he was taken sick and purged severely. This continued more or less for two days and was followed by slight fever in the early evenings. In company with Elder Thatcher he left Mexico City for home Sept. 15, 1881, and on the morning of the 17th went on board the steamer "Knickerbocker" in the harbor of Vera Cruz, which sailed in the evening of the 18th. Elder Young gradually grew worse, though all that was possible was done for him, and he died in the night of Sept. 27, 1881, in latitude 24 degrees 21 minutes N. and longitude 80 degrees 52 minutes W., about one hundred and ten miles from Havana. The body was buried at sea. Bro. Young was a most exemplary and lovable young man, intelligent, talented and refined. He was a most intimate boyhood companion of President Heber J. Grant and a good and exemplary young man.
