Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Hart, Charles Henry

Hart, Charles Henry, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies, was born July 5, 1866, in Bloomington, Bear Lake county, Idaho, the son of James H. Hart and Subina Scheib. He is the oldest son of his mother's nine children, six of whom are still (1920) living. His father served with President John Taylor in opening up the French Mission, assisted in Church immigration and newspaper work in St. Louis, Mo., in the early fifties, was for several years Church immigration agent in New York City, and was first counselor to President Wm. Budge, of the Bear Lake Stake, for many years. The mother of Charles H. was born and educated in London and came to Utah with her parents In 1852. She died March 1, 1919, at the age of 80 years. The subject of this sketch moved with his father's family to Provo, Utah, when a boy, and was there baptized by his father. After a few years' residence in Provo and Salt Lake City, the family moved back to Bear Lake valley. There he engaged in the various duties incident to the conditions growing out of the settlement of a new country, being employed in farming, in canyon work, in freighting during the summer season, and in attending the district school during the winter months. At the age of fourteen he entered a printing office and remained there for over two years, learning such branches of the printer's art as are common to a country newspaper office. After attending high school, he became a student in the Normal department of the University of Utah, from which he was graduated with the class of 1887 with valedictorian honors. He then entered the University of Michigan, in which he pursued his law course, winning his L. L. B. degree in 1889. Following graduation he returned to the west and entered upon the practice of law at Paris, Idaho, where he remained for a year. He then removed to Logan, Utah, where he continued in the practice of his profession, and his marked ability and devotion to the interests of his clients won him quick recognition in a large practice. He was elected to the office of county attorney and later was chosen a member of the last Territorial council. He was then elected a member of the constitutional convention which framed the organic law of Utah, and he took part in preparing the State constitution, his knowledge of law being of immense benefit in this direction. Afterward he was elected judge of the First Judicial District of the State and served upon the bench for nine years, his record as judge being in harmony with his record as a citizen and a lawyer, characteristic by marked devotion to duty and by a masterful grasp of every problem presented for solution. While officiating upon the district bench he was called upon to serve as a member of the Supreme Court of the State many times. Later he formed a partnership with Hon. Frank K. Nebeker, under the firm name of Hart & Nebeker, at Logan, Utah, and was there successfully engaged in practice until called upon to fill a mission. Brother Hart was ordained a Deacon in early life, and later an Elder. He was ordained a Seventy by John Henry Smith, Aug. 10, 1890. When the Mutual Improvement Associations were organized, he became associated therewith, and took an active part therein for many years, serving as secretary of the local organization where he lived and also as a counselor to the Stake superintendent of the Bear Lake Stake, at a time when the associations of that Stake numbered fifty-seven. In 1898 he was set apart as a president of the sixty-fourth quorum of Seventy, and was acting in that capacity when called to be a member of the First Council of Seventies of the Church, held in April, 1906. Elder Hart has been interested in Sunday School work from his boyhood, teaching classes in various departments, but particularly in the theological department, and was also superintendent and teacher of the parents' class of the Logan Fifth Ward Sunday School at the time he was called to his present position among the Seventies. He succeeded to fill the vacancy caused by the death of the late Christian D. Fjeldsted, and was set apart by President Joseph F. Smith, April 9, 1906. Since then he has been a most earnest and effective worker in advancing the interests of the Church. He is a member of the General Sunday School Board, which has charge of a Sunday School membership of one hundred and ninety thousand, and he is also a member of the General Board of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association, an organization comprising about fifty thousand members. He was appointed by Governor Bamberger as a member of the Mormon Battalion Monument Commission, in which office he serves without compensation. In October, 1889, Brother Hart married Adelia Greenhalgh, daughter of Peter and Sarah Greenhalgh, early English converts to the Church, who settled at Willow Creek (now Willard), Box Elder county, Utah, and later in Bear Lake county, Idaho, at the time of the early settlement of those places. Mrs. Hart bore her husband ten children, namely, Lucile (now Mrs. W. D. Pack and a violinist of marked proficiency), Leona (now Mrs. Willard Ashton and an accomplished pianist), Genevieve (now Mrs. Raymond Wilcox and a high school teacher of public expression), Charles J. (who filled a mission to the Northwestern States and afterwards served in the U. S. army), Harold H. (now filling a mission in the Northeastern States), Paul Eugene, Dean Eldon, Melvin G., Raymond G. and Phyllis. The mother died in Salt Lake City in March, 1913, and in June, 1915, President Hart married LaLene Hendricks of Logan, Utah, a daughter of B. A. and Mary Hendricks of Lewiston, Utah.
