Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Ivins, Anthony W.PPIvins, Anthony Woodward

Ivins, Anthony W.PPIvins, Anthony Woodward, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles, was born Sept. 16, 1852, at Toms River, Ocean county, New Jersey, the son of Israel Ivins and Anna Lowrie Ivins. He came to Utah with his parents in 1853 and to southern Utah in 1861. He was baptized in November, 1860, by Joseph Pollard; ordained a Deacon, and subsequently a Teacher, serving faithfully in both these offices until he was 13 years of age, when he was ordained an Elder. Later he was ordained a Seventy by Joseph Young and acted as a counselor in the first Mutual Improvement Association in St. George; he was chosen as president of the St. George Fourth Ward, Y. M. M. I. A., in 1879. Later, when the associations of the four St. George Wards were consolidated into one, Bro. Ivins was chosen as president of the amalgamated association. Later he acted as Stake president of Y. M. M. I. A. In 1875-1876 he filled a mission to Arizona, New Mexico and Mexico, In company with Daniel W. Jones, Helaman Pratt, Jas. Z. Stewart, Robert H. Smith, Ammon M. Tenney and Wiley C. Jones. The expedition was sent out by President Brigham Young and was under the direction of Daniel W. Jones. It went instructed to explore and report on the country for colonization purposes, visit the various Indian tribes, establish friendly relations between the Indians and whites, and preach the gospel to the people. The party visited the Navajos, Hopis (Moquis), Apaches, Pimas, Maricopas and Papagos. It penetrated Mexico to the city of Chihuahua, went west into the Sierra Madre country, and explored the Casas Grandes district, where the "Mormon" colonies of Mexico later were established. Two thousand five hundred copies of extracts from the Book of Mormon were distributed on the trip. In 1878 Bro. Ivins filled a mission to the Navajo and Pueblo Indians of Arizona and New Mexico, Erastus B. Snow being his companion. In 1881 he was chosen a member of the High Council of the St. George Stake, at which time he was ordained a High Priest by John D. T. McAllister. In 1882, at the April conference. He was called to the City of Mexico to do missionary work among the Mexican people. He returned home in April, 1884, having presided for one year over the Mexican Mission. In 1888 he was chosen to act as first counselor to Daniel D. McArthur, in the presidency of the St. George Stake, in which capacity he continued to act until he was called by President Wilford Woodruff in 1895 to go to Mexico and take charge of the interests of the Church in that country. He moved his family to Mexico in 1896, having gone there himself the previous year, and he was appointed president of the Juarez Stake of Zion, at the time the Stake was organized by Apostle Francis M. Lyman, in December, 1895. While presiding in Mexico he also acted as vice president and general manager of the Mexican Colonization and Agricultural Company, under which the "Mormon" colonies in Mexico were established, and was president of the Dublan Mercantile Company, the largest mercantile house in that part of Mexico. He was chosen and sustained as a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles at the general conference held in October, 1907, and was ordained an Apostle, Oct. 6, 1907, by President Joseph F. Smith. The first civil service performed by Bro. Ivins was that of special policeman in St. George precinct. He saw service in the Indian wars which prevailed in southern Utah, was constable of the St. George precinct, city attorney and mayor, deputy sheriff of Washington county, prosecuting attorney, and for six years, assessor and collector of the county. He also served as a representative to the Territorial Legislature in 1894, and as a member of the constitutional convention in 1895. Elder Ivins secured the first government appropriation for the Shebit Indians and moved them from the Shebit Mountains (where they had become a menace to the white settlers) and purchased, and established them on their present reservation on the Santa Clara River. He was the first government agent to these Indians, in which capacity he served for two years; he resigned this position in order to accept the nomination to the legislature. Before going to Mexico Bro. Ivins engaged successfully in farming and stock business, both privately and as manager of the Mojave Land & Cattle Company, and the Kaibab Cattle Company, both of which were incorporated companies and owned the largest herds and ranches in what is now known as the Arizona Strip, which lies north of the Grand Canyon of the Colorado and south of the Utah line. Since returning from Mexico, Elder Ivins has been occupied with Church duties and been identified with various colonization and irrigation schemes and other enterprises of a secular nature. Among these may be mentioned that he took a leading part in the Enterprise Reservoir and Canal Company, which company has built a splendid reservoir at the head of Shoal Creek, in Washington county, Utah. Elder Ivins is now general superintendent of the Y. M. M. I. A. for the whole Church, is president of the Board of Trustees of the Utah Agricultural College, vice president of Zion's Saving Bank & Trust Company, and director in the Deseret Savings Bank and Utah State National Bank. In 1878 Elder Ivins married Elizabeth A. Snow (daughter of Erastus Snow and Elizabeth Ashby), who was born March 24, 1854, in Salt Lake City. She has borne her husband nine children, of whom eight are still living. Following are the names of Bro. Ivins' children: Anthony W., Antoine R., Anna L., Florence, Leah, Heber Grant, Stanley S., Augusta and Fulvia. Since the return from Mexico in 1898 the family have resided in Salt Lake City. Elder Ivins is known throughout the Church as an interesting and logical speaker, a successful business man and a wise counselor. Since his early youth he has been before the public in many different capacities, both of an ecclesiastical and secular nature. He is a thorough scholar and a fluent speaker of the Spanish language and a staunch friend of the Mexican saints, (See also Vol. 1, p. 311.)
