Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Jenson, Andrew

Jenson, Andrew, assistant Church Historian. (Continued from Vol. 1: 261.) In 1901 Elder Jenson published Volume I of the L. D. S. Biographical Encyclopedia, the first book of its kind ever published in the Church. He also assisted President Anthon H. Lund in revising the Danish translation of the Book of Mormon and the Pearl of Great Price, and in 1902 he was sent on a special mission to Scandinavia to supervise the printing of the revised edition of the Book of Mormon in the Danish language. During this time he attended the dedication of a new meeting house in Copenhagen, Denmark, July 4, 1902. After his return to Utah in 1903 he traveled extensively in many Stakes of Zion in the interest of Church history. In February, 1904, he was summoned to Washington, D. C., as a witness in the Smoot case before the Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections and had occasion to explain in somewhat detail the organizations of the Church. Later the same year (1904) he was called on another special mission to Scandinavia, this time to supervise the printing of a new edition of the History of Joseph Smith in the Danish language. He attended the dedication of a mission house in Stockholm, Sweden, Oct. 23, 1904, and returned home in 1905. The following four years he spent traveling in the Stakes of Zion, gathering historical data. In 1909 he was called to preside over the Scandinavian Mission and left home to fill that mission in January, 1909. During his sojourn in Scandinavia this time he traveled extensively in Denmark, Sweden and Norway and delivered illustrated lectures on "Mormonism" in many of the principal cities of Denmark and Norway; he also visited in Germany, Holland, Belgium, France and Great Britain with members of his family. While presiding in Denmark and Norway he published large editions of the Book of Mormon and the Pearl of Great Price in Danish and returned home by way of Russia, Siberia, Japan and Hawaii, thus circumnavigating the globe a second time. Since his return home from that mission in July, 1912, he has been busily engaged at the Historian's office, dictating to stenographers and putting into readable shape the vast manuscript material which he has gathered in many lands and climes during the past thirty years. In 1913 he published a second volume of the L. D. S. Biographical Encyclopedia and the third or concluding volume of that work of reference is now in the hands of the printer. Up to the present time Elder Andrew Jenson has traveled about 300,000 miles in the interest of Church history.
