Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Lund, Anthon H.PPLund, Anthon Henrik

Lund, Anthon H.PPLund, Anthon Henrik, first counselor to President Heber J. Grant. (Continuation from Vol. 1:161.) For an extended account of the truly remarkable career of President Anthon H. Lund the reader is referred to the sketch published in Volume I of this work, which gives the biography in outline to the year 1900, when he was appointed superintendent of the Church Religion Classes and Church Historian. In 1901, Elder Lund was called to the office of second counselor in the First Presidency, and, at the departure of President John R. Winder from this sphere of action, he was appointed first counselor, a position he now (June, 1920) holds. For almost twenty years, then, he has been connected with the First Presidency of the Church. It is needless to say that he has discharged every duty devolving upon him in this calling, as in every other that has come to him, with great ability and never wavering fidelity. Part of the time, particularly during the last illness of our beloved President Joseph F. Smith, the burden of the office was carried entirely by the two counselors. In 1911, President Lund was made acting president of the Salt Lake Temple, and in 1918, at the death of President Joseph F. Smith, he became president of that sacred building, and also president of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. President Lund has traveled extensively. In 1909 he and his wife and daughter visited Denmark, Norway, Sweden. Germany, Holland, Belgium, France and England, and in 1919 he accompanied President Heber J. Grant, Elder Rudger Clawson, Bishop Charles W. Nibley, Elder Stephen L. Richards and Elder Arthur Winter to the Hawaiian Islands, where the Temple at Laie was dedicated Nov. 27, 1919. President Lund, in addition to his ecclesiastical offices, holds several positions of industrial and commercial importance, and in every place his sound, well matured judgment, his integrity, and his faithful adherence to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ are felt as a powerful influence which is highly esteemed and valued by his associates. (J. M. Sjodahl. )
