Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Lyman, Francis M.PPLyman, Francis Marion

Lyman, Francis M.PPLyman, Francis Marion, President of the Council of Twelve Apostles. (Continued from Vol. 1:136.) In 1901 Apostle Francis M. Lyman was called by the First Presidency to preside over the European Mission. During his presidency he introduced a number of reforms in the missionary labors in Great Britain, as well as on the continent of Europe. In the spring of 1902 he visited Palestine and offered up a solemn prayer on the Mount of Olives. On the same trip he also visited Italy, Egypt, Asia Minor, Turkey in Europe, etc. On July 4, 1902, he dedicated a mission house in Copenhagen, Denmark. A year later (July 24, 1903), he dedicated a new mission house in Christiania, Norway. In August following he visited Finland and Russia. At the general conference of the Church, held in Salt Lake City in October, 1903, he succeeded the late Brigham Young, jun., as president of the quorum of the Twelve Apostles. In the beginning of 1904 he returned to America, being succeeded in the presidency of the European Mission by Heber J. Grant. Soon after his return home, he was summoned to Washington, D. C., as a witness in the Smoot investigation before the Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections, where he was subjected to severe cross-questioning. In 1905 he accompanied President Joseph F. Smith and company to the Eastern States and took part in the dedicatory services of the Joseph Smith Memorial Monument Dec. 23, 1905. The following years President Lyman was busily engaged in visiting the different Stakes of Zion, organizing and reorganizing new Stakes and Wards, dedicating meeting houses, etc. President Lyman died at his residence in Salt Lake City, Nov. 18, 1916. "The Deseret Evening News" of that day, commenting on his demise, says: "Lamenting the sudden death and mourning at the bier of one whom he had sent away in peace, an ancient king exclaimed unto those round about him, 'Know ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel?' With similar emotions and in similar terms may the word go forth to latter-day Israel in announcing the death of President Francis Marion Lyman. Truly he was a mighty man and a chieftain among the host. To tens of thousands who had not even heard that he was ill, the news this morning of his demise will come as a terrible and benumbing shock. So quickly has the 'grim reaper' done his work, that within the space of three days the splendid physique was changed from vigorous pulsing health into cold and lifeless clay. A great community is plunged in grief and a hushed solemnity broods over all, disturbed only by the sobs and sorrow of the multitude who feel themselves bereaved. Francis Marion Lyman was of heroic size in every sense. His rugged massiveness of build was fit embodiment of his granite-like firmness and strength of character, and his bigness of heart. Yet he had the gentleness, the humility and the sympathy of a child. A man of dynamic energy and incessant industry, he was never too busy to stop and throw his arm around a young man, especially a son of one with whom he had had previous acquaintance, asking kindly concerning his welfare and giving a word of advice. Himself a strict disciplinarian as to his own habits, he was charitable to the weaknesses of others; if he seemed stern, it was only because he was grieved by any form of backsliding, and because he could not look upon evil with patience or toleration; at any rate, he required no code of conduct from others that he was unwilling to observe himself. He was a true exemplar, unyielding in his convictions, void of hypocrisy or guile, the soul of loyalty and honor, and open and candid as the day. These qualities made him the trusted and beloved leader that he was-a thoughtful father among the people, a wise counselor, a generous and sincere friend. . . . President Lyman's belief and testimony was-and it is shared by hundreds of thousands in these Rocky Mountain valleys who knew and loved him-that in passing death's portal he would merely go from one stage of experience-from one room, as it were, in the illimitable mansion of eternity-to another. That which we, who are left behind, mourn as death, is by those who on the other side await the released spirit, hailed in a sense as birth. Where we may weep, they will rejoice-our seeming loss is their gain. Into a goodly company President Lyman has accordingly entered-loved ones and friends who will welcome him as joyously as loved ones and friends here part from him with tears But he has left the precious legacy of an honored name, a well-spent life, and an undying example of righteousness. The simplest phrase is his best epitaph-he was 'God's noblest work, an honest man'."
