Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

McKay, David Oman

McKay, David Oman, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles, was born Sept. 8, 1873, in Huntsville, Weber county, Utah, the son of Bishop David McKay, of Huntsville, and Jennette Evans. His father was born in Caithness, Scotland, but, when still a small boy, emigrated with his parents to Utah, where he arrived in the year 1859. He was Bishop of Huntsville for twenty years, and after his removal to Ogden was ordained a Patriarch and chosen as a member of the High Council of the Weber Stake. He also served in the last Utah territorial legislature and afterwards was elected State senator three times. Jennette Evans, mother of David O., was born in South Wales, Aug. 28, 1850. In the fall of 1859, she arrived with her parents in Ogden, Utah, and resided there until her marriage, in 1867, when she accompanied her husband to Huntsville and made her home there until one year before her death, which occurred Jan. 6, 1905. She was connected with the Relief Society and Y. L. M. I. A. of the Huntsville Ward from the time of their organization, but during her entire life her home and family received such attention, consideration and gentle care that can be bestowed only by an ideal wife and mother. Thus David O. McKay, in his childhood and youth, was highly favored in having the guidance of exceptionally discreet and loving parents-faithful, consistent Latter-day Saints. In their home the Priesthood of God was always respected. It was a home where the performance of every religious duty was a part of life, where respect and honor for parents and for each other was impressed daily by words and acts and in which the most sacred obligation was the daily devotion to God. With such home influence it is not surprising that the young boy David was early impressed with the efficacy of prayer and that as a youth, when the religious part of his nature began to assert itself, he sought guidance in secret prayer. When riding in the hills he would sometimes dismount, and, kneeling by a service-berry bush with only his horse for company, would plead with the Lord to give him a testimony of His truth. Sometimes it would be by the creek in his father's meadow, and sometimes in the timber when out in the hills. Thus the influence of his early teaching, the influence of his home, guided his thoughts and actions until the critical period of youth was passed. He was baptized September 8, 1881, by Peter C. Geertsen, of Huntsville, and soon afterwards he was ordained to the Lesser Priesthood. From his early childhood he was an enthusiastic member of the Sunday school and Primary Association. Later he became secretary of the Huntsville Sunday school and Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. His God-fearing parents watched the development of their eldest son with that anxiety and pride which are felt only by those who truly love, and many a time a kind word and loving arm kept the lad from swerving from that straight path which they knew would lead to respected manhood. David O. received his early education in the Huntsville common schools, and when twenty years old he became principal of the Huntsville school. He went from this position to the University of Utah, where he graduated as president of his class in 1897. While he was enthusiastically planning to enter the teaching profession to repay in a measure what his parents had sacrificed to keep him at school, a call came for him to go to Europe as a missionary. Having previously been ordained an Elder, he was now ordained a Seventy, August 1, 1897, by Seymour B. Young, and set apart for a mission to Great Britain. On his arrival in Liverpool he was appointed to labor in Scotland, where he performed most excellent missionary labors. Having taken advantage of every opportunity offered by the Church and the educational institutions of his State, it is a natural consequence that companions, saints, friends and enemies alike should be deeply impressed by the teaching of this earnest and enthusiastic young missionary. As a result of his two years' work, several families were brought to a knowledge of the truth, and prejudice against the work of the Lord was allayed in the minds of many people who were willing to listen to his testimony. From March, 1898, until August, 1899, he presided over the Scottish conference and returned home Sept. 10, 1899, being specially released to become an instructor in the Weber Stake Academy. One week after his return from Europe he entered said Academy and three years later became the principal of that institution, which position he held until 1908. His influence upon the Academy was indeed remarkable. During his administration a spirit of love and unity permeated the life of the entire school. His ambitions and ideals soon became the goal for which teachers and students were willing to make great sacrifices, and the daily association with him counted for genuine mental and spiritual development. His spirit was felt especially by the careless and wayward students. A pleasant look, a word of encouragement, a hand on the shoulder, a heart-to-heart talk, a confession, followed by continued interest and assistance, resulted almost invariably in a conversion; and scores of boys and girls now grown to manhood and womanhood give him credit for leading them to higher and more useful lives by his noble example and teachings. As president of the Board of Education of the Weber Normal College, to which office he was chosen in 1908, he has still been able to give much encouragement and inspiration; and all connected with the institution hope that his many other duties will not compel the withdrawal of his assistance from the school that is so greatly indebted to him for its growth and development. For six years ( 1899-1906), Bro. McKay labored as second assistant superintendent of the Sunday Schools of the Weber Stake, and in connection with Supt. Thomas B. Evans and Charles J. Ross he worked energetically and unceasingly for the advancement of the youth. Possibly no other schools of the Church made greater strides toward perfection than did those of Weber Stake at that time. Bro. McKay won the love and respect of all connected with the Sabbath Schools, all his work being characterized by that energy and unselfishness which cannot but win the confidence of associates, and the blessings of the Lord, and as a mark of appreciation, a party was tendered him in Ogden May 16, 1906, by the entire body of officers in this organization, who presented him with a handsome watch fob set with diamonds, and a worthy tribute in a testimonial beautifully engrossed. The recent testimonial of the Weber Stake Sunday Schools in the Ogden Tabernacle, December, 1919, and the presentation of a handsome gold watch and chain, was but another of the many expressions of appreciation that came from the members of the great Sunday School Union. In the beginning of his labors in the Stake superintendency preparation meetings for teachers were established, individual and co-operative outlines of the lesson were prepared, through which each Sunday School lesson became a unit. Subsequently "aim," "illustration" and "application" became household terms. So firmly did he believe, and so enthusiastically did he explain this new class work system that even brothers and sisters who had been teaching in the good old way for many years, became converted and through most strenuous efforts were soon among the strongest supporters of the new method. In 1901 (Jan. 2nd) Bro. McKay married Emma Ray Riggs of Salt Lake City, the daughter of O. H. Riggs and Emma Robbins. She was born June 23, 1877, in Salt Lake City, where she was reared and educated, graduating from the University of Utah with the degree of A. B. in 1898. This marriage has been blessed with six children, namely, David Lawrence, Llewelyn Riggs, Louise Jeanette, Royle Riggs, Emma Ray and Edward Riggs. Sister McKay has been an ideal wife and mother and an inspiration in all the work of her husband. In the rearing of his children we again see in David O. McKay the remarkable teacher, for although his Church work has required much of his time, every possible moment he has been permitted to spend at home has been given to his boys and girls and as a result of this association and training, supplemented by the guiding hand of a wise and loving mother, these young people are marching toward the goal of splendid manhood and beautiful womanhood. The ideals he has held up to teachers in the Sunday School, Religion Class, Primary and Priesthood quorums he has practiced in his home. At the general conference of the Church held in April, 1906, three vacancies were filled in the Council of the Twelve Apostles, caused by the death of Elder Marriner W. Merrill and the resignation of John W. Taylor and Matthias F. Cowley. These vacancies were filled by the appointment of Elders George Franklin Richards, Orson F. Whitney and David O. McKay, who were unanimously sustained by the conference April 8, 1906. Bro. McKay was ordained an Apostle by President Joseph F. Smith April 9, 1906. In 1906 (Oct. 6th), he was sustained as second assistant general Sunday school superintendent, and as first assistant general Sunday school superintendent April 4, 1909. In reporting the reorganization of the general superintendency, many splendid things were said of what Bro. McKay had accomplished in the Sunday school work. Among them the following was recorded in an editorial in the "Juvenile Instructor": "Apostle David O. McKay is well known to the Church at large. His phenominally successful labors in the superintendency of the Weber Stake Sunday schools were watched with interest before he became one of the Lord's special witnesses. His great influence for better Sunday schools since he became second assistant general superintendent of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board, has been felt not only on that board, but also throughout the Stakes of Zion. We are glad to welcome him as our first assistant general superintendent." In February, 1918, Apostle McKay received from the press, "Ancient Apostles," a book written by him for the Deseret Sunday School Union. In this book the Ancient Apostles are made real living men with characteristics, such as men possess today-men about whom young people love to read and from whom the highest ideals may be formed. In 1918 (Nov. 27th), Elder McKay was appointed general superintendent of the Church Sunday schools by the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve. He selected as his assistants Elder Stephen L. Richards and Elder George D. Pyper. The confidence and love that each of these three men has for the other is appreciated by all who know them. At a meeting of the General Board held Jan. 7, 1919, which was attended also by the First Presidency, the names of the new general superintendency were presented by President Heber J. Grant and unanimously sustained by the board. Elder Edward P. Kimball, writing of the reorganization, says: "Elder David O. McKay is signally honored by this call to preside over the Sunday schools of the Church in all the world. He is the first general superintendent who has not been in the First Presidency of the Church while acting in this capacity. His appointment comes as a merited recognition of the faithfulness and zeal which he has displayed during his long association with the Sunday schools; and that confidence in his training for the great responsibility of his new calling and in his capabilities in the fidelity to the great Sunday school cause, exhibited by his brethren in placing him at the head of this wonderful work will find an echo in the heart of every Sunday school worker throughout the Church. His name is synonymous with the Sunday school movement, and those who are most intimately acquainted with him know best how close to his heart are the youth of Zion, and how devoutly and indefatigably he has applied himself for their improvement and salvation. Bro. McKay has given his strength to the work ever since he was first appointed a member of the Sunday school board in 1906. His mind is constantly busy with new problems and plans for the growth of the work. While he looks to and into the future, he is no idle dreamer; he has a wonderful capacity for making men see his vision and then of solving the details of his plan which will make this vision a living reality. His sure and unfailing testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ is exemplified in his every thought, word and deed for the young people of the Church. His kindly, gentlemanly bearing toward every one whom he meets is proverbial; his testimony is inspiring, and his example compels admiration." When the Church School Superintendency was reorganized in the spring of 1919, Bro. McKay was appointed commissioner of Church school education, with Stephen L. Richards as first and Richard R. Lyman as second assistant commissioner, and Adam S. Bennion, superintendent. He is at present head of the outline work in the general committee on courses of study for the Priesthood, and chairman of the Church Correlation Committee. Even with all the calls that have been made upon his time in an educational way and by the Church, Bro. McKay has accomplished much real social service work that has resulted in improved conditions in his home city, county and State. He was for several years president of the Ogden Betterment League, an organization formed to improve civic conditions and especially to establish higher standards of morality for young people. In all the campaigns against liquor and vice he has been most energetic. He has been since 1915 also an active member to the Red Cross Executive Board of Weber county. Since his ordination to the high and holy calling of an Apostle, Elder McKay has labored most zealously and successfully in the interests of the Church. He has traveled very extensively in the different Stakes of Zion, attending quarterly conferences, organizing and re-organizing Stakes and Wards and paying particular attention also to Church schools and to the work done by the auxiliary organizations of the Church. Elder McKay is a popular speaker, his earnestness always making a favorable impression upon his hearers, and being a man of education he wields a great influence among the professors and teachers of Church schools, where his counsels and advise have done much to improve the educational conditions of the Church.
