Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Miller, Orrin P.

Miller, Orrin P., first counselor in the presiding bishopric of the Church. ( Continued from Vol. 1: 307. ) In October, 1901, Orrin P. Miller was chosen as second counselor to Presiding Bishop Wm. B. Preston, to fill the vacancy caused by the promotion of Elder John R. Winder. He took hold of his new office with great zeal, having exhibited marked ability as a president of the Jordan Stake and in handling stock and other property belonging to the Church. He continued as second counselor to Bishop Preston until Dec. 11, 1907, when he was chosen as first counselor to Bishop Charles W. Nibley. This position he held until July 7, 1918, when he died in Salt Lake City. The following was published editorially in the "Deseret Evening News" of July 8, 1918: "The State loses a choice citizen, the Church an efficient leader and servant, and the people a tried and sturdy friend by the death of Bishop Orrin P. Miller. . . . He was of the best type of the native Utahan, unassuming but dependable, quiet but firm, patient but steadfast, an observer and a listener rather than a performer or a talker, but wise in council, conservative in outlook and of excellent sagacity as a man of affairs. Moreover, he was a man of the people, always approachable; and in his high ecclesiastical position as counselor in the Presiding Bishopric, he demonstrated a fine conception of that beautiful part of the Bishop's calling which consists in being 'good to the poor'-than which, we venture to think, there is no better proof of the true Christian, be he leader or layman. While Bishop Miller's virtues were mostly such as would be called homely, they nevertheless sustained successfully many acid public tests; and with his growth in years and prominence, so also grew he in men's confidence and esteem. Correct habits of his life and the lightly-borne physical burdens of matured middle age seemed to give warrant that many years of usefulness were still before him-but this was not to be. To say that no one will be found precisely to fill his place is an obvious truism that can be remarked of any useful man who dies in the harness. And yet human experience is that, much as such men may be needed, other men come forward to fill the gaps and the world wags on as before. No doubt it will always be so; and yet, in an exceptionally literal and sincere sense it can be said of Orrin P. Miller that he will be long and deeply mourned and by many thousands . . . the more fondly remembered because so sorely missed."
