Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Musser, Amos Milton

Musser, Amos Milton, assistant Church historian. (Continued from Vol. 1:381.) Elder Musser, who had been in the Church employ as a clerk at the Historian's Office for many years, was sustained as an assistant Church historian at the April conference held in Salt Lake City April 4, 1902, and held that position until Sept. 24, 1909, when he died in Salt Lake City, 79 years old. The following was published in the "Deseret Evening News" at the time of his demise: "Amos Milton Musser . . . was one of the well-known citizens of this city and a faithful and prominent worker in the Church. He is missed in the Historian's Office, in the Ward and the Stake in which he resided, as well as in the family circle and among his numerous friends and acquaintances. Elder Musser was one of the defenders of Nauvoo during his early youth. With others, his mother, with her children, was driven into Iowa by the mob. In 1851 he started for Utah and at Kanesville he became a member of the Church, of which he has been a faithful and active member ever since. Shortly after his arrival in Utah he was called to go on a mission to Hindostan, and he accepted this call and arrived in Calcutta in 1856. He was absent on this mission for five years and reached home in the fall of 1857, having circumscribed the earth in his travels. Elder Musser never tired of speaking of his experiences during this mission, and the wonderful manner in which the Lord opened the way for him, traveling, as he did, literally without money. He used to say that at no time did he have to beg for food, clothing or transportation. He opened his heart in prayer to his Father in heaven, and the way was always prepared for him. At home he filled many important positions. From 1858 to 1876 he was traveling Bishop. He was one of the ten incorporators of the Deseret Telegraph Company. In 1873 he was appointed assistant trustee-in-trust for the Church. He filled a mission to the Eastern States, and published several pamphlets which had a wide circulation. Elder Musser had a long and useful life."
