Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

PPPenrose, Charles W.Penrose, Charles William

#%%#PPPenrose, Charles W.Penrose, Charles William, second counselor in the First Presidency of the Church. (Continuation from Vol. 1, page 256.) Elder Penrose labored efficiently as an assistant Church Historian until July, 1904. At a meeting of the First Presidency and the Apostles held in Salt Lake City July 7, 1904, he was chosen an Apostle to fill the vacancy in the quorum of the Twelve caused by the death of Abraham O. Woodruff, and was ordained one of the Twelve Apostles by President Joseph F. Smith. His long experience as a preacher of the gospel qualified him especially for this high and holy calling, and he at once became a tower of strength in the midst of his brethren. In December, 1904, he was summoned to Washington, D. C., and appeared as a witness in the Smoot case, to testify before the Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections. In December 1905, he accompanied President Joseph F. Smith and other Church leaders to Vermont, where he, on Dec. 23, 1905, attended and was one of the speakers at the dedication of the monument erected at Sharon, in honor of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He continued as editor of the "Deseret News" until January, 1907. In 1906 he was called to succeed Heber J. Grant as president of the European Mission. In that position his many talents as a preacher of the gospel and as a writer for the "Millennial Star" his influence was felt not only throughout the British Isles, but all over the continent of Europe, where there were branches of the Church, as he traveled quite extensively on continental Europe as well as in Great Britain. On one of his visits to Denmark he dedicated a chapel and conference house (erected at Aalborg), July 7, 1907. On Sunday, July 26, 1908, he dedicated Deseret, the new Latter-day Saint missionary home in London, England, and on Saturday, March 27, 1909, he dedicated a new L. D. S. chapel recently erected in Oldham, Lancashire, England. Both of these were acquired by the Church under his direction. In July, 1909, in company with President Anthon H. Lund and others, he visited Scandinavia, and together with his wife, Roumania, sailed up the Norwegian coast beyond the Arctic Circle. He there witnessed the midnight sun, and held and preached at an interesting meeting in Vardo, near the northern point of Norway. He was the first Apostle of the Church who ever visited any point of the world north of the Arctic Circle. Afterwards Pres. Penrose visited and held meetings in Germany, Switzerland, Holland, and other continental countries. In the summer of 1910 he returned home, being succeeded in the presidency of the European Mission by Rudger Clawson, June 11, 1910. From December 1, 1906, when President Penrose took charge, to the date of his valedictory, June 9, 1910, the official report gave the following statistics: "There have been distributed 18,056,257 tracts, 523,216 books, and 3,641 persons have been added to the Church by baptism, in the British Mission alone, while in the other parts of the European Mission there have been at least 7,400,000 tracts distributed, 626,500 books distributed, and over 4,800 baptisms, making in the aggregate about 25,000,000 tracts and 1,149,700 books distributed, and over 8,500 persons baptized. Thousands of investigators who have not yet obeyed the gospel have become believers in its principles, and many of them will also doubtless break the bonds of tradition and social environments, and cast in their lot with the people of God." He sailed from Liverpool late June 11, 1910, and arrived in Salt Lake City early June 21, a remarkable trip of 91/2 days, the shortest on record at that time. At the meeting of the First Presidency and Apostles, held Dec. 7, 1911, Pres. Penrose was chosen as second counselor to Pres. Joseph F. Smith, filling the vacancy caused by the death of John Henry Smith. Bro. Penrose held this position until the death of Pres. Smith in November, 1918, since which he has acted as second counselor to Pres. Heber J. Grant. In the latter part of 1914 Elder Penrose accompanied Pres. Joseph F. Smith on a missionary tour through the Southern States, on which he preached in some of the leading cities and towns in Alabama, Georgia, Florida and Louisiana and also in California. Pres. Penrose is one of the ablest and best informed men among all the leaders of the Church. As an expounder of the principles of the gospel he has, perhaps, no equal, and as a writer his "Rays of Living Light" and other productions from his pen have had a wider circulation and been translated in more foreign languages than any other literary production originated in the Church. Notwithstanding his advanced years, Pres. Penrose is remarkably well preserved physically, and his mental powers seem to be as brilliant and active at over 88 years of age as in the days of his youth. His beautiful and inspiring poetical productions are known throughout Israel, and his hymns are sung in all the congregations of the saints, not only in the Anglo-Saxon world, but as translations in many other countries. Bro. Penrose has, perhaps, spent more years in the ministry as a missionary and as a presiding officer, both at home and abroad, than any other man in the Church, since the very beginning of its existence. His style of preaching and the plain comprehensive language used is always calculated to make a lasting impression upon all who come within the radiance of his voice. True and faithful in all the many callings to which he has been called and the many positions he has filled, he is verily one of the pillars of the Church, whose faithfulness and incessant activity could well be emulated by any and all who desire to serve the Lord and keep His commandments./
