Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Reynolds, GeorgePPReynolds, George

Reynolds, GeorgePPReynolds, George, one of the seven presidents of Seventy. (Continued from Vol. 1, page 206.) Elder Reynolds continued his activities in the Church until 1907, when he had a breakdown, due to over work, from which he never fully recovered, and after long suffering passed peacefully to rest, Aug. 9, 1909, surrounded by his family, at his residence, at the corner of Wall and Apricot streets, on Capitol Hill, Salt Lake City. Through his extensive literary work and through his long association, a third of a century or more, with the Sunday school work and other prominent Church activities, Bro. Reynolds was as widely known as any man in Utah and wherever known, was universally esteemed for his honor, integrity and kindness of heart. He was a gifted writer. Besides writing a number of smaller works, he was the author of the "Story of the Book of Mormon," "The Dictionary of the Book of Mormon" and "The Concordance of the Book of Mormon." He was secretary to the First Presidency of the Church during a part of the administration of President Brigham Young and filled the same position for all the First Presidencies up to the time of his demise, being constantly in the employ of the Church. For many years he was superintendent of the Twentieth Ward Sunday School, and at the time of his death was the oldest member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board, being one of its officers since its inception. For many years he was a member of the general superintendency and its treasurer. He was also deeply interested in the affairs of the State schools. The "Deseret Evening News" of Aug. 10, 1909, commenting upon the life of George Reynolds, says: "Few men in the Church have been more incessantly devoted to the work of the last dispensation than the man who has just gone to his rest. His connection with the Church dates from his early boyhood and was the result of his individual conviction of the divinity of the message as he heard it declared by the missionaries of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Before reaching his teens, he was preaching the gospel on the streets of London and ceased not to proclaim the glad tidings until the final summons of yesterday. To him the gospel was meat and drink, breath and life. Elder George Reynolds has manifested earnestness, sincerity, devotion and power, such as come only through divine inspiration. As a patriarch he passes with honor, leaving a large posterity to emulate his noble example."
