Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Richards, George F.PPRichards, George Franklin

Richards, George F.PPRichards, George Franklin, a member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. ( Continued from Vol. I, page 544). By invitation from President Joseph F. Smith, Elder Geo. F. Richards, with wife and youngest child, accompanied the President and his party (about thirty people all told) on their pilgrimage to Sharon, Vermont, the birthplace of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and was present on the 100th anniversary of the Prophet's birth (Dec. 23, 1905), when the beautiful granite monument, erected to the memory and honor of the Prophet, was unveiled and dedicated. Returning from this memorable trip the party visited Boston, Palmyra, Manchester, Cleveland, Kirtland, Chicago and Omaha. They also visited several points of historical interest to the Latter-day Saints, such as the home of the Prophet Joseph's parents in Manchester, the Sacred Grove, the Hill Cumorah, the Kirtland Temple, etc. The party left Salt Lake City Dec. 18, 1905, and returned Jan. 1, 1906. While residing in Tooele, Utah, Brother Richards engaged with his sons in the implement and lumber business, as well as farming. Being called to be a member of the quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Brother Richards was sustained in that position at the general conference of the Church held in Salt Lake City, April 8, 1906, and the next day (April 9th) he was ordained an Apostle by Pres. Joseph F. Smith, to fill the vacancy in the quorum of the Twelve occasioned by the death of Elder Marriner W. Merrill. Soon after his ordination to the apostleship, Bro, Richards was chosen as a member of the General Board of the Y. M. M. I. A. and a member of the General Board of the Religion Classes. For several years he also acted as an advisory member of the General Board of Primary Associations. The duties of his calling necessitated his traveling extensively in the Stakes of Zion, from Canada on the north to Old Mexico on the south, and also in the missionary fields in the United States. Thus, in company with Pres. Joseph E. Robinson, he attended the conferences of the California Mission in the fall of 1906, in the spring of 1907, in the fall of 1909 and in the spring of 1915. During the latter part of 1906 and the fore part of 1907 he accompanied Pres. Nephi Pratt through the Northwestern States Mission, attending all of the conferences, and again in June, 1910, he attended the conferences held in the States of Oregon and Washington. In the spring of 1912, in company with President Samuel O. Bennion, he visited all the conferences of the Central States Mission. Having received a call from the First Presidency to preside over the European Mission, he was blessed and set apart for that position Aug. 5, 1916, by President Joseph F. Smith, and the following day, accompanied by his son George, the latter's wife and two smaller children, he left home for England. At that time England, including Canada, had been at war with Germany for two years and sea travel was consequently very dangerous, especially for British and Canadian steamships, but the Church, being under contract to patronize the Canadian Steamship Company's lines, Bro. Richards and those who were with him, sailed from Montreal for Liverpool on the C. S. Co.'s steamer "Corsican," and though the ship was sought after by the German submarines, no harm came to it on the voyage, as it reached Liverpool in safety Aug. 25, 1916. Upon the departure of Pres. Hyrum M. Smith for his home in Utah Sept. 1, 1916, Bro. Richards succeeded him as president of the European Mission. In February, 1919, his son George and family returned home. In March, 1919, President Richards, accompanied by his wife, visited the Netherlands, where they attended meetings in eight of the principal cities of that country. A persistent, but unsuccessful effort was made to obtain permission to visit Switzerland, the Swiss officials refusing to permit it. In June, 1919, Elder Geo. Albert Smith, who had been appointed to succeed Elder Richards as president of the European Mission, arrived in Liverpool with his family and took charge of the mission July 1st. President Richards, having been released to return home, left Liverpool a few days later, crossed the Atlantic in the ship "Melita" and arrived in Salt Lake City July 25, 1919, having been absent nearly three years.
