Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Smith, George Albert

Smith, George Albert, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles, was born April 4, 1870, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of John Henry Smith and Sarah Farr. He received his early education in the Salt Lake City public schools, and later entered the Brigham Young Academy at Provo, which institution of learning at that time was presided over by Dr. Karl G. Maeser. When his father left on a mission to Europe, in 1883, "George A.," as he was often called, returned to Salt Lake City and entered the Z. C. M. I. clothing factory. Subsequently he took a position with the Co-op. Wagon and Machine Co., and later took a course at the State University. Graduating from this institution, he returned to the Z. C. M. I., where he worked until June, 1892, when he was called on a mission to the Southern States. After five months in the field, he was transferred to the office at Chattanooga, Tennessee, where he became secretary of the mission, and as such assumed the charge of mission affairs during the absence of J. Golden Kimball. In that capacity, as in all others, he manifested strict devotion to duty and was an earnest worker in the cause of truth. He returned home in July, 1894. Previous to his departure on that mission he was ordained a Seventy by his father, John Henry Smith, and was subsequently chosen as a president of the 3rd quorum of Seventy. After returning from his mission, he took his old position at the Z. C. M. I., where he remained until Feb. 10, 1898, when he became receiver of the United States land office under an appointment made by Pres. McKinley, Jan. 31, 1898. He was reappointed to the same position by Pres. Theodore Roosevelt, March 27, 1902, which position he still held when he was chosen as an Apostle in October, 1903. At that time he held the position of Stake president of Y. M. M. I. A. in the Salt Lake Stake of Zion. In the 17th Ward, Salt Lake City, where he was raised, he was a most active member in the Sunday school, first laboring as a teacher, then as a secretary and later as a superintendent. He also took an active part in the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. in his early youth. And after his calling to the Apostleship he became a most active member of his quorum, visiting the different Stakes of Zion, assisting in the organization of new Stakes and Wards and attending to Church duties generally. Soon his health began to fail and it became necessary for him to retire for a certain length of time from his official duties for the purpose of regaining strength. Part of this time he spent on the Pacific coast. In 1919 he was called on a mission to Europe to preside over the European Mission, succeeding George F. Richards. At the time of his departure for that mission, a sketch of his life was published in the "Improvement Era" of July, 1919, from which we cull and copy the following: "Some years ago Apostle Smith's health gave way, but before his loss of health, he averaged thirty thousand miles of travel yearly, at the rate of one and one half meetings per day. He visited the saints throughout the country, magnified his position as an Apostle of the Lord, and gave counsel by precept and example to all with whom he came in contact. He was elected president of the Utah society of 'The Sons of the American Revolution' for 1918, and was re-elected in 1919; was a delegate to the S. A. R. Congress, at New York, New Jersey, Rochester (New York), and Detroit (Michigan). He has visited many of the missions in the United States; and, before he became a member of the Council of Twelve, some of the missions of Europe. George Albert Smith has been active in the politics of Utah. He has a remarkable faculty for the making of friends, his enemies even respecting him. He has been an active Republican. but has never said mean or unkind things of his opponents. This is one of his characteristics. In the preaching of the gospel, he does not tear down a man's house, but builds the gospel structure over him with an open and loving invitation to inhabit it. Bro. Smith was elected vice president of the International Irrigation Congress, at Calgary, Canada, in 1913, re-elected vice president at Sacramento, California, in 1914, and president of this Congress, at El Paso, Texas, in 1915. In 1917 he was elected president of the International Dry-farm Congress, at Peoria, Illinois, and elected president of the combined Irrigation and Farm Congress, now known as the International Farm Congress, at Kansas City, in 1918. In these positions he has made many friends. He has been personally acquainted with Presidents McKinley, Roosevelt and Taft, and with several members of the cabinet, governors, senators and representatives throughout the Union and Canada, and with many business men of prominence with whom he has associated as member and officer in the Irrigation Congress and in the International Farm Congress. George Albert Smith is a typical Latter-day Saint; broad minded, pure as a woman, active in good work, zealous in his calling, reliable, conscientious, honest, clean in language and action, faithful, punctual, considerate of his fellows, high or low, having confidence in God, a man who puts his soul into his work, and who is as nearly completely obedient to the laws of God as man can be upon the earth. His actions in youth never caused his parents one moment of anxiety, and he has kept in mind the name he bears, and honored it, believing truthfully, that no son ever had a better father and mother than he. He is a great admirer of punctuality, and one who knows him may set it down as a truth that if he is not on time for an appointment that he will not be there. In his labors with the young men of the Church, he made a speciality of impressing the value of punctuality upon them. Elder Smith has passed through many wonderful experiences, showing the care of God over him, and has had at least twenty-five remarkably narrow escapes from death which would make very interesting reading in themselves. The Lord has preserved him, and we are certain that his new calling to preside over the European Mission, will give him great opportunities to accomplish much of the good that is in his heart. His experience in Church, State and national affairs wonderfully adapt him for leadership in the European Mission, during these days of political, economic and religious life and reconstruction."
