Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Smith, Hyrum MackPPSmith, Hyrum Mack

Smith, Hyrum MackPPSmith, Hyrum Mack, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles (continued from Vol. I: 772). As a young Apostle it fell to the lot of Bro. Smith to travel extensively in the Stakes of Zion, assisting the older members of the quorum to organize and re-organize Stakes of Zion, dedicate meeting houses, attend Mutual Improvement conventions, etc., and he grew rapidly to understand the many duties pertaining to his high and holy calling in the Priesthood. In February, 1904, he was summoned to Washington, D. C., together with other prominent officers of the Church, to appear as a witness in the Smoot investigation case before the Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections. In December, 1905, he accompanied President Joseph F. Smith and his party to Vermont and took part in the dedicatory services held Dec. 23, 1905, when a monument was dedicated in honor of the Prophet Joseph Smith. In 1913 he was called to preside over the European Mission and together with his wife and four children he arrived in Liverpool, England, Sept. 30, 1913. When the great world war broke out he was in Germany on a tour of the missions under his direction, and he experienced considerable difficulty in obtaining passage back to England. He met with signal success and capability every exigency of that trying period, directed the movement of the Elders in every mission under his presidency, called them in and modified their work according to the situation; and the work of the Lord, under his guiding hand, went on with as little interruption as possible. Bravely he faced the ordeal with valor and with a courage unflinching. He instilled into the hearts of the missionaries laboring under him, from presidents of missions to the humble traveling Elder, a love of mankind and a burning eagerness to preach the gospel to a war-torn world. His utterances from the pulpit and in conversation were keen disquisitions on the great war. He had studied the causes of the war and was fearless in his denunciation of unrighteousness as a contributing factor; but he was kind and forbearing in his pity for mankind for the plight into which the world had been plunged. On his mission as president, he was ably assisted by his wife, Ida B. Smith, who worked with him untiringly. After filling a most successful mission, Bro. Smith and family returned to America Sept. 15, 1916, and he immediately resumed his former labors in the Stakes. of Zion and continued thus until he was stricken with his last sickness from the effects of which he died in the Latter-day Saints hospital, Salt Lake City, Jan. 23, 1918. His wife, Ida Bowman Smith, after giving birth to a son, died in Salt Lake City Sept. 24, 1918. The following was published in the "Deseret News" at the time of Apostle Smith's demise: "A great sorrow comes to this community, the Church as well as the State, in the death of Hyrum M. Smith, eldest son of President Joseph F. Smith, and himself an Apostle in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He was known and beloved throughout the length and breadth of the intermountain country, every part of which he has traversed as an earnest, vigorous, sincere and impressive preacher of righteousness, the uncompromising opponent of evil, a stalwart, worthy native son of Utah, and a patriotic citizen through and through. Few men have lived a purer life, few have so stoutly resisted from boyhood up the blandishments of the world that tempt from the path of rectitude, few could go to face their account with so little to regret or wish otherwise. And yet, to those who knew this excellent man, it would seem that few could be so ill-spared at this time, because there are so few to take his place. His loss will be most keenly felt, and he will be truly mourned. To his revered father, than whom no man ever loved his children more devotedly, this deep bereavement will be especially severe. His mother, his wife and children, his brothers and sisters, his close associates and his host of acquaintances are plunged in a sorrow the measure of which will correspond to the degree of their intimacy with him. The finite mind gropes in vain for a reason why one so good and useful, so valiant and strong, one for whom life seemed to hold so much in store, should thus be torn away in the very prime and vigor of manhood. But though this mystery we may not explain, nor its purport comprehend, to the soul surcharged with grief there comes relief in the assurance that the great Father above will sanctify all sorrow to His children's good, and that He does all things well."
