Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Smith, John Henry

Smith, John Henry, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles (continued from Vol. I:141). John Henry Smith continued his labors in the various Stakes of Zion, assisting in the organization of new Stakes and Wards, ever bringing a good influence to bear upon all those with whom he associated. In 1904 he was summoned to Washington, D. C., as a witness before the Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections in the case of Senator Reed Smoot. In December, 1905, he accompanied Pres. Joseph F. Smith and others to Vermont, taking part in the services when the monument erected in honor of the Prophet Joseph Smith was dedicated. When Pres. Joseph F. Smith (after the death of Counselor John R. Winder), selected a new counselor, John Henry Smith was chosen and set apart as second counselor in April, 1910. The duties pertaining to this high and holy office were faithfully discharged by Brother Smith until the time of his death, which occurred in Salt Lake City Oct. 13, 1911. The "Deseret Evening News," at the time of his demise, commented as follows, in an editorial: "To say that it was a great shock to this community to hear of the sudden departure from this sphere of action of Pres. John Henry Smith is to express but feebly the general sentiment. For the summons came without previous warning. He seemed so robust and strong, so active and full of vitality, and his presence in the midst of his loving family, and in the councils of the Church, seemed to be so much needed, that one naturally hoped and expected for him many more years of usefulness in this life. It is difficult to reconcile oneself to the thought that President John Henry Smith, the tender husband and father, the wise counselor, the genial friend, the delightful pulpit and platform orator, the strong defender of the truth, the faithful witness and messenger of the Master, has left us. But such is the decree of Him whose servant he was. He has gone to mingle with his brethren behind the veil and to continue his work in another sphere, for the redemption of the world. No doubt, he is needed there. He lives though he has departed. . . . President John Henry Smith has done a good work for the Master. He has served faithfully and finished his mission. The crown of victory is his."
