Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Smith, Joseph Fielding

Smith, Joseph Fielding, sixth president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (continued from Vol. I, page 66). At the general conference of the Church held in Salt Lake City, Oct. 7, 1901, Joseph F. Smith was sustained as first counselor to President Lorenzo Snow, succeeding George Q. Cannon, who had died April 10, 1901; but three days later, Oct. 13, 1901, President Lorenzo Snow died, and at a meeting of the First Presidency and Twelve Apostles, held Oct. 17, 1901, the First Presidency was re-organized with Joseph F. Smith as president, John R. Winder as first and Anthon H. Lund as second counselor. At a meeting held Nov. 2, 1901, President Smith was chosen as president of the Church Board of Education. As soon as he became president of the Church, Pres. Smith commenced a career of great activity. The building of meeting houses in many different localities received special attention and it is a matter of record that during his administration a greater number of meeting houses, chapels and tabernacles were built, both in the Stakes of Zion and in the missionary fields, than had ever been done before since the Church was organized. In December, 1892, President Smith stated to the Associated Press that the Church did not sanction, authorize or perform marriages contrary to law. This statement was made necessary because of certain false reports which had been circulated to the effect that the Church still sanctioned plural marriages in secret. In February, 1904, President Smith, together with a number of other Church leaders, were summoned to Washington, D. C., to appear as witnesses in the Smoot investigation case before the Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections, having been subpoenaed by the prosecution. President Smith was kept on the stand for nearly a whole week, subjected to all kinds of questioning, and he astonished the members of the committee and others by his frank and direct answers. At the 74th annual conference of the Church held in Salt Lake City in April, 1904, President Smith declared in a written statement that no plural marriages had been solemnized with the sanction, consent or knowledge of the Church since the manifesto was issued by President Wilford Woodruff, Sept. 24, 1890, and President Smith further announced that all plural marriages "are prohibited" and that anyone who should assume to "solemnize or enter into such marriages "will become subject to excommunication from the Church. In December, 1905, President Smith, accompanied by about thirty others, visited Vermont and dedicated a monument erected to the honor of the Prophet Joseph Smith Dec. 23, 1905, it being the 100th anniversary of the birth of the Prophet. The President's party left Salt Lake City Dec. 18, 1905, and returned Jan. 1, 1906. In May, 1906, President Smith purchased for the Church the old Washington press upon which the first edition of the Book of Mormon was printed in 1830. In July, 1906, President Smith, accompanied by a part of his family and others, left Salt Lake City on a visit to Europe. They crossed the Atlantic ocean on the ship "Vaterland" and during their stay in Europe they visited Great Britain, Belgium, Holland and other countries. After his return President Smith visited many of the Stakes of Zion, attending conferences, dedicating meeting houses and otherwise organizing and directing the affairs of the Church. In February, 1909, with part of his family, Bishop Charles W. Nibley and others, President Smith left Salt Lake City on a visit to the Hawaiian Islands. He arrived in Honolulu Feb. 27, 1909, and after a pleasant visit on the island (where he had filled his first mission as a boy and made a number of subsequent visits), he returned home April 1, 1909. The new Bishop's Building, erected in Salt Lake City, in 1909, was dedicated by President Smith Jan. 20, 1910. In July, 1910, President Smith made another visit to Europe, accompanied by Charles W. Nibley and others. On this visit the President visited Great Britain, Holland, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Germany and Switzerland, attending conferences and special meetings in the different missions. The President's party, returning to America, arrived in Salt Lake City, Sept. 3, 1910. In July, 1913, President Smith visited Alberta, Canada, where he dedicated a site for a Temple July 27, 1913. In November, 1913, he visited Chicago (Illinois), where he dedicated the Rosland district missionary home and a chapel and mission home on the Logan Square. On their return trip the President and his party visited Far West and Independence (Missouri). Later in the year President Smith visited some of the Stakes in Arizona and dedicated a new Church Academy at Snowflake; he also dedicated two chapels in Mesa, visited the Roosevelt dam, etc. In August, 1914, he made another visit to Canada. In November, 1914, he visited some of the Southern States, attended a conference at Jacksonville, Florida, and returned home by way of California. During the war period President Smith showed great sympathy for the allies and on his initiative the Church invested half a million dollars in Liberty bonds. He also authorized the spending of $1600 to buy an ambulance automobile for use in France. Four of his sons enlisted in the army, one of whom (Calvin S.) distinguished himself as an officer in the service in France. The others are Andrew K., who served as an interpreter for the German prisoners at Fort Douglas; Samuel, who served in the aviation corps at Berkeley, Calif., and Fielding, who served in the students' training camp at the Presidio, near San Francisco, California. In June, 1915, President Smith made another visit to Hawaii, and during the succeeding three years made several other trips to that land. On one of these visits (in February, 1916) President Smith and Bishop Nibley selected the site for the erection of a Temple, the saints at the previous semi-annual conference held at Salt Lake City having voted unanimously in favor of erecting a Temple in Hawaii. Later the same year President Smith made another visit to the Hawaiian Islands. On June 27, 1918, he attended the dedication of a monument in honor of his father Hyrum Smith in the Salt Lake Cemetery, it being the 74th anniversary of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith in Carthage, Illinois. President Smith celebrated the 80th anniversary of his birth Nov. 13, 1918, although his health at the time was very poor. After that he continued to sink gradually until Nov. 19, 1918, when his spirit took its flight to the Great Beyond. He had presided over the Church seventeen years and gained the love and confidence of the entire community. During his life President Smith married six wives. His first wife was Levira A. C. Smith (daughter of Samuel Harrison Smith and Levira Clark) who was born April 29, 1842, in Nauvoo, Illinois, and was married to Joseph F. Smith April 4, 1859. In 1866 (May 5th) President Smith married Julina Lambson (daughter of Alfred B. Lambson and Melissa J. Bigler), who was born June 18, 1849, in Salt Lake City, Utah. She bore her husband eleven children, namely, Mercy Josephine, Mary Sophronia, Donette, Jos Fielding, David Asael, Geo. Carlos, Julina Clarissa, Elias Wesley, Emily, Rachel and Edith. In 1868 (March 1st) President Smith married Sarah Ellen Richards (daughter of Willard Richards and Sarah Longstroth), who was born Aug. 24, 1850, in Salt Lake City, Utah. This union was blessed with eleven children, namely, Sarah Ellen, Leonora, Joseph Richards, Heber John, Rhoda, Minerva, Alice, Willard Richards, Franklin Richards, Jeanetta and Asenath. In 1871 (Jan. 1st) President Smith married Edna Lambson (daughter of Alfred B. Lambson and Melissa J. Bigler), who was born March 3, 1851, in Salt Lake City. The children of this marriage were Hyrum Mack, Alvin Fielding, Alfred Jason, Edna Melissa, Albert Jesse, Robert, Emma, Zina, Ruth and Martha. In 1883 (Dec. 6th) President Smith married Alice Kimball (daughter of Heber C. Kimball and Anna Gheen), who was born Sept. 6, 1858, in Salt Lake City, Utah. The issue of this marriage were the following children: Lucy Mack, Andrew Kimball, Jesse Kimball and Fielding Kimball. In 1884 (Jan. 13th) President Smith married Mary Taylor Schwartz (daughter of William Schwartz and Agnes Taylor), who was born April 30, 1865, in Holliday, Salt Lake county, Utah, and who became the mother of the following children: John S., Calvin S., Samuel S., James S., Agnes, Silas S., and Royal S. The "Deseret Evening News" of Nov. 19, 1918, published the following editorial in eulogy of President Joseph F. Smith: "Modern day Israel mourns today the loss of the beloved leader who after seventeen years of splendid presidency and eighty years of glorious life has laid off the burdens of mortality and has gone to mingle with those great ones whose labors are continued on the other side. The people's grief will be sincere and deep, for this was a man whose abounding love for his fellow-men was of the same quality with that affection which he lavished upon his own family. No trait of his resplendent character was more beautiful and conspicuous than this tender attachment which he ever manifested toward all those who had claim upon it. No man ever held more truly the key to that love which 'is the secret sympathy, the silver link, the silken tie, which heart to heart and mind to mind in body and in soul can bind.' In this parting from him, therefore, there is not only the sense of bereavement for a wise and righteous leader taken away, there is also among tens of thousands the feeling of personal sorrow in the separation from a genuine friend, a compassionate father, a kind and patient brother. These relationships President Smith desired to sustain to his people, and did sustain, in every sense of the word. The first among the six presidents of the Church to have been born within its pale, and to have spent every day of his life under its aegis and influence, he was permitted to hold the high calling of Prophet, seer and revelator longer than any of his predecessors save one. His uncle, the Prophet Joseph Smith, was slain in 1844, soon after the Church had passed the fourteenth anniversary of its organization. From that year until 1877, President Brigham Young held the keys and authority-a period of thirty-three years. President John Taylor held the office ten years, President Woodruff eleven and President Lorenzo Snow three. These were great spirits all, mighty men of God every one; yet President Smith possessed for the position the unique advantage above referred to-he did not have to 'come out of the world' and unlearn any of its traditions and errors; from the hour of his birth he was privileged to bask in the rays of the revealed and restored gospel, of which during the ensuing four score years he was to be so valiant a champion, so excellent an expounder. And the results have justified in every way the hopes that were cherished and the predictions that were made concerning his presidency. The Church has prospered amazingly, both in spiritual and temporal things. Missionary work abroad has gone forward with great vigor, and Zion at home has been strengthened. Evil has not been looked upon with the least degree of allowance, yet charity for the repentant erring has not been withheld. The spirit of union and harmony has been promoted, and the body of the Church has been made a compact, potent force for righteousness, and strong to resist the onslaughts of the adversary. Of President Smith's personality and attributes it is needless to speak. His life has been an open book-his course of conduct has been open to the observation of all men. . . . Of the great results of his life and labors, volumes might be written, for he has left his impress upon the history of this and future generations. He was all in all a man, sterling, staunch, true, a benefactor of his race. His courage, sincerity and faith were magnificent, yet he had the humility of a child, and was not ashamed to shed human tears. He sought to live in near relation with those holy influences which gross mortality does not sense; and we are permitted to know from many of his recent utterances that during the latter part of his life particularly he enjoyed a blessed communion which no man can contemplate without awe but which to a good, pure man is a foretaste of heaven. He has carried off bravely his large part in the battle of life, and has earned the victor's crown. His memory will be blessed forever !"
