Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Smith, Joseph Fielding, junior

Smith, Joseph Fielding, junior, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles, was born July 19, 1876, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Pres. Joseph F. Smith and Julina Lambson Smith. He was baptized and confirmed by his father July 19, 1884, and four years later was ordained a Deacon; subsequently he was ordained a Teacher and set apart as president of the Teachers' Quorum in the 16th Ward, and from his early youth became an active Church worker in the 16th Ward, Salt Lake City. He was ordained an Elder Sept. 8, 1897, and a Seventy May 12, 1899, by Joseph F. Smith. The following day ( May 13th) he left for Great Britain on a mission. On his arrival in Liverpool, England, he was appointed to labor in the Nottingham conference, where he became known as a successful and energetic Elder. He returned home in 1901 and in 1903 he was chosen as a president of the 24th quorum of Seventy and acted as instructor of that quorum until the Salt Lake Stake of Zion was organized in March, 1904, when he was ordained a High Priest by Hyrum M. Smith, and set apart as one of the High Councilors of said Stake, which position he held until the time he was called to be an Apostle. In 1898 (April 26th) he married Louie E. Shurtliff, daughter of Lewis W. Shurtliff, of Ogden. She died March 30, 1908, leaving two small children (Josephine and Julina). In November, 1908, Elder Smith married Ethel G. Reynolds (daughter of the late Elder George Reynolds ), who has borne him six children, namely, Emily, Naomi, Lois, Joseph F., Amelia, and Lewis Warren. Early in life Elder Smith became very much interested in the genealogical work of the Church and has served as secretary, librarian and treasurer of the Genealogical Society of Utah. He established the "Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine" with the approval and under the direction of the board of directors, editing the paper during the first year (1910), but had to relinquish the editorial chair on account of other duties after being called into the Council of the Twelve. In the summer of 1902 he visited Massachusetts, gathering the genealogy of the Smith family. On this trip he secured hundreds of names and straightened out the family line from Robert Smith, the earliest ancestor in America. He was also actively engaged while quite young in the Mutual Improvement work of the Church, acting as instructor in the 16th and later in the 17th Ward. In 1898-1899 he acted as an aid in the Y. M. M. I. A. board of the Salt Lake Stake, and became a member of the General Board in 1903. In 1909 he was also chosen as a member of the general board of Religion Classes and is at present first assistant to Rudger Clawson in the general superintendency of the Religion Class organizations of the Church. Since 1906 he has been sustained as an assistant Church Historian. From 1901 to 1910 he served as a home missionary in the Salt Lake Stake of Zion. In 1910, when John Henry Smith was chosen as second counselor in the First Presidency, Joseph Fielding Smith was chosen to fill the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve, caused by the promotion of Elder John Henry Smith. He was ordained an Apostle April 7, 1910, by Jos. F. Smith. Since that time Elder Smith has been devoted to the duties of his high and holy calling, traveling extensively in the various Stakes of Zion, preaching the gospel and assisting in ordaining and setting apart the many new officers called from time to time to fill positions in the Church. Since April, 1912, he has been a member of the board of trustees of the Brigham Young University. In 1917 he was chosen as a member of the Church Board of Education and is at present a member of several important committees connected with Church activities. When Pres. Anthon H. Lund was sustained as president of the Salt Lake Temple, he chose Elder Smith as his first assistant, which position he now holds. Joseph Fielding Smith is naturally spiritually minded, has an unbounded faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ and the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith; he is energetic and capable in all his work, is sound on doctrine, and has written a number of doctrinal and historical essays on different topics, all of which show a thoroughness in study and research.
