Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

#%%#PPTaylor, John WhittakerTaylor, John Whitaker/

#%%#PPTaylor, John WhittakerTaylor, John Whitaker. ( Continued from Vol. 1:151.) As a younger member of the Council of Twelve Apostles John W. Taylor traveled extensively in the different Stakes of Zion (after presiding for several years over the Colorado Mission), attending Stake conferences and assisting in organizing and re-organizing Stakes and Wards. But as a difference of opinion arose between him and the First Presidency of the Church and the members of his own quorum in regard to the manifesto issued by President Wilford Woodruff concerning plural marriages, Bro. Taylor resigned from his position as one of the Twelve Apostles in April, 1906. After that he retired to private life and spent the remainder of his days attending to necessary labors in providing for his large family. Bro. Taylor died at his home in Forest Dale, Salt Lake county, Utah, Oct. 10, 1916. In an obituary published in the "Deseret Evening News" on the day of his demise the following occurs: "Early in life John W. Taylor developed a marked spirituality and was the recipient of many manifestations of the power of God. His testimonies of the gospel and of the missions of the Savior and the Prophet Joseph Smith were deeply grounded in his soul, and to them he remained firm and unshaken to the end. . . . His inspired discourses will never be forgotten. He will be remembered as one filled with the inspiration of the Holy Ghost; his teachings and testimonies were a source of renewed diligence and encouragement to the Latter-day Saints. He was filled with the spirit of prophecy, and many of his utterances have realized a striking fulfillment. In a temporal capacity he took great interest in the colonization of the unsettled parts of the country, and he was especially interested in the development of the settlements in Canada. The Saints there never weary of telling how much support he gave them by word and deed and how remarkably his predictions concerning the future of that country have been fulfilled. The Taylor Stake of Zion in southern Alberta was named in his honor. He was also highly respected by the non-Mormon business men of Canada and in this country. He also presided over the Colorado Mission with marked ability, and by those who knew him in the mission field he is esteemed as one of the best of missionaries ever known in the Church. His happy disposition, coupled with a vein of humor, and his remarks filled with holy inspiration in public and private, won for him the confidence and respect of all around him. He got out of harmony with the Church and as a result the Council of the Twelve excommunicated him from the Church; but he never became bitter toward the Church. Like his illustrious father, he was a man of deep and strong convictions, 'The Kingdom of God or nothing,' was his motto. He loved righteousness and hated iniquity. His life was clean and pure, his language chaste and elevating. His family and friends who stood by his bedside during his last illness will never forget his beautiful teachings and exhortations, upholding the doctrines of the gospel, the authority of the holy priesthood, exhorting all to keep the commandments of God. He was blessed with a numerous family, all of whom survive him except three of his children. They all have an honorable standing in the Church with good moral characters. They are true, loving and loyal to each other and filled with love, confidence and respect for their honored husband and father."/
