Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

#%%#PPTeasdale, GeorgeTeasdale, George/

#%%#PPTeasdale, GeorgeTeasdale, George, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles. (Continued from Vol. 1:144.) Apostle Teasdale, continuing his apostolic labors, assisted in re-organizing the Saints in Utah county, organizing them into three Stakes of Zion, namely, Utah, Alpine and Nebo. He continued traveling in the different Stakes, assisting in the organizing of Wards, etc. Bro. Teasdale died in Salt Lake City June 9, 1907. The "Deseret Evening News" at the time of his demise published the following editorially: "Another faithful servant of the Most High, Elder George Teasdale, of the Apostles' Quorum, has been released from his earthly mission and called to another sphere of action. His was a long and useful life. For a quarter of a century he has occupied the exalted and responsible position of an Apostle of the Lord in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and he has been singularly blessed in his labors in the ministry, at home and abroad. Elder Teasdale was a conspicuous type of a spirituality that our religion produces. This was in fact his leading trait of character. Amid the toil and privations entailed by the struggle for material existence in pioneer Utah and pioneer Mexico, he still retained the sweetness of his spirituality, and that was indeed of a high order. The great theme of his discourses was the atonement of our Savior, and the way in which his precious blood cleanses all men who will succeed Him, from their sins. The subtle distinction in point of doctrine, the careful and detailed explanation of some idea in theology, the defense by the cannonade of argument, of an assailed position-these he left to others. He concerned himself mainly with the simple and tender story of the cross. The main thing with him was the work of the Redeemer of the world, and how it can touch the conduct of men. The Lord gave him light to see it. His long and useful life was an example of faithfulness and devotion to his religious ideal, a zeal for the truth tempered by calm judgment and an unyielding adherence to whatever he regarded as the call of duty, conscience, and God. Elder George Teasdale has gone to his rest and his reward. His life's work is done. He has fought the good faith and won the fight. He died in a full hope of a life beyond this narrow vale and of a glorious resurrection from the dead. To him heaven was as real as earth-life, the existence of God as certain as his own."/
