Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Thatcher, MosesPPThatcher, Moses

Thatcher, MosesPPThatcher, Moses, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles. (Continued from Vol. 1:127.) After losing his position as one of the Twelve Apostles, Brother Thatcher retired to private life, but continued successful in financial affairs. He was summoned to Washington, D. C., to testify before the Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections in the Smoot investigation case, and on that occasion, as on all others, he remained true to his former friends and associates in the Church. He died at his home in Logan, Cache county, Utah, Aug. 21, 1909. The following was published in the "Deseret Evening News" of Aug. 23, 1909: "With the death of Moses Thatcher, one of the prominent and most gifted men of this intermountain region has passed to the great beyond. Thousands of his friends will always hold him in loving remembrance for his splendid work in the missionary field and at home in various offices of responsibility and trust. From the tender age of fifteen years until some years ago, he gave his time and his talents to the work of the Lord, for the propagation of the principles he loved so well and to which he remained faithful to the last. Moses Thatcher's first impressions in connection with the Church date back to the expulsion of the Saints from Nauvoo. He was then but four years of age, but never forgot the cloud that seemed to rest over the wandering people-his people. He never forgot the hardships of the pioneers. He knew what it was to suffer for principles. He knew life in its various phases, from that of a rough mining camp to that of statesman and rulers of nations. And in every position he was successful, for he was earnest and sincere, even if, like every mortal, he at times was mistaken in his judgment. One of the great missions performed by Moses Thatcher was that to Mexico, and the success of it was chiefly due to his wise and well directed efforts. He became the friend of statesmen and gained a hearing by remarkable literary efforts as well as sermons and conversations. His 'Tribute to the Memory of Montezuma' was a truly remarkable article. During this mission Mexico was dedicated to the end that the gospel might spread among her people. In the dedication the Lord was asked to rid the nation of revolutionary elements and the disposition to shed blood; to break the shackles from the bodies and minds of the poor Lamanites, that they might be free in the law of Christ. The Lord was asked that, as the coming of the Spanish conqueror foreshadowed their bondage, so might the gospel foreshadow their deliverance; that, as the first overcame them with the sword, so might the proclamation of divine truth subdue and soften their hearts. The Elders besought the Lord to bestow His blessings upon the State and governmental officials and the people, that intrigues, plottings, and rebellions might cease, and peace and prosperity reign. That the Lord has heard this prayer, inspired by His own Spirit, is evident in the prosperity and progress of the Diaz regime. Of late years Moses Thatcher has not enjoyed good health. He has been a patient sufferer, and his death, no doubt, came as a welcome release."
