Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Wells, John

Wells, John, second counselor in the Presiding Bishopric of the Church, was born Sept. 16, 1864, in Carlton, Nottinghamshire, England, the son of Thomas Potter Wells and Sarah Cook. He was reared in Nottingham and there he became a companion and playmate of Elder Arthur W. Winter, who was instrumental in his conversion to the gospel. In August, 1882, he was baptized at Nottingham, England, and subsequently ordained to the Lesser Priesthood, commencing his active duties in the Church within a few days after his baptism. In 1885 he was appointed president of the Nottingham branch, in which calling he labored diligently until his emigration to Zion. He left England with his wife, Almena Thorpe (whom he married in 1886 ), and a babe, arriving in Salt Lake City July 11, 1889. Shortly after his arrival in Utah he obtained work in the Z. C. M. I. shoe factory, and later in the wrapping desk of that institution. On Feb. 1st, 1890, he entered the office of the Presiding Bishopric as a general office helper, under the direction of Robert S. Campbell, then the chief clerk of that office. When Elder Campbell resigned this position, in the spring of 1898, John Wells was given charge as chief clerk. Since that time many changes have taken place in the method of handling and accounting for the tithes. The old system of central tithing offices, witha Bishop's agent in each of the leading Stakes of the Church was discontinued and the duty of receiving, handling and accounting for the tithes was transferred to the Bishops of the Wards, supervised and directed by the Presiding Bishopric. New methods of handling the tithes were inaugurated, and the tithing system practically placed on a cash basis. New systems of Ward, Stake and Mission books and records were put into operation. These systematic and progressive measures have gradually developed and are now operated in the Stakes, Ward and Missions. In all this rearranging of systems, Elder Wells was the leading spirit. For several years Elder Wells presided over the First Quorum of Elders in the Ensign Stake of Zion, and took an active part in the work of the 18th Ward. For ten years he was connected with Dr. W. H. Groves' Latter-day Saints Hospital, supervising its construction from the first stone which was laid June 28, 1903, until the building was opened Jan. 5, 1905. Thereafter he acted as superintendent of the hospital until August, 1913, when his many other duties became too heavy to continue the supervision of the hospital. In 1913 he was ordained a High Priest. In 1914 he became a member of the High Council of the Ensign Stake of Zion. On November 17, 1916, he was chosen as second counselor to President Richard W. Young of the Ensign Stake and set apart to that office under the hands of President Charles W. Penrose, in which position he acted until July 18, 1918, when he was ordained a Bishop by President Joseph F. Smith and set apart as second counselor to Presiding Bishop Charles W. Nibley. Bishop Wells has been a faithful member of the Church since he joined it, a worker of almost unequalled energy and persistence, reliable, trustworthy and faithful to all the responsibilities his brethren have imposed upon him. Bishop Wells is also a member of the committee on courses of study for the Priesthood. He is the father of seven children by his wife, Almena Thorpe, namely, Mabel T. (now Mrs. D. W. James, Jr. ), Bertha T. (later Mrs. A. M. Palmer, now deceased), Florence T. (now Mrs. Hooper Knowlton), Arthur Thorpe (deceased), Clarice Thorpe, John Thorpe and Lewis Thorpe.
