Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Whitney, Orson F.PPWhitney, Orson Ferguson

Whitney, Orson F.PPWhitney, Orson Ferguson, a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles. (Continued from Vol. I, page 658.) Bishop Orson F. Whitney had presided over the Eighteenth Ward for nearly twenty-eight years, and for seven years had served in the capacity of an assistant to the Church Historian, when, at the General Conference in April, 1906, he was called to the Apostleship, and became a member of the Council of the Twelve. It was on the ninth day of April that he was ordained an Apostle by President Joseph F. Smith, the ordination taking place in the Salt Lake Temple. While deeply sensible of the high honor conferred upon him, he nevertheless felt keenly the separation from the little flock that had so long sustained him as their shepherd, and when the time came to part, tears of affection and regret were shed on both sides. At the farewell testimonial where he and his counselors (Elders Patrick and Barton) laid down their Ward offices, he entreated his old-time friends and associates to continue greeting him as "Bishop." He afterwards said in the hearing of this writer: "I have never wanted to be called 'Apostle' Whitney; it is exceedingly distasteful to me; that sacred title should not be used thus commonly. I have never desired it; but I have expressed, on more than one occasion, a preference for my old title of 'Bishop,' which I wore so long, and around which so many happy memories cluster. I recognize, of course, that 'Elder' is now my proper designation, on all official occasions; but when meeting socially with old-time friends, or when referred to in a literary connection, I prefer to be called Bishop'--for purposes of identification if nothing more. There are many Elder Whitneys in the Church, and I produced most of my literary works as Bishop Whitney." Having severed his connection with the Historian's Office, he entered zealously upon the discharge of his apostolic duties. Since becoming one of the Twelve, he has visited repeatedly all or nearly all of the Stakes of Zion, now numbering about four-score, preaching at the quarterly conferences, ordaining Stake and Ward officers, and otherwise ministering to the people. Where-ever he goes, he is warmly welcomed, and his labors are highly appreciated. He has also made extended trips to different parts of the United States and Canada, and has addressed public gatherings in New York, Boston, Washington, Chicago, Portland, San Francisco, and other large cities. During one of these jaunts, for which he was specially set apart by the then President of the Twelve, Francis M. Lyman, he visited scenes memorable for their connection with early Church history, and described them in a series of entertaining letters, addressed to Pres. Joseph F. Smith and published in the "Deseret News." This was in the summer of 1914, the year the great war broke out. Elder Whitney went first to Independence, Missouri, preaching there on the subject of "Zion and Her Redemption." Then, in company with others, he visited the towns of Richmond and Liberty, and the sites of Far West and Haun's Mill. At Liberty he and his party, which included Pres. Samuel O. Bennion of the Central States Mission, were permitted to enter the building that was formerly Liberty jail, where the Prophet Joseph Smith and other Church leaders were imprisoned during the winter of 1838-39, the period that witnessed the expulsion of the Latter-day Saints from Missouri. The basement of the building-the former dungeon-remains very much as it was, but a modern residence has been erected above it. Elder Whitney secured, by purchase, a fragment of the old jail door, also two iron bars of the jail window, and afterwards presented them to President Joseph F. Smith, with the suggestion that they be placed in the Deseret Museum; a suggestion acted upon. With Elder Horace H. Cummings, at that time general superintendent of the Church schools, he next proceeded to Carthage, Illinois, where they inspected the old jail, scene of the martyrdom of the Prophet and Patriarch-a piece of property now owned by the Church and kept up for the accommodation of tourists. Crossing the Mississippi river to Keokuk, Iowa, they steamed up the river to Nauvoo, the dead though still beautiful city that was once the home of the Saints. Elder Whitney went on to Ohio, where he has relatives, and paid a second visit to the Kirtland Temple, first seen by him in the year 1877. In the State of New York he visited for the first time Palmyra, where the original edition of the Book of Mormon was printed; the Smith Farm, the Sacred Grove (scene of the Prophet's first vision), the Hill Cumorah, and Niagara Falls. By way of Toronto and Montreal he made his way to Lake Champlain, and spent a pleasant week at the island home of his friend, Dr. Guy Carlton Lee, founder of the National Society for Broader Education, with which Elder Whitney is connected. The doctor accompanied him to the Joseph Smith Monument. There Elder Whitney held a service with the Saints, before journeying on to Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Washington. In Boston he met his brother-in-law, Elder Junius F. Wells, and together they took in the sights of the "Hub" and its historic environs, scenes with which Elder Wells was already familiar. Another brother-in-law, Senator Reed Smoot, gave him a hospitable welcome at the nation's capital. He visited both houses of Congress, and was introduced by Senator Smoot and Representative Joseph Howell to various men of prominence. Returning westward, he, accompanied by President German E. Ellsworth, of the Northern States Mission, filled appointments at St. Paul, Minnesota, and Winnipeg, Canada, dedicating a chapel at each place. While in Chicago, Bishop Whitney superintended the publication of a new edition of his poem, "Elias-An Epic of the Ages," probably his greatest literary work. It was first published in 1904 by the Knickerbocker Press of New York City, as an edition de luxe subscribed for by leading men and women of Utah and elsewhere. The edition of 1914 was annotated as a text book for the Church schools. What some regard as his masterpiece, "Love and the Light-An Idyl of the Westland," was issued from the press of the "Deseret News" in 1918. While working on this poem he, in company with Pres. Joseph E. Robinson of the California Mission, traveled from Denver to Los Angeles, holding meetings at many points, and glimpsing en route those great natural wonders, the Petrified Forest and the Grand Canyon of Arizona. Written especially for the young people of Zion, to combat the sinister influence of the so-called "Higher criticism," the Idyl immediately became popular and was placed upon the M. I. A. reading course and introduced into the Church schools. Two other works by this author, namely, "The Making of a State" and "Whitney's Popular History of Utah," each in one volume, have been published, the former in 1908, the latter in 1916. At the present time (1920) Bishop Whitney is preparing for publication in book form his "Saturday Night Thoughts," a series of historical and doctrinal essays which appeared originally in the Saturday issues of the "Deseret News" during the suspension of public religious gatherings, owing to the influenza epidemic of 1918-19. This book is especially designed for Church school students and young missionaries. Its author has been for many years a member of the General Church Board of Education, and is connected in a similar way with the General Board of Religion Classes. Elder Whitney counts among his pleasant memories the privilege of listening to President Taft and President Wilson in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, and afterwards meeting those dignitaries. His fervent prayer for President Wilson, at the General Conference in October, 1919, the President then being seriously ill, will be long remembered by all who heard it. Besides preaching, writing and setting apart and instructing missionaries, Elder Whitney serves upon important committees and sits in council on special cases, whenever such labors are required by the First Presidency. By their appointment be became chairman of the committee that prepared the Church exhibit for the Alaska-Yukon Exposition, held at Seattle in 1909. A unique feature of this exhibit was a pair of small-sized, beautifully finished models, one of the Salt Lake Temple, the other of the Salt Lake Tabernacle, the work of Reister Wright, of Salt Lake City. These models the Church subsequently presented to the Smithsonian Institute, Washington, D. C. Elder Whitney attended the Panama-Pacific Exposition at San Francisco in 1915, and in 1917 was again in California visiting his son, Wendell, of the 145th Field Artillery, at Camp Kearney, near San Diego. While at the training camp he was the guest of Colonel (afterwards General) Richard W. Young. Later in the season he took his wife and daughter to San Diego, spending Christmas and New Years there. His tongue and pen are kept busy teaching and defending the Truth, not only from pulpit and rostrum, but also by correspondence and by means of biographical and other articles emanating from his branch of the Publicity Department of the Church, and appearing in histories, encyclopedias and magazines all over the country. "The Mormons in the History of California,'' a solicited chapter for Eldredge's History of California, and the article on Utah in the Encyclopedia Americana, are sample of Bishop Whitney's contributions to current literature.
