Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Young, Levi Edgar

Young, Levi Edgar, one of the first seven presidents of Seventies, was born Feb. 2, 1874, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Seymour B. Young and Elizabeth Riter. He was baptized in 1882 by Seymour B. Young and soon afterwards ordained to the lesser Priesthood. For several years he was prominently identified with educational work in the district and Church schools and also at the University of Utah. He was graduated from that university in 1895. The following two years he was engaged as a teacher in the Lowell school, Salt Lake City. He also taught two years in the L. D. S. College, and later went to the University of Utah, where he became instructor in history for two years. After being ordained a Seventy, June 18, 1897, by Seymour B. Young, he filled a mission to Europe in 1901-1904. He presided over the Swiss and Austrian Mission in 1902-1904. Soon after his return from Germany, in 1907, he married Valeria Brinton (daughter of Bishop David B. Brinton of Big Cottonwood and Susan Huffaker Brinton), who was born Dec. 13, 1878. This marriage has been blessed with three children, namely, Harriet Wollerton, Jane Seymour and Eleanor Brinton. After the death of George Reynolds Bro. Young was chosen and sustained as one of the first seven presidents of Seventies at the general conference held in Salt Lake City in October, 1909. He was set apart to that position Jan. 23, 1910, by Apostle John Henry Smith in New York. Brother Young was educated in the public schools in Salt Lake City and in 1915 received his B. S. degree from the University of Utah. After that he spent two seasons in Harvard University and one year in Columbia, New York, doing graduate work in history. He holds the degree of M. A. from Columbia, and for his doctor's degree in philosophy his theses was the "Economic and social development of Utah under Brigham Young's leadership." He now holds the chair of American History at the University of Utah and is engaged in doing original research work in western American history. He is also spending much time in archeological work within the confines of the State. In 1916 he took charge of an exploring expedition in San Juan county, Utah, returning to Salt Lake City July 26, 1916. Elder Young is president of the Pacific Coast Branch of the American Historical Association ( 1919-20 ), is a member of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, the American Historical Association, and the American Anthropological Association.
