Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Greenwood, Earl Samuel

Greenwood, Earl Samuel, the second Bishop of the American Fork Fourth Ward (Alpine Stake), Utah county, Utah, was born July 13, 1880, in American Fork, the son of Samuel Greenwood and Ellen Julian. He was baptized May 25, 1889, by James H. Clark and subsequently ordained to the offices of Deacon, Priest and Elder. Having first obtained a liberal common school education in his native town, he took a three years' normal course in the B. Y. A. at Provo, after which he taught school in American Fork, where he also took an active part in the Ward auxiliary organizations, being a teacher in the Sunday school and secretary of the Y. M. M. I. A. In 1902-1904 he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring in Virginia and North Carolina, part of the time as president of the North Carolina conference. After his return home from that mission in 1904 he was ordained a Seventy by Robert E. Booth and became a member of the 67th quorum of Seventy. He was also appointed superintendent of the American Fork Fourth Ward Sunday school, which position he held until Oct. 24, 1915, when he was ordained a High Priest and Bishop by Apostle Rudger Clawson and set apart to preside over the American Fork Fourth Ward, succeeding W. B. Smith. This position he still holds. Bishop Greenwood has also served one term (1914-1915) as mayor of American Fork city. During his administration he took a most active part in increasing the water supply of the city and waged a successful campaign in favor of prohibition. He is otherwise a miller by avocation, and since 1904 has been manager of the People's Mill and Elevator Co. (formerly owned by the Chipman Mercantile Co.). In the year 1904 (June 29th) Bishop Greenwood married Jane L. Robinson (daughter of Edward Robinson and Sarah E. Harrington), who was born Sept. 28, 1882, in American Fork. This union has been blessed with four children, namely, Elliott Rulon, Quentin E., Lois and Sherman R.
