Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Harrington, Leonard Ellsworth

Harrington, Leonard Ellsworth, the first Bishop of American Fork, Utah county, Utah, was born Jan. 27, 1816, in New Lisbon, Otsego county, New York, the son of James Harrington and Polly Evans. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he was baptized in 1840 and moved to Nauvoo, Illinois, in the summer of 1842. There he took an active part in the building up of that community and was elected justice of the peace in August, 1843, receiving his commission from Governor Thomas Ford. He resigned the office in 1846 on account of leaving the State, migrating to the West. He arrived in the Valley of the Great Salt Lake in the fall of 1847, crossing the plains in Edward Hunter's company, and made his home in Salt Lake City until the fall of 1850, when he moved to Utah county and became one of the first settlers of American Fork, where he resided the remainder of his days. When the American Fork Ward was organized in 1851, he was chosen and ordained the first Bishop of the new settlement and acted in that capacity until his death. He was also appointed postmaster of American Fork in 1851, which office he held until 1880. In 1851 he was chosen orderly sergeant in the Nauvoo Legion or Utah Militia. In 1852 he was elected a member of the House of Representatives of the Utah legislature and remained a member of that body until 1882, when he was disqualified because of the provisions of the Edmunds law. In July, 1853, he was elected mayor of American Fork, which office he held until 1882. He continued for many years as an active military man, being appointed battalion adjutant in the Nauvoo Legion in 1853. Honored and respected by all, Bishop Harrington died at his home in American Fork June 21, 1883, leaving a large family to mourn his loss. As a member of the Utah legislature he served Utah county and the whole territory with conspicuous ability for no less than twenty-eight years, most of this time acting as chairman of the judiciary committee. He was one of the soundest, most industrious and most progressive of early-day lawmakers, and was a stalwart, sterling citizen in every sense. His lively interest in education is attested by the fact that he was a promoter of Utah's first free school as early as 1866, and after the establishment of the B. Y. Academy at Provo he was chosen as one of its trustees, in which capacity he served until his death. Bishop Harrington was a wise leader of men, fatherly and influential, and his judgment on all questions that arose under pioneer conditions was always of the best and won for him great respect from the other large figures among whom he moved, as well as from the entire community. Before coming to Utah, Bishop Harrington married Lois Russell, who bore her husband six children, namely, Theodore S., Sarah E., Leonard E., Jane, Olive and Henry D. In 1855 he married Mary Jones; her children were Daniel and Mary. In 1858 he married Harriet Noon, whose children were Heber A., Leonard S., Chancey Delos, Harriet and Ida.
