Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Hindley, John Robinson

Hindley, John Robinson, the first Bishop of the American Fork Third Ward (Alpine Stake), Utah county, Utah, was born Jan. 2, 1863, at American Fork, the son of John Hindley and Jane C. Robinson. He was baptized when eight years old and raised in American Fork. After receiving a common school education, he finished his studies in the B. Y. Academy at Provo. He was ordained successively to the offices of Priest, Elder and Seventy, the latter ordination by Henry Moyle, and he subsequently acted as a president of the 63rd quorum of Seventy. In 1887-1889 he filled a good mission to the Southern States, acting part of the time as president of the East Tennessee conference. Prior to going on this mission he served as a school trustee in American Fork and after his return served several terms in the same capacity. He also presided over the American Fork Ward Y. M. M. I. A. and was a teacher in the Ward Sunday school. He also helped to organize a missionary class which proved very beneficial to the young people of both sexes. Soon after his return from his mission he obtained a position as secretary and bookkeeper in the American Fork Co-op. In 1898-1900 he filled a mission to Great Britain, and presided over the London conference for eighteen months. During his presidency (when he had forty Elders and four lady missionaries laboring under his direction) the conference headquarters were moved from 36 Penton street, Islington, to 97 Farley Road, Stoke Newington. On his return from this second mission he served as salesman and bookkeeper in the Chipman Mercantile Company. When the Alpine Stake was organized in January, 1891, he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as a High Counselor, which position he held until July, 1901, when he was ordained a Bishop by George Teasdale and set apart to preside over the American Fork Third Ward, which position he still holds. Soon after this ordination he took the initiative in the erection of a $9000 brick meeting house, which was dedicated March 17, 1907, by Pres. Joseph F. Smith, and when the Alpine Stake tabernacle was being constructed, he acted as treasurer of the building association. In 1883 (Dec. 13th) Bro. Hindley married Annie Chipman (daughter of William Henry Chipman and Sarah Binns), who was born April 2, 1864, at American Fork. This union has been blessed with five daughters, namely, Sarah C., Edith Irene, Anna, Eliza, and Jean S. Sister Hindley has for a number of years acted as president of the Relief Societies of the Alpine Stake.
