Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Nicolaysen, Morten Andreas Carl

Nicolaysen, Morten Andreas Carl, missionary-translator, was born April 22, 1876, at Skive, Jutland, Denmark, the son of N. Sophus Nicolaysen and Johanne R. A. Fischer. He finished his five-year apprenticeship as a printer in September, 1895, at F. E. Bording's printing establishment in Copenhagen, where "Skandinaviens Stjerne" had been printed since its first issue in 1851. Here he first came in contact with "Mormon" literature and the Elders of the Church and after studying the Book of Mormon he was convinced of its truth and, applying for baptism, he received that ordinance in the waters of Ãresund Dec. 14, 1897. From the beginning he rejoiced exceedingly in the gifts of the everlasting gospel and he soon became actively engaged in Church work in the Copenhagen branch, where he labored as a Sunday school teacher, counselor and president of the local Y. M. M. I. A., district teacher, assistant and superintendent of a large Sunday school, etc. In 1900 (Oct. 21st) he was ordained an Elder by Elder James Thornsen. On recommendation of Assistant Church Historian Andrew Jenson (who was doing special missionary work in Scandinavia), he was called by Mission-president Anthon L. Skanchy in September, 1902, to write and translate for "Skandinaviens Stjerne" and to do other clerical work in the mission office. After nearly three years labor, he was honorably released to emigrate to Zion. Just before leaving his native land he married Thorn L. M. Pfeiffer, who had been a faithful and devout member of the Church since her baptism April 13, 1899. About two years after his arrival in Utah Elder Nicolaysen resumed his missionary labors in the interest of the Scandinavian people by writing and translating for the Danish-Norwegian weekly "Bikuben," which occupation he followed for seven years. His writings were usually marked with directness, always having as an aim to bring the reader to an understanding of the truth of the everlasting gospel. He was ordained a Seventy Jan. 15, 1912, by Charles H. Hart, and after leaving the "Bikuben" office in July, 1914, he worked from time to time in the Salt Lake Temple for over half a year, but gradually he went back to the printing profession-the trade of his youth-after following other avocations for fourteen years, and is at present employed at the "Arrow Press," the largest job printing establishment in Salt Lake City. In the different Wards and branches of the Church where he has resided, Bro. Nicolaysen has always been active in Church duties. By faith and perseverance, under numerous difficulties, and by complying with the laws of life and health, he has retained the vigor of youth to a great degree. In a happy matrimony he has been blessed with six children, namely, four sons (Mack, Edward, Carl and John) and two daughters (Irmelin and Lily). Elder Nicolaysen became a life member of the Genealogical Society of Utah April 22, 1912. He was admitted as a citizen of the United States of America July 25, 1917.
