Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Young, Clara DeckerPPYoung, Clara Decker

Young, Clara DeckerPPYoung, Clara Decker, one of the three original pioneer women who arrived in Great Salt Lake Valley in July, 1847, wac born July 22, 1828, at Freedom, Cattaraugus county, New York, the daughter of Isaac Decker and Harriet Page Wheeler. She was a delicate child, being afflicted with asthma. Strange as it may seem in the light of the hardships and exposure through which she passed in later life, her parents hardly dared to hope that she would live beyond childhood. When she was three years old she ran under her father's ax, while he was chopping wood, and before he could prevent it the blade was buried in her skull. The father, wild with horrifying emotions, bore his child into the house; she appeared to be dead, but eventually showed some signs of life, and by careful nursing she was able to speak after a lapse of one year. She literally fluttered between life and death for six months. Sister Clara lived with her father's family successively in Ohio, Missouri and Illlinois. She possessed her mother's rare courage and presence of mind, and although a child of only ten years of age she passed bravely through all the terrifying scenes of Missouri, and when fifteen years of age she passed through a long siege of sickness. When but sixteen years old she was married to President Brigham Young, May 8, 1843, remained by the side of her husband in the exodus from Nauvoo and at Winter Quarters, and when the pioneer band, led by her great and wise spouse, set out on their momentous journey, in the spring of 1847, she remained bravely by his side in that long and perilous pilgrimage, her brave spirit and stout heart rendering her a valuable adjunct to that immortal company. After arriving in the valley of the Great Salt Lake July 24, 1847, she at once began to do what she could to make a habitable place for herself and husband, and she remained in the Valley while President Young returned to the Missouri river after the rest of his family and to lead the bulk of the emigration to the Valley. The career of Sister Clara D. Young is marked for its generosity, nobility and courage. As a mother she evidenced the deepest regard for the welfare of her children, and she also took charge of other children with the love that only a devoted foster parent could manifest. When at last her noble race was won, hundreds of heads were bowed in profound sorrow. She died Jan. 5, 1889, in Salt Lake City. Mrs. Jeanette Young Easton is her only surviving child. Sister Clara was the last of the three original pioneer women of Utah to pass away from mortality.
