Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Francis, Samuel

Francis, Samuel, was born July 3, 1830, at Trowbridge, Wiltshire, England, the son of William Francis and Ann Phillips. His parents were poor, in consequence of which they were unable to give their children a liberal education, but they were fond of their children and sought their happiness in every possible manner. They were honest, industrious and affectionate. Young Samuel was early in life employed in the manufacture of cloth and continued in that business until after the death of his father. When about thirteen years of age he commenced the study of religion in earnest, but could find nothing in the sects of the day which satisfied him. Finally he heard of the Latter-day Saints and attended their meetings, and, although opposed by his folks and other relatives, he became a convert to "Mormonism" and was baptized Feb. 8, 1847. He was ordained a Priest by Elder John Halliday Jan. 16, 1848; although not yet eighteen years old he became an active worker, preaching the gospel in Trowbridge and adjacent towns successfully. In November, 1849, his father was taken sick with inflammation of the lungs and brain, and died Nov. 21, 1849. This death brought great grief to Samuel and his mother. In March, 1850, Samuel went to London to assist his cousin Joseph Francis, who was doing a grocery and provision business there. Soon after that his sister Amelia took sick and died. Having returned to Trowbridge, Samuel was appointed by Geo. Halliday to take charge of missionary labors in Sherborne, and at a conference of the Saints held at Trowbridge, Dec. 29, 1850, he was ordained an Elder by Geo. Halliday, after which he engaged most earnestly in missionary labors, passing through all the experiences which local missionaries met with in those days in England. By the middle of June, 1851, he had baptized about twenty persons. Afterwards he labored successfully in Cornwall and Brighton. In September, 1854, he was appointed to labor in the Swiss Mission under the presidency of Daniel Tyler. He bid good-bye to the Saints at Brighton Sept. 28, 1854, traveling through France, and arrived at Geneva, Switzerland, a few days later. He was appointed to preside over the Saints in Italy. Crossing the Alps he arrived at Turin Oct. 7th. The next day he went to La Tour where he commenced missionary labors and was successful in acquiring the language and making friends. In November, 1855, he accompanied a small company of Saints to England, arriving in London Dec. 4, 1855. After seeing the emigrants safely on board the ship he returned to his former field of labor in Italy. In February, 1856, he was called to Geneva, Switzerland, to attend to the Swiss emigration. This change improved his health which had become considerably impaired while in Italy. When Pres. John L. Smith left Geneva for England, Feb. 24, 1857, he left Elder Francis in temporary charge of the Swiss and Italian Mission. While engaged in missionary labors at La Tour, Italy, he met an accomplished young lady school teacher of German parentage by the name of Esther C. E. Weisbrodt, whom he converted to the gospel and whom he afterwards married at Geneva, Switzerland, July 1, 1857. The fruits of this happy union were ten children (seven sons and three daughters), all of whom were reared to man and womanhood. Elder Francis labored in the Swiss and Italian Mission until the spring of 1858, when he was called to labor in England under the direction of Elder William Budge. He was afterwards called to preside over the Durham conference. On receiving an honorable release from his missionary labors, after rendering eleven years of faithful service, he emigrated to America with his wife and two children, sailing from Liverpool in May, 1861, on the ship "Monarch of the Sea." Crossing the plains by ox teams he arrived in Salt Lake City in September, 1861. After his arrival in Utah he turned his hands to any employment that afforded a means of subsistance; he drove team, sawed wood, ran a carding machine and taught school. In August, 1863, he moved into Weber valley and made Morgan county his permanent home, engaging principally in farming and stockraising. With the exception of a short sojourn in Ogden he remained a resident of Morgan county the remainder of his life. When the Morgan Stake was organized in 1877 he was chosen counselor to Willard G. Smith, president of the Stake and continued in the Stake presidency until the death of Richard Fry April 25, 1900, when he was honorably released and ordained a Patriarch. Samuel Francis was no less active in governmental affairs than those of the Church; he applied himself to study and qualified himself to occupy positions of honor and trust in the government of county and State. He filled the positions of justice of the peace, county clerk, county recorder, county commissioner, county attorney and probate judge. He also served a number of terms in the Territorial legislature and was also a member of the State Constitutional Convention when Utah was admitted into the Union as a State. During his early terms of office in the county he applied himself to the study of law, and for many years conducted almost the entire legal business of the county. He was admitted to the bar in 1888 and practiced in the courts of the State until the time of his death. He died May 26, 1906, at the age of 76 years. Possibly no other man in the history of Morgan county gave so much valuable service in both religious and civil affairs as did Samuel Francis.
