Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Fraughton, Franklin Augustus

Fraughton, Franklin Augustus, second Bishop of Wallsburg, Wasatch county, Utah, was born Jan. 31, 1846, at Westfield, Chautauqua county, N. Y., the son of George Fraughton and Heneretta Case. He emigrated with his parents to Utah in 1854, crossing the plains in an independent train. They settled in Provo, Utah county, where in the year 1855 Bro. Fraughton was baptized by John Sessions. The family remained in Provo until the spring of 1860, when they moved to what is now Heber City, Wasatch county, and in the year 1866 Bro. Fraughton went back to the Missouri river after the "Mormon" emigration as night herder in an ox-train. In the fall of 1866 and the summer of 1867 he acted as scout in what is known as the Black Hawk Indian war, and on August 12, 1867, he married Juliet Mott and made a home in Heber City. In 1870 he was ordained an Elder by Joseph Murdock and a few years later was ordained a Seventy and set apart as one of the presidents of the 20th quorum of Seventy. For a number of years he was in the Stake superintendency of Y. M. M. I. A. He sawed the lumber that made the first house built in Park City; he also, in connection with three other men, purchased and operated the first steam saw mill which ever came into Wasatch county, and sawed hundreds of thousands of feet of lumber for the Ontario and other mines in the Park. In 1885 he was called on a mission to the Southern States and labored principally in the State of South Carolina. His first companion was Elder Wiley G. Cragun of North Ogden, Utah, and he first labored in York county. About the first experience he had there was an attack on himself and companion by a mob of about twenty-five armed men. Falling into their hands he was given forty stripes with oak sprouts. Elder Cragun made his escape to the woods under fire of about twenty-five shots. Bro. Fraughton was among the first Elders called to the South after the Cane Creek (Tennessee) massacre. He filled his mission and returned home in 1887 and was called and sent to Wallsburg to act as Bishop of Wallsburg Ward, being ordained a High Priest and Bishop by Franklin D. Richards. He acted as Bishop until May 1, 1903, when he was honorably released from that office. Together with Wm. P. Fullmer, Bro. Fraughton raised the first sugar beets under contract to the Sugar company at Lehi. They were also the first beets raised in Wasatch county. In 1907 he was called to take a mission to the Northern States and labored mostly in Indiana, returning in 1909. In 1912 (Jan. 28th) he was chosen as first counselor to Bishop Wm. P. Fullmer of the Wallsburg Ward, in which position he labored until April 2, 1916, when he was honorably released.
