Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Grow, Henry

Grow, Henry, a prominent Elder in the Church, was born Oct. 1, 1817, at Philadelphia, Pa., the son of Henry Grow and Mary Riter. His great grandfather, Frederick Grow, and his wife emigrated from Germany to Pennsylvania before the war of the revolution, took up a large tract of land and made it into five farms of 60 acres each, dividing the same among his five children, four sons and one daughter. This great grandfather was in the war of the revolution. Henry Grow was the youngest of seven children, five girls and two sons. He learned the trade of a mill-wright and bridgebuilder, after which he superintended the bridges, culverts, etc., on the Norristown and Germantown railroads, both in construction and repairing the works. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he was baptized in the Delaware river, Philadelphia, in May, 1842, by Wm. Morton. He emigrated to Nauvoo, Ill., in 1843, where he worked on the Nauvoo Temple until it was finished. He passed through all the troubles of those days and was one of the members of the Nauvoo Legion. He was one of the remnants that remained at Nauvoo after the departure of the Twelve, with the advance companies of the Saints for the West, but in April, 1846, before the vanguard of the pioneers had got barely on their journey, the anti-Mormons began to rise and the mob outrages on the Saints were terrible. Henry Grow was in the famous battle of Nauvoo. While this battle was going on he heard a voice one night distinctly say: "Get up and get out of here in the morning." He arose in the morning, hitched a yoke of cattle to his wagon, put in utensils, bedding and tent, leaving everything in the house, got his wife and three children in the wagon, and had moved about 50 yards from his house when the mob fired a 12 - pound ball through the house, which was a frame building. After the entrance of the mob into Nauvoo he crossed over to Montrose, Iowa, where he had his family in a tent during the battle. Starting on his journey westward, he traveled alone with his family across the prairies of Iowa to Winter Quarters, where they arrived late in October, 1846. He first built a log cabin at Winter Quarters and then went to Kimball's, six miles above, where he built himself a house and settled for a year; but in the fall of 1847, after the departure of the pioneer companies, he moved with his family into Missouri, locating on the Little Platte, twenty miles above Weston, where many of the old Missouri mobocrats dwelt. There he kept the saw and grist mill called Lester's mill in repair and did other carpenter work. In the spring of 1851 he and his family again came up the Missouri river, bound for the Valley; he was organized in Capt. James Cumming's hundred, Alfred Cordon's 50 and Bishop Kesler's ten. Orson Pratt commanded the other fifty. On account of high water the companies headed the Elk Horn river and came on to the Platte below Laramie. On the Sweetwater, below Independence Rock, the company was surrounded by a war party of Cheyennes and had a narrow escape from being destroyed by the savages. The next day, above Independence Rock, they met a thousand Snake Indian warriors waiting for the Cheyennes. Henry Grow arrived in Great Salt Lake City on his birthday, Oct. 1, 1851, and located at Mound Fort, north of Ogden. In 1852 he was called to Salt Lake City by President Young to work for him in building mills, bridges, etc. In 1853 he built the first suspension bridge built in Utah across the Weber river. In 1854 he went to work at Sugar House to build the sugar works under Bishop Fred Kesler, and in 1855 he assisted in building the two saw mills in Big Cottonwood canyon known as A and B. In 1856 he moved a saw mill from Cottonwood to the forks of City creek, seven miles above Salt Lake City, for Pres. Brigham Young, and the same fall he went up Big Cottonwood again and framed and put up Mill D, sawed two logs and left Dec. 17, 1856, with five men on seven feet of snow with snowshoes. It took them two days to get out of the snow at the risk of their lives. In 1857 Elder Grow went up and built Mill E, at the head of Big Cotonwood canyon, near Silver Lake; in 1858 he went to Provo and put up temporary buildings at the time of the move; he also built the suspension bridge over the Provo river. In 1859 he tore the works out of the old grist mill at the mouth of Canyon Creek and placed the cotton and woolen machinery in the mill for Pres. Brigham Young. This was the first machinery of the kind put up in Utah, and this machinery was afterwards taken down to St. George. In 1861 he built a suspension lattice bridge across the Jordan river. At the time of putting up the theatre he built a water wheel on the water ditch opposite Dr. Sprague's house to hoist all the rock and timbers for the theatre. He also made the heavy beams and principal rafters out of plank for the work and fitted up the footlights. During the following years he did a great deal of mill work for Pres. Young at different places. In 1863 the President called on him in regard to the construction of the big tabernacle in Salt Lake City. Asked him if he could construct a large bowery after the same structural work as the Jordan bridge, drawing the outline on the ground with his umbrella, and he also asked Bro. Grow how large he could build it Bro. Grow replied, "One hundred and fifty feet wide and as long as you want it." Then they figured out the design and the dimensions of the contemplated building and Bro. Grow built the Tabernacle according to the directions given him by Pres. Young; the building was finished in 1867. In 1868 the President called on Bro. Grow to put up the Z. C. M. I. building; the plan was drawn by Obed Taylor and the work of construction was superintended by Henry Grow throughout. From that time till the spring of 1876 he had charge of all the carpentry work on the Temple Block. In 1876-77 he filled a mission to the United States, laboring principally in Pennsylvania, Delaware and Maryland, and visited all his relatives and the old family homestead. On his return from that mission he was engaged in tearing down the Old Tabernacle and erecting the Assembly Hall, superintending the practical work under Architect Obed Taylor. It was completed in 1879. Later Elder Grow built two brick houses for Pres. John Taylor and superintended all the buildings and carpentry work for the Church, including the scaffolding and hoisting apparatus for the Temple. In 1880 he was called by Pres. Taylor to go east to look at improvements of paper mills for the purpose of putting up a new paper mill at the mouth of Big Cottonwood Canyon. After visiting the principal cities in the east, he returned home and drafted and commenced the building of the new Deseret Paper Mill at the mouth of Big Cottonwood canyon. This paper mill was completed and put in running order in 1883. Bro. Grow became known as a skilful mechanic and an experienced practical builder and was well liked by all the hands who worked under his superintendency; among all his works the roof of the Big Tabernacle in Salt Lake City is the most unique and stupendous of his works. Soon after he joined the Church Elder Grow was ordained to the Priesthood; he was ordained a Seventy in 1844, at Nauvoo, Ill., and for many years he acted as one of the presidents of the 30th quorum of Seventy and was a member of the Nineteenth Ward, Salt Lake City. He was also active in military affairs, and served as a member of the Salt Lake City council from 1870 to 1876. In the East he married two wives, Mary Meyer, who bore him six children, and Ann Elliott, who has borne him seven children. After arriving in Utah he married Julia Veach, who bore him fourteen children. Thus he became the father of 27 children. Bro. Grow died Nov. 4, 1891, in Salt Lake City, Utah, as a highly respected citizen and a faithful member of the Church.
