Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Halls, George

Halls, George, Bishop of the Mancos Ward, Colorado, was born Oct. 18, 1846, in the parish of Orsett, county of Essex, England, the son of John Halls and Susannah Selstone. His parents being quite poor, George had but little schooling, having to begin working for wages when yet very young. His parents became converts to "Mormonism" when George was six years old. His father died in 1861 and in 1862 George left his native land with his mother for Utah, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Wm. Tapscott" and the plains in Horton D. Haight's company. He drove a team of four yoke of oxen across tho plains. On his arrival in Utah he settled at Huntsville, Weber county, and in 1866 went back to the Missouri river as a teamster in Horton D. Haight's company after emigrants. During his first few years in Huntsville he worked for wages in the summer and attended school in the winter. He spent most of his time as a sheepherder, but used his leisure time in the camp studying grammar, etc., being very persistent in his efforts to obtain knowledge. While at home he was an active worker in the Sunday school and other associations, was a member of the Ward choir and a leading actor for many years in the Huntsville Dramatic Association. In 1876 (Oct. 13th) he married Mary Moiselle Hammond, daughter of Francis A. Hammond and Jane Dilworth. For twelve years, commencing with 1872, he engaged in farming and stockraising, and in company with his brother, William, owned and operated a section of land, a dairy and a cheese factory with success. In 1885 he accompanied Francis A. Hammond to Bluff, San Juan county, and in 1886 moved to Mancos, Colorado. The same year the Saints at Mancos were organized as a Ward and Bro. Halls was chosen and ordained as Bishop of the same, which position he held for 25 years, when he was succeeded by his nephew, Thomas Halls. During this time he also acted as superintendent of the Ward Sunday school and as a choir leader, and was an active helper in Ward associations. His Ward accounts were always settled to date and nothing ever went by default. He served a term as commissioner of Montezuma county and has taken a prominent part in educational matters. Bro. Halls has the confidence of the leaders of the Church and the esteem and respect of the leading citizens of the county. He possesses an extensive library and is well informed on general history; is a constant reader of current literature and is up to date in a knowledge of the world's work. He owns a good home and farm with pleasant surroundings, where many prominent men and women of the Church and State have receeived a warm welcome and generous hospitality, for which he and his kind wife are especially noted. Many of the visitors have left their benediction of peace upon the heads of Bro. Halls and his wife. He is still healthy and active and bids fair to live to a ripe old age. He is firm in the gospel of Christ and has an abiding testimony in the Divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith.
