Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Halls, Mary Moiselle

Halls, Mary Moiselle, wife of George Halls, was born May 18, 1857, at Beaver Dams, near the junction of the Santa Clara and Rio Virgen rivers in Southern Utah, the daughter of Francis A. Hammond and Jane Dilworth, her parents at that time being on their way home from a mission to the Sandwich Islands. After staying at Ogden the family moved to Huntsville in 1863, where Mary was baptized when nine years of age by Elder Thomas Wilson. As a young girl she learned to spin, knit, quilt and do all kinds of housework and to milk the cows and churn the butter. She attended school during the winter, but had very little chance for education. She was married to George Halls Oct. 13, 1876, and became active in the Ward affairs. She was a teacher in the Sunday school and a counselor in the Ward Y. L. M. I. A. for six years and president of said association, and also president of the Primary Association for a number of years. In all these positions she acted with zeal and success. In 1885 she accompanied her husband to Bluff, in the San Juan country, and the following spring went to Mancos, Colorado, where the family still lives. While at Bluff she acted as president of the Y. L. M. I. A. of the San Juan Stake, which position she held for 25 years. In the Mancos Ward she is a teacher of the Sunday school and was organist twelve years. When the Young Stake was organized she was appointed as president of the Relief Society in that Stake, which position she still holds. To visit all the Wards of the San Juan Stake she had to travel six hundred miles by team over a mountainous country and camp out, exposed to all kinds of weather, but she never hesitated, faltered or murmured. Her endurance is marvelous, and she never tires at Church work. For integrity and devotion to duty she has no superior, and now, though advanced in years, she has the fire and energy of impulsive youth, and is very hospitable and kind to all.
