Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Hamblin, JacobPPHamblin, Jacob

Hamblin, JacobPPHamblin, Jacob, a distinguished Indian missionary and faithful Church worker, was born April 2, 1819, at Salem, Ashtabula county, Ohio, the son of Isaiah Hamblin and Daphne Haynes. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism" he was baptized March 3, 1842, by Elder Lyman Stoddard in Wisconsin, and went to Nauvoo, Ill., that year. He had the privilege of baptizing his parents in Illinois on the 11th of April, 1845. He started for Utah in the spring of 1850, arrived in Salt Lake City with a number of his relatives, Sept. 1, 1850, and settled in Tooele valley, whence he was appointed to establish an Indian Mission in Southern Utah in 1854. With a few others he established a settlement on the Santa Clara, a tributary to the Rio Virgen, He was ordained an Apostle to the Lamanites on Friday, Dec. 15, 1876, at St. George by President Brigham Young. His direct experience with the native tribes of the West began in Tooele Valley in 1851, the valley then being sparsely settled by whites. It was in that valley during an engagement with some marauding Indians that one of the savages was entirely in Jacob's power, and with trusty rifle raised he was about to pull the trigger, when an inspiration came to him: "If you do not shed the blood of an Indian, not one of them shall ever have power to shed yours." The rifle was immediately lowered and the astonished Lamanite was told to "go away." Jacob was a famous frontiersman, and under the "Mormon" rule assisted in locating and establishing settlements in Southern Utah, in Arizona and New Mexico. He enjoyed the confidence, friendship, esteem and trust of Brigham Young, as well as that of his entire acquaintance. His duties under the "Mormon" authorities required constant intercourse for many years with the wild Indians, and his life, on several occasions, was in imminent peril, but he possessed an abiding faith that he was in many instances protected from bodily harm from the wild Indians by special interposition of Divine providence. It can be said to his everlasting honor and wisdom that during all his business relations with them he never killed an Indian, and that they placed great confidence in him, saying that "Jacob never lied." Prof. H. A. Thompson, of the U. S. Geological Survey, said of him: "I would trust my money, my life and my honor in the keeping of Jacob Hamblin, knowing all would be safe." Bro. Hamblin removed from Kanab, Utah, to Arizona with part of his family in 1878; the rest of the family followed in 1881. He located in Amity and stayed there until the fall of 1882, when he moved to Pleasanton, New Mexico, where he died Aug. 31, 1886. As the settlement of Pleasanton was broken up, his brother, Frederick Hamblin, brought his remains to Alpine, Arizona, where several of his family resided. To the honor of the authorities of the Church, of which he had been a consistent and devout member for 44 years, five months and 28 days, we will state that a monument has been erected at his grave, bearing the following inscription: "In Memory of Jacob V. Hamblin, born April 2, 1819; died Aug. 31, 1886; Peace-maker in the Camp of the Lamanites; Herald of Truth to the House of Israel." Bro. Jacob was the husband of four wives and the honored father of twenty-four children.
