Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Hyde, George Tilton

Hyde, George Tilton, president of the Portneuf Stake, Bannock county, Idaho, was born Nov. 26, 1866, at Kaysville, Davis county, Utah, the son of Rosel Hyde and Hannah Maria Simmons. He was baptized June 3, 1875, by John Bennett, and ordained successively to the office of Deacon, Priest, Elder and Seventy. He acted as president of a Deacons quorum at Kaysville, secretary of the Kaysville Y. M. M. I. A. and secretary of a branch Primary Association. He filled a mission to the Southern States in 1893-1895. He was also president of the Cambridge Ward Y. M. M I. A. in Idaho and filled many other positions of responsibility and trust in the Church. When yet a young man he became a counselor in the Pocatello Stake presidency of Y. M. M. I. A. He was ordained a High Priest and Bishop Feb. 19, 1899, and set apart as Bishop of the Cambridge Ward. Eight years later (June 30, 1907) he was set apart as Bishop of the Downey Ward. He was set apart as president of the Portneuf Stake August 15, 1915, when that Stake was organized. President Hyde received a public school education, and after leaving school he remained at the parental home assisting in farm duties until he had attained his majority, when he accepted a position in a store and began his t career as a merchant. In 1895 he e moved from Utah to Downey, Idaho, a where he joined his brother William A. Hyde, who had previously be come established in business there. He is now president and general manager of the W. A. Hyde Company, which conducts one of the largest and busiest department stores in this section of Idaho. President Hyde is also president of the Downey State Bank and was one of the original promoters of the Portneuf and Marsh Valley Irrigation Company. In fact President Hyde has taken a leading part in all the important business enterprises in that section of the country where he resides. In 1897 (Nov. 18th) he married Emma Nibley (daughter of James Nibley and Fannie Gibbs), who was born Nov. 6, 1873, at Paradise, Cache county, Utah. This marriage has been blessed with seven children, five sons and two daughters, namely, Osmond, Rosel, Emma and Erma(twins), Charles, Donald and Reed. President Hyde's wife died Oct. 13, 1915, four days after giving birth to her eighth child. In a civil capacity President Hyde has served his fellow-citizens as county commissioner of Bannock county, Idaho, three terms. He has the reputation of being a gentleman of quick discernment, alert and persevering. In manner he is genial, and unfailing courtesy renders him affable with all with whom he has business or social relations.
