Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Jensen, Niels

JENSEN, Niels, one of the earliest converts to "Mormonism" in Denmark, was born Dec. 3, 1806, at Kaierod, Birkerod parish, Frederiksborg amt, Denmark, the son of Jens Jensen. He learned the pottery trade at Birkerod and served as a hussar in the Danish army and as a body guard to General Fribo. He located at Hirscholm, near Copenhagen, where he established himself as a successful potter. When Erastus Snow and his fellow-missionaries arrived as the first Latter-day Saint Elders to Scandinavia in 1850, they commenced their labors in Copenhagen, but they soon extended their operations into the country and found believers in a neighborhood called Hirscholm, not far from the city of Copenhagen, where Niels Jensen and his wife Gertrude resided; they were converted to "Mormonism" and were baptized, thus laying a foundation for a little branch of the Church at that place. After Apostle Erastus Snow had finished his mission in Scandinavia and was about to return to his home in America, he invited such of the Scandinavian Saints as were ready, or could make ready, to accompany him to Utah, and among those who responded was Bro. Niels Jensen, who, together with his wife and one child (Jensine), joined a little company of 28 souls who emigrated to Utah in 1852 as the first fruits of "Mormonism" direct from Scandinavia. On his arrival in Salt Lake City, Elder Jensen located in the Second Ward, where he established himself as a potter and where he resided until the time of his death. Bro. Jensen was ordained a High Priest and set apart to act as a counselor to Bishop Isaac Hill of the Second Ward, Salt Lake City. He was also appointed by President Brigham Young to preside over the Scandinavian meetings, which were held in the Social Hall and in the Second Ward school house. These positions he held as long as he lived. Brother Jensen was a man of great faith and intelligence and his wise counsels and suggestions were always listened to in the Bishop's monthly meetings with interest. At the time of "the move" in 1858, he located temporarily at Spanish Fork, Utah county, where he built a comfortable home for his family, but when the war troubles were over he moved back to Salt Lake City. During the grasshopper famine in 1855-56 he suffered much. He was known as a benefactor to many suffering emigrants of his own nationality and others who arrived from the plains, and he also assisted several Scandinavians with means to emigrate to Zion. He assisted in establishing a tannery in the Second Ward and manufactured the first glazed pottery ware made in Utah. Yielding obedience to the higher law he married, as a plural wife, the widow of the late Lars Jensen, who bore her husband a son (Niels Jensen) to whom Bro. Jensen taught the potter's trade, and who later established a pottery in Salt Lake City. He also taught that trade to Frederick Petersen, Ferdinand Hansen and James J. Hansen, the first of whom established a pottery in Brigham City, the second in Logan and the third in Hyrum, Cache county. Bro. Jensen died at his home in the Second Ward, Salt Lake City, May 5, 1860. His first wife, Gertrude, was the daughter of Ole Jörgensen and was born Feb. 10, 1807, at Kaierod, the same as her husband. She died in Salt Lake City May 21, 1877. Niels and Gertrude Jensen were both beloved by all who knew them and both died as faithful members of the Church.

Gertrude Jensen, wife of Niels Jensen.
