Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Johnson, Nephi

Johnson, Nephi, a Patriarch in the Church, was born Dec. 12, 1833, at Kirtland, Ohio, the son of Joel H. Johnson and Annie Johnson. He was baptized in May, 1842, by John Smith, the Prophet's uncle, and migrated to Utah with his parents in 1848, crossing the plains in Franklin D. Richards' company. As a boy he became well acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith, who stayed at the Johnson family home many times when visiting Ramus, Hancock county, Ill. Together with his parents and co-religionists generally, Nephi endured many of the hardships and persecutions through which the Saints passed in those early days. From 1851 to 1853 he lived at Cedar City, Iron county, Utah, being one of the first settlers in Iron county, whence he was called on a mission to the Indians in Southern Utah and Nevada, and for many years after that he worked diligently and efficiently assisting in settling the valleys along the Rio Virgen and the Muddy. In 1858 he went out with Col. Wm. H. Dame's exploring company to explore the desert west of Utah, and Bro. Johnson led some of the party as far west as Death valley. The same year he led an exploring party and built the road into Upper Virgen valley, locating the town of Virgen City, where he lived for fourteen years. While a resident of that place he acted as presiding Elder, acting Bishop and Bishop's counselor. In 1871 he moved to Kanab, Kane county, Utah, where he acted as first counselor to the Bishop; he also served three terms as county commissioner, acted as town president for several years, was superintendent of waterworks three years and road commissioner ten years. In January, 1856, while living at Cedar City, he married Mandana R. Merrill, who bore him ten children, namely, Lovinia, Nephi, Joel, Justin, Editha, Susan, Sixtus, Wallace, Lillian, and Seth. In October, 1860, he married Conradina A. Mariger, who bore him sixteen children, namely, Elsie, Annie, Sixtus E., John, Lawrence, George, Willie, Eliza, Minnie, Saddie, Alfa, Alice, Nephi, Orson, Jessie, and Alfred. In 1889 he married Mrs. Bodel M. Jensen, a widow with six children, who also bore him one child (Bodel M.) Bro. Johnson has always been a very active and efficient Church worker wherever he has resided. He has worked considerable in the Temples and occupied many important positions in the Priesthood.
