Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Johnson, Swen Frederik

Johnson, Swen Frederik, first counselor in the presidency of the Portneuf Stake of Zion (Idaho), was born in Sweden, Dec. 6, 1869. He grew to a man's estate in his native land and acquired a good practical education, first attending the public schools and later completing a course in the college of Latin at Göteborg, Sweden. When about twelve years of age he began to learn the printer's trade, and after serving an apprenticeship for seven years mastered said trade in its several details. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism" he was baptized April 8, 1888; was ordained an Elder, Dec. 25, 1888, and filled a mission in Norway in 1888-1890. He emigrated to America in 1890 and located in Salt Lake City, Utah, where he for eight years was associated with the Danish-Norwegian paper "Bikuben" published in that city. He came to Downey, Idaho, in 1899 to act as head clerk of the W. A. Hyde Mercantile Establishment, of which he is also a stockholder. He also owns a 200 - acre farm near Downy, which he operates with much success. Besides being chosen the first mayor of Downey, Elder Johnson has given other able and efficient service as a justice of the peace, land commissioner under the Carey act, school trustee, president of the Bannock County Fair Association, etc. Whether as a printer, a business man, or a Church official, he has always been devoted to duty. For several years he acted as Stake superintendent of Sunday schools in the Pocatello Stake and also acted as president of an Elders quorum. He was ordained a High Priest by Orson F. Whitney May 17, 1914, and was set apart as second counselor in the Portneuf Stake Presidency August 15, 1915. Later he was chosen as first counselor. In 1891 (March 11th) Elder Johnson married Marthine Petersen, a native of Norway, which union has been blessed with nine children, five sons and four daughters, namely, Henry J., John F., Ijnar N., Viggo A., Alida J., Florence E., Sigrid V., Arley W., and Nina L.
