Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Jones, Kumen

Jones, Kumen, Patriarch and Bishop and a resident of Bluff, San Juan county, Utah, was born May 5, 1856, at Cedar City, Iron county, Utah, the son of Thomas Jones and Sage Traharne. He was baptized in May, 1864, by Richard R. Birkbeck; was ordained an Elder Dec. 19, 1878, by David H. Cannon, and on the same day married Mary Nielsen in the St. George Temple; was ordained a High Priest Sept. 3, 1880, by Apostle Brigham Young Jr., and set apart as second counselor to Bishop Jens Nielsen at Bluff, Utah; was ordained a Patriarch May 21, 1908, by Apostle Geo. Albert Smith, and ordained a Bishop Nov. 13, 1910, by Apostle Geo. F. Richards. In the fall of 1878 he was called together with a number of others (mostly young men from Iron county) to locate on the San Juan river, near the point where four states (Utah, Colorado, New Mexico and Arizona) corner together. He left his home in Cedar City to fill this mission April 14, 1879, and since that year he has been a resident of Bluff. By his first wife Mary Nielsen, one son (Leonard K.) was born Nov. 6, 1889. He married Lydia May Lyman in the St. George Temple Dec. 2, 1882, by which wife the following children were born to him: Franklin L., Kumen S., Thomas A., Marvin Willard, Edward C., Leland H., Mary Lydia, Marion, Alma U., and Francis W. Most of these children are still alive. His wife Lydia May died April 17, 1906. Besides being an active Church worker, Bishop Jones has acted as county superintendent of district schools for a number of terms, served as school trustee about twenty years, been justice of the peace for Bluff precinct, acted as road supervisor, director and superintendent of the San Juan Co-op twenty years, superintendent of the Bluff Cattle Pool, director and secretary of the Elk Cattle Company, director of the San Juan State Bank, etc. Of his many Church positions may be mentioned that he has acted as Stake and Ward president of Y. M. M. I. A. and assistant superintendent of the Ward Sunday schools.
