Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Kempton, Alvin Bradford

Kempton, Alvin Bradford, Bishop of the Eden Ward (St. Joseph Stake), Graham county, Arizona, was born Oct. 1, 1844, at Nauvoo, Hancock county, Ill., the son of Richard Kempton and Caroline Bradford. When eighteen months old, his father died, after which his mother moved to Winter Quarters and thence to Brownells' camp, where his mother married Erastus H. Rudd. Later they moved to Harris's Grove, Iowa. He crossed the plains in 1852 in Robt. Wimer's company and located in Bountiful, Davis county, where he was baptized by Bishop David Stoker in 1852. The following spring the family moved to Farmington and during "the move South," at the time of the Johnston army trouble, Alvin made five trips with passengers traveling south. After the move he located at Payson, Utah county, and while there took part in the Black-hawk war. In 1866 he moved to Burrville, Sevier county, where he acted as the first superintendent of the Burrville Sunday school. In 1868 he was ordained an Elder by Bishop John F. Shields. In 1877 he started for Arizona, and after spending two years on the road, arrived at Eden, where he was chosen as the first superintendent of the Eden Sunday school. In 1885 he was ordained a Seventy by James Larsen. In 1896-98 he filled a mission to Great Britain. After his return from that mission he was ordained a High Priest by Andrew Kimball and chosen as Bishop of the Eden Ward. Bishop Kempton followed the avocation of farmer and carpenter. He acted as postmaster at Eden fifteen years and was justice of the peace five years. In 1868 (Jan. 1st) while residing at Payson, Utah, Bro. Kempton married Sarah Jane Curtis, who bore him ten children, namely Alvin Joseph, Richard Hyrum, Asa Bradford, Zeta Jane, Eliza Annie, Laura Sophronia, Delia Caroline, Zilpha Mariare, Heber Curtis and Calvin Ira. Bishop Kempton died at his home in Eden, Arizona, Nov. 29, 1917, leaving a wife, eight children and forty-two grandchildren to mourn his death.
