Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Lamph, William Topping

Lamph, William Topping, late Bishop of Castle Gate, Carbon county, Utah, was born October 31, 1854, at Consett, Durham county, England, the son of Daniel Lamph and Eleanor Topping. He was baptized November 11, 1877, by Thos. E. Bennett; ordained a Priest in the spring of 1878 by Thos. Evans; ordained an Elder in the summer of 1879 by Geo. Crane; presided over the Spennymoor branch from its organization till he emigrated from England in 1881. He crossed the Atlantic in the steamship "Wyoming" which sailed from Liverpool, May 21, 1881. After a temporary sojourn in Coalville, Summit county, Utah, he located at Winter Quarters, and later at Castle Gate, Carbon county, where he, on Nov. 11, 1890, was set apart to preside over the Castle Gate branch. He was ordained a High Priest and Bishop and set apart to preside over the Castle Gate Ward May 8, 1893, by Francis M. Lyman. This position he filled till the fall of 1899. Elder Lamph has always been a diligent worker in organizing branches and Wards both in England and Utah, and has held many positions of trust and responsibility. He has followed the occupations of an ironworker, miner, and farmer, and has served his fellow citizens since coming to America as justice of the peace, school trustee, president of a canal company, secretary of a producers association, vice president of a co-op store, etc., and has throughout led a most busy and active life. Ecclesiastically he has acted as Sunday school superintendent, president of Y. M. M. I. A., choir leader, etc.; in fact he has held every position from class teacher to Bishop. He has also labored as a home missionary. In 1884 (March 9th) Elder Lamph married Jane Chinick Bennett who has borne her husband eleven children, seven sons and four daughters. Their names follow: Eleanor Pearl, Nephi Albert, Wm. Leigh, David Daniel, Lillias Myrtle, John Ivor, Jennie Irene, George Bennett, Grace Inez, and Edward Arthur. Since March 2, 1903, Bishop Lamph has been a permanent resident of Cleveland, Emery county, Utah.
