Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Larsen, Niels

Larsen, Niels, an active Elder in the Vineyard Ward, Utah county, Utah, was born March 13, 1841, at Kallehave, Præstö amt., Denmark, the son of Lars Pedersen and Johanna Nielsen. While yet a boy he went to sea and spent eleven years before the mast, during which time he made many long voyages and also participated in the Danish-Prussian war in 1864. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he was baptized March 30, 1868. Being very desirous of emigrating to Utah he left his wife and four children, his parents and friends to work his way to Zion; his wife agreed to let him go, believing thathe would soon be glad to return. He gave his wife a deed to their home and all the money he had, after which he took his departure Sept. 11, 1870, as a sailor on a Norwegian bark which sailed from Liverpool, England. He worked on board that vessel for nine months and earned 23 pounds Sterling. After landing in New York he paid $51 for his passage from that port to Salt Lake City and crossed the plains in Capt. Robert F. Neslen's company. His wife became desirous of joining him, and by letters indicated that if he would come back to Denmark she would return with him to Utah. After obtaining counsel from President Brigham Young, Bro. Larsen returned to Denmark. On his arrival there he was appointed to labor as a traveling Elder until the following year, when he set sail for America once more, with his wife and three children, his oldest boy having died the year before. After arriving in Salt Lake City, July 24, 1873, he located with his family on the Provo river, near Utah lake, in which neighborhood he has resided ever since. Having previously been ordained an Elder, he and his wife received their blessings in the Endowment House, Salt Lake City, May 4, 1874. In the winter of 1874-75 he labored on the St. George Temple, and when the Lake View Ward was organized, in 1877, he was chosen as second assistant in the superintendency of the Ward Sunday school. He also presided over the Deacons in the Ward, and in 1880 was set apart as first counselor in an Elders quorum. In August, 1888, his wife died; she was the mother of thirteen children. In 1889 (September 5th) he married Sine Pedersen, who was born at Hörmested, Hjörring amt, Denmark, March 31, 1844. Elder Larsen was ordained a High Priest January 14, 1900, by Apostle George Teasdale, and set apart to act as second counselor to Bishop William Lewis of the Vineyard Ward. In 1902-04 he filled a mission to Scandinavia, laboring first in Norway and afterwards in Denmark. In January, 1908, together with his wife, he commenced work for the dead in the Salt Lake Temple, which labor he has continued during the past eight years each winter, and has done ordinance work for 1,800 dead relatives. Elder Larsen possesses a strong testimony in regard to the divinity of the great Latter-day work and feels confident that by the help of God he shall be enabled to prove faithful to the end of his earthly career.
