Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Lawson, James

Lawson, James, a Patriarch and a Utah pioneer of 1847, was born July 20, 1820, at Kinross, Scotland, of a distinguished family. One brother a physician, another a lawyer -and both of some renown. James thought he saw a future in shipbuilding and in his youth engaged for five years with Robert Napier & Sons of Glasgow, a firm that built the first steam-driven battleships of the British navy. During this period he assisted in building some of the first steamships that ever crossed the Atlantic, such as the "Britannia," "Arabia," "Caledonia," "Arcadia" and "Cambria," all belonging to the Cunard line of steamers. He also worked on a number of warships built for the British government, and several vessels ordered for Turkey and the East India Company. The fame of the new nation, America, appealed to his adventurous spirit, and from Liverpool on the ship "Mitoka" he sailed, Sept. 5, 1843, for New Orleans. Working his way thence on the river boats, he arrived at Nauvoo in 1844. The tragic death of the Prophet Joseph, the persecution of the Saints, and the breadth and beauty of their doctrines, coupled with the heroism which he witnessed in them, decided him in their favor, and he was soon enrolled in the company of Parley P. Pratt on the long and perilous journey to the valley of the Great Salt Lake. In his diary we read that in February, 1846, the leading members of the Church and all others that could go were leaving Nauvoo, that the snow was three feet deep when they got across the river on the ice, and that many were sick with fever and ague; he himself "was making carriages and wagons and standing on guard." After he had "ironed off" two wagons and a carriage for Sister Mary Smith (widow of the martyred Patriarch), he tells how the mob, 900 strong, came upon her farm just after he had succeeded in getting her and others across the river. Then he "returned to Nauvoo to help the men fight the mob," until Sept. 7, 1847, when he united with a party that set out for Winter Quarters. The loss and recovery of their flock of sheep, the shortage of food and the "famishing condition" of many of the company, the great flight of quails that so providentially furnished them with enough to sustain life, how people were robbed of all that they had, how some were thrown into the Mississippi river, and some were whipped and abused in a most shameful manner, and how the Temple was desecrated by the faithless mobs, which "broke their agreement with the people"-those are among the earlier entries of the journal kept by Bro. Lawson during the great move westward. He left Winter Quarters on June 11, 1847, with the first company, under Captains Perregrine Sessions and John Van Cott. For some time they halted at the Elkhorn river, catching many fish and allowing their cattle to recuperate. "On the 19th day we started out on our journey," writes Elder Lawson, "went about twelve miles, and camped on a beautiful plain, the place interspersed with flowers of various hues and with trees. Learning that a man had been killed by Indians in a company ahead of us, we awaited here the arrival of more of the pioneers. On the 22nd of June we rolled out, Bro. Charles E. Rich in front, Parley P. Pratt next, John Taylor third, Jedediah M. Grant fourth, etc. On the prairies many buffalo were encountered, some of which were killed for food." In an attempt to round up some wild horses, several of the men, including Bro. Lawson, went afoot. He became exhausted from lack of water when far from camp, where he was discovered and brought back. The rest of the journey was mostly pleasant, "for everything was union and harmony through the whole camp." The progress of the journey was marked by more buffalo, and a great many Indians, who were "all the while digging for something," and who grew very friendly, but fled in terror when the men fired off a cannon for their entertainment. The Indians liked music and traded elk skins for various articles. After leaving Fort Laramie, then in a state of decay, food became scarce, and while searching for it they "came to a place where there was a natural bridge-the height 150 feet, width about 80 feet, and rather narrow-about 21 feet." Near this "grand sight" they killed some buffalo. The country was very bleak, with many hills. On one steep hill they had to yoke many cattle to each wagon. At the top of this hill they found clear springs of water, and laid over there for a day. They passed through alkali lands and were in great danger of being mired in the mud flats. Near Rock Independence, where they rested again, were many salaratus lakes. At Devil's Gate "the ledges hang over on both sides, almost meeting, several hundred feet high, and perpendicular." Here the roads became heavy and full of sand. Soon the pilgrims were among the friendly Shoshone Indians, and very cold weather came on as they reached Bear river. Bro. Lawson lost a cow that fell over a precipice. A few more hard days brought the weary travelers into the Salt Lake Valley, near the Fort, which they entered Sept. 4, 1847. The scenes of this strenuous life changed at this point. Now came the building of a log house with flat roof; the resort to "wild onions" (sego lilies) and other Indian foods during the starvation period that immediately followed; the trading with the Indians for horses; the growing of the first crops; the incursion of the crickets and their destruction by the gulls; the labor of constructing irrigation ditches; the curious condition of having a good deal of money and not being able to buy anything with it; the early harvest that saved the people from famine; the winter work in the deep snow of the canyons getting out firewood; the division of the land by lot among the people; the arrival of people on the way to California and the trading with them -these are among the incidents referred to in Bro. Lawson's diary of this period. Called to go to Iron county, Bro. Lawson made this journey, with many notable experiences, and signalized his southern trip by smelting the first iron that was made from the immense deposits of iron that were discovered in this region. Returning north in the summer of 1851, he began the construction, in Salt Lake City, of his home. This house, at the time of its erection, the largest in Utah, continued for years to hold this distinction, and was used for many public purposes, including night school and entertainments, for which uses its construction-all the rooms opening into one-admirably adapted it. In 1852 and again in 1865 he engaged in missionary work in the Sandwich Islands, where, as usual, his mechanical skill was employed in establishing shops and in the building of houses. On his return to Utah he became identified with the construction department of the Utah Central Railway, for his achievements in iron-working had long been recognized. The earliest heavy iron-forging in Utah, including the making of the first mill irons used here, were the work of his hands. Among other interesting things he is known to have done are, when other mechanics failed at the task, he assembled the parts of an oil mill, brought from the East in the early sixties, to make oil from flax grown in Utah. The first paint that was used upon the Salt Lake Theatre and the Tabernacle was mixed with linseed oil from this mill. He produced the first forge to treat gold dust, and constructed the drop forge from which the first "Mormon" coins were stamped. Though he twice took part in colonizing enterprises, once in Iron county and once in Carson valley, Nevada, in each instance he came back to Salt Lake City, always making that city his home. At the age of 70 he retired from regular employment, living at the old great home which he had built at an early day, and which is still standing sturdily at 129 North Second West Street. Even after he had reached the age of 90, his vitality persisted, and at the time of his death from bronchitis, Sept. 14, 1912, his mind was clear and his faculties unclouded till the moment of his departure. The leading characteristics of this pioneer, who had participated in the rounding of several different commonwealths, are plainly indicated from incidents of his history. Independence and fondness for adventure in distant lands are strikingly brought out. Presence of mind is illustrated by his almost miraculous escape during the steamboat wreck as he was proceeding from New Orleans to Nauvoo. In the middle of the night the steamer struck a snag, and sank in a few minutes, carrying down almost every passenger. But Mr. Lawson, with rare insight, sprang from his bed and jumped at once into a flat boat, and, with only a few others, finally floated to the shore. Courage and resourcefulness in the presence of grave danger were exemplified on numerous occasions of mob violence, and soldier or police duty. When Nauvoo surrendered, Mr. Lawson crossed the river to the Montrose side, but was immediately surrounded by about 300 of the mobbers and ordered to lay down his arms. Raising his double shooter, he declared he would kill the first man that molested him; and he was permitted to move away. In a similar encounter with five well-armed and picked men, the latter were content to retreat without a battle. Patience and self-sacrifice came out in clear relief when he gave up the lands he had toiled to cultivate in Salt Lake Valley and took the barren allotment made to him in the general plan. Keen foresight was shown when, sent on a mission to Carson valley by way of Humboldt river, he bought for the sum of $3,200 the Eagle Valley Ranch, now the site of Carson City, Nevada. For this valuable property he received no compensation. As a scout, Indian fighter, guard and peace officer other interesting episodes are related to his credit. He was a lover of fine horses, and during the gold rush to California secured many of the best animals from the travelers, who had worn them out in the long journey by the time they had reached Salt Lake Valley. By proper attention these horses recovered, under Mr. Lawson's management, and his enterprise in handling them amounted to a very profitable business. His generosity was manifested by the free use of his money in all public or charitable exercises, and in the help in home-building which he frequently rendered to others. His children unite in emulating his kindness, firmness, and manly qualities. He was a lover of nature, an admirer of the beautiful, and a patron of education. In stature he was tall and powerful, of athletic build, and capable of great feats of strength and endurance. He was of handsome countenance, with dark eyes and brown hair, and made a good impression upon those whom he encountered. His life was one of action and achievements. It was filled with adventure, replete with difficult situations, inspired by hope, ennobled by self-sacrifice, exalted by faith, purified by religion, and fulfilled by accomplishment. To him each day brought opportunity for good. He lived long, yet wasted no time. He met the issue of his day with calmness and fortitude and was never wholly defeated. The monuments of his life's work remain for our encouragement and gratitude. His influence abides, his example inspires and his memory endures.-Isabel.
