Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Lewis, Theodore Belden

Lewis, Theodore Belden, an energetic Church worker and one of Utah's foremost educators, was born Nov. 18, 1843, in St. Louis, Mo., the son of Thomas Anderson Lewis and Martha J. O. B. Lewis, and a grandson of Judge Henry Lewis of Howard county, Mo. He lost both parents when he was quite young, but was left with sufficient means to rear and educate him, living with his mother's parents (William Norman Byrd and Mary Fitzgerald) in St. Louis, Mo., until 1855, when he went to his grandfather Lewis's house where he had spent his vacations, while attending Central College, in Howard county, Mo., and later the Fairview Academy. When the Civil war broke out, he joined the Southern army and served under General Price. He was in the battle of Boonville, June 17, 1861, and in a number of engagements later. Being captured in battle Dec. 19, 1861, he was taken to Gratiot Street prison and later to Alton, but was finally parolled in the spring of 1862 and commenced reading law. In 1865 he came to Utah and commenced teaching school in the Mill Creek Ward. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he was baptized in May, 1866. In 1868-70 he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring principally in Kentucky and Virginia; he traveled without purse or scrip and much of the time alone, was greatly blessed in his labors, baptized 108 souls, and made many friends for his people by his great faith and upright life. He was especially powerful and successful in administering to the sick. After his return to Utah in 1870 he lived in Provo, Utah county, and became a teacher in the Brigham Young Academy. He moved to Payson in 1871 to teach school. From 1872 to 1876 he resided at Nephi, Juab county, where he was ordained a High Priest and acted as superintendent of district schools and justice of the peace. He taught school there and organized a large improvement association. In May, 1876, he moved to Salt Lake City and taught a school in the Twentieth Ward, previously taught by Karl G. Maeser. In 1879 he was elected county superintendent of Salt Lake county. By diligent and hard study he resumed and completed the course in the study of law. He worked earnestly for free schools in Utah. In November, 1885, he became principal of the Ogden High school, which position he held for twelve years. In August, 1894, he was appointed territorial commissioner of public schools by the supreme court, which position he filled with abiltity until Utah became a State. When the Sunday schools in Ogden were graded he conducted the very large theological department in the Second Ward until his death. The department was visited by many non-Mormons, to whom he bore a strong testimony of the truth of the gospel as restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith. Many young men who studied under him have since filled honorable missions and ascribe their success in life to the impressions received under his instructions. Elder Lewis also labored as a home missionary many years. He was an earnest, broad, deep and clear-headed thinker, a powerful and convincing orator and lecturer; his voice was pleasing and his gesticulations dignified and graceful. In both public and private life he exhibited the characteristics of a fine cultured Southern gentleman of the noblest type of his Virginian ancestors. He passed to his final rest July 20, 1899. Following is an exerpt from his dying testimony: "I wish to add my testimony to my children and for all the world. I testify my faith in and knowledge of the gospel of salvation as revealed to Joseph Smith and as established in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which I dearly love. Through obedience to its sacred principles and the observance of its holiest ordinances the most endearing ties are formed and sanctified and all the rational hopes of the human soul may be realized, if not in this life, then in the great beyond. Let my family in all its entirety seek earnestly the light which has guided my footsteps and walk in it. God bless you all! God bless mankind!" In 1870 (August 19th) Prof. Lewis married Martha J. Coray (daughter of Howard Coray and Martha J. Knowlson), who was born Feb. 19, 1844, at Nauvoo, Ill., and she became the mother of ten children, namely, Genevieve, Theodore Belden, William Henry, Frank Wilbur, Maude Mary, Ginevra, Martha Jane, Owen Byrd, Thomas Clyde, Marcia Woodson and Laura Eppie. Five of the children were still living in 1918. Bro. Lewis's second wife was Ephrina Sarepa Coray (a sister of his former wife), born Feb. 4, 1850, at Fort Kearney, Nebraska. She became the mother of seven children, five of whom are still living.
