Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Bayles, Hanson

Bayles, Hanson, Bishop of Blanding, San Juan county, Utah, was born Nov. 29, 1857, at Parowan, Iron county, Utah, the son of Herman Daggett and Anna Fredericka Easter. As a child he attended such schools as his native village afforded and shared the hard work of making a living on the rugged frontiers. While still a boy he was ordained to the office of Teacher and at the age of sixteen to the office of Elder, the later ordination taking place under the hands of Wm. Woodward preparatory to work which he did for the dead in the St. George Temple. In April, 1879, he accompanied an exploring party sent by the General Authorities of the Church to find a place for settlement on the San Juan river. Crossing the Colorado at Lee's Ferry, and traveling through Northern Arizona, they reached the present site of Bluff in June, 1879. Returning by way of Castle valley, they arrived home Sept. 16, 1879, after a most trying and eventful trip. In 1880 (Nov. 3rd) Bro. Bayles married Mary Ann Durham in the St. George Temple, John D. T. McAllister officiating. On Nov. 9, 1880, he started with his young wife for the San Juan Mission, reaching Bluff Dec. 22, 1880. In all the hardships, disappointments and perilous times incident to the early life of Bluff, Bro. Bayles took a most active part, laboring for the temporal and spiritual welfare of the little colony in whatever place he was called to fill. His wife died in child-bed Jan. 31, 1888, leaving him four small children. Nine years later (July 14, 1897) he married Evelyn Lyman. Bro. Bayles was ordained a High Priest Feb. 20, 1893, by Pres. Francis A. Hammond and set apart as a High Councilor in San Juan Stake. He served as a special Y. M. M. I. A. missionary in San Luis and San Juan Stakes during the winter of 1897-98. For several years he was assistant Stake superintendent of Sunday schools and from July, 1905, to August, 1908, he served as Stake Sunday school superintendent; he was ordained a Bishop August 16, 1908, and set apart as the first Bishop of Grayson (now Blanding), Utah. In the early days of San Juan he acted for several years as county assessor strong factor in preserving law and order. Bro. Bayles is interested in cattle, sheep, land and merchandise. He is a director in many business and always ready to assist the needy and boost every worthy enterprise. The live institutions of his Ward testify of his ability as a leader, and the phenomenal growth the settlement has had since his coming reflects the genuine effort and excellent judgment of his administration.
