Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Lyman, Frederick Rich

Lyman, Frederick Rich, counselor in the presidency of the Millard Stake, was born Oct. 12, 1856, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Amasa M. Lyman and Caroline E. Partridge. He was a grandson of Edward Partridge, the first Bishop of the Church. With his parents and others of his father's family he moved to Fillmore in the early sixties and was baptized Nov. 18, 1865, by Daniel Thompson. About the year 1871, together with his brothers Platte D., Edward L., Joseph A. and Walter C. Lyman, George Finlinson, John W. Dutson and others, he was called by President Thomas Callister to settle on Oak creek for the purpose of strengthening the small colony which was then located at that place. There he commenced the eventful career which characterized his life's labor. In 1875 (Dec. 6th) he married Ann Elizabeth Lovell (daughter of John Lovell and Ann Georginsen), who was born at Fillmore Dec. 13, 1859, and their only child, Edith Elzina Lyman, was born at Oak City Aug. 4, 1879. Bro. Lyman was ordained a Seventy and later a High Priest by Apostle Francis M. Lyman. In 1884-86 he filled a mission to the Southern States and shortly after his return he was called to act as a counselor to Bishop Peter Anderson at Oak Creek, in which capacity he labored for about twenty years. In 1907 he was called to labor as first counselor to President Alonzo A. Hinckley in the Millard Stake, which position he held the remainder of his life. He also became connected with the settlement of Delta and was president of the irrigation company at that place from its inception. He died at Oak City Feb. 4, 1911. His demise occurred 34 years to a day after that of his father; 265 relatives and friends attended his funeral. Bro. Lyman was an intense lover of nature and could see its beauties in all its creations. He was a leading spirit in all public improvements and his energetic labors were visible on every hand in his home town and in that of the town of Delta.
