Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Lyman, Platte De Alton

Lyman, Platte De Alton, president of the San Juan Stake, San Juan county, Utah, was born in a wagon on the Platte river, near Fort Laramie, Nebraska (now Wyoming), Aug. 20, 1848, while his mother was traveling from Winter Quarters to Salt Lake City. He was the son of Amasa Mason Lyman and Eliza Maria Partridge. He was baptized when about eight years of age, and until he was fifteen years of age resided in Salt Lake City and Farmington, Davis county, Utah, and then accompanied his parents to Fillmore, Millard county, Utah. In 1867 (May 18th) he married Adelia Robison and left home May 24, 1867, on a mission to Great Britain. He labored as president of the London conference and returned to Fillmore in September, 1869. Soon after his return he was sustained as a High Councilor in the Millard Stake and called to take charge of the Oak Creek branch. In February, 1872, he was sent from Millard county to the Territorial convention. He became superintendent of the county co-operative herds, engaged variously in farming, saw-milling and stockraising, and went with the rest of Millard Stake into the United Order in 1874. In 1875-76 he filled another mission to England, where he was appointed president of the Nottingham conference. In July, 1877, he was set apart as Bishop of Oak Creek Ward. In 1879 he married Annie Maud Clark, thus obeying the law of plural marriage. In August of that year he received a call from the presidency of the Church to assist Silas S. Smith in bringing a company of Saints through to colonize on the San Juan. They reached the present site of Bluff in April, 1880. Bro. Lyman became counselor to Silas S. Smith, president of the San Juan and San Luis Missions in September of that year, and was called in April, 1882, to preside over the San Juan Mission. He acted as the first president of the San Juan Co-op and was one of the original board of selectmen when San Juan county was first organized. In September, 1884, he was released from his labors in San Juan, and settled in Scipio, Utah. The following February he was sustained as a High Councilor in the Millard Stake. Having bought cattle, he sought range for them in the western part of San Juan county, but after tending them there six years he found it best to live again in Bluff. He was sustained in November, 1890, as second counselor to President Francis A. Hammond of the San Juan Stake, and moved his family to Bluff in April, 1891. In October, 1898, he was called to preside over the European Mission, with James L. McMurrin and Henry W. Naisbitt as his counselors. He left immediately, traveled much in Great Britain and on the European continent, and held the positian of president until June, 1901, when he was released to preside over the San Juan Stake. He reached home in July, and died Nov. 13, 1898, at Bluff, Utah, leaving two wives and seven children. His living children are: Mrs. Evelyn Bayles, Albert Robison, Mrs. Mary Reeve, Mrs. Lucretia Ranney, Edward Partridge, Mrs. Caroline Bayles and Mrs. Emma Brown.
