Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Martineau, James Henry

Martineau, James Henry, a Patriarch and prominent Church worker was born March 13, 1828, in Amsterdam, Montgomery county, New York, the son of John Martineau and Eliza Mears. He writes: My father went to England in his youth, graduated as physician and surgeon, married the widow of Captain Hawkins of the British Navy, the daughter of the Earl of Stanhope by whom he had two daughters, Julia and Lucretia. His wife died in Baltimore, Maryland, and he next married my mother in 1824, she being then about seventeen years of age. In 1831 he was chief engineer in building the Camden & Armboy railroad, one of the first railroads built in the United States. He was employed by the government on some important works, and was chief engineer of the Croton waterworks of New York City and its chief of construction when he died. He invented the central discharge water wheel, the turbine principle, which has revolutionized water power; also horse power machine for threshing grain, which displaced the flail or the treading out grain by horses or cattle. He was of Huguenot descent, thence dating back to ancient Rome, the family name in Latin being Martinus, changed to Martino or Marino in Italian, Martinho in Portuguese, Martin, Martinot and Martin in ancient French, Martin in German and English, and in Slav dialects Martinovich. I have an unbroken lineage of twenty-two generations back to A. D. 1250 on the paternal side and twenty-one on the maternal to A. D. 1255, unbroken. I graduated at Monroe Academy, N. Y., at the age of sixteen and entered the office of the "Cayuga Tocsin" in Andover, N. Y., as "printers devil" working up to compositor and pressman on one of the first Hoe presses made. When the Mexican war commenced in 1846 I enlisted in the U. S. regular army to serve during the war. Just two hours before I was to go to the front my mother came, demanded my release as a minor, and led me home. Refusing to return to the printing office, I went to Milwaukee, Wis., entering the office of the "Milwaukee Sentinel" as pressman, but soon enlisted again, and with many other recruits was sent to Newport Barracks. Serving in various ways on detached service until the war ended I was honorably discharged in July, 1848, and returned to Milwaukee. In 1849 I started for California, but on my arrival at the Missouri river I was told that it would be impossible so late in the season to safely cross the plains and so I stayed in Western Missouri until the spring of 1850, teaching school. Early in 1850 I again started on my journey to the Pacific Coast, during which my life was twice miraculously preserved, and I arrived in Salt Lake City, July 22, 1850. I was impressed to stop there for the season and go on west the next year. But I went no farther, for two women, the wife of Elder P. P. Pratt and the widow of Don Carlos Smith taught me the gospel, and I was baptized Jan. 19, 1851, just where the Temple stands in Salt Lake City before I heard a sermon by a "Mormon" Elder. In February, 1851, I was ordained a Seventy by Jedediah M. Grant, and placed in the 27th quorum. About three hundred others were ordained at the same time. In March, 1851, I went with William K. Rice to the new town of Parowan, established three months before, ours being the first company which reinforced the settlement. I joined the Nauvoo Legion as sergeant major of the Iron regiment under Col. George A. Smith, became second lieutenant, and finally adjutant of Iron Military District, comprising all of Utah south of Fillmore. I was the first county clerk of Iron county and the first city recorder of Parowan. I also served as city councilor and alderman; served as county surveyor and sheriff; was Bishop's clerk and Bishop's Councilor and on May 21, 1854, I was ordained a High Priest by Elder George A. Smith and set apart as a counselor to Stake President John C. L. Smith. I was Ward clerk, and Stake clerk for a time, and kept record of all military operations, explorations and Indian difficulties which at times were very serious, threatening our destruction. I was one of a company of sixty men in 1858 sent out by Governor Brigham Young to hunt a place of refuge for the Saints, when the U. S. Army was invading Utah, and as its historian made a report of the expedition to Governor Young. As military instructor I frequently drilled the companies and battalions of the Legion, at one of which, the Parowas Battalion, Col. John C. Fremont was a spectator. Dining with me that day he said to me "Mr. Martineau, if I had 10,000 such men, I could conquer Mexico." He did not see our awkwardness. This was on his last trip of exploration for a railway route across the continent. I surveyed Parowan town plat, also Paragoonah, Ft. Johnson and the first city plat of Beaver, besides much farm, pasture and hay land. I was one of the party which crossed the mountains to the Panguitch Lake. With a canoe, which we made we were the first whites to navigate it. In May, 1855, I was appointed to make out the consecration deeds of the property of the people to the Church. All heads of families in Parowan consecrated cheerfully, myself included. In 1852 (Jan. 8th) I married Susan Ellen Johnson, daughter of Joel H. Johnson, who joined the Church June 1, 1831, and who was present when the "Word of Wisdom" was given in 1833. My wife was born in Kirtland, Ohio, July 11, 1836, and has remained a faithful and true Latter-day Saint from that date until the present time, through all the trials of the Church. During these years spent in ardous public service, Indian wars and explorations, I received only $10.00 for four years service as sheriff. We all worked for nothing, expecting no temporal reward. In Salt Lake City, Jan. 18, 1857, I married Susan Julia Sherman, daughter of Lyman Royal Sherman and Delcena Diadamie Johnson, born in Far West, Missouri, Oct. 21, 1838. She became the mother of eight children, five now living. She died Jan. 28, 1874, having lived as a true Latter-day Saint all her life. Removing to Salt Lake City in 1860 I was advised by Pres. Young to go to Logan, where I was needed as a surveyor, Cache valley being then rapidly settled. I went there in July, 1860, and located many large canals and installed the Logan City water works. I also became county clerk, county surveyor, city recorder of Logan City, and engaged in farming. I was also U. S. deputy internal revenue collector, served as a "minute man" for more than twenty years in many military expeditions in Indian troubles, at the same time serving as brigade adjutant of Cache Military District, of three full regiments, and as their military instructor, and as a member of the staff of Gen. Daniel H. Wells, until the Nauvoo Legion was annulled. In 1868 I assisted in locating the Union Pacific Railroad from Echo Canyon to Central, Nevada, its first western terminal, as topographical and construction engineer. After this I made a geodetic survey for the Smithsonian Institute from Central, Nevada, to Ogden, Utah. In 1869 I located the railroad from Ogden to Salt Lake City, and in 1871-72 as chief engineer located the Utah Northern Railroad from Ogden to Franklin, Idaho. By direction of Pres. John Taylor I laid out the foundations of the Logan Temple and its grounds in 1877 and wrote an official history of its construction as a Church record. In November, 1882 I went with Elders Erastus Snow and Moses Thatcher to Sonora, Mexico, to find a refuge for Saints; returning in January, 1883. In 1884 I was called to Arizona to act as second Counselor to President Christopher Layton. On this trip we visited every settlement and scattered families in Southern Arizona, organizing the St. Joseph Stake, comprising the Maricopa, Pima and Mesa settlements with all their Wards, ordaining High Councilors and other officers, after which we explored Northern Sonora as far south as Magdalena, visiting various estates, but making no purchases, the prices charged being too high. During my twenty-four years residence in Logan I surveyed large additions to Logan City plat, and also surveyed the following city plats with their farm, pasture, hay lots and irrigation canals: Providence, Millville, Hyrum, Paradise, Wellsville, Mendon, Newton, Clarkston, Richmond, Smithfield, Hyde Park and Benson in Utah and Weston, Oxford, Franklin, Blackfoot and Idaho Falls in Idaho. While in Utah and Arizona I also surveyed much public land as U. S. deputy surveyor under eight U. S. surveyor generals. I laid out altogether thirty five towns. In September, 1888, I removed to St. David, in Arizona, which I surveyed as a city plat, and I also surveyed Pima, Curtis, Graham, Fort Thomas, Thatcher, Solomonville and Duncan, with their fields and canals. I served four years as county surveyor and was offered a seat in the Arizona legislature and the county judgship by both political parties, but, advised by Elder Erastus Snow, I declined both offices. I also served as U. S. deputy land and mineral surveyor under three U. S. surveyor generals. Having great desire to go to Mexico, I applied in 1885 to President Taylor for release as counselor in the St. Joseph Stake presidency, which was afterwards granted, and in 1888 I removed to Colonia Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico, and I surveyed the town plats of Chuichupa and Dublan, and the Colonia Juarez land purchase, with many other large tracts, one of which was an 800 - square-mile tract of mountain timber land on the Sierra Madre Range for the California Land Company. Anxious to continue my work for my dead I visited Utah in 1903 and finally in 1908 made my residence there permanent, my wife soon joining me, a son caring for our home in Mexico until 1912, when all my family in Mexico, sixty in number were forced to fly to the United States for safety, abandoning almost all they possessed, including homes, farms, orchards and live stock to bandits called Mexican soldiers, who looted and destroyed as they pleased, and killed men and women. I lost all the savings of a life time, thousands of dollars and now, past 88 years of age, my wife 80, we are left feeble and nearly helpless except for the care of my son Lyman R and daughter Elizabeth Nebeker, but very thankful that none of my family were slain. I was ordained a Patriarch Nov. 30, 1898, by Marriner W. Merrill.
