Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Mitton, Samuel Bailey

Mitton, Samuel Bailey, a member of the High Council in the Cache Stake of Zion and a resident of Logan, Cache county, Utah, was born March 21, 1863, at Wellsville, Cache county, Utah. His early training was deeply religious, his parents being faithful Latter-day Saints who had joined the Church in England and crossed the plains with ox-teams, and afterwards suffering the privations incident to the settling of a new country. At an early age he was ordained a Priest and acted as secretary of his quorum during most of the time he was a member. From early childhood he manifested great love for music and all through his life it has been his inseparable companion. At the age of fourteen he became organist for the Wellsville Ward, serving in this capacity most of the time for 23 years. He served for some time as one of the presidency of the Y. M. M. I. A. in Wellsville Ward and made a missionary tour of Cache Stake with Elder Matthias F. Cowley. Cache Stake then comprised the whole of Cache valley. Jan. 8, 1884, he was ordained a Seventy and served as clerk of the 28th quorum of Seventy. On March 28, 1888, he married Miss Mary Hawkins, of Samaria, Idaho, in the Logan Temple. For seven years he acted as chorister of the Cache Stake Sunday schools. In the winter of 1889-90 he was called by Apostle Moses Thatcher to serve as a homo missionary for six months in Cache Stake, remaining out among the people most of the time. In the summer of 1890 he moved to Ogden, and remained there two years. While there he took an active part in the Wards, especially in a musical way, and served for a short period as organist of the Ogden Tabernacle choir. In the spring of 1900 he moved to Logan, Utah. Later he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as a member of the Cache Stake High Council by Apostle Charles W. Penrose, which position he still holds. He was sustained as director of the Logan Tabernacle choir Nov. 23, 1915.
