Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Murdock, Joseph R.

Murdock, Joseph R., president of the Wasatch Stake. (Continued from Vol. 1, page 361.) At the request of President Wm. H. Smart, President Joseph R. Murdock moved to Heber City in December, 1902. At the quarterly conference at Heber City, August 12, 1906, he was chosen and set apart as president of the Wasatch Stake, with James C. Jensen as his first and Edward D. Clyde as his second counselor. This call came to President Murdock in consequence of President Wm. H. Smart having been appointed to preside over the Uintah Stake of Zion. After the new presidency assumed their position in the Wasatch Stake they continued the noble work commenced by their predecessors in fighting the liquor traffic, which resulted in all the saloons in the county being closed, and the sale of liquor practically suspended. They also arranged for amusements in the Stake to be placed under the supervision of the Church authorities. Before President Smart left the Stake, President Murdock was appointed by the presidency of the Wasatch Stake to assist in various irrigation projects, looking to the reclaiming of the arid lands in what was then known as the Uintah Indian Reservation. In this capacity President Murdock took the initiative in getting out the waters upon the lands in what is known now as the Dry Gulch Irrigation Company, which represents about 80,000 acres of agricultural land. This project has been carried out successfully and thousands of homes have been benefited thereby. In developing the water rights of the Provo river, President Murdock's services have been extended into Utah and Salt Lake counties, where two irrigation companies have been organized, providing for the storing of waters of the Provo river, and of the pumping of water out of the Utah Lake to an elevation of 100 feet from where it is carried into Salt Lake county as far as Little Cottonwood on the east and Bennion Ward on the west side. By these projects over 10,000 acres of land have been brought under cultivation, and when the canals are completed 20,000 acres more will be benefited thereby. President Murdock has taken part in the development of many of the resources of Wasatch county and is now president of the Bank of Heber City, and the Heber Mercantile Company. Together with his sons and sons-in-law he is largely interested in farming and sheep-raising.
