Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Naisbitt, Henry W.

Naisbitt, Henry W., a prominent Elder in the Church, was born Nov. 7, 1826, in the village of North Allerton, England, the son of John Naisbitt and Martha Neede. His parents were religious people; his father, being very zealous, left impressions upon his son never afterwards destroyed. The father died when Henry was a lad, and the boy had to help the widowed mother to the neglect of schooling. Being of a mechanical turn of mind, he was apprenticed to a man who was skilled in the making of copper kettles from the solid metal. Leaving this he learned how to make silk hats and later learned the carpenter's trade. From the carpenter's bench he went into the grocery business, at which he spent his remaining years while in England. From his early youth Henry W. Naisbitt had a great love for reading, especially was he fond of reading religious books. In 1850 he became a convert to "Mormonism" and emigrated to America with his wife in 1854. After his arrival in Utah he became associated with Wm. Jennings in business. In 1876-78 he filled a mission to Great Britain where he labored principally as assistant editor of the "Millennial Star." Upon his return to Utah he took up his labors in Z. C. M. I., Salt Lake City, and became universally known as one of the expounders of "Mormonism" in the large tabernacle meetings in Salt Lake City. He also wrote for the newspapers and magazines. In 1898-1901 he filled another mission to Great Britain, this time acting as a counselor to Pres. Platte D. Lyman in the presidency of the European Mission. Elder Naisbitt was 72 years of age when he went on this last mission. His almost fifty years of study and his faithful living of the principles of the gospel marked him a superior man. Not only was he an able speaker and an able writer of prose, but he also exhibited great skill in writing poetry, and in 1901 published a book of poems entitled "Rhymelets in Many Moods." After a well spent life he passed to his final rest Feb. 26, 1908. During his lifetime Elder Nalsbitt married five wives. His first wife was Elizabeth Paul, whom he married in England Dec. 24, 1853; she emigrated to Utah with her husband in 1854 and after bearing her husband eight children died March 17, 1869, in Salt Lake City. He married his second wife, Mary Ann Luff, in October, 1862; she became the mother of six children and died April 5, 1877. His third wife was Catherine Hagell whom he married April 13, 1867; she crossed the plains with ox-teams in 1865, passed through many hardships before reaching Utah, and afterwards became the mother of eight children. Elder Naisbitt married Elizabeth Irvine April 13, 1870; she bore her husband five children. His fifth wife was Frances Hurst, who was married to him in 1879 and became the mother of four children.
