Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Nebeker, John

Nebeker, John, a Utah pioneer of 1847, and an active Church worker, was born August 1, 1813, at Newport, Delaware, the son of George Nebeker and Susannah Meredith. He was the eldest of eight brothers, five of whom were among the earliest settlers of Utah. Three besides himself (Henry, Peter and George) came to Salt Lake Valley in 1847 and the other (Lewis) arrived a few years later. All the Nebekers in Utah are descendants of these brothers and all of that name in America are no doubt related to them. The Nebeker family came to America from Germany some time prior to 1730 and settled in Delaware. John received a common school education and also finished a commercial school education under the tutelage of his father, who had finished a commercial education. His father was a foreman of a cotton factory in Delaware, a farmer in Illinois, and a government surveyor in Ohio. John's mother was an intelligent and thoroughly good woman, the daughter of a Baptist clergyman of Wilmington, Delaware. John became proficient in mathematics and learned the saddle and harness-making trade as well as farming. He married Lurena Fitzgerald, a native of Pennsylvania, in Ohio, Oct. 25, 1835. During a visit to Nauvoo, Ill., in the winter of 1845-46 he became a Latter-day Saint, his wife and mother having previously been converted to that faith. Prior to taking this step he had thought of going to Oregon, but now he determined to follow the fortunes of the Saints. With a good outfit of wagons and cattle he left Vermillion county, Ill., in the fall of 1846 and arrived at Winter Quarters on the Missouri river in time to assist in fitting out the pioneers, one of whom (Perry Fitzgerald) was his wife's brother. After their departure he joined the general emigration which in June, 1847, set out for the Rocky Mountains. He was chosen as a captain of ten in Geo. B. Wallace's fifty and Abraham O. Smoot's hundred. On the journey his son Ashton was run over by a wagon and had his thigh broken. The fractured bones were set by Luke S. Johnson and Henry I. Doremus, the boy playing with a pocket knife while the operation was in progress. The company arrived in Salt Lake Valley Sept. 26, 1847. Bro. Nebeker and his family, having lived in the South Fort, an adjunct of the Old Fort, until the spring of 1849, moved onto a city lot (Lot 4, Block 116, Plat A., Salt Lake City survey). In the summer of 1848, it is claimed, John Nebeker cut the first wheat that ripened and was harvested in this intermountain region, on a lot lying between Third and Fourth West streets and Second and Third North streets, near the southeast corner of where the West Side high school now stands. He chose some knolls on which to plant his wheat. It is also said that he had one of two apple trees that first bore fruit in Utah, the other tree being raised by Pres. Brigham Young. Bro. Nebeker took a great interest in the cultivation of fruit trees, he and his brothers bringing with them from Illinois a quantity of apple seeds and peach pits. The young trees that sprang from these plantings are believed to have stocked most of the early orchards of Salt Lake Valley. Prior to the organization of the provisional State of Deseret, and while yet a resident of the Fort, John Nebeker acted as a deputy marshal, his duties corresponding with a deputy of today. Many tough characters coming with the gold seekers on their way to California, Deputy Nebeker more than once arrested such persons, and for lack of a better place of confinement would take them to his home and board and lodge them there until their cases were disposed of by due process of law. He also acted as justice of the peace of Salt Lake City, but as such was more of an arbitrator than a judicial officer, it being his practice to get the parties, plaintiff and defendant together out of court and in a neighborly way induce them to an amicable settlement of their difficulties. In the fall of 1853 he presided over the missionary company which located and built Fort Supply on Smith's Fork, near Fort Bridger, a movement intended to exert a civilizing influence over the Shoshone Indians. While there he represented Green River county in the Territorial legislature. In the fall of 1861 Elder Nebeker moved with a portion of his family (he having married a plural wife, Mary Woodcock, in September, 1854) to Toquerville in Washington county, Utah, where he raised cotton and built and operated a cotton gin. He was closely associated with Apostle Erastus Snow in the settlement of Southern Utah, including what is now a part of Nevada. In 1869-70 he went on a mission to Illinois and Indiana. From 1870 to 1872 he acted as probate judge of Kane county, Utah. Soon afterwards he returned north and located a part of his family at Laketown in Rich county, Utah, which section he represented in the Utah legislature of 1874. Ecclesiastically he was president of the Elders quorum for several years after the settlement and at a later period was a member of the High Priests quorum. Elder Nebeker died Oct. 26, 1886, at his home in Laketown, Rich county, Utah. He was a man of veracity, of character and integrity. Possessed of a keenly sympathetic nature, he was ready at all times to render assistance to any one in trouble. He practiced self-denial, despised effeminancy and was noted for his impartiality and high sense of justice. He was the father of twelve sons and nine daughters, most of whom grew to maturity.
