Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Nebeker, Lurena Fitzgerald

Nebeker, Lurena Fitzgerald, wife of John Nebeker, was born April 25, 1819, in Monongahela county, Pa., the daughter of John Fitzgerald and Leah Phillips. The Fitzgeralds are a very ancient branch of the noble and illustrious race of Geraldines, seated at an early period at the Castle of Pallice, in the county of Limerick, Ireland. Maurice Fitzgerald, one of the first and principal invaders of Ireland first assumed that surname instead of Geraldine. He landed in Ireland in the reign of King Henry II A. D. 1169. Lurena Fitzgerald was the youngest of a family of five children. On her mother's side she descended from an old Pennsylvanian Dutch family, her mother being the daughter of a Methodist minister. When a child her father moved to Reily, Butler county, Ohio, which locality at that time was a dense forest. As a child she was a Bible reader, and she received valuable training in sewing from her mother who had been a tailoress. At the age of sixteen she was married to John Nebeker Oct. 25, 1835. They made their home at Reily, Ohio, for a time and then moved to Vermillion county, Ill., where she became a convert to "Mormonism" in 1842. She was the first person bearing the name of Nebeker who joined the Church. Four years later her husband was baptized. When the Elders first brought the gospel to her home they were frequently in need of clothing and on such occasions she would get busy with her needle and fit them out with what they needed. In the fall of 1846, with her husband, she left her home in Vermillion county and journeyed to the Missouri river, near Council Bluffs, Iowa, where they spent the following winter. With their own family of five children, George Nebeker, her husband's youngest brother, and her older sister Barbara Fitzgerald, they crossed the plains in Capt. George B. Wallace's fifty, her husband being the captain of ten in said fifty. They arrived in Salt Lake Valley Sept. 26, 1847. Sister Nebeker endured the hardships and privations connected with the settling of Salt Lake City, and during the cricket famine she was eleven weeks without a loaf of bread in the house, and there were nine in the family. Sister Nebeker was very industrious, economical and thoroughly practical. In making homespun cloth, stocking yarn and other needed articles she could scarcely be excelled by any other woman. She was unusually benevolent and hospitable, and become universally known and beloved because of her acts of charity. She waited on prisoners who were confined in her home with ball and chain from lack of other quarters, at the time her husband was assistant marshal to John Van Cott and Horace S. Elredge. The loss of an eight-year-old boy (Wiley) by drowning at the Warm Springs, July 23, 1860, was a most severe blow to her. In the early sixties, when her husband was colonizing Southern Utah he ran into a band of Piede Indians who had a seven or eight-year-old boy whom they were going to kill because his parents were dead. Bro. Nebeker traded the Indians some horses for the boy and brought him to Salt Lake City, where he was reared in the Nebeker home. The Indian boy (Richard) was a dutiful boy to his foster mother. The John Nebeker home, located at 446 West Second North Street and built in 1856, was, when first erected, one of the best houses in Salt Lake City, and it was always a place of hospitality and good cheer. Sister Nebeker was the mother of thirteen children. Of these five boys and four girls, namely, Perry, Ira, Aaron, Ashton, Rosella, Almira J., Prescinda, Laura and Aquila, grew to manhood and womanhood. Sister Nebeker was also a mother to her weakly sister, Barbara, for over forty years. When over sixty years of age she took a motherless infant (a granddaughter) to raise, and also raised two older granddaughters who had their mother. Sister Nebeker was fond of poetry and took great interest in current events. She died Feb. 7, 1898, in Salt Lake City, Utah.
