Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Nebeker, Ashton

Nebeker, Ashton, an active Elder in the Church, was born at Danville, Ill., Sept. 23, 1843, the son of John Nebeker and Lurena Fitzgerald. Together with his father's family he arrived in the Great Salt Lake Valley in September, 1847, and was baptized about 1851. In March, 1865, he married Lucy Pratt, at Tooele, Utah, and was called, together with his father, to settle the so-called Dixie country in Southern Utah. He was finally released and returned to Salt Lake City, while his brother, Perry, was filling a mission to Germany. Later he was again called to the Dixie Mission, where he resided continuously until 1886, during which time he held many positions of trust and responsibility, both of an ecclesiastical and secular nature. From 1873 to 1877 he acted as sheriff of Kane county, and was also assessor and collector of said county for some time. He was with Major Powell's expedition exploring the Grand Canyon of the Colorado, being one of the first white men to go through all of the rapids of the Grand Canyon. As a major in the Utah militia he participated in several Indian expeditions and filled a mission to the Moquis Indians. From 1886 to 1890 he resided at Jerome, Arizona, having government mail contracts, at the expiration of which he returned to his old home at Toquerville. In 1892 he moved to Tuba, Arizona, where he resided until 1903, during which time he acted as deputy sheriff of Coconino county, Arizona, upon leaving which he moved to Alamo, Lincoln county, Nevada, where he resided until his death, which occurred August 29, 1911. At the time of his death he was postmaster at Alamo and a notary public for the State of Nevada. In 1878 Ashton Nebeker married Elizabeth Theobald in the St. George Temple. The following named children were the issue of this marriage: Aquila A., Theobald, Arthur and Deronda. The children by his first wife were: Lucy Lurena, Wiley, Amy Belle, Grace, Hazel and Ashton Stokes.
