Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Nebeker, William Perry

Nebeker, William Perry, a Utah pioneer and prominent Church worker, was born Sept. 5, 1836, at Riley, Butler county, Ohio, the son of John Nebeker and Lurena Fitzgerald. At the age of eleven years he crossed the plains with his parents, driving a team of two yoke of oxen most of the way, until prostrated with mountain fever, and arrived in the Valley Sept. 26, 1847. On the journey he was baptized in the Platte river by Apostle John Taylor. Young Nebeker assisted in raising the first crops in Utah, and with the rest of the pioneer settlers passed through many hardships, subsisting on thistle roots, fighting crickets, and living on half rations. He was a studious boy and obtained his early education in a most unique way. When his father was deputy marshal, under John Van Cott, in 1849, the prisoners were lodged and fed at Deputy Marshal Nebeker's home, encumbered with ball and chain, in the same room as his family. One of the prisoners who had quite a long sentence to serve proved to be a man of more than ordinary education. He took a liking to the boy Perry and spent the weary winter days in tutoring him. The mother learned to appreciate the prisoner's friendship in the house on account of the good training he gave her boy. During the winter of 1857-58 Perry acted as body-guard to President Brigham Young. At the age of 24 (August 6, 1860) he was elected as a representative to the Territorial legislature from Salt Lake county and served in a special session called by Gov. Cummings and at the regular session of 1860-61. He was the first unmarried man who sat in the Utah legislature. He served also as a member of the first State legislature in 1895. Elder Nebeker filled many other positions of honor and responsibility, such as county superintendent of district schools, justice of the peace, notary public, deputy registration officer, U. S. census enumerator, special U. S. irrigation commissioner, director of the Agricultural College of Utah, etc. In 1863-67 he filled an important mission to Europe, during which he presided over the missions in Switzerland, Italy, France, Germany and Holland. In 1868 he was called to colonize the Bear Lake country and established his home at Falula Springs, near Laketown, Rich county, Utah-a town which he named after receiving President Young's approval of the same. In 1870 (Oct, 31st) Elder Nebeker married Sarah Ivins McKean, daughter of Theodore McKean and Mary Page Gulick. The following named children were born to them: Theodore McKean, Maud, Sarah Lurena, William Perry, Laura, Mary Page and Ethel. His wife died Feb. 21, 1880, at Falula Springs, leaving six small children. On Feb, 19, 1885, Bro. Nebeker married Phoebe Stafford Tingey, daughter of Bishop John Tingey and Phoebe Stafford. From that union three sons were born, namely, Charles Stafford, Leo Stokes and Harold Wesley. In the fall of 1889 Bro. Nebeker removed with his family to Salt Lake City. He was ordained a High Priest by William B. Dougall, July 19, 1906. He died Oct. 16, 1910, in Salt Lake City.
