Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Nebeker, Sarah Ivins McKean

Nebeker, Sarah Ivins McKean, wife of William Perry Nebeker, was born April 11, 1849, at Toms River, Ocean county, New Jersey, the daughter of Theodore McKean and Mary Page Gulick. She was a granddaughter of Washington McKean and Margaret Ivins and Captain Stephen Gulick and Deborah Holmes Page. Mrs. Nebeker descended from the Shreve family, which traces its ancestry in America to the middle of the seventeenth century, or to 1641. They were of English-Dutch birth and settled in Rhode Island and Long Island, whence they went to New Jersey, where they were known as planters. They were Quakers in belief. The Shreves were prominent in the Revolutionary war, and among them were Colonel Israel Shreve, Colonel William Shreve and Captain Samuel and Captain John Shreve. Another line of her ancestry, the Gulicks, were distinguished for their valor during the Revolutionary war; one was captain in the Continental army and another lost an arm in the service of his country. The McKean family was also prominent in the early history of the United States and were of Scottish origin. In 1857, at the age of eight years, she crossed the plains with her parents, who settled in Salt Lake Valley. She received a better education than most of the girls of her age, her parents being people of culture. Having musical talent, she taught music in her younger days. She was an expert at fine needle work and as a girl also learned to be an excellent cook and housekeeper. On Oct. 31, 1870, she became the wife of William Perry Nebeker, and made her home in Bear Lake Valley. Once when journeying there she had a narrow escape from drowning in the Ogden river. Sister Nebeker died Feb. 21, 1880, at her home at Falula Springs, near Laketown, Rich county, Utah, leaving six small children to battle with the world without a mother, the eldest being six years old and the youngest eleven days old. Her oldest child, Theodore, preceded her to the grave. Sister Nebeker was a lover of nature's beauties, the birds, the flowers, the wild beauty of the mountains and meadows, and the animals, all appealed to her. The windows of her pioneer log house were always full of blooming plants. Her whole heart was in her home and she was a queen of the kitchen and parlor.
