Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Olsen, Christian

Olsen, Christian, a faithful Elder in the Church, was born March 15, 1821, in Christiania, Norway, the son of Ole Hansen and Maren Halvorsen. He received a common school education and married Christine Nielsen Nov. 24, 1843. Though brought up in the Lutheran faith, he, in early manhood, discerned the hollow creed of that denomination and took a dislike to "the form of Godliness" found in the State religion, prescribed by law. Despising the hypocrite, he naturally detested the sanctimonious cant and affectation of the hired clergy, "teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake." Hence, when the true gospel of Christ found him, he, together with his wife, was ready to embrace it, both joining the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, April 1, 1861. Bro. Olsen soon became a zealous laborer in the Lord's vineyard, doing considerable missionary work, both in the city of Christiania and outside; and many a "watery grave," say 3 1/2 x 7 feet, through ice from two to three feet thick, did he cut for prospective candidates for baptism, after a hard day's work and in the dead of night. His own home, on Bentzebakken, in Christiania, was a haven of rest for the missionaries, who named the humble cottage "Lille Zion" (Little Zion). Here meetings were held regularly every week for years. Bro. Olsen emigrated to Utah in 1869, leaving Christiania April 19th and arriving in Salt Lake City August 8th the same year, a passenger on the first Scandinavian immigrant train that pulled into Ogden. He settled in Santaquin, Utah county, Utah, in July, 1872, and resided there continuously until his death December 24, 1912. He was the father of twelve children and the progenitor of a numerous posterity. He was stauch, firm and full of integrity, yearned for justice and righteousness, urged caution and sought to live an exemplary life. Being humble, unobtrusive and of retiring habits, he never "blew his own horn," hence he did not become widely known, nor even received the recognition that many feel was justly his. But to those acquainted with him his name stands as a synonym for precision, rectitude and probity. (C. L. O.)
