Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Owens, James Clark

Owens, James Clark, Bishop of the Woodruff Ward ( Snowflake Stake), Navajo county, Arizona, was born July 7, 1832, in Jackson county, Mo., the son of James Clark Owens and Abigail Cordelia Burr. With his parents he passed through the trials and drivings of the Saints, first in Missouri and afterwards in Illinois. He was baptized in 1843 in Hancock county, Ill., attended the conference at Nauvoo, Aug. 8, 1844, and remembered how Brigham Young was transformed in the eyes of the people. With his father's family he located temporarily at Mt. Pisgah, Iowa, at the time of the exodus in 1846. From this point his father started out in search of work, but was caught in a severe storm and badly frozen. He died from the effects of this exposure, leaving his widowed wife and children as follows: Horace Burr Owens, James Clark (the subject of this sketch), Amelia and Julia. The family crossed the plains in Captain Hodge's ox company, in 1853. Bro. Owens wintered at Provo, Utah county, and early in 1854 moved to Fillmore where he quarried rock for the State house. In January, 1856, he married Lucretia P. Robinson, and the following year cut stone for the Salt Lake Temple; he did the same labor also in 1870-77. He also worked as a stone mason on the St. George Temple in 1876; was ordained an Elder April 4, 1866, by Samuel L. Sprague; ordained a High Priest March 9, 1869, by Erastus Snow and served as a High Councilor; served as sheriff a number of years in Southern Utah and was captain in the militia during the Walker and Black Hawk wars. In November, 1878, he moved to Arizona and the following year was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the Woodruff Ward by Wilford Woodruff. Together with other settlers who suffered the loss of their dams and crops for a number of years, he had to find employment on the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railroad to earn bread for his family. After serving as Bishop at Woodruff about twelve years he removed to Fillmore, Utah, where he remained four years and then returned to Woodruff, Arizona, where he died of heart failure Feb. 1, 1901. Bishop Owens was the father of twelve children and was survived by his wife, Lucretia P. Robison Owens, daughter of Joseph Robison and Lucretia Hancock. The children are the following: James Clark (now Bishop of Showlow, Arizona), Marion Alfred, Clarence Edward, Zina, Franklin Horace, and Adelia.
