Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Bennion, Samuel Otis

Bennion, Samuel Otis, president of the Central States Mission, was born June 9, 1874, at Taylorsville, Salt Lake county, Utah, the son of John R. Bennion and Emma Jane Terry. He was baptized when about eight years old and was later ordained a Deacon and presided over the quorum of Deacons of which he was a member. In due course of time he was ordained an Elder and later a Seventy. In 1898 (August 25th) he married Miss Charlotte Towler of Mill creek Ward, Salt Lake county, Utah. President Bennion received a fairly good education in his younger days and was occupied for many years in the sheep and farming business. He was called on a mission to the Central States and left for his field of labor Nov. 9, 1904; after laboring as a traveling Elder for six months, he was chosen to preside over the South Texas conference and acted in that capacity until he was selected as secretary of the Mission, in November, 1905. He held that position until he was appointed president of the Central States Mission in October, 1906. In March, 1907, under the direction of President Joseph F. Smith and counselors, he moved the headquarters of the Mission from Kansas City, Mo., to Independence, Mo., which was the first time the Church had an established residence at Independence since the expulsion of the Saints from that county by the mob in 1833. Under the direction of Pres. Bennion the Church has built or bought some splendid meeting houses in different parts of the Central States Mission, notably at Independence, where a fine chapel was erected in 1914; a printing plant building was also erected there in 1915 and a good mission home was built in 1917. In addition to this the Church has purchased a substantial chapel at St. Louis, Mo., and erected a fine school building and a magnificent meeting house at Kelsey, Texas. Another meeting house has been built at Enoch, Texas, and others in different parts of the mission. President Bennion's mission so far has been a most successful one, and the Central States Mission with headquarters at Independence, Jackson county, Mo., is growing rapidly.
