Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Quinney, Joseph, Jr.

Quinney, Joseph, Jr., second counselor in the Stake Presidency of the Cache Stake, Cache county, Utah, was born Dec. 25, 1870, in Weber canyon, Utah, the son of Joseph Quinney and Sarah Bradshaw. He was baptized at Logan in 1879 by Christian J. Larsen, and ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Teacher and Priest. He was ordained an Elder in 1892 by Henry Ballard and ordained a Seventy in 1893 by Christian D. Fjeldsted, and became a member of the 32nd quorum of Seventy. In 1895-99 he filled a mission to Samoa, and also visited the Society Islands, Fiji, New Zealand and Australia. After his return home he was employed by David Eccles as a clerk in the Logan Sugar Factory, and also continued active in Church work. He was chosen as one of the presidents of the 119th quorum of Seventy, acted as superintendent of Religion Class, Sunday school and Mutual Improvement Associations, and afterwards acted as Stake superintendent of Sunday schools in the Cache Stake. In 1910 he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as an alternate High Councilor in the Cache Stake, and in 1911 he was chosen as second counselor to Pres. Serge F. Balliff in the Cache Stake presidency, which position he still holds. In his connection with the sugar business he has acted as cashier of the Logan Sugar Factory, manager of both the Logan and Lewiston factories, and district manager of what is known as the Cache valley district of the Amalgamated Company's operations. In 1917 he was promoted to the position of general agricultural superintendent, which position he still occupies. In 1916 he was chosen to visit Russia to obtain sugar beet seed. Traveling via Sweden and Finland, he reached St. Petersburg, Russia, and then visited the provinces of Keif, Podolia, Bolenia, Odessa, Moscow, Toula, Korkoff, etc. He then traveled by train through Siberia to Vladivostock, and thence crossed the sea to Japan, where he visited the Elders of the Japanese mission. Continuing the voyage he crossed the Pacific Ocean via Hawaii to America, thus circumnavigating the Globe. It has been his privilege to visit nearly all the missions of the Church in the whole world, and he has passed through experiences that have fallen to the lot of only a few. He has witnessed many wonderful manifestations of the power of God to strengthen his faith in the divinity of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Bro. Quinney has a family of five sons, one of whom is now attending school at the Harvard University; another is laboring as a missionary in Samoa, and one is serving his country in the U. S. Army. His oldest son filled a mission in Germany before the outbreak of the war.
