Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Ratcliffe, James

Ratcliffe, James, a prominent Elder in the Church, was born May 19, 1842, at Rowen, France, the son of James Ratcliffe and Elizabeth Greenless. He moved to Middlesborough, England, with his parents when a child, served seven years as an apprentice boilermaker and later became foreman over 28 employees. During this time he commenced his musical career, which gave him the honor of playing at one of Queen Victoria's receptions. He was an artist on the snare drum and won several medals for his efficiency. In one of his band excursions he met his future wife Emma Jane Estham. Together with his parents he adhered to the Methodists, but on his visits to the Estham home he heard of "Mormonism," to which he became a convert, and was baptized in 1861, at Middlesborough. In 1861 (Dec. 25th) he married Emma Jane Estham. Joseph F. Smith, who at that time labored as a missionary in England, performed the marriage ceremony, he being an intimate friend of the Esthams. In the spring of 1862 Bro. Ratcliffe left England and emigrated to America, crossing the Atlantic in a sailing vessel. After being compelled to sell most of their goods, such as dress patterns, shawls, etc., they left Florence July 28, 1862, to cross the plains with ox teams. After enduring the usual hardships of such an overland journey, they arrived at Salt Lake City Oct. 4, 1862, and soon afterwards located at Grantsville, Tooele county. Later he was engaged to play in the Salt Lake Theatre orchestra and was also furnished work in Pres. Brigham Young's blacksmith shop. Still later he located permanently at Grantsville, where he became one of the leading citizens in ecclesiastical, social and civic affairs. Being of very industrious habits, he soon prepared a little home, making the adobes with his own hands, after which he began tilling the soil. For several years in succession he lost his crops by grasshoppers. In 1865 he was ordained an Elder and was a member of the Grantsville choir for fifty years, part of the time being its leader. He organized a string and martial band in Tooele county and organized a brass band Nov. 17, 1877, of which he was the leader for 21 years. He acted as Stake chorister several years, and served as first assistant superintendent of the Grantsvllle Sunday school from 1888 to 1898. In 1885 he was ordained a Seventy by Apostle Francis M. Lyman. In 1892 he labored as a special missionary in the Weber Stake, and in 1898-1900 he filled a mission to Great Britain. On his return he furnished means for many of the Saints to emigrate to Zion. In 1903 he was ordained a High Priest by Hyrum M. Smith. In 1907-1908, he filled a second mission to Great Britain, laboring principally in the Leeds branch; he returned home in the fall of 1908 on account of sickness. Together with his wife he spent his last days working in the Salt Lake Temple for the dead. Elder Ratcliffe died at Grantsville July 30, 1914, and his wife, Emma Jane Estham, died Jan. 19, 1915. When the call came to go to the great beyond it was remarked by his physician that such love as existed between him and his wife could not be separated long. This proved to be the case, for six months after his own death his beloved wife joined him on the other side. Following are the names of the children of James and Emma Jane Ratcliffe: Lenora Jane, Emma R., Louisa R., James E., Merlin R., William H., Robert A., Matilda R., Elizabeth R. and Marintha R.
