Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Redd, Lemuel Hardison Jr.

Redd, Lemuel Hardison Jr., president of the San Juan Stake of Zion, was born at Spanish Fork, Utah county, Utah, Oct. 25, 1856, the son of Lemuel Hardison Redd and Keziah Jane Butler. While yet a small child his parents moved to Washington county. He was baptized at the age of eight years; ordained a Teacher when fourteen and an Elder when 22 years old. He attended the University of Deseret in 1875-76, after which he taught school one year.

In 1878 he married Eliza A. Westover, and in 1884 he married Lucy Lyman. In 1879, responding to a call from Pres. John Taylor, he went with a company of Saints under President Silas S. Smith to make a settlement on the San Juan river. He took an active part in the labor and hardships of that wonderful journey. He started in October, 1879, and was five months on the road, reaching the present site of Bluff, April 6, 1880. The next year (1881) he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as second counselor to Bishop Jens Nielsen, in which capacity he labored for twenty years, and at Bishop Nielsen's death he became Bishop of Bluff. In 1910 he was set apart by Pres. Joseph F. Smith as president of the San Juan Stake. Many years in the early days of Bluff he acted as superintendent of the Ward Sunday school, was secretary of the Y. M. M. I. A. and also acted as Ward clerk.

For fifteen years he served as superintendent of the San Juan Co-op and is still president of a number of corporations. He served San Juan county as representative to the Utah legislature two terms. In the trying and perilous time of redeeming San Juan county from isolation and anarchy he took a leading part, serving five years as the county's first assessor, during which time he often faced grave danger for the sake of law and order. At present he is extensively engaged in farming and stockraising and connected more or less with all the principal industries of the county where he has wielded a telling influence in placing them on a paying basis. He is a man of unwavering integrity and has never faltered in his support of his brethren in the Priesthood. His children from his first marriage are Lula, Lemuel H., Hattie Ellen, Herbert H., Edith, Charles, Marian and Amy. The children by his second marriage are Corlie, Frank, Annie and Amasa J. One of the friends of President Redd says of him: "As a man he is quiet and unpretentious, firm as a rock and humble as a child."
