Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Rich, Benjamin Erastus

Rich, Benjamin Erastus, one of the most successful missionaries of the Church and for many years president of missions, was born Nov. 7, 1855, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Charles C. Rich and Sarah D. Pea. His father was one of the earliest settlers in Salt Lake Valley, arriving there in October, 1847. Ben E. Rich, who is one of his father's fifty-two children, received his education in the schools of Salt Lake City, and was employed as a salesman in the Z. C. M. I. In 1885, at the age of twenty, he removed to Ogden and became manager of the Ogden Equitable Cooperative Store. In 1881-83 he filled a mission to Great Britain and returned in charge of nearly 700 emigrating Saints. He married Diana Farr, Dec. 27, 1877, and entered business for himself in Ogden. He also began activity in the effort being made at the time for statehood for Utah. During the next few years he mingled religion, politics and business in his career, becoming prominent in each. In 1893 he removed to Rexburg, Idaho, with his family. Here he purchased the "Rexburg Press," the name of which he changed to the "Silver Hammer." He had already contributed materially to various Church publications and had achieved success in his literary efforts. He wrote a book "Mr. Durrant of Salt Lake City" which gained great popularity, and later wrote numerous pamphlets and booklets which were distributed quite widely throughout the Church and the world. Later he removed the "Silver Hammer" office to St. Anthony, Idaho. Both in Idaho and Utah he was active in local and national politics. In June, 1898, he was called to take charge of the Southern States Mission, which position he filled until July, 1908, when he was called to the presidency of the Eastern States Mission, a position which he filled until the time of his demise. For nearly twenty years he was continuously engaged in missionary work, hardly sparing time from his labors to make more than business visits to Utah or elsewhere. Throughout the Church and throughout the United States he became known as one of the strong advocates of "Mormonism," and the thousands of Elders who were associated with him in the missionary work esteemed him highly. For eleven years he made his home at Chattanoogo, Tennessee. Qualities of courage, loyalty and independence won for him friends everywhere. He was considered one of the most ardent workers in the Church and one of the most fearless expounders of the gospel of Christ. In his career as a missionary he met and debated with many anti-Mormons of prominence and always left a strong impression upon his hearers. He also underwent various forms of persecution peculiar to the South and always bore it with manliness and patience. During the first fifteen years of his missionary life he enjoyed excellent health. During the last two years or his life he suffered considerably with sickness and finally passed to the great beyond Sept. 13, 1913, in New York. He was survived by his widow, Mrs. Diana R. Rich (who for several years has made her home at Centerville, Utah), and eight children, namely, Ben L. Rich, of Salt Lake City, Dr. Lorin F. Rich of Ogden, Fred Rich of Salt Lake City, Dr. Homer E. Rich of Vernal, Utah, Mrs. Alvin C. Strong of Salt Lake City, Don O'Neil Rich, Mrs. Vivian Watkins of Vernal, and Frank C. Rich of Centerville. His remains were shipped to Salt Lake City where they were interred Sept. 21, 1913. Pres. Joseph F. Smith, in speaking at his funeral said: "In Pres. Ben E. Rich no confidence was ever misplaced. He failed to fulfill no trust, his character stood out bright and clear in the defense of truth, he was fearless of the world and of opposition, he was established in the knowledge of the eternal truth of the gospel, his faith was built on the foundation of assurance and he knew the cause he represented was just and right in the sight of God and before all men. He was a stalwart defender of the faith, a friend of mankind, faithful to duty and capable to perform it."
