Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Richardson, Myron Barber

Richardson, Myron Barber, Bishop of the Ogden Third Ward (North Weber Stake), Utah, was born Feb. 21, 1865, at Ogden, Utah, the son of Ebenezer Clawson Richardson and Phoebe W. Childs. His parents, who were born in the eastern part of New York State, joined the Church during the early persecutions of the Saints, his father being baptized by the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Mississippi river. They emigrated to Utah in 1850 in Capt. Brown's company, and located at Brown's Fort (now Ogden), Utah. Bishop Richardson writes, "I was baptized when nine years of age by John Carver. At fourteen years of age I received the Aaronic Priesthood and was ordained a Deacon by Bishop Pleasant Green Taylor. When seventeen years old I was ordained a Teacher. In April, 1884, I was ordained an Elder by John England at Plain City, and on April 10, 1884, I married Louisa C. Shurtliff, daughter of Pres. Lewis W. Shurtliff of the Weber Stake. I was ordained a Seventy Oct. 1, 1901, and set apart for a mission to the Northwestern States by Jonathan G. Kimball. Arriving in the Mission Oct. 5, 1901, I was assigned to the Portland conference, where I labored until December, 1902, when I was called to preside over the Boise conference. I labored in this capacity until Nov. 10, 1903, when I was released to return home. I enjoyed my [p.216] missionary labors very much and was blessed by the Lord. Upon my return home I moved from Plain City to Ogden, where I made my residence in the Third Ward. Here I was called to act as supervisor of the parents department of the Sunday school, and also labored as a presiding Ward teacher. I have also acted as one of the presidents of the 53rd quorum of Seventy. In 1908 I was chosen first vice president of the Utah State Federation of Labor, and acted in this position for the next three years. During this time I was chosen to represent the laboring class in a labor convention held at Chicago. I served as a member of the Utah State legislature during the ninth session, which met in 1911. In 1911 (Jan.1st) I was ordained a High Priest and set apart by John V. Bluth as second counselor to Bishop Wm. D. Van Dyke of the Ogden Third Ward, North Weber Stake. I held this position until Oct. 12, 1913, when I was called to succeed Elias S. King as first counselor to Bishop Wm. D. Van Dyke Jr.. Bishop Wm. D. Van Dyke died May 22, 1914, and on June 28th I was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the Ogden Third Ward by Apostle Orson F. Whitney, which position I am holding at the present time. The names of my children are: Lewis E., Emily S., Edith A., Irene L. and Myron B. Richardson, Jr. The last named has served as a missionary in the Eastern States Mission. I also have ten grandchildren."
