Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Robinson, Richard Smith

Robinson, Richard Smith, Bishop and Indian missionary, was born Nov. 25, 1830, in Upton, Cheshire, England, the son of Edward Robinson and Mary Smith. He emigrated to America in 1842, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Henry." The company spent six week on the ocean. During the first two weeks the voyage was prosperous, but during the last four weeks the ship was be-calmed. The captain (who was a bachelor), and the leader of the company, Elder John Snyder, did not agree very well. From New Orleans the journey was continued up the Mississippi in a large steamer to St. Louis, Mo., where the company had to remain all winter because of the severity of the weather, and in the spring of 1843 the company proceeded up the river to Nauvoo in the "Maid of Iowa" together with another company of Saints which had crossed the Atlantic in the ship "Sydney." The little steamer, "Maid of Iowa," made three unsuccessful efforts to stem the rapids and at length the passengers were landed, walked up the river past the rapids and then boarded the vessel again. Bro. Robinson remained at Nauvoo, Ill., until the exodus in 1846. His father built a fine brick house immediately east of Nauvoo, and his mother died in that city. After the exodus, in 1846, Bro. Robinson tarried in Iowa till 1849, when he crossed the plains to the Valley, but continued the journey to California the same year, after spending only one week in the Valley. He worked in the mines near Sacramento till 1852, when he returned to the Valley by the Northern route and settled at American Fork, Utah county, where he married, and in 1854 was sent with Jacob Hamblin and about 40 others to Harmony, where he was one of the early settlers. Together with Samuel F. Atwood and Lorenzo W. Roundy he laid most of the rock and adobes of the old fort at Harmony, which was built 200 feet square and two stories high. This fort was subsequently washed away. From Harmony Bro. Robinson removed to Pinto in the fall of 1856. He and the family of Rufus Allen and Amos G. Thornton were the first settlers at Pinto. They built two cellars covered with willows and clay and spent the winter of 1856-57 at the infant settlement, they being the only two families there. The next season other settlers arrived at Pinto and a regular townsite was surveyed. When a branch was organized, Bro. Robinson was chosen as Presiding Elder of the same. Subsequently he was ordained a Bishop. Pinto was originally an Indian missionary resort, and Bro. Robinson also helped to build the stone fort at Santa Clara. Pinto consisted the first winter of its existence of two cellars. When the first California emigrants passed through, having heard of the place and approaching the little settlement in the evening, they saw lights through an opening. They rode up on what they thought was an elevation to look for the light. The elevation proved to be a cellar, and when the horsemen forced their animals up what they thought a hill, a man came running out from the cellar below and begged the intruders not to ride over his house. Bro. Robinson presided at Pinto about twenty years, after which he moved to Upper Kanab, Kane county, Utah, in the spring of 1876 to take charge of the Canaan dairy. He was also placed in charge of the branch of the Church at Upper Kanab and held that position about ten years, until he was called to Lower Kanab to preside as Bishop. Prior to this he was a member of the first High Council of the Kanab Stake. He acted as Bishop of Kanab from 1884 to 1889, and was finally released on account of sickness. He made several missionary trips among the Indians.
