Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Rogers, Thomas

Rogers, Thomas, a faithful Elder in the Church, was born in October, 1827, in Falkirk, Scotland, the son of Archibald Rogers and Isabella Wilson. When about a year old his parents emigrated to Canada, where his father died about 1835. Subsequently his mother married Andrew L. Lamereaux, who was a good father to her children. All becoming converts to "Mormonism," Thomas was baptized by his stepfather in June, 1840, after which the family passed through many of the persecutions and trials of those early days. They moved from Canada to Kirtland, Ohio, and thence to Nauvoo, Ill., prior to the time of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. They became intimately acquainted with the Prophet, and it afforded Thomas a great deal of pleasure in after years to tell of his close associations with Joseph Smith. During the exodus of 1846 the Lamereaux family crossed the Mississippi river, traveled through Iowa and stopped one winter at Winter Quarters. In 1848 Thomas crossed the plains as a teamster in President Brigham Young's company, Andrew Cahoon being the captain of ten. In 1851 (March 27th) Thomas Rogers married Aurelia Spencer, daughter of Orson Spencer and Catherine Curtis, and the newly married couple located permanently at Farmington, Davis county. During the Johnston army troubles, Thomas Rogers served under Lot Smith as a minute man as long as the war lasted. He also exhibited great activity during the time of Indian troubles. In 1858 he participated in the expedition which was sent north to rescue the settlers who had located on Salmon river, the Indians having attached the little colony there. He helped to move the families back to Utah. In 1869-1870 Bro. Rogers filled a mission to Great Britain, where he was very successful as a missionary, but his health failing, he returned home sooner than he expected. Bro. Rogers died Sept. 16, 1896, from the effects of a stroke of paralysis and was buried in the Salt Lake City cemetery.
