Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Rogers, Aurelia Spencer

Rogers, Aurelia Spencer, wife of Thomas Rogers and the "mother" of the Primary Associations in the Church, was born Oct. 4, 1834, in the town of Deep River, Connecticut, the daughter of Orson Spencer and Catherine Curtis. Her father moved from Connecticut to Middlefield, Mass., where he labored as a Baptist minister for many years, but becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he was baptized in 1841 and moved with his family to Nauvoo, Ill., in the summer of 1842. In February, 1346, the family crossed the Mississippi river, starting for the Rocky Mountains, but when 30 miles from Nauvoo, Sister Spencer, mother of Aurelia, died from exposure. Her remains were taken back to Nauvoo for burial. Previous to leaving Nauvoo, Orson Spencer had been called on a mission to Great Britain to edit the "Millennial Star." To fill said mission he left Winter Quarters and six motherless children, all less than thirteen years of age, in a log cabin and in care of James Bullock. The children crossed the plains in Brigham Young's company in 1848. On this journey, in Andrew Cahoon's ten, Sister Aurelia first met her husband, and three years later (March 27, 1851) they were married and soon afterwards located at Farmington. Sister Rogers, as one of the early settlers of Farmington, passed through quite an experience while battling with poverty and famine, owing to the grasshoppers destroying the crops and for other reasons. Stores were few and far between in those early days, and the women had to spin and weave their own cloth, make their own soap and manufacture their own candles and candies, Sister Rogers took part in such public duties as fell to the lot of women. Thus she acted as secretary in the Ward Relief Society for twenty-two years and was the first president of the first Primary Association organized in the Church, the organization being effected at Farmington Aug. 11, 1878. Sister Rogers is the mother of twelve children, eight boys and four girls. At the advanced age of 80 years she made a silk dress for herself, without using glasses. In 1894 she made a trip to the Woman's Suffrage Association convention, held at Atlanta, Georgia, and also visited the Pacific coast. Sister Rogers has had the privilege of entering every Temple the Church has erected up to the present time with the exception of the Kirtland Temple. She is a most remarkable and intelligent woman and is idolized by thousands as one of the genuine mothers in Israel. (See Life Sketches of Orson Spencer and Others, by Aurelia Rogers).
