Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Roskelley, James

Roskelley, James, senior president of the 17th quorum of Seventy and a resident of Smithfield, Cache county, Utah, was born Jan. 10, 1865, at Smithfield, the son of Samuel Roskelley and Rebecca Hendricks. In his young days he passed through several experiences with hostile Indians, and on one occasion an old Indian buck drew a large knife around his throat sufficient to draw blood. In order to help his father to make a living he worked on the farm and drove teams in the canyons, where he had several narrow escapes from sudden death. After receiving a common school education he organized and conducted a high school for one winter, having great success. At the age of fifteen his father left home on a mission to Europe, and one month later his mother died, after which the responsibility fell upon James to take care of his father's large family. Bro. Roskelley was baptized July 12, 1874; ordained a Teacher Feb. 22, 1875, by William A. Noble; ordained a Priest June 6, 1883, by John J. Plowman; ordained an Elder May 20, 1884, by George L. Farrell, and ordained a Seventy May 26, 1884, by Wilford Woodruff. Subsequently (June 10, 1888) he was set apart as a president of the 17th quorum of Seventy and became senior president of that quorum Jan. 30, 1909. In 1884-86 he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring principally in East Tennessee, where he had many thrilling experiences, being mobbed many times and shot at on several occasions. In one of these persecutions, while sitting on a porch of Col. William Green, Lee Valley, Tenn., Aug. 8, 1884, he was shot by a mobber in the left arm. In 1913-1914 he filled a six months' mission to the Northwestern States, laboring principally in Portland, Oregon. Twice he has labored as a home missionary in the Benson Stake and also acted as first assistant in the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Cache Stake. He has been the genealogical society representative of the Benson Stake since August, 1912, was first counselor in the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. in Smithfield, and twice assistant superintendent of the Smithfield Ward Sunday school. He also served two terms as field assessor in Cache county, and as a city councilman of Smithfield. Though principally engaged in farming, he has also been engaged in the lumber business, life insurance business and other vocations. He married Frances Annie Emery (daughter of Henry Emery and Elizabeth Brewerton), born in Salt Lake City, June 13, 1867. This marriage has been blessed with twelve children, namely, Aurelia, James E., Druzilla, Frances Annie, Henry Brewerton, Edith, Elizabeth, Vida, Tabitha, Mary Edna, Katie and Dorris Rhodes.
