Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Scholes, Francis

Scholes, Francis, counselor in the presidency of the High Priests' quorum of the Liberty Stake, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born July 2, 1835, at Leeds, Yorkshire, England, the son of Thomas Scholes and Ann Newton. When about five years old his father died. Notwithstanding the limited educational facilities at that time, Francis was taught to read and write. At an early day he learned the trade of clay pipe manufacturing, which business he followed while in England. In 1856 (Sept. 6th) he married Sarah Jane Fishburn, daughter of Francis Fishburn and Eliza Jeffs. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he was baptized May 29, 1880, by Elder Robert L. Fishburn. In 1881 he was ordained an Elder by James Rydalch and called to assist in the presidency of the Leeds branch. In 1882 he emigrated to Utah, together with his wife and seven children, crossing the Atlantic in the steamship "Nevada," and arrived in Utah May 1, 1882. After residing temporarily at Brigham City, Box Elder county, he removed to Salt Lake City in 1883, and here followed the occupation of teamster and building contractor. Later he became interested in the sheep business, in which he was successful. Retiring from his commercial activities at the age of 60, he devoted practically the remaining fifteen years of his life to Temple work. In 1897 (Nov. 16th) he was set apart as a Temple worker in the Salt Lake Temple, and later was called to labor in the Logan Temple in like capacity. At the organization of the Liberty Stake of Zion he was chosen and set apart as second counselor to President Joseph Keddington of the High Priests' quorum March 24, 1904, which position he held until his death, which occurred July 30, 1910. Elder Scholes was the father of nine children, all born in Leeds, Yorkshire, England, namely, Thomas, Joseph, Ann, Arthur, Walter, Frederick, Francis, Sarah Jane and Caroline. Bro. Scholes was a good man, and a devout and consistent Latter-day Saint.
