Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Scowcroft, John

Scowcroft, John, one of the leading business men of Ogden, was born Dec. 9, 1844, at Tottington, Lancashire, England, the son of James Scowcroft and Hannah Fairbrother. His parents were hand-loom weavers, in comfortable circumstances, and at the age of eight years, having left school, John began working at the same vocation, which he continued until he was fourteen. His boyhood and early manhood were spent in his native village, near the city of Manchester, where he learned the business of confectioner. Always religious, he became a convert to "Mormonism" in 1861, and after his baptism, was a devout and zealous laborer in the ministry. He presided over the Tottington branch of the Church and was the superintendent of its Sunday school. At Hastlingden, in Lancashire, he became a successful wholesale and retail confectioner. Emigrating to America he crossed the Atlantic in the steamship "Wisconsin," which sailed from Liverpool, England, June 5, 1880, bringing with him his wife, Mary Fletcher Scowcroft, his four sons (Joseph, Willard, Heber and Albert), and his daughter (Sarah A.). These, with one other daughter, Florence M., born since their arrival in Utah, made up the sum total of their children. They arrived in Salt Lake City June 23, 1880; the same year they settled in Ogden, where Bro. Scowcroft, after being in the employ of R. P. Harris, commenced business for himself in 1881, establishing a confectionery and bakery and gradually working into general merchandise. Eventually he branched out into the wholesale trade, rounding the splendid institution which now bears his name. For a number of years Elder Scowcroft was one of the presidents of the 75th quorum of Seventy and also superintendent of the Ogden Second Ward Sunday school, the Ward in which he lived. Eventually he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as counselor to Bishop Robert McQuarrie, a position which he held the remainder of his life. In 1890, and again in 1901, he visited England, and while on the latter tour he was stricken with paralysis, which finally proved fatal. He recovered sufficiently to return to Utah, but gradually declined until death relieved him of his sufferings on April 7, 1902, in his beautiful dwelling Lancaster, so named in honor of the county seat of his old English home. The domestic life of Elder Scowroft was as good and happy as his career was prosperous; he charmed every one he met by his cheerful and amiable courtesy; he was a free and generous giver to charity and a willing and a ready promoter of every worthy cause. At his demise he left a widow, four sons and two daughters.
