Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Skidmore, Charles Henry

Skidmore, Charles Henry, Bishop of the Miller Ward, Granite Stake, Salt Lake county, Utah, was born July 23, 1875, in a log cabin built by his father at Richmond, Cache county, Utah. He was the fifth of twelve children of Bishop Wm. L. Skidmore (see Vol. I, p. 403) and Sarah Armina Knapp. He was baptized in the "Big Ditch" at Cherrycreek, August 2, 1883. Later he was ordained a Deacon, Teacher, Seventy and High Priest. From the time he joined the Primary Association as a child he has been an active worker in the Church. In 1895-97 he labored as a traveling Elder, clerk and president of the Sheffield conference in England. At home he has served as a member of the Cache Stake boards of Religion Classes, Mutual Improvement associations and Sunday schools; as teacher in the 119th and 40th quorums of Seventy, and as head teacher of the thelogical department of the B. Y. College. He was ordained a High Priest in January, 1910, at which time he became the youngest member of the High Council of Cache Stake, which position he held until October, 1912, when he moved to Salt Lake City. During the years 1911 and 1912 he also acted as president of the Cache Stake missionary conference, which was organized for the special purpose of preaching the gospel to its resident non-members. In 1912 he was chosen a member of the Granite Stake Sunday School Board, on which he served until Nov. 18, 1914, when he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the Miller Ward, by Francis M. Lyman. He has filled several positions which have called into play unusual ability in organizing and managing business affairs; he was especially noted for his work in pioneering dry farming in Tooele county. He was director, secretary, manager, and finally president of the Rush Valley Farming Company, a corporation. During this time, besides putting farming into operation on a large scale, he surveyed and mapped some 10,000 acres of land. As a student he made his own way through four years of high school, four years of college and two years of post graduate work, the latter being accomplished in the University of Chicago. He was once president of the Alumni Association of the B. Y. College and was for four years a member of the Board of Education of Logan City. As an educator he has spent several years in teaching grades from two to eight, and ten more years in teaching students from the first year high school to the senior year of college work. For nine years he was head professor of mathematics in the B. Y. College. He became superintendent of the Granite School District Oct. 1, 1912, which, omitting Ogden and Salt Lake City, is the largest school system in Utah. He is now a trustee of the Utah Educational Association. He was a Utah delegate to the first dry farmers congress of the United States, which was held at Denver, Colo., and has traveled extensively in the United States and in Europe. For the purpose of getting the best school methods he has visited schools in Massachusetts, New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, Kansas, Colorado and California. On June 3, 1903, he married Louise Wangsgaard (daughter of Christian C. Wangsgaard and Arma Anderson of Huntsville, Utah), born Feb. 29, 1879, at Huntsville, Utah. She was a teacher of the B. Y. College Training School. As a result of this marriage their home has been blessed with the following children: Leone, Demoivre Ray, Irl Stanley, Loraine, Zella and Rex Austin.
