Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Smith, Hyrum

Smith, Hyrum, a Patriarch in the Taylor Stake of Zion, Alberta, Canada, and a resident of the Lethbridge Ward, was born Dec. 15, 1882, at Snowflake, Arizona, a son of the late Pres. Jesse Nathaniel Smith and Emma Larson. Being born and reared in an undeveloped country, Bro. Smith became acquainted with many of the privations incident to pioneer life; he grew up on the farm and at the age of fifteen was doing a man's work and taking a man's responsibility. Being reared by goodly parents, in the fear of the Lord, he received a testimony in regard to the truth of "Mormonism" in his early youth and was baptized by his father Dec. 15, 1890. At the age of thirteen he was ordained a Deacon by Wm. J. Flake and served as secretary of a Deacons quorum two years, and since that time he has been an earnest and active worker in the various quorums of the Priesthood and also in the auxiliary organizations of the Church. He acted as Stake secretary of Y. M. M. I. A. for about two years and at the age of nineteen was called to act as Sunday school superintendent in the Snowflake Ward, which position he held for two and a half years, when he enrolled in the State Normal school of Arizona at Flagstaff. He graduated from that school in 1908. In 1908 (June 10th) he married June Augusta Bushman, daughter of Bishop John Bushman and Lois A. Smith in the Salt Lake Temple. At the present writing Bro. Smith has three children, whose names are Marvin Eugene, Dorothy and Oliver Rollin. He has always taken a lively interest in educational matters; has served as public school trustee and has taught five years in the Church schools, four years in the Snowflake Stake Academy at Snowflake, Arizona, and one year in the Knight Academy at Raymond, Alberta. Since early manhood he has been an advocate of drugless therapy; in 1913 he graduated from the Palmer School of Chiropractic at Davenport, Iowa, and at the present time is following the profession of chiropractor. Bro. Smith was ordained an Elder in the fall of 1902 by Joseph H. Richards; ordained a Seventy May 31, 1908, by John R. Hulet; became a president of the 83rd quorum of Seventy May 16, 1909, and was ordained a High Priest and Patriarch May 24, 1910, by Apostle Francis M. Lyman. At that time he was the youngest ordained Patriarch in the Church, being only 27 years old. In 1914 he moved from Snowflake, Arizona, to Southern Alberta, living first at Raymond, and later moving to the city of Lethbridge, where he now resides.
