Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Smith, Samuel Harrison Barley

Smith, Samuel Harrison Barley, a nephew of the Prophet Joseph Smith, was born August 1, 1838, in Daviess county, Mo., being the only son of Samuel Harrison Smith and Mary Bailey. His father was a brother of the Prophet Joseph Smith and a prominent figure in the early history of the Church. At the time of the younger Samuel's birth the persecutions were raging against the Saints in Missouri, and when the child was only four days old, his mother with her infant and two small children were driven from their homes by a ruthless mob and forced to travel 30 miles through a blinding storm to a place of safety. From this awful ordeal she never recovered, but after a lingering illness died from the effects of exposure, leaving young Samuel motherless at two years of age. After the expulsion from Missouri the boy was taken with his father's family to Illinois, where they remained in and around Nauvoo until after the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum. At that time Samuel H. Smith in attempting to reach Carthage to aid his imprisoned brethren was shot at and pursued several miles by the mob, from which he received internal injuries which resulted in his death a month later, leaving young Samuel an orphan at six years of age. From this time on the boy lived with different relatives, and in 1848 he crossed the plains to the Valley in Pres. Brigham Young's company. Here he shared in all the hardships and privations of early pioneer life. At the age of seventeen Samuel went on a mission to the States and from there was transferred the following year to the British Mission, where he labored until called home in 1858, together with all the other missionaries at the time of the Johnston Army troubles. In 1859 he assisted in opening the lead mines at Minersville, Utah. In 1860 (April 17th) he married Mary Catherine Smith (daughter of Conrad Smith and Ann Elizabeth Geesman) born March 22, 1842, at Quincy, Franklyn county, Pennsylvania. A few days later started on his second mission to England, going in company with his cousin Joseph F. Smith. They remained in Europe three and a half years, meeting with very gratifying success. While there Samuel organized the Leeds conference. After his return to Utah in 1863 he moved to Bear Lake Valley, Idaho, in the spring of 1864, where he assisted in founding the town of St. Charles. He remained there two years and held many responsible positions in that new and growing community. In 1866 Bro. Smith returned to Salt Lake City where he continued his activity in Church work, being engaged in the Endowment House and at the Historian's office for a number of years. In 1870 (May 2nd) he married Julia A. R. Winter, daughter of Bishop Thomas Winter of the Fifth Ward (Salt Lake City), and Julia Restell; she was born Feb. 8, 1854, in Salt Lake City. In 1877 Bro. Smith filled a short mission to California. After his return from that mission he spent the remainder of his life in or near Salt Lake City, where he conducted a large dairy business for many years. He died June 12, 1914, at the age of 75 years, leaving two widows, Mary C. and Julia W., and ten sons: Samuel B., Joseph B., Alvin B., Junius B., Albert W., J. Winter, David W., Newton T., Heman T., and Clarence T.; and six daughters, namely, Florence S., Jenta S., Cumorah S., Ruby K., Sue Blanche, and Grace L. Elder Smith was a great reader and a deep thinker; he took an active part in politics and public affairs and was a staunch defender of the faith. He was a man of large stature and strong athletic appearance, clean in speech and habits and generous to a fault.
