Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Smith, William B.

Smith, William B., one of the early settlers of Kaysville, Davis county, Utah, was born in February, 1814, at Dunton, Bedfordshire, England, the son of John Smith and Lucy Brown. He was baptized in 1841 in England by John Sheffield. His father and mother lived and died in England. William came to America in 1843 and settled in Nauvoo, Hancock county, Ill., where he resided until the Saints were expelled from that place in 1846. He crossed the plains to Utah in 1850 with Capt. Evans and settled at Kaysville, Davis county, where he took up land near the Great Salt Lake. This farm he improved and stocked with cattle and sheep. In October, 1838, he married Ann Barnes, who was born at Sandy, Bedfordshire, England, March 6, 1817, and died at Kaysville in 1871. In 1857 (Jan.10th) Bro. Smith married Isabell Burton, who was born Sept. 17, 1827, at Windsdale, Yorkshire, England. Her father, James Burton, died in England, and the mother with her nine children emigrated to America and crossed the plains in Capt. Mile Andrus's company in 1855. She died in the sixties. Of her nine children, four are still living. By this second marriage Brother Smith had six children, four of whom are still living; this second wife died April 11, 1907, at Kaysville. In his early youth Bro. Smith was ordained to the Priesthood, and being a staunch believer in the principles and doctrines of the Latter-day Saints, he labored faithfully his entire life for the betterment of mankind. He was ordained a High Priest December 9, 1883, by Thomas Steed. During his residence in Kaysville he assisted with team and means several times in making trips to the Missouri river after emigrants, and was also a member of one of the expeditions sent out to meet the hand-cart companies in 1856. During the Johnston Army troubles he served as a military man in Echo canyon and elsewhere, mostly under the command of Lot Smith. He was one of the most active and enterprising citizens of Davis county, generous to a fault and is still widely remembered for his many charitable deeds. He died Oct. 11, 1897, at Kaysville, leaving a large estate for his wife and children. He settled his sons on farms of their own when they grew to manhood, and they are today among the most substantial citizens of Davis county.
