Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Snow, Orrin Henry

Snow, Orrin Henry, second counselor in the Stake presidency of the Taylor Stake, Alberta, Canada, was born April 17, 1869, at Pine Valley, Washington county, Utah, the son of William Snow and Ann Rogers. He was baptized Sept. 23, 1877, by Joseph I. Earl, ordained a Deacon at the age of twelve years by Bishop Frederick W. Jones of Pine valley, Utah, and subsequently held all the offices in the Aaronic Priesthood. He attended the district schools in Pine valley during the winter seasons, working on the farm in the summer, until he was twenty years of age. Then he attended the B. Y. Academy at Provo, the last winter studying under Dr. Karl G. Maeser. His father died when he was ten years of age, and thus early in life Bro. Snow was left principally to his own resources. Having been ordained an Elder by Bishop Wm. Gardner, he filled a mission to the Southern States in 1891-93, laboring first in the North Alabama conference and afterwards presided over that conference. He also spent some time assisting in the presidency of the mission at Chattanooga, Tennessee. After visiting the World's Fair in Chicago he returned home in 1893. At home he has filled many positions in the Church and also held several secular offices. From 1894 to 1896 he acted as county commissioner for Washington county, and he acted as secretary of the 25th quorum of Seventy four years. In 1896 (Sept. 23rd) he married Ella May Burgess in the St. George Temple. This marriage has been blessed with six children, namely, Afton, May, J. Golden, Norma, Orrin Porter and Ann. His wife died May 19, 1908, at Lund, Nevada. In 1900 he removed to Cedar City, Utah, having sold his property in Pine valley, and after spending the winter at school he moved to Lund, Nevada, where he, on August 7, 1902, was chosen as Bishop of the Lund Ward. Subsequently he was ordained a High Priest and Bishop by Pres. Joseph F. Smith. Elder Snow taught school at Lund two years and engaged in a profitable mercantile and farming business. In 1909 (August 2nd) he married Charity Alvira Redd in the Salt Lake Temple and soon afterwards visited Canada. Being favorably impressed with the country he sold his holdings in Nevada and moved to Raymond, Alberta, in the spring of 1910. Soon afterwards he was chosen as a High Councilor in the Taylor Stake, and in May, 1911, chosen to fill the vacancy in the Stake presidency caused by the death of Wm. A. Redd. At Raymond, Elder Snow has been engaged in farming and in the real estate business.
