Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Spilsbury, George

Spilsbury, George, a Patriarch in the St. George Stake of Zion, was born April 21, 1823, at Leigh, Worcestershire, England, the son of Joseph Spilsbury and Hannah Haden. He was baptized Oct. 11, 1840, and labored as a missionary in Wales in 1841-42, baptizing seventeen souls. In 1842 (Sept. 5th) he married Fanny Smith and, together with this wife, emigrated to Nauvoo, Ill., arriving there in May, 1843. He attended the famous meeting called by Sidney Rigdon after the martyrdom of the Prophet and Patriarch and voted for Brigham Young and the Twelve at the conference held August 8, 1844. He was a member of the Nauvoo Legion and Capt. Wm. Pitts' brass band. After participating in the trials and troubles attending the exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo, he finally crossed the plains to the Valley in 1850 and lived in Salt Lake City for nine years; he then moved to Draper, Salt Lake county, where he served as postmaster. In 1862 he was called on a colonization missien to Southern Utah (or Dixie) and located the same fall at Grafton on the Rio Virgen. In 1866 he moved to Rockville for protection against the Indians. Here he became a diligent Sunday school worker. In 1868 he changed his residence to Toquerville where he has resided ever since. The Sunday school at Toquerville immediately claimed his services and he became superintendent of the same in 1871. He was also appointed superintendent of Sunday schools for Kane county, which position he filled for six and a half years until the western part of Kane county was annexed to Washington county; he then labored as second assistant to Miles P. Romney in the Sunday schools of the St. George Stake. Subsequently he became first assistant to A. R. Whitehead. He also labored under Sunday School superintendents Richard Morris and George Q. Miles. He continued as a member of the St. George Sunday School Board until March 16, 1913, laboring in the Sunday school cause over fifty years. For seventeen years he rode on horseback, and after that he wore out three buggies and buckboards, three sets of harness and four horses in the Sunday school cause at his own expense. Altogether he traveled more than thirty thousand miles in the interest of Sunday schools. On the 90th anniversary of his birthday he attended a Sunday school gathering at Hurricane (ten schools being represented), on which occasion he was presented with a costly lap robe, a rocking chair and a memorial. At the age of 93 years, Patriarch Spilsbury is still hale and hearty and enjoys perfect health. He has kept the Word of Wisdom 36 years, and been a member of the Church 76 years. When his son David filled a mission to Great Britain in 1880-82 he obtained upwards of two thousand names of ancestors, for nearly half of whom Patriarch Spilsbury and his daughter Katy have done ordinance work in the St. George Temple.
