Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Steed, Laura Lucinda Reed

Steed, Laura Lucinda Reed, wife of Patriarch Thomas Steed, was born May 22, 1828, near Rome, Ashtabula county, Ohio, the daughter of John Reed and Rebecca Bearce. She was the fourteenth child of a family of sixteen children. The Reeds and Bearces were of New England stock, the Reeds descending from the emigrant Wm. Reed who landed in America in 1636; many of his descendants were prominent as officers in the French and Indian wars and also in the American Revolution for Independence. Sister Steed's parents received the gospel and were baptized in 1830; they remained as staunch supporters of the truth during their lives and assisted in building both the Kirtland and Nauvoo Temples. Her mother in her old age traveled to Salt Lake Valley, a lone widow, with her two youngest children, and was with the company of Saints whose lives were saved by the Lord sending quails to their tent doors after their expulsion from Nauvoo. John Reed was, when he joined the Church, a comparatively wealthy man, owning farms, grist mills, and as much coin as the strongest man was able to lift; yet, because of the mobbings and movings of the Saints, he lost all, and the younger children, including Laura L., had little or no chance for schooling. While residing on Shoal creek in Caldwell county, Mo., where Bro. Reed was building a grist mill and blacksmith shop for Jacob Haun, he had a dream three nights before the Haun's mill massacre took place, in which he saw the creek running red with blood. He took the dream as a warning and at once moved his family away, which saved them from that awful massacre. Sister Laura L. was baptized in 1836 and was with her parents during all their persecutions. She often played at the feet of the Prophet Joseph Smith and was held on his lap on many occasions when he was a guest of the Reed home while hiding from his enemies. She has often told her children of the eventful days of the martyrdom of the Prophet and Patriarch, and how sad the Saints felt on hearing of the occurrence. In 1846 (Dec. 13th) she was married to Thomas Steed, and at the time of their marriage they had less than $30 between them. At once they began to struggle for means to bring themselves to the Valley, and on May 1, 1850, with their few earthly effects loaded in wagons, Sister Steed with a baby only six weeks old in her arms, they started on their way (together with friends) from their home at Keokuk, Iowa. They finally crossed the plains in Capt. Mile Andrus' train, which arrived in Salt Lake City August 29, 1850. The trials, hardships and sufferings which the family underwent on that journey none can tell, only those who under like conditions made the trip. The first winter was spent in and around Salt Lake City, and in February, 1851, the family became permanent settlers on a farm at Farmington. Sister Steed's marriage to Thomas Steed was blessed with fifteen children, namely, John, Charlotte, George Henry, Thomas Joseph, Laura Lucinda, Arthur Albert, Walter William, Laura Lovina, Fannie Louisa, Ira Edwin, Charles Marco, Alice Charlotte, Franklin David, Rose Rebecca and Lee Elonzo. At her marriage Sister Steed was tall and slender, with black hair, dark eyes and rosy cheecks, but later in life she became a large woman, had a commanding appearance, was a great worker and had ability and expertness in cooking, sewing and all kinds of domestic work. Her pride was her family, and "Aunt Laura,' as she was affectionately called, was a "wise councilor, a true and dutiful wife, a loving and kind mother, a sincere friend, a good neighbor, a peace-loving citizen and a true Latter-day Saint." Sister Steed died at Farmington Nov. 22, 1903.
