Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Steed, Thomas Joseph

Steed, Thomas Joseph, a prominent and active Elder in the Church, was born April 3, 1852, at Farmington, Davis county, Utah, the son of Thomas Steed and Laura Lucinda Reed. He was baptized at Farmington by Henry W. Miller June 24, 1860; ordained an Elder March 3, 1873, by John D. T. McAllister; ordained a Seventy by Truman Leonard Feb. 3, 1874, and became a member of the 65th quorum of Seventy; ordained a High Priest and set apart as a High Councilor June 6, 1886, by John Henry Smith in the Davis Stake. During the winter of 1880-81 he visited the Davis, Morgan, Summit and Wasatch Stakes as a special home missionary; acted as president of the Y. M. M. I. A. of Farmington five years; served as first assistant superintendent of the Stake superintendency of Y. M. M. I. A. in the Davis Stake; filled a preaching mission to the States of Wisconsin, Minnesota and Iowa in 1881; served as a Sunday school teacher and a Ward teacher in the Farmington and Clinton Wards for many years; acted as justice of the peace a number of terms; furnished means to advertise the mass meeting which resulted in the incorporation of the Davis and Weber Counties Canal Company, which has built one of the most extensive canal and reservoir systems in Utah. For his services in that connection he is called the father of the enterprise, and he has served the company as superintendent, vice president, president and director. From 1886 to 1913, or until his transfer to the Weber Stake in 1913, Bro. Steed served as a High Councilor in the Davis Stake. He has spent several years as a home missionary. Elder Steed is a man of "big things;" he has opened up and improved as many new farms as any other man in Utah, and is still actively engaged in farming, stock-raising, fruit growing and dealing in real estate. He has been an active Church worker all his days. In 1873 (March 3rd) he married Susannah Davis (daughter of Abraham T. Davis and Matilda Haynes). The issue of this marriage is eleven children, namely, Anna Amy, Wm. Rufus, Walter Ralph, Laura Grace, Ethel P., Fannie Rose, Charles Elmer, Horace, George, Jay and Anson. Bro. Steed is now acting as first counselor in the presidency of the High Priests quorum.
