Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Stevens, David Riley

Stevens, David Riley, a Patriarch in the Millard Stake of Zion and a resident of Holden, Millard county, Utah, was born Nov. 21, 1839, near La Harpe, Hancock county, Illinois, the son of Wm. Stevens and Marinda Thomas. He removed with his parents to Nauvoo while a child and participated with them in the general exodus of the Saints. After spending some time at Council Bluffs on the Missouri river, the family crossed the plains in 1850 and located temporarily at Pleasant Grove, Utah county, Utah, whence they, responding to call from the Church authorities, moved to Fillmore, Millard county, in 1853; later they were among the first settlers of Holden, where they have lived ever since. Bro. Stevens was baptized about June, 1852, by Noah T. Guyman at American Fork, Utah county; was ordained a Seventy in 1859, and married Caroline Felshaw Dec. 24, 1862; she bore her husband fourteen children, namely, Mary Olive, Wm. Riley, Caroline, Marinda Ellen, Daniel, David Felshaw, Lorenzo Milton, Clara Vilate and Clarence Edward (twins), Alma, Marion Roscoe, John Elmer, Hazen F., and Laura. In 1861, responding to call, Bro. Stevens went back to the Missouri river as a Church teamster in Capt. John R. Murdock's train after emigrants. He was ordained a High Priest and Bishop July 22, 1877, by Apostle Erastus Snow and set apart to preside as the first Bishop of Holden, which position he held for thirteen years. In May, 1890, he was set apart as second counselor to Pres. Ira N. Hinckley of the Millard Stake. He labored with Pres. Hinckley until a change in the Stake Presidency took place in May, 1890, when Elder Stevens was ordained a Patriarch (Nov. 24, 1902), by Pres. Joseph F. Smith. Since August 11, 1912, he has been a member of the Millard Stake High Council. Besides being an active Church worker Elder Stevens has taken a most active part in secular matters and has held many positions of honor and responsibility in the interests of his fellow-citizens. From 1882 to 1893 he acted as a commissioner of Millard county. His occupation is that of a farmer and stockraiser.
