Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Stoker, David

Stoker, David, Bishop of East Bountiful, Davis county, Utah, was born Sept. 28, 1844, in Hancock county, Ill., the son of John Stoker and Jane McDaniel. The parents spent their early life in Ohio where they were married, and in 1836 they emigrated to Adams county, Ill., and later settled in Hancock county, in the same State. At the time of the exodus (1846) the family came west as far as Mt. Pisgah, Iowa, where they remained until 1848, when they fitted out ox teams preparatory to crossing the plains to Utah, which they did that year in Pres. Brigham Young's train, arriving in Salt Lake City Sept. 23, 1848. The first winter was spent in the Old Fort, and in the spring of 1849 they located at Bountiful, which at that time was sparsely settled and in a wild state. Here David received his education and, became earlier in life a faithful worker in the Church. In 1866 (March 3rd) he married Miss Regena Hogan, daughter of Erick G. M. Hogan and Harriet Nesteby. Bishop Stoker's whole life was spent in Bountiful, where he assisted in transforming the country from a wild and barren waste to its present prosperous condition. His home was considered one of the finest of its size in the locality. In 1892-1894 he filled a mission to the Northern States. During the Indian troubles in Utah he served in the militia organized to protect the settlers and was in the Black Hawk war for 81 days. After presiding a number of years over the Elders quorum at Bountiful, he was ordained a Seventy and still later a High Priest and chosen as first counselor to Bishop Chester Call. This position he held till Jan. 19, 1896, when he was ordained a Bishop by Lorenzo Snow and set apart to preside over the East Bountiful Ward. He also served as county commissioner and probate judge of Davis county, and served two terms in the Utah Territorial legislature. Respected and beloved by his people he died April 1, 1911, at his home at Bountiful.
