Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Strong, Alice F. Bury Walsh

Strong, Alice F. Bury Walsh, wife of Jacob Strong, was born April 16, 1829, at Over Darwen, Lancashire, England, the daughter of Edmund Bury and Jane Fish. She joined the Church at Over Darwen at the age of sixteen (being the only member of her father's family who became thus converted), and emigrated to Utah in 1856, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Horizon," together with her husband Wm. Walsh and three children (Robert, John and Sarah), the latter a babe six months old. From Boston, Mass., the company traveled to Iowa, where they waited six weeks for hand-carts, but finally started out for the Valley in Capt. Edward Martin's hand-cart company. Her son Robert died on the journey across the plains, and Sister Walsh and her family suffered in common with the other emigrants who crossed the plains and mountains with hand-carts that memorable year. On the journey Sister Walsh was one of three couples to occupy one tent, and nine children under eight years of age occupied the same tent. Her husband (Wm. Walsh) died at Devils Gate. The ground was frozen so hard the morning he died that the brethren could not dig a grave, so they buried him under the snow. Nine others died the same night. Thus Sister Walsh was left a widow to care for her two remaining children, the boy so weak that he could not stand alone. Sister Walsh writes: "My shoes froze to my feet, and later, when I was able to remove them, the skin and flesh came off too, leaving only the bones. My hands were also severely frozen. At last help came from the Valley, and when all were ready to start I was sitting in the snow with both my children on my lap. There seemed to be no place for me, but just before the company started, it was decided that I should ride in the commissary wagon, which I did during the whole journey. Joseph B. Alvord, the young man with whom I rode, understood frontier life and helped me with my children the best he could. We arrived in Salt Lake City Nov. 30, 1856. Here I found myself in a strange land, not knowing anyone and possessing nothing but the clothes I stood in, my spare clothes being cached at Devils Gate. I have not seen them since. A number of emigrants being allotted to each Ward, I was taken to the Tenth Ward in Salt Lake City to live in the home of Jacob Strong, whom I afterwards married." During the "general move" south in 1858, Sister Strong and family went as far as Springville, Utah county, but returned to Salt Lake City the same year. She became the mother of three children by her second husband, namely, Lucinda, Wm. J. and Alma E.) When one of these children were born, Sister Strong was living in a log cabin with dirt roof, through which the water poured into the cabin, making the room extremely wet and cold. Sister Strong learned to spin and weave cloth for her family and became very useful in that avocation. She passed through the famine caused by the ravages of the grasshoppers and otherwise participated with her husband and the other pioneers in all the hardships incident to pioneer life. Sister Strong is still (1916) alive, 87 years of age, and rejoices in the gospel of Jesus Christ.
