Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Swift, Sarah Walsh

Swift, Sarah Walsh, president of the Daughters of the Hand-cart Pioneers, was born Nov. 19, 1855, at Over Darwen, Lancashire, England, the daughter of Wm. Walsh and Alice F. B. Walsh (Strong). When six months old she sailed for America with her parents, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Horizon," and the plains in Capt. Edward Martin's hand-cart company, which arrived in Salt Lake City Nov. 30, 1856. On the journey her father and her oldest brother (Robert) died. Sister Sarah found a home in the house of Jacob Strong, who afterwards became her step-father. The family moved to Springville at the time of the move in 1858. After their return to Salt Lake City, Sister Sarah learned to knit stockings for the family, and had but small opportunities for schooling or play. She writes: "We all had to work hard to earn a living in those early days; my mother often worked all day to earn one yard of factory, as it was then called, costing one dollar per yard. We went to live on a farm in Emigration canyon for a short time. There we kept some sheep, and as they ran through the oak brush they often left pieces of their wool which I, as a little girl, gathered up with great care to make bats for quilts for which my mother did the carding. We used to strip sugar cane and glean wheat, which my stepfather threshed out with a flail. We also gathered the milk weed pods to make pillows. When twelve years old I learned to spin yarn and soon became so much of an expert at that work that I could spin my three skeins of yarn a day. At the age of fifteen years I was called to labor in the Relief Society, and frequently visited the families on my block together with an older lady, helping to carry what was given to us. We received flour or anything the people would contribute for the poor. When the Female Retrenchment Society was organized in the Tenth Ward, Salt Lake City, I was chosen one of the counselors, and in 1874 I also commenced to labor in the Sunday school. In 1877 (June 6th) I was married to William Swift, who died Sept. 16, 1884, and I was left a widow with three children, including a pair of twins, five weeks old. In 1898 I was chosen as second counselor in the Ward Relief Society, occupying that position until November, 1906." From April 23, 1907, to Oct. 23, 1915, Sister Swift labored as a Stake Relief Society missionary in the Liberty Stake. Since 1910 she has been an active member of the Utah Hand-cart Pioneers' Association and is now president of the Daughters of the Hand-cart Pioneers.
