Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Swenson, Swen L.

Swenson, Swen L., Bishop of the Pleasant Grove First Ward (Alpine Stake), Utah county, Utah, was born Feb. 17, 1865, at Pleasant Grove, the son of Canute Swenson (Knud Svendsen) and Hannah Maria Hanson. He was baptized August 31, 1873, by Wm. West; ordained a Deacon when thirteen years of age and ordained a Priest later. From his early childhood he worked on a farm during the summers and attended the district school and the B. Y. Academy at Provo in the winters. When 21 years of age, he began work in the Pleasant Grove Co-op store as a clerk. After obtaining more schooling at the Brigham Young Academy at Provo, he entered into the mercantile business with Thorne Brothers and Company and was elected treasurer of Pleasant Grove City and subsequently collector. He was ordained a Seventy July 10, 1890, by John J. Hayes and married Susan E. Brown May 22, 1895, in the Salt Lake Temple. In September, 1895, he left on a mission to the Southern States, where he labored principally in Mississippi and Louisiana, part of the time as president of the Louisiana conference. He returned home in July, 1897; was ordained a High Priest and set apart as second counselor to Bishop Joseph E. Thorne August 19, 1897, by Edward Partridge; was elected mayor of Pleasant Grove City Nov. 3, 1897, and subsequently served as councilman. He was ordained a Bishop by Apostle Mathias F. Cowley Jan. 25, 1903, and set apart to preside over the Pleasant Grove Ward. Two weeks later the splendid Ward meeting house was burned to the ground, and under his direction the erection of the Pleasant Grove Tabernacle was commenced the following spring. When Pleasant Grove was divided into three Wards May 16, 1909, he was chosen as Bishop of the Pleasant Grove Second Ward. Bishop Swenson has been connected with the bank of Pleasant Grove for many years as assistant cashier, and was elected mayor of Pleasant Grove a second time Nov. 3, 1915. He is the father of four children, namely, Dorothy, Russell B., Helen and Elizabeth.
