Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Teeples, William Randolph

Teeples, William Randolph, a counselor in the bishopric of the Pima Ward, Graham county, Arizona, was born June 7, 1834, at Huron, Huron county, Michigan, the son of Geo. Bentley Teeples and Hulda Colby. His parents joined the Church and he went with them, about 1843, to Nauvoo, Ill., where William was baptized by Elder Zenos H. Gurley. He remembered Joseph and Hyrum Smith, though only ten years old when they were killed. He emigrated to Utah in 1848 with his parents, crossing the plains in Heber C. Kimball's company, and drove an ox team across the plains for Mary Smith, mother of Pres. Jos. P. Smith. Together with his parents he became one of the first settlers of Provo, Utah county. He married Catherine Chamberlain in 1866 and the only child by this marriage was Sarah Elizabeth. In 1859 (August 21st) he married Harriet B. Cook, daughter of Bishop Phineas W. Cook and Ann E. Howland (also pioneers of 1848). She was born at Richland, Kalamazoo county, Michigan, Oct. 28, 1844. The children by this marriage were Harriet Rita, Beatrice, Ann Eliza, Wm. George, Alonzo R., Phebe Henrietta, David Wolcott, Alice Aurelia and Eunice Rosalia. Bro. Teeples married Caroline Ann Scofield in October, 1868; she was the daughter of John and Margaret Scofield of Sunderland, England, was born Nov. 3, 1851, at Sunderland, and came to Utah about 1859. This marriage was blessed with seven children, namely, Phineas Henry, John Albert, Chas. Welcome, James, Sidney Lee, Caroline Hulda and Margaret Ellen. Bro. Teeples learned the blacksmith trade when a young man, participated in the early Indian wars in Utah, served in the Echo canyon campaign during the Johnston Army troubles, assisted in starting the cotton industry in Southern Utah, made a trip to California in 1858-59, moved to Salem, Utah county, and afterwards to Provo, continually working at his trade. He was one of the first pioneers of Bear Lake valley, Idaho, in 1863, built a small log house at Paris and went to Montpelier as a pioneer settler of that place in May, 1864. In 1865 he moved to Holden, Millard county, Utah, where he followed blacksmithing and farming until 1879, when he was called to Arizona, where he became the first Mormon pioneer in the Gila valley. He had been instructed to go there and find a place that suited him. Raising a company of ten men (only four families), he settled with them at a place now known as Pima, Graham county, on the south side of the Gila river, near the foot of Mt. Graham. At a conference held Sept. 25, 1892, he was ordained a High Priest by Lot Smith and set apart as a Bishop's counselor. He put forth all his energy in building up that part of the country and died June 5, 1883, at Pima, 49 years of age. Bro. Teeples was generous to a fault and would give his last dollar for the benefit of the community in which he lived.
