Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Terry, James Parshall

Terry, James Parshall, a Patriarch in the Church and a resident of Hinckley, Millard county, Utah, was born Jan. 1, 1830, at Albion, Home District, Upper Canada, the son of Parshall Terry and Hannah Terry. In 1838 he removed with his father's family to Missouri, whence the family with the rest of the Saints were driven out under the exterminating order of Gov. Lilburn W. Boggs. The Terry family settled temporarily in Pike county, Ill., where young James P. was baptized in June, 1840, by Wm. Allred. In the summer of 1843 the family moved to Nauvoo, Ill., where they resided until 1846, when they became participants in the general exodus of the Saints. His father lost nearly everything he owned during the drivings and stopped for a time at Carterville on Mosquito creek, Iowa. While stopping temporarily at Winter Quarters, James P. was ordained an Elder. The family migrated to Great Salt Lake Valley in 1849, arriving there Oct. 15th. Bro. Terry was ordained a Seventy by John Pack March 4, 1855, and became a member of the 8th quorum of Seventy. In 1856 (Nov. 2rid) he married Mary Richards (daughter of John and Agnes Hill Richards) who subsequently bore her husband eleven children. Subsequently he married Sarah K. Lemons, a widow, by whom he had one child (a boy). After living with him about three years she asked for and obtained a bill of divorce. In 1862 Bro. Terry moved to Southern Utah with his family, arriving at Rockville Jan. 13, 1863. The following year he was commissioned as a captain of militia in the Iron Military District. In 1877 (May 6th) he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as first counselor to Bishop Chas. N. Smith in the Rockville Ward, which position he held until March 22, 1891. He acted as school trustee about fourteen years in the Rockville school district, and was also road supervisor about the same length of time. For two or three years he held the office of selectman in Washington county. In 1887-88 he filled a mission to Canada and the United States. On his way home, April 20, 1888, as he was traveling between Toquerville and Virgen City on foot, he was overtaken by deputy U. S. marshals and arrested on a charge of unlawful cohabitation. After examination at Silver Reef he was placed under $1500 bonds to appear at Beaver May 11, 1888. On his appearance in court on that day the Prosecution failed to make out a case against him and he was consequently discharged. In 1902 (Feb. 24th) Elder Terry was ordained a Patriarch by Apostle Mathias F. Cowley, and since 1899 he has been a resident of Hinckley, Millard county, Utah. Bro. Terry has ever been a faithful and consistent Latter-day Saint, ever on hand to defend the principles of the gospel and to labor in any capacity in which the authorities of the Church have asked him to labor. As an aged man he still enjoys good health and is generally beloved and respected by all who know him. He is the father of twelve children and has at the present time a numerous posterity. His wife, Mary, died May 17, 1902, at Hinckley, Millard county, after doing a great deal of ordinance work for the dead in the St. George Temple; in this vicarious labor her daughter and others assisted her.
