Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Thomson, George

Thomson, George, an active Elder in the Church, was born March 1, 1830, at Thornhill, Perthshire, Scotland, the son of Moses Thomson and Janet Steele. When George was seventeen years old he became a convert to "Mormonism," being the first of his father's family to embrace the gospel. An older brother became so enraged because of his baptism that he held him by force while his mother whipped him. John Sharp, afterwards Bishop of the 20th Ward, Salt Lake City, was baptized at the same time. George commenced working in the coal pits when eighteen years of age. At the age of 21 he took a year's savings and sent it to Liverpool to secure his passage to America. He crossed the Atlantic in the ship "Ellen," which arrived at New Orleans March 14, 1851. A friend paid his passage to St. Louis, Mo., and a sister gave him five dollars more to pay his passage up the Missouri river to Council Bluffs. Here he engaged with Joshua Grant to drive a freight team across the plains. He traveled with eleven other men and a young woman (Joan Bee) who did the cooking for the company. After his arrival in Utah he located in the Sessions settlement (now Bountiful) and married Joan Bee (his traveling companion across the plains) in 1853. He then returned to Kanesville, Iowa, somewhat disappointed with the treatment he had received from some of his brethren in Utah. After remaining one year in Iowa, he concluded that Zion was after all the best place for him, and consequently returned to the body of the Church, and has been steadfast as a faithful Church member till the present day (now in 1916 being 86 years old). In 1865 he participated in the Echo canyon expedition and at the time of "the move" took his family to Payson. In 1860 he removed from Bountiful to Richmond, Cache county, being one of the founders of that place. Here he passed through all the experiences and hardships connected with the founding of a new settlement. In 1861 he married Alice Tomlinson and enjoyed his honeymoon trip traveling with an ox team from Salt Lake City to Cache valley. His first wife had no children, but his second wife bore him eight children, namely, Margaret, George M., Alice J., Richard, Agnes L., Joseph R., Isabelle and Mary. In 1866 Bro. Thomson married a plural wife, Maria Crosley, who bore him two children, John and Thomas. He was ordained an Elder in 1860 by John Bair and later ordained a High Priest. In 1860 he assisted Apostle Ezra T. Benson to build a house. As a military man he took a prominent part in guarding the settlers against Indians. For many years he served the public as a water master and road supervisor. Apostle Marriner W. Merrill gave him credit for organizing the best system of water distribution in Cache county. His wife Alice died in 1897, and in 1898 he established a home on River Heights and worked in the Logan Temple, doing ordinance work for about one thousand of his dead kindred. In 1915 he moved back to Richmond, where he still resides and is a man of robust health and strong physique.
