Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Tippets, John Harvey

Tippets, John Harvey, a member of the Mormon Battalion, was born Sept. 5, 1810, at Wittingham, Rockingham county, New Hampshire, the son of John Tippets and Abigail Pierce. In March, 1832, he heard of the Book of Mormon and walked fifteen miles to see it. Becoming converted to "Mormonism" he was baptized in the fall of the same year. In the fall of 1834 he first met the Prophet Joseph Smith, and from that time till the Saints were driven from Missouri he was with them and became subject to all the trials and tribulations of his people. He witnessed the betrayal of Joseph Smith and others by Geo. M. Hinkle at Far West, Mo., in 1838, went to Nauvoo in 1844, and shared in the persecutions there until driven out by the mob. He was in Pres. Brigham Young's company when the call for the Mormon Battalion was made, and enlisted in Company D (Capt. Nelson Higgins) and marched with a part of the battalion to Pueblo. On the 23rd of December, 1846, in company with Thos. Woolsey, he started from Pueblo to carry money, mail and dispatches to the Saints at Winter Quarters, taking with them their guns, four days' provisions and two mules. After enduring untold hardships of hunger and cold, they reached Winter Quarters in 52 days. On the trip they were taken prisoners by Pawnee Indians and came very near being burned at the stake. Soon afterwards they were met by some friendly Omaha Indians, who directed them to their journey's end. In the spring of 1847 Elder Tippets joined the pioneers and traveled with them as far as Laramie; thence he went toward Pueblo and joined his company, with which he then made his way to Salt Lake Valley, where he arrived in July, 1847. He returned to Winter Quarters the same year for his family, and arrived in the Valley with his family Sept. 24, 1843. He located in Salt Lake City. In 1856 he was called on a mission to England and when he returned to Utah in 1858 on account of the Johnston Army troubles he found the Saints had moved south. In 1863 he moved to Farmington, Davis county, where he resided until his death. In 1878 he was ordained a Patriarch. For several years he suffered much through sickness, but bore his affliction with the utmost patience. Sometime before his death he became aware that he could not live much longer and so expressed himself, but his mind was clear to the last, and he died in full faith in the gospel at his residence in Farmington, Feb. 14, 1890, of dropsy. During his life Patriarch Tippets married three wives, by whom he became the father of ten children. His first wife, Jane Abigail Smith, bore him two children; his second wife, Caroline Hawkins, bore him two, and his third wife, Eleanor Wise, six children.
