Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Turner, Charles

Turner, Charles, a Patriarch and Bishop of South Morgan Ward (Morgan Stake), Morgan county, Utah, was born in the year 1827, at Learnington Spa, Warwickshire, England. He received his early education in England. When five years of age his parents moved to Ryton, in the same shire. At the age of 23 he became a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and shortly after his baptism was ordained a Priest. He labored in the Coventry branch of the Church for seven years, and was ordained an Elder in 1854. He traveled for three years as a missionary in England and Scotland, and was for seventeen months president of the Dundee conference. In 1861 he became imbued with a desire to come to America, and in April of that year took passage on the ship "Underwriter," a sailing vessel, landing in New York. He went to Florence, whence he made the trip across the plains by ox teams, arriving in Salt Lake City Sept. 15, 1861. After remaining in the city seven weeks he went to the Weber valley, locating on what is now the site of Morgan City. During the two years following he worked at whatever he could obtain to make a livelihood. At the end of this time he engaged in brick making, manufacturing the brick from the native clay, and furnished the first brick in Morgan City; many of the houses now in use were built from these brick. He also burnt the native lime stone and engaged in this business for over thirty years, still retaining his farm, which he operated in a small way. From 1896 he gave his time more particularly to farming and ranching. He built a fine home in Morgan City in 1888, and also built a house for his oldest son. He also purchased a house in Morgan which he gave to his second son. In 1861 (Dec. 8th) he married Miss Elizabeth Wilkens, who died Feb. 26, 1865, leaving one child which died later. Bro. Turner married Miss Annie Bosch Oct. 14, 1865; she is still living and is the mother of thirteen children, of whom eleven are living. In 1872 Bro. Turner married Hannah Jones, who died May 26, 1914, after bearing him six children. In 1918 he had 14 living children and 44 grand-children. He was identified with most of the public enterprises of Morgan City. Before the admission of Utah into the Union he served for two terms as selectman of Morgan county, and was largely instrumental in building up the community in which he lived. Some time after his arrival in Utah he was ordained a High Priest and presided over the North Morgan district before the Morgan Stake was organized, and at the time of the organization of said Stake in 1877 he was ordained a Bishop by Apostle Loenzo Snow and set apart to preside over the South Morgan Ward. After acting as Bishop thirty years he was ordained a Patriarch July 10, 1906, by Charles W. Penrose. He died Oct. 23, 1910, at Morgan, Utah, beloved and respected.
