Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Wells, Samuel H.

Wells, Samuel H., second counselor in the presidency of the Moapa Stake of Zion, Clark county, Nevada, was born at St. George, Utah, April 18, 1871, the son of Stephen Robert Wells and Annie Thorne. He was baptized April 18, 1879, by his father; was ordained a Deacon when twelve years old and subsequently a Teacher; became a member of Wm. H. Thompson's brass band when thirteen years old, and continued with that band for fifteen years. He also became a member of the St. George Stake choir when sixteen years old and sang in said choir for fifteen years. His father died July 26, 1889. He was ordained a Seventy by B. H. Roberts June 15, 1891, and became a member of the 29th quorum of Seventy. The same year he joined the Home Dramatic Company of St. George. In October, 1891, he went to Cedar City, Iron county, and learned the blacksmith's trade with Bishop Wm. Coray. Here he remained two years and became a member of the Cedar City tabernacle choir and president of the Cedar City Home Dramatic Company. In 1894-96 he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring principally in Texas. He was eminently successful as a missionary; assisted in organizing two branches of the Church and was whipped by a mob near Honey Grove, Texas. After his return home he became second assistant superintendent of the St. George Stake Sunday school. In December, 1897, he was appointed to labor as a Y. M. M. I. A. missionary in Beaver and Iron counties. He married Mary Louisa Woolley June 27, 1898; she was the oldest daughter of Judge Edwin G. Woolley and Lavina Bentley. In 1900 he assisted in organizing auxiliary organizations in the White Pine Ward, Nevada, and he was ordained a High Priest June 14, 1901, by Apostle Abraham O. Woodruff and set apart as an alternate member of the St. George Stake High Council. On account of poor health he took his family to Salt Lake City in October, 1902, and attended the L. D. S. University for two years. In 1894 he went to Moapa and proceeded down the Muddy valley, where he purchased land. On a subsequent visit to Salt Lake City, he reported to the First Presidency the opportunities of making settlements in the Muddy valley and that a railroad was being built through that country. The following October he moved his family, consisting of wife and three children, to the Moapa or Muddy valley, locating on the Bowman ranch, about one and a half miles above St. Joseph, or Logan, as it is now called. The following February (1895) he bought 520 acres of land at St. Thomas, which he subsequently sold, except 90 acres. Elder Wells shipped the first carload of cantaloupes, watermelons and onions ever shipped out of the Moapa valley the same year. Conditions in the valley at that time were rather unsatisfactory, as a few non-Mormons had taken possession of the best land, and they were opposed to the Latter-day Saints settling there, but Elder Wells took the matter up with the First Presidency, and the Church purchased 2,600 acres of land for $25,000. Subsequently Bro. Wells got ahead of some California capitalists in securing the surplus water of the Muddy river for irrigation purposes. When Clark county was organized from a part of Lincoln county, February, 1909, Bro. Wells was appointed one of the county commissioners; that year he promoted the Moapa Valley Telephone Company, and a line was built 25 miles in length at a cost of $4,500; Elder Wells was made president of the company. Subsequently he used his influence with the San Pedro, Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad for the building of a branch line down the valley; the road was built and completed in June, 1912. When the Moapa Stake of Zion was organized June 9, 1912, Bro. Wells was chosen as second counselor to Pres. Willard L. Jones, which position he still holds. In 1914 he became manager of the Nevada Land and Livestock Company for the Church. Seven children have been born to him.
