Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Wilson, George Deliverance

Wilson, George Deliverance, a Mormon Battalion veteran, was born Dec. 28, 1807, at Shelburn, Chittendon, Vermont, the son of Deliverance Wilson and Levina Fairchild. On account of ill health he commenced to travel when a young man, and hearing of the restored gospel, he came to Kirtland, Ohio, to investigate. The Prophet Joseph Smith, during an interview, gave him a Book of Mormon. He asked how he could find out if it were true and was answered, "Read it, and if you are not satisfied with it, read it again." The reading resulted in his conversion to "Mormonism." Being a mechanic, he spent the winter of 1837-38 at Kirtland, working in the shop, repairing wagons for the brethren who were moving from Ohio to Missouri. He followed the Church to Missouri and Illinois. In 1842 he married Mary Ellen Johnson, who became the mother of two sons and died in 1845. During the exodus from Nauvoo and the journey of the Saints westward, Bro. Wilson enlisted in the Mormon Battalion, but on account of sickness in the company was sent back with Wm. W. Willis's company to winter at Pueblo. He arrived in Salt Lake Valley in July, 1847; later he located at Santaquin, Utah county, Utah, where he married Martha Ann Risto in 1856. Afterwards he moved to Sanpete county, still later to Sevier county, and afterwards he located in Millard county. In all of these places he built saw mills. He also passed through the troubles connected with the Black Hawk Indian war. In 1867 he went to the Muddy as a colonization missionary, and after his release from there, settled at Panguitch. He built a saw mill at Hillsdale, where he resided until his death, which occurred October 18, 1887. Bro. Wilson was ordained a High Priest June 23, 1887, by Mahonri M. Steele, having previously held the office of a Seventy. He was the father of thirteen children. His children by his first wife were David Johnson and George Jacob. Those by his second wife were Mary Johnson, George Hyrum, Martha Ann, James William, Joseph Deliverance, Jesse Stephen, Levina Emeline, David Israel, John Thomas, Sarah Ann and Almera.
