Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Bowen, Joseph Leonard

Bowen, Joseph Leonard, a pioneer of Utah and Idaho, was born July 5, 1837, about nine miles from Kirtland, Ohio. His parents had joined the Church about three months after its organization. His father died when he was only nine years old, leaving his mother homeless with a large family traveling on the road between Kirtland and the "Mormon" settlements in Missouri. The family passed through some terrible experiences and hardships before they again were able to cast their lot with the Saints in the gathering places. In 1849 Joseph came West with his mother and first settled at Ogden, Weber county, Utah. Here he helped to build the two first forts erected at that place, namely, the so-called Farr fort and Mound fort. In the spring of 1855 he was called on the Salmon River Mission, and though only eighteen years old, he took the part of a man in every way. He acted as one of the guards on this mission and had some very hot skirmishes with the Indians. He remained in that part of the country three years, or until the mission was abandoned in 1858. While on Salmon river, he assisted in making the first irrigation ditch and the first grist mill built in Idaho. In 1858, after his return from the North, he participated in the general move South, and on his return became one of the early settlers of Cache valley in 1860. The Indians being very troublesome, he was called by Apostle Ezra T. Benson, with 49 others, to act as a minute man under the command of Col. Thos. E. Hicks to guard the lives and property of the settlers. After acting in this capacity in Cache valley a few years, he was called to go to Bear Lake valley by Apostle Benson for the same purpose, leaving his young wife, whom he had recently married, and he did not see her again for two years. In Bear Lake valley he helped to build the first house and established a large farm. He also opencd up a number of the canyons in that part of the country. Bro. Bowen spent the better part of his life in doing good to others. He died in the Beaver Ward, Box Elder county, Utah, May 30, 1910, leaving a large posterity. Two wives and five children had preceded him to the great beyond.
