Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Woolley, Henry

Woolley, Henry, a veteran Elder in the Kaysville Ward, Davis county, Utah, was born Oct. 29, 1820, at Dunston, Staffordshire, England, the son of William and Jane Woolley. He emigrated to America in 1844, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Fanny," which sailed from Liverpool, England, Jan. 23, 1844, and arrived at New Orleans March 7, 1844. After spending a few months at St. Louis, Mo., he proceeded up the Mississippi river to Nauvoo, Ill., where on May 12, 1845, he married Mary Stretten Blood (widow of William Blood). During the exodus, Bro. Woolley came west, and while encamped on the east side of the Missouri river, near the present Council Bluffs, preparing to emigrate to the Valley in the spring of 1848, Pres. Brigham Young requested him to lend his teams to others who were anxious to emigrate to the Valley that year and that he himself might remain in the States a little longer. Complying with the President's wish, Bro. Woolley spent another winter in the East and finally emigrated to the Valley in 1849, crossing the plains in Allan Taylor's company, which arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 13, 1849. After residing in Mill Creek until the fall of 1850, he moved his family to Holmes' creek (now in Kaysville), being one of the first settlers in that neighborhood. He took up a farm, upon which he immediately commenced to make improvements and soon became known as a successful farmer. In 1856 he participated in the expeditions that went East to rescue the hand-cart emigrants. In 1857 he participated in the Echo canyon campaign against Johnston's army. In the spring of 1858 he was sent to Salmon river (now in Idaho) to assist the Saints who had settled there (but had been attacked by Indians) to return to Utah. Later, during the same year, he participated in the general move south, going as far as Provo, Utah county. After his return he remained a permanent settler at Kaysville until Oct. 10, 1898, when he died, leaving three children and many grandchildren.
