Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Woolley, John Wickersham

Woolley, John Wickersham, a Patriarch in the South Davis Stake and a resident of Centerville, Davis county, Utah, was born Dec. 30, 1831, at New Lynn township, Chester county, Pennsylvania, the son of Edwin D. Woolley and Mary Wickersham. He came to the Valley in September, 1848, after crossing the plains in Pres. Brigham Young's company, and after residing in the Ninth and subsequently the Thirteenth Ward, Salt Lake City, he settled at Centerville, Davis county, Utah, in 1864. He was ordained a Priest by Bishop Edward Hunter; subsequently he was ordained an Elder and later ordained a High Priest by Pres. Brigham Young and set apart as second counselor to Bishop Edwin D. Woolley. Soon after this he was set apart as one of the High Councilors in the Davis Stake, and finally ordained a Patriarch June 28, 1913. Besides being active as a Churchman, Bro. Woolley has held many positions of a civil nature in the community; thus he acted as constable of Salt Lake county and as justice of the peace at Centerville precinct sixteen years; acted as deputy sheriff of Salt Lake county, deputy territorial marshal, county commissioner and lieutenant, captain, sergeant and major in the Nauvoo Legion; participated in the Black Hawk war, and was one of the first ten which crossed the Little Mountain to meet Johnston's army in 1857. He was also among the first to meet the hand-cart companies in 1856. He made one trip as far as Ice Springs on the Sweetwater to help the emigrants and two other shorter trips. In 1860 he went back as an assistant in Capt. Joseph W. Young's Church company. In 1863 he was captain of a Church train bringing emigrants across the plains. Bro. Woolley married three wives, namely, Julia Sirls Ensign, March 20, 1851 (who became the mother of six children), Ann Everington, Oct. 4, 1886, and Annie Fisher, March 23, 1910. The names of his children are John E., Franklin L., Lorin C., Julia A., Mary E., and Amy I.
