Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Wright, Jonathan Calkins

Wright, Jonathan Calkins, a prominent Elder in the Church, was born Nov. 29, 1808, at Rome, Oneida county, New York, the son of Peter Bice Wright and Elizabeth Shrad. When six years old he removed with his parents to Dearborn county, Indiana. His father died when the lad was only fourteen years of age, after which he moved to Illinois. While working hard for a livelihood he also struggled to obtain an education and succeeded in getting something better than a common school education. In 1838 (March 1st) he married Miss Rebecca Wheeler and settled at Exeter, Scott county, Ill., where he gained much respect and influence on account of his intelligence and ability and by leading an upright life. He was entrusted with the office of county commissioner and other positions. Being a devoted member of the Methodist persuation, he was solicited by many of its members to enter the ministry, but he felt unsettled and troubled in his mind in relation to which one among the numerous conflicting sects had the true gospel of Christ. After seeking the Lord in fervent prayer, he went to Nauvoo, Ill., where he met the Prophet Joseph Smith and became firmly convinced that he was an inspired man of God. He obtained some of the Church works at the office of the "Nauvoo Neighbor," where he also met Elders John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Elias Smith and others. While he felt it was his duty to embrace the gospel, he started for home without being baptized and was struck down with a severe sickness, as if death were upon him. This happened after he left Nauvoo, when he decided to turn back. He soon found himself back in the house of Hyrum Smith, being fully convinced that in "the waters of Jordan" there was healing to be found for body and soul. He proceeded to the banks of the Mississippi river and was baptized and confirmed by Hyrum Smith. After being ordained an Elder May 29, 1843, he returned to his home in Exeter a happy man, but he soon bade farewell to that place to dwell among his brethren at Nauvoo, where he lived and shared with the Saints in their joys, sorrows and persecutions until the exodus in 1846. After the death of Bro. John P. Greene he acted as marshal of Nauvoo and was a member of the city council at the time that the Illinois legislature annulled the charter of the city of Nauvoo. As an officer at Nauvoo and Winter Quarters he was vigilant, enduring, brave and fearless, and wielded a strong arm in defense of his people against mobs and tyrants. He was sent from Winter Quarters back to Nauvoo and other places to encourage the remaining Saints to follow in the wake of the main body of the Church to a safe asylum in the Rocky Mountains. He came to Utah in 1850 to continue a long and useful career, mostly in Box Elder county, where he located in 1854, and officiated as a counselor to Apostle Lorenzo Snow in the presidency of the Stake as well as president of the High Council of the Stake. From the first organization of Box Elder county he held positions as judge of probate, clerk, attorney, superintendent of schools, county recorder, and was also an active member of the Utah legislature twenty-two sessions. He was a wise counselor and a warm and firm friend to the weak and lowly and a lover of righteousness and truth. He died at Brigham City, Nov. 8, 1880, of inflammation of the lungs and general debility. His last days were full of suffering and affliction. Bro. Wright left a large family and a host of friends to mourn his loss. During his life Bro. Wright married at different times seven wives (one of them, Sister North, being sealed to him), by whom he became the father of 34 children, 24 sons and 10 daughters.
