Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Anderson, David Ballantyne

Anderson, David Ballantyne, a promising member of the Church, who died in his youth, was born Jan. 30, 1887, in Ogden, Weber county, Utah, the son of Edward H. Anderson and Jane Ballantyne. He was baptized when about eight years old and took an active part in Church matters from the beginning. He attended the Madison grade school, beginning the day after he was eight years of age, and graduated from the Webster school, Salt Lake City, on January 31, 1902. He then took a three years' course in the preparatory school of the University of Utah, beginning that fall, at which time also he decided to study medicine. Finishing his preparatory school work in 1905, he became a student in the college for three years. During one of these years he assisted in medical work at the Latter-day Saints Hospital, staying there at night, thus helping to earn his way through college. In 1908 he entered the University of Chicago, studying in the Medical College, and at the same time taking regular college work. He graduated with the degree of B. S. in June, 1910. The following autumn he entered by examination the sophomore year of the medical course in the Johns Hopkins University. Here he studied three years, graduating with honor as M. D., in June, 1913, being the second Utah student to graduate from the medical school of that great institution. That summer he took charge of the Mrs. Robert Garrett Children's Hospital, at Mt. Airy, near Baltimore. He also went to New York and took examinations as interne in Mt. Sinai Hospital, and was one of the eight chosen from about ninety applicants. During his vacation in 1912, he went to California with the medical staff of the National Guard of Utah. In September, 1913, he passed the Utah state medical examination, and was employed by Dr. F. E. Straup for the remaining months of that year, doing good service in his profession at Bingham. He loved his work passionately and on one occasion stated: "I cannot understand why all men are not doctors." On December 27, 1913, he left for New York, entering upon his course in Mt. Sinai on the first day of January, 1914, where his respectful and modest demeanor gained the good-will and friendship of all, including many leading physicians. While on a vacation he was accidentally drowned in Lake George, New York (near Bolton), May 27, 1915. He had served as an interne in the Mt. Sinai Hospital, New York, for nearly eighteen months out of his term of thirty months and had been granted a two-weeks' vacation. Together with his companion, Dr. Morris Kush (who was also drowned with him), he sailed up the Hudson river to Albany, May 22, 1915, arriving at Lake George and walking to Bolton the next day. His brother Hugo, while unsuccessfully dragging Lake George for his body, wrote to his parents in Salt Lake City, Utah: "I shall do all in my power, but if I cannot succeed, then you should take consolation in the fact that he lies in as beautiful a spot as could be found-out in the nature he so dearly loved." The House Staff, of which he was a member, wrote to his parents: "Not alone have you lost a dear, good and respectful son, but we have lost a staunch, honorable and kindly friend. Professionally, David possessed marked talent which he always exhibited in a quiet, unassuming manner. We feel that a great future would have been in store for him." Some splendid tributes were paid him at the memorial services held at the hospital synagogue on June 4, 1915, which hundreds of friends attended. Dr. Anderson dearly loved nature, and from early boyhood spent his summer vacations in the Wasatch or the Uintahs. Scarcely a spot from Nebo to Bear Lake, or from Timpanogas to Leidy Peak, and where the Green River sweeps around the eastern Uintahs, that he had not explored, camping in the woods and fishing in the lakes. As avocations, he delighted in music and photography. During his grade and University of Utah years he took active part in ward affairs, in M. I. A., Sunday School, and Lesser Priesthood quorum work. During his whole educational career one of the greatest pleasures that came to his life was the opportunity to explain to his associates, in his unassuming way, the beliefs and ideals of his people and the Gospel teachings learned from his parents and in Sunday school, mutual and other organizations of the Church. He lived in conformity with these, his life being an everyday sermon to his associates, the most effective kind of preaching in all the world. In this way he performed a lasting work among a class of educated men whom it is difficult to reach in the ordinary way, although he was not privileged to fill a formal mission. While studying in the University, he with his brother passed three summers fencing and cultivating, as pioneers in that district, with good success, a forty-acre farm on the Sand Ridge in Weber county. He often wrote that the physical strength that came to him in this work carried him in health through the strenuous years of mental toil in his professional study. Always David rendered to his family and friends (and he had friends in nearly every state in the Union), cheerful, helpful and loving service. Besides the geniality of his nature, he possessed a keen sense of dry humor which, added to his general affability enabled him to make friends of nearly all with whom he came in contact. His hopes, desires, plans, and ambitions were to come home to continue the efficient service which his high scholastic attainments had fully equipped him to render to the people in the valleys and mountains of his beloved Utah. The characteristics of his nature were hard work, perseverance, clean morals, cheerfulness and efficiency. His was indeed a beautiful life.
