Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Anderson, Christian

Anderson, Christian, a prominent Norwegian missionary, was born May 12, 1833, at Vestra Toten, Norway, the son of Anders Petersen and Gunnil Knudsen. The parents were extremely poor, and so his childhood and young boyhood brought him much privation. Christian, however, was of a studious nature, and he managed to acquire a fair education through the crude school of those days and his own studying. He testified that early in his life there came to him a testimony that "some great things" would come to him in the future. The boy's vision reached to the time when the restored gospel would be brought to him, and its glorious light would shine into his soul. As a youth Mr. Anderson went to Christiania, where he worked at various trades until at least he became apprenticed to a painter, which business he largely followed all his life. In 1856 he married Petronelle Nielsen of Aker, near Christiania. The children of this union were Carl, Rachel, Richard, Nephi, Gunda, and Peter, all born in or near Christiania. Early in his married life the gospel was brought to him by the Elders and Saints in Christiania. He said the hearing of it brought a "battle with myself and my surroundings"; but the right conquered, and he was baptised Nov. 22, 1858. He soon became an able and enthusiastic advocate of the truth. The same year he was ordained an Elder and appointed to preside over a district of the Christiania branch of the Church. In March, 1860, he was appointed to preside over the Aker branch, a suburb of Christiania, where, in his humble home, "Malerstuen," the Saints, for a long time, held their meetings. On Oct. 22, 1861, he was released from presiding over this branch and appointed a mission to the interior of Norway. He left the 28th of the month and spent three and a half months walking over the snow-clad hills and valleys of his native land, preaching the gospel. He reached Trondhjem on the north coast and then wended his way back to Christiania, where he was again appointed to preside over the Aker branch. In the fall of 1863 he was called on another mission to the interior of Norway. At this time the Elders were persecuted considerably for preaching. Elder Anderson was ar rested and confined for eight days in Hamer jail, awaiting a hearing. At the hearing he was released on conditions that he would not administer any of the ordinances of the gospel. He was fined $15 and costs. After remaining in the locality until he had worked off this fine, he returned to his home. He had hardly got well started in his work again before an order came from the court that he was to serve a term of six days on bread and water because he had baptized persons for the remission of their sins. He served this sentence. This expression is found in his diary at this time: "I now find myself here, and under the circumstances, quite satisfied, because the Lord strengthens me both in body and in spirit." In May, 1868, Elder Anderson was appointed to preside temporarily over the large and prosperous Christiania branch. In December the appointment was made permanent. Peter Brown was president of the conference which included the whole of Norway. Elder Anderson soon became one of the most eloquent expounders of the gospel. The presiding brethren of the mission and conference now decided to build a conference home and hall in Christiania. Plans were made and the building erected, at Osterhausgade 27, which for many years was one of the finest mission houses of the Church. It was dedicated July 23, 1871. Among the prominent Elders present might be mentioned Wm. W. Cluff, president of the Scandinavian mission; Peter Brown, president of the Christiania conference; Martin Christoffersen, Olof J. Andersen, Halvor H. Berg, Jens C. A. Weibye, and others. This occasion, with all that pertained to it, must have marked a high tide in Elder Anderson's life. Elder Anderson with his family left Christiania for Utah, Oct. 10, 1871. They located at Coalville, Utah, where Bro. Anderson filled the office of High Counselor of the Summit Stake, until he moved to Wilson Ward, just west of Ogden, in the fall of 1879. In the fall of 1884 he was called on a mission to Norway. He arrived in Christiania Nov. 7, 1884, where he was appointed traveling Elder in the conference. Because of ill health he could not remain long, so he was released Oct. 16, 1885, to return home. During the latter years of his life he lived in Ogden, Utah, following his occupation of painting. His wife died in Ogden Feb. 8, 1903 Elder Anderson died in Salt Lake City while attending the general conference of the Church, April 9, 1906.
