Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Anderson Nephi

Anderson Nephi, author, editor and a member of the general board of the Y. M. M. I. A. of the Latter-day Saints, was born Jan. 22, 1865, in Christiania, Norway, the son of Christian Anderson and Petronelle Nielsen. He emigrated to Utah with his parents in the fall of 1871. The family lived at Coalville, Utah, until 1879, when they moved to Wilson, just west of Ogden. As a boy he worked with his father and brothers at farming and at painting and paper hanging, his father's trade. He married in the Logan Temple, Dec. 22, 1886, Asenath Tillotson, daughter of Ephraim Tillotson and Ruth Collinston. The children of this wife are, Ronella, Gerald, and Laurine. Bro. Anderson taught school in Ogden in 1886-1890, and moved to Brigham City in 1890, where he continued to teach. In August, 1891, he went on a mission to Norway, returning in October, 1893. After his return to Utah he continued teaching in Brigham, being county superintendent of schools from 1900 to 1903. His wife died Jan. 26, 1904, and in March, 1904, he left Brigham on a mission to Great Britain, having been called to labor in the Liverpool office, under the presidency of President Heber J. Grant as assistant editor of the "Millenial Star." During this mission he was privileged to visit most of the European countries, including a brief visit to Scandinavia and his native Norway. He returned to Utah in September, 1906, but soon afterwards moved to Salt Lake City where he served as an instructor in the Latter-day Saints' University for three years. Besides his classes in English, he had charge of the missionary department, both day and evening classes. In 1908 (June 24th) he married in the Salt Lake Temple, Maud Rebecca Symons, daughter of Charles W. Symons and Arzella Whittaker. The children from this marriage are (1919) Dean S., Ruth A., Grant S., Harald S. and Charles S. In July, 1909, he was called to independence, in Missouri, to take charge of the editorial department of the "Liahona, The Elders Journal," to which city he moved with his family. In September, 1910, he was recalled to Salt Lake City to edit the recently founded "Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine," and to labor for the interest of the Genealogical Society of Utah, which at the present writing (November, 1919 ) is his occupation. Elder Anderson's educational advantages have been the district school, the early-day high school at Ogden under Prof. T. B. Lewis, and a number of short terms at the University of Utah. This has been enriched largely by personal study of books and men and things in his varied experiences. In the Church he has held the office of Deacon, Seventy and High Priest, being ordained to the latter Priesthood under the hands of President Joseph F. Smith, on the occasion of his appointment to the superintendency of the Young Men's Mutual Associations of Box Elder Stake, Jan. 14, 1900. In his younger days he held many positions in the auxiliary organizations of the Church. While living in Brigham City he was also for some time president of the Scandinavian organization, Stake clerk, and a president of the 58th quorum of Seventy. While in Salt Lake City, he has occupied the positions of High Councilor in the Liberty Stake of Zion, member of the general committee on Courses of Study for the Priesthood, member of the General Board of Mutual Improvement Association, etc. In these committees he has frequently assisted in preparing manuals and outlines for lesson work. Besides performing these Church duties and his daily labor to obtain a livelihood, he has found time to contribute largely to the literature of the Church in the form of doctrine articles, essays, and stories. These for many years have been published in the Church magazines, and are too numerous to mention here. Elder Anderson makes no secret of the fact that besides telling as good a story as he can, his main purpose is to teach the principles of the gospel as revealed to the Church and the world through the Prophet Joseph Smith. This gospel, he claims, is the biggest thing in the world, and deserves the best in literature that can be given it. His ambition in this line is to present to the understanding of all, to high and low, the beautiful principles of the gospel, and present them in a form that will appeal to the heart as well as to the understanding. Up to the present, his larger literary works, and those published in book form are as follows: "Al mina." published in the Contributor in 1890; "Beyond the Arctic Circle" (Contributor, 1894); "Added Upon," 1896; "A Daughter of the North," first published in the "Juvenile Instructor,'' in 1896, and later revised and issued as a book; "Marcus King, Mormon," in the "Juvenile Instructor," in 1897, and later in book form; "A Young Folks History of the Church," 1898; "The Castle Builder," 1902, in the "Improvement Era" and in book form; "Piney Ridge Cottage," in the "Juvenile Instructor" and in book, 1912; "Story of Chester Lawrence," 1913; "John St. John," 1917; "Romance of a Missionary" in the "Improvement Era," in 1908, and as a book in 1919. "Added Upon," which aims to present in a simple, concrete form the basic principles of "Mormonism," explaining the why, the whence, and the whither of man, has become quite firmly established in the hearts of all Latter-day Saints. Since its first publication in 1896, seven editions of the book have been issued. It has the distinction of being the first book' published within the Church dealing with a great gospel theme in story form. All of Elder Anderson's books have met with favor and are continued to be read by one generation after another.
