Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Ashton, Elias Conway

Ashton, Elias Conway, a member of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board, was born Feb. 16, 1880, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Edward T. Ashton and Effie W. Morris. He was baptized March 5, 1888, by Wm. L. Binder, and became a diligent Church worker in his early youth, being ordained to different positions in the holy Priesthood. After having received a common school education in the public schools of Salt Lake City he attended the L. D. S. University, and for more than two years studied in the economics and commerce department of the University of Chicago. Subsequently he studied in the law department of that institution for three years, being graduated in 1907 with the degree of L. L. B. cum laude. He was admitted to the bar of the Supreme Court of Utah in 1907 and later practiced in the U. S. courts of Utah, Idaho and Montana. For six months Bro. Ashton practiced law with Stephen L. Richards and subsequently formed partnership with others. He was also associated with the late Gen. Richard W. Young and Ashby Snow in the practice of law and was a member of the State Legislature in 1909. He was instructor in the University of Utah law department for five years, became a member of the American and Utah Bar Associations, and a member of the American Judicature Society and from 1912 to 1914 he was a member of the examining committee of the Utah Bar Association. In 1899 ( July 14th ) Bro. Ashton was ordained a Seventy by Apostle Geo. Teasdale and in 1899-1901 he filled a mission to the Western States with headquarters at Denver, Colorado. While residing in the 15th Ward, Salt Lake City, he was always engaged in Church activities. In 1915 he was chosen as a member of the Deseret Sunday School Union board and as such traveled extensively in different parts of the country in the interest of Sunday School work. While examining the Utah Apex mine at Bingham, Salt Lake county, Oct. 14, 1919, he was caught in a collision between an ore train and the electric car in which he was riding and he died as a result of this accident a few hours afterwards. On Sept. 17, 1908, he married Rosabel Hall (daughter of Professor Mosiah Hall and Rose Walton), who with four children (two boys and two girls) survive him. Elder Ashton was noted as a brilliant speaker and a good reasoner, giving special attention to his activities in the Church. In every respect he was an exemplary young man, whose pure and consistent life might with propriety be copied by others. He was stricken down in the prime of manhood when a long and useful career seemed to await him.
