Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Balle, Christian Thomsen

Balle, Christian Thomsen, Bishop of the Fremont Ward (Wayne Stake), Wayne county, Utah, was born in Aalborg, Denmark, Nov. 22, 1849, the son of Jens Thomsen Balle and Inger Kirstine Pedersen. Together with his parents he left his Aalborg home in December, 1853, for America and arrived in Salt Lake City, Utah, in the fall of 1854. After residing in Salt Lake City until April, 1860, he moved with his parents to Ephraim, Sanpete county, Utah, where he herded cows and helped his father on the farm. When the Black Hawk war broke out in 1865 he was enrolled in Peter Isaksen's infantry company, but was soon afterwards transferred to Lewis Larsen's cavalry company. In a skirmish with the Indians, July 7, 1867, west of Ephraim, his horse was shot under him. He was finally discharged from military service Nov. 1, 1867. After first being ordained a Deacon in the early 60's he was ordained an Elder June 5, 1876, by John Smith and on the same day married Emma Eugenie Thustrup. This marriage was subsequently blessed with eleven children, namely: Eugenie, James C., William A., Emma R., Myrtle E., Homer Leroy, Evalena, Leo Royal, Pearl J., Flossie B. and Lillian O. His wife had taught school in Ephraim for some time previous to her marriage. Bro. Balle moved to Mayfield in 1877 and was ordained a Seventy March 1, 1885, by Frederik J. Christiansen; he acted as president of the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. in Mayfield five years and as counselor in the same organization two years. In July, 1886, he was called on a mission to Scandinavia, during which he labored in the Aalborg conference, part of the time as president of the Frederikshavn branch. He returned on account of sickness in 1887. In the hope of improving his health he removed with his family to Fremont, Piute ( now Wayne) county, where he labored as a Ward teacher and as a home missionary for a number of years, and also as president of the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. He was chosen as a president of a quorum of Seventy in August, 1891, and ordained a High Priest May 30, 1897, by Francis M. Lyman. For two years he labored as a local missionary in the WayneStake, making a house-to-house visit among the Saints, preaching the Gospel and ascertaining the general condition of the Saints. He also acted as second assistant superintendent of the Sunday school. For a period of ten years he served as a forest ranger and supervisor on the Fish Lake Forest Reserve. From April 29, to Jan. 13, 1907, he served as first counselor to Hiett B. Maxfield, Bishop of the Fremont Ward. On the latter day he was chosen as Bishop of said Ward and ordained to that office May 10, 1907, by Apostle Orson F. Whitney. He served in that capacity until August 2, 1919, when he was honorably released. Bishop Balle is universally known for his honesty, integrity and fidelity to the work of the Lord. He is a farmer and stock raiser by avocation.
