Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Balle, Emma Eugenie Thustrup

Balle, Emma Eugenie Thustrup, wife of Bishop Christian Thomsen Balle, was born Sept. 15, 1854, in Store Lindet, Lolland, Denmark, the daughter of Jens Christian Thustrup and Anne Marie Nielsen. She attended a country school until June, 1868, and, becoming a convert to "Mormonism," was baptized in June, 1864, by Ole H. Berg. Her father had died Sept. 17, 1855, and her mother had become a convert to "Mormonism" some time afterwards. Emma emigrated to Utah, together with her mother and brother, in 1868, crossing the Atlantic Ocean in a sailing vessel and the plains with ox teams. She located temporarily in Provo, where she was treated with much kindness by the family of Ole H. Berg. After attending the district school at Provo she studied in the Timpanogas University, after which she taught school in the family of Jens Hansen in Spanish Fork. Later she taught school in Salem, Utah county, and afterwards in Ephraim, Sanpete county. After her marriage she continued school teaching for a short time and then moved to Mayfield with her husband in June, 1877, where she continued school teaching. In Mayfield she acted as secretary of the Ward Relief Society and of the Ward Y. L. M. I. A. In April, 1889, the family moved to Fremont, Wayne county, where Sister Balle was chosen as president of the Ward Primary Association in 1890 and served in that capacity until October, 1899. From 1891 to January, 1896, she served as secretary of the Fremont Relief Society, a member of the Wayne Stake Board of Primary Association and as secretary of the School Board of Education. In September, 1907, she was appointed postmaster of Fremont, which position she still holds (1919). She was set apart as clerk of the Fremont Ward May 10, 1907, and still holds that position. Sister Balle has been a Sunday school teacher for over forty years and is now the teacher of the theological class in the Fremont Ward. She is the mother of eleven children.
