Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Ballif, Serge Fredrick

Ballif, Serge Fredrick, President of the Cache Stake of Zion, was born Sept. 23, 1859, at Ogden, Utah, the son of Serge Louis Ballif and Elise Lacoultre. He came to Logan, Utah, with his parents as an infant and has resided in that city ever since. Here he received a common school education and then attended the University of Deseret in Salt Lake City, presided over by Dr. John R. Park. Bro. Ballif was baptized when about eight years of age and ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Teacher, Priest and Elder. He presided over the Y. M. M. I. A. in the Logan Fourth Ward for a number of years, after which he acted as Stake president of Y. M. M. I. A. in the Cache Stake. In 1890-1893 he filled a mission to Switzerland, during which he presided part of the time over the French conference comprising the branches of Neuchatel, Lausanne and Geneva. After returning from this mission he was ordained a Seventy by Christian D. Fjeldsted and later was chosen as a president of the 64th quorum of Seventy. Later he filled a second mission to Europe, during which he first labored in Belgium, where he presided over the Liege conference thirteen months, and was then called to preside over the Swiss and German mission, succeeding Hugh J. Cannon. He held that important position about five and a half years and part of the time his family was with him. He returned home in 1909, being succeeded in the presidency of the mission by Thomas E. McKay. During his presidency the Book of Mormon was reprinted in the German language, and a number of other books and pamphlets (Church publications) were published in the German and French languages. He petitioned through the American Consul at Berne for religious freedom, or permission to preach the gospel in Switzerland unmolested by the authorities. At the time of his release he left 50,000 francs in the bank at Zurich in the interest of the mission after paying the fares of the Elders home and publishing all the books and pamphlets mentioned. The German books were printed in Leipsie and the French books in Geneva. After his return from this mission Bro. Ballif engaged in business in Portland, Oregon, but was called back to Utah by the Church authorities in 1911 to preside over the Cache Stake of Zion, succeeding Isaac Smith. In 1885 (July 29th) he married Zelnora Eliza Angell (daughter of Truman Osborne Angell) in the Logan Temple. This marriage has been blessed with six children, namely: Hazel, Frederick, Leonard H., Zelnora, Rachel and Evelyn.
