Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Berry, William Shanks

Berry, William Shanks, one of the martyrs of the Church, was born Feb. 9 1838, in Dresden, Weekly county, Tennessee, the son of Jesse Berry and Amelia Shanks. Four of his grandfathers-that is, his two grandfathers, his great-grandfather and his grandmother's second husband, his step-father-were Revolutionary soldiers and fought to establish freedom upon the American continent. His father served his country as a soldier in the war of 1812 and re-enlisted in 1814. Bro. Berry, the martyr, joined the Church in his youth and came to Utah with his mother in 1844. In April, 1884, he was called on a mission to the Southern States, and while holding a meeting in Lewis county, Tennessee, Aug. 10, 1884, together with others, he was assaulted by a mob of twenty-five masked men. Two local brethren, who attempted to defend the Elders, were instantly killed and two of the Elders, namely, William S. Berry and John Henry Gibbs, shared the same fate. The following account of the massacre was published in the "Millennial Star," Vol. 46, page 570: "Elders John H. Gibbs, Wm. S. Berry and Wm. H. Jones had met at the house of James Condor, on Cane Creek, Lewis county, Tennessee, that Sabbath morning for the purpose of holding religious service. They had been there but a short time when a body of masked men rode up to the house and fired at the Elders, instantly killing Elders Gibbs and Berry and wounding Mrs. Condor. Martin Condor was then shot and killed, and his half-brother, James R. Hutson, after shooting one of the assassins, met the same fate. Elder Jones, seeing that the only chance to save his life was by running to the woods, fled, followed and fired at by some of the mob, but escaped unhurt. Elder Henry Thompson, who was found by the mob at the house of Mr. Garrett, near by, also managed to escape to the woods, where he remained without food or water for thirty-six hours, after which he was conducted by Mr. Garrett to Shady Grove. The bodies of the murdered men were buried, but those of Elders Gibbs and Berry were subsequently taken up and sent to Utah, where, at last accounts, they were expected to arrive on the 22nd ult. The remains of Elder Gibbs were to be sent to Paradise, Cache county, where his family resides, and those of Elder Berry were to go to Kanarra, Iron county, his late residence. President Joseph F. Smith, in the absence of Presidents Taylor and Cannon, who were on a preaching tour in Idaho, published a request that memorial services over the sorrowful event should be held in the various Stakes of Zion on Sunday, Aug. 24th. The notice closed with a recommendation that moderation and the patience of the Gospel be observed in all these ceremonies, rendering honor and regret to the slain, and remembering that our mission is not to wreak vengeance on the ungodly, but to preach peace on earth and goodwill to all men.'" Thus it will be seen that Elder Berry was killed in his native State, one which his forefathers had helped to settle in the beginning. They were among the first whites to settle in that country and were compelled to build their hog pens adjoining their houses in order to protect the inmates of the former from the bears which attacked them unless guarded with great care. Bro. Berry left a family of thirteen children, the youngest of whom he never saw, it having been born after the father's departure upon his mission. The oldest boy was about nine years of age and the youngest about three months old when the father was murdered. The martyred Elder was known as one of the very best of men; he was just, conscientious, industrious, and affectionate, and died as he had lived, in the service of his Master, and passed away to meet the martyr's reward. The following was published in the "Millennial Star," Vol. 26, page 587: "It was rather a hazardous undertaking to go to Cane Creek after the bodies of Elders Berry and Gibbs. Elder W. E. Robison, on learning that the Elders had been attacked in that region, disguised himself and proceeded thither immediately, in the hope of being able to render them some assistance (as he had not learned the particulars of the affair, and was not aware that the Elders were killed ). Before he arrived at the Condor farm, he met two men who were guarding the road, and on entering into conversation with them, learned that they were two of the assassins. They were evidently expecting the arrival of Elder B. H. Roberts after the bodies of the murdered Elders, and were prepared to waylay and kill him. Elder Roberts subsequently disguised himself and proceeded by another route to the Condor farm, where, with the assistance of some of the local Saints, he disinterred the bodies, placed them in metallic coffins, and conveyed them safely away. Elder Robison accompanied the bodies to Utah, where they arrived on the 22nd ult. Thousands of people assembled at the various railway stations as the bodies were transported through the Territory-that of Elder Berry southward towards Kanarra, and that of Elder Gibbs northward to Cache county-to manifest their honor for the noble martyrs and profound sorrow over their shocking death. Bands of music were also in attendance, playing solemn airs. No vindictive or revengeful feelings were manifested by the Saints, but the sentiment expressed on every hand was, that though the officers of the law should fail to bring the murderers to justice, that Being should be relied upon to do so who has said 'Vengeance is mine; I will repay.'"
