Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Biesinger, Thomas

Biesinger, Thomas, a prominent Elder in the Church and a successful missionary, was born Dec. 20, 1844, at Wiesenstetten, Wurtemberg, Germany, the son of Joseph Biesinget and Maria Josepha Maier. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism" he was baptized July 27, 1862, in Lake Constanz, by Joseph Zollig, Emigrating to America in 1865, he crossed the Atlantic in the sailing vessel "Belle Wood" and the plains as a teamster in a merchant train, donating his wages toward the transportation of poor Saints. He arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 8, 1865, and resided successively in Lehi and Fairfield, Utah county. In 1874 ( March 9th ) he was ordained an Elder. He was appointed superintendent of the Fairfield Sunday school June 27, 1875, and later of the Cedar Valley Ward Sunday school, including Cedar Fort and Fairfield; was also head teacher in the Ward. He was ordained a Seventy May 14, 1876; was appointed in September, 1875, to rebaptize the Saints in Fairfield into the United Order; acted as presiding teacher in Fairfield and superintendent of the Sunday school until he moved to Lehi in 1880. While a resident of Fairfield he also acted as school trustee in Fairfield and carried the mail from Lehi to Ophir two years. In October, 1883, he was called on a mission to Austria. After his arrival in Vienna, Nov. 25, 1883, he labored three months with Elder Paul E. B. Hammer and baptized three persons. He then went to Prague, Bohemia, where he was arrested March 25, 1884, and after a preliminary hearing he was confined in the State prison for 38 days. He was then tried and sentenced to serve 30 more days in prison. After his release from prison he labored a short time in Switzerland, where he presided over the Berner conference from August to December, 1884. In December, 1884, he was called by Apostle John Henry Smith to make a second attempt to do missionary work in Austria and Hungary, but his name being known to the police authorities throughout the empire and the newspapers having given him considerable unsolicited advertising, he was forced to leave Austria again after a sojourn there of three months. At that time several Elders were banished from Bavaria, which left the Saints in Nurenberg and Mun chen in a disorganized condition, and Elder Biesinger wes sent there to reorganize the branches and set things in order generally. In this work he was eminently successful, notwithstanding the efforts on the part of police authorities to hinder him in his labors. At length he was summoned before the authorities and ordered to leave Bavaria in twenty-four hours. On this occasion he had a splendid opportunity to bear his testimony before the chief magistrate and others. Soon afterwards he was released from his mission and on returning home, together with sixteen other returning Elders and 324 emigrating Saints, he was placed in charge of the Swiss and Germain Saints and also acted as a counselor to Elder John W. Thornley, the president of the company, which arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 14, 1885. After his return to Utah, Elder Biesinger took charge of Beck's Hot Springs, near Salt Lake City, and for six months managed Solomon Bros.' restaurant. In September, 1887, he went to Europe on a business trip, expecting to return in a few months, but President George Teasdale appointed him to labor as a missionary in Switzerland, where he presided over the East Swiss conference until December, 1888, after which he labored for a short time in Berlin, Germany. In 1889 he was released to return home, crossing the Atlantic in the steamship "Wyoming," together with 359 emigrating Saints and 18 returning Elders; at this time he again had charge of the Swiss and German Saints and was also counselor to Lars S. Anderson, president of the company. They arrived in Salt Lake City June 26, 1889, Since his return from that mission Bro. Biesinger has been engaged in merchandizing, mining, insurance and optical business, etc. In a Church capacity he is at present a Ward teacher, a Sunday school teacher, has been a Ward representative of the Genealogical Society during the past three years and now labors as a special missionary and ordinance worker in the Salt Lake Temple. Bro. Biesinger had three wives, namely, Caroline Hartkorn and Elizabeth Kroph, whom he married March 9, 1874, and Louise Markham, to whom he was married in 1886. His first wife was a widow with small children to whom he became a guardian. There were no children by this marriage. His second wife, Elizabeth, bore him seven children and his third wife, Louise, six children.
