Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Blackburn, William

Blackburn, William, a faithful Elder and Church worker, was born in Manchester, England, Feb. 5, 1857, the son of Samuel Blackburn and Sarah S. Lamb. His parents having embraced the fullness of the gospel in 1844, William was also baptized as a convert to "Mormonism" March 28, 1868, and became a diligent worker for the Church. He was ordained an Elder July 20, 1876, and appointed to preside over the Burnley and Rawtenstall branches of the Liverpool conference, which position he held until he emigrated to Utah, in May, 1883. After residing temporarily in South Bountiful, Davis county, he moved to Eagle Rock (now Idaho Falls), Idaho, in 1884. Here he took an active part among the Saints, a branch of the Church being organized there about that time. He attended meetings and Sunday schools in private houses and assisted materially in the erection of the first Latter-day Saint meeting house, which was built in Eagle Rock in the summer of 1885. He also acted as an assistant to the first superintendent of the Eagle Rock Sunday school. Later he acted as regular assistant superintendent of the Sunday school and also as clerk of the branch. Still later he was appointed presiding Elder of the Eagle Rock branch, succeeding John D. Evans in that position. Bro. Blackburn also paid the first tithing that was ever contributed to the Church from the Eagle Rock branch which in the beginning constituted a part of the Lewisville Ward. In June, 1885, Bro. Blackburn re-baptized 61 members of the Church who by this means became identified with the Eagle Rock branch. He moved part of his family to Lewisville, where he built a small log house and entered 160 acres of land as a homestead, but having yielded obedience to the higher law of marriage, Bro. Blackburn found it necessary to remove to other parts of the country, in order to avoid arrest. He remained on the "underground" about five years and made a home for his plural family in St. Charles, Idaho, his first family residing in the 13th Ward, Salt Lake City. From 1887 to 1890 Brother Blackburn lived at Yost, Utah, where he acted ably as branch clerk and secretary and treasurer in the Sunday school and filled other important positions. Later he located at Moreland, near Blackfoot, Idaho, and also took employment at Scofield or Winter Quarters, Utah, being there at the time of the terrible explosion which caused the loss of twenty lives, but through the providence of the Lord, his own was spared. He was one of the seven volunteers who broke through into mine No. 4 to rescue the living and remove the bodies of the dead. On that trying occasion he put in 26 shifts in 12 days as one of the rescuers. Together with his wife and five sons (the oldest 11 and the youngest 5 years old), Bro. Blackburn moved to Byron, Wyoming, in the summer of 1892. On his arrival there he was almost penniless, but he renewed his efforts and became one of the Latter-day Saint pioneers of the Big Horn country. He studied land surveying and map-making and for a number of years worked for the Oil Land Company. Always taking an active part in public affairs, he acted as a notary public for 12 years. He has lived in the Penrose branch and Ward ever since that branch and Ward was first organized, and was appointed the first branch clerk Dec. 17, 1905, and Ward clerk when the Ward was organized. He platted and surveyed the town of Penrose, and on April 11, 1915, he was sustained as first counselor to Bishop James B. Wasden of the Penrose Ward. Bro. Blackburn is still an active and energetic Church worker and has raised a fine family, all of his children being active Church workers. Through his financial assistance two of his sons have filled honorable missions, one to the Central States, laboring in Texas, and the other to the Southern States, laboring in North Carolina. Two of his sons also rendered efficient military service in the U. S. army overseas during the late war, and one of them (Lafayette Blackburn) died as a result of being gassed.
