Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Brim, William Franklin

Brim, William Franklin, a Patriarch in the Church, was born Aug. 23, 1850, in Pottawattamie county, Iowa, the son of Alexander Brim and Anna Bishop, while his parents were en route from Nauvoo to the Rocky Mountains. Together with his parents he arrived in Great Salt Lake Valley in 1852 and settled in the First Ward, Salt Lake City, where he was raised and baptized. His father was one of the first tanners in the Valley. When William F. was sixteen years old he located in Coalville, Summit county, and worked in 1868 on the Union Pacific Railroad on Yellow Creek, east of Echo Canyon. In 1871 he and some of his brothers went to Ophir, Rush Valley, where they spent four years engaged in mining. In 1875 Bro. Brim married Rosabell Phippen (daughter of Worthington Phippen and Julia Pratt), who was born in 1855 in Salt Lake City. At this time Bro. Brim was ordained an Elder in the Salt Lake Temple. In May, 1876, he moved to Owyhee (now Cassia) county, Idaho, where he figured prominently as one of the first "Mormon" settlers. There also he acted as assistant superintendent of the Albion Ward Sunday School. When the Cassia Stake was organized in 1884 he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle John W. Taylor and set apart as second counselor to President Horton D. Haight. At the same time his wife Rosabell was set apart as Stake president of the Y. L. M. I. A. of the Cassia Stake, which position she held for thirteen years. Bro. Brim also held his position as second counselor in the Stake presidency for thirteen years, during which time he made the almost unprecedented record of never being late to any of the important meetings held at Oakley, though he lived twenty-five miles away from the Stake headquarters. He afterwards moved to Oakley, Cassia county, where he resided until 1916. In 1897, while a member of the Stake presidency he filled a mission to the State of New York, laboring principally in Fayette Twp., Seneca county (where the Church was organized) and where no Latter-day Saint Elder had visited as a missionary for twenty years. His missionary companion was Elder Theodore T. Burton of Salt Lake City. After the death of President Haight, Jan. 19, 1900, Elder Brim, together with Counselor Moroni Pickett, presided over the Cassia Stake until a new presidency was chosen. At that time he was ordained a Patriarch by Apostle Mathias F. Cowley. His wife died March 10, 1910, childless, but in their early married life they adopted an infant only ten days old, and raised her to womanhood; she is now the wife of Samuel Cook of Oakley, Idaho. In 1917 Elder Brim married Elizabeth Haslem (daughter of John S. Haslem and Martha Hammer of Salt Lake City). She was born Sept. 14, 1857. Bro. Brim's present home is in the Emigration Ward, Salt Lake City, Utah.
