Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Brimhall, George Henry

Brimhall, George Henry, president of the Brigham Young University, of Provo, Utah county, Utah, was born Dec. 9, 1852, in Salt Lake City, the son of George Washington Brimhall and Rachel Ann Mayer. He occupies a position of distinctive precedence in educational circles in the west. His father was born Nov. 14, 1814, became a resident of Utah during the era of pioneer development, and was identified with its industrial interests as a master mechanic. He was prominent in religious and political circles and was a member of the Territorial legislature. Rachel Ann Mayer, a daughter of George Mayer and Ann Yost, was born in Indiana, Feb. 9, 1829. The daughter of pioneers, she herself was a pioneer and did the work incident to those days. Her family, consisting of ten children (four sons and six daughters), as a rule, bear the impress of her strong will and sturdy character; particularly is this true in relation to her eldest son, George H., who greatly resembles his mother. He first attended a private school in Ogden, for in those pioneer days public schools were unknown. Later he attended the public schools in Salt Lake City, Cedar Fort, in the Dixie country, and in Spanish Fork. Afterward he became a student at Provo, attending the first high school of that city. At a still later date he was a student in the Brigham Young Academy, the institution that became the successor of the Timpanogas Academy. President Brimhall has often said in public that it was due mainly to his mother's determination, in the face of the greatest financial odds, that he was enabled to attend school in Provo. In his school days he was eager to advance, eager to obtain knowledge. Many lessons were prepared while he was teaming and herding. He was one of a group of forty-two young men who established a high school in Spanish Fork, known as the Young Men's Academy. A student of the school, at first, he soon became one of its teachers. While thus engaged he worked out a system of public school grading. In educational circles his progress has been continuous. From being a superintendent of the Spanish Fork schools, he became county superintendent of Utah county and later city superintendent of Provo City. It was this latter position he was filling when he was called to the faculty of the Brigham Young Academy. During his period of service on the faculty, he held the chair of psychology and pedagogy for the greater part of the time. At all times during his connection with the institution he has held some executive position. By an action of the board of trustees he became its chief executive Jan. 3, 1903. Prior to this time he had served as president of the Utah State Teachers' Association. President Brimhall's professional career falls naturally under three heads: his work as a teacher, as an executive and as an educational lecturer. He has always been recognized in the profession as one of Utah's foremost teachers; with him it is a gift as well as a profession. In all the years of teachers coming and going at the Brigham Young University, no other teacher ever attracted so many students to his classes as has Professor Brimhall. Prior to Professor Brimhall's coming to the presidency of the school, two degrees had been conferred upon, him, the first the degree of Bachelor of Pedagogy, the second the degree of Doctor of Science and Didactics. It is self-evident that he has succeeded as an executive, because of his having been called to one executive position after another successively. A steady progressive expansion in the Brigham Young University as to buildings, equipment, faculty and students has occurred under his administration. In all probability President Brimhall is most gifted as a public speaker. His ability to lay hold of an apt illustration on the instant, and drive it home, has been one of the elements of his good teaching. He is one of the best known educational lecturers in this intermountain country, lecturing at institutes and in educational meetings throughout this entire region. But the scope of President Brimhall's public addresses reaches far beyond that of an educational lecturer. Rarely has any man been as generally sought for on platform and in pulpit as has he. It is safe to say that there is no public movement of any general interest that he has not been asked to champion by word of mouth. Suffrage, prohibition, civic betterment, public welfare movements have each sought and received such support as his talent affords. There is one variety of discourse in which President Brimhall is past master; it is in the short address and short sermon. These addresses have made the chapel exercises of the Brigham Young Universify noted and their author famous. They are always short, racy and to the point, filled with apt illustration and telling epigram. Dr. Brimhall has served for many years on the general Church board of education, the Church board of examiners, the general board of religion classes, and on the general board of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. He is one of the oldest members of the Y. M. M. I. A. board. In connection with Dr. Milton H. Hardy he wrote the first manual, a series of lessons for the young people all over the Church. In a period covering thirty-three years there have been comparatively few summers when he has not been engaged in writing lessons for the M. I. manuals. But his literary achievements have not been confined to writing lessons; he has been a constant contributor to local magazines and has given out many interviews to the public press. His composition is not confined to prose. He has written a measurable quantity of creditable verse. His "Old Glory," written on the entry of the United States into war, set to music by Prof. Clair W. Reid, was sung all over Utah and in many of the adjoining States. In addition to being connected with the various Church boards, before mentioned, President Brimhall has served his Church in the capacity of a Stake superintendent of the Y. M. M. I. A. Associations of Utah Stake, and as a member of the High Council of that Stake. He has always taken great interest in civic affairs. He was a member of the city council of Spanish Fork during the period of his residence in that city. In 1896 he was a candidate on the Republican ticket for the State senate, but a democratic landslide resulted in the defeat of all Republicans. He has been a speaker in practically every political campaign since the days of statehood. In 1874 President Brimhall was married to Alsena E. Wilkins. To them were born six children, namely, Lucy J., Alsena E., George W., Mark H., Wells L., and Milton H. In 1885 President Brimhall married Flora Robertson. The children born to them are: Dean R., Fay R., Fawn R., Ruth Afton, Paul R., Alta R., Golden H., and Arco R. Prof. Brimhall is fond of fishing and hunting and mountain climbing. His leisure hours find him haunting canyons and streams with his boys and other members of his family who delight in manly outdoor sports. He is endowed with rich spiritual and rich intellectual endowments, whose gifts have been supported by a life of strenuous work. Whatever his limitations may be he never fails to scintillate. Brilliancy is in the essence of all his power. His style, whether in oral or written discourse, is full of originality, and presents many surprises in analysis, thought, and sentence structure. He possesses a personality that has impressed itself upon thousands of students; a personality that has attracted the attention of many persons from both east and west because of its force and originality; a personality that compels and comands, and rarely fails to grip those with whom he comes in contact.
