Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Brunson, Lewis

Brunson, Lewis, Bishop of Fillmore (Millard Stake), in Millard county, Utah, was born Jan. 27, 1831, at Mantua, Portage county, Ohio, the son of Seymour Brunson and Harriet Gould. Together with his parents he passed through the persecutions against the Saints in Missouri and Illinois and was an exile with his people when he was baptized in 1849 by Uriah Cutler in Iowa. He crossed the plains as captain of a company and at the end of the journey received the warmest thanks from those over whom he had presided. Arriving in Utah he settled in Provo, Utah county, but was soon afterwards called by President George A. Smith to assist in forming a settlement on Chalk Creek, Millard county; thus he became one of the earliest settlers of Fillmore. On May 7, 1885, when only 22 years of age, he was ordained and set apart by President Brigham Young to act as Bishop of Fillmore, which position he held for six years. In 1857 (Oct. 16th) he married Amanda Louisa Park of Provo (daughter of John and Matilda Park.) She bore her husband six children, namely, Mary Louisa, Joseph Lewis, Harriet Matilda, Adeline, George Cannon and Peter Lorenzo. In 1861 he was released from his office as Bishop and called on a mission to the United States. He returned in 1862 as captain of a company of Saints. After his return from his mission he was called by the Church authorities to act as a High Councilor and as president of the High Priests' quorum in the Millard Stake (being set apart by Wilford Woodruff) which positions he held at the time of his death. Bro. Brunson married Lamira Mace Jan. 13, 1857; she was born Jan. 14, 1840, in Salt Lake City. Seven children were the issue of this marriage, namely, Seymour L., Reuben E., Arthur M., Hyrum, Daniel, Clarilda and Harvey. Later the same year (March 31, 1857) he married Catherine Curling who bore him seven children, namely, Annie, Jeanette, John L., James William, Isaac F., Lewis and Charles A. Bro. Brunson died at Fillmore Jan. 4, 1888, beloved and respected by all who knew him.
