Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Brunson, Peter Lorenzo

Brunson, Peter Lorenzo, Bishop of Fillmore and second counselor in the presidency of the Millard Stake of Zion and a resident of Fillmore, Millard county, Utah, was born July 20, 1866, at Fillmore, the son of Lewis Brunson and Amanda Louisa Park. He was baptized Oct. 2, 1874, by his father, was raised in Fillmore and received a common school education. He was ordained a Deacon and afterwards a Teacher and in June, 1887, he was ordained an Elder by Christian Anderson; ordained a High Priest Nov. 13, 1904, by Mahonri M. Steele and set apart as second counselor to Culbert L. King of the Marion Ward, Panguitch Stake. In the year 1887 (March 11th) he married Clarinda A. McCullough of Fillmore, daughter of Henry J. McCullough, which marriage has been blessed with eleven children, namely, Peter Lorenzo, Mary Altana, Amy Louisa, Helen, Harriet, Myrtle, Henry Rollo, Nora, Lewis Clark, Elbert Lamar and Max Ellot. Bro. Brunson located in Marion, Garfield county, Utah, soon after his marriage and lived there twenty years, during which time he acted as assistant superintendent of the Ward Sunday school, was religion class teacher, counselor and president of the Ward Y. M. M. I. A., counselor to Bishop Culbert L. King, etc., and moved back to Fillmore in September, 1906. At Fillmore he acted as Ward teacher, president of Y. M. M. I. A., counselor to Bishop Partridge, etc. In 1909 (Oct 17th) he was ordained a Bishop by Francis M. Lyman and set apart to preside over the Fillmore Ward. He acted in that capacity three years, or until he was chosen to act as second counselor to President Orvil L. Thompson of the Millard Stake. President Brunson has filled many positions of a secular nature. Thus he acted eight years as a school trustee at Marion, served as a member of the city council at Fillmore eight years, etc. He is a farmer by occupation; otherwise he is a dealer in monuments and an efficient carver in stone.
