Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Bunker, Edward

Bunker, Edward, founder and Bishop of Bunkerville (St. George Stake), Lincoln county, Nevada, was born August 1, 1822, at Atkinson, Penobscot county, Maine, the son of Silas Bunker and Hannah Berry. He was the youngest of nine children whose names were Nahum, Abigail, Martin, Alfred, Hannah, Kendall, Silas, Saben and Edward. When nineteen years of age he left a comfortable home and in company with his brother-in-law, John Berry, went west, going as far as Kirtland, Ohio, where they met Martin Harris, one of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon and attended the meetings of the Saints. He soon became a convert to "Mormonism" and was baptized in 1845. Subsequently he made his way to Nauvoo, Ill., where he worked on the Temple and the Nauvoo House. He also joined the famous Nauvoo Legion and as a member of that body did considerable military duty. In 1846 (Feb. 9th) he married Emily Abbott and almost immediately thereafter crossed the Mississippi river with his young wife and traveled as far as Garden Grove, Iowa, where he left his wife in a half-finished log cabin while he enlisted as a member of the famous Mormon Battalion in which he marched to California. He was detailed on that journey as assistant teamster to Hyrum Judd, which released him from carrying his gun and also exempted him from guard duty. After the arrival in California in January, 1847, he spent most of his time doing guard duties at Los Angeles until his discharge July 16, 1847. Starting together with many others of the Battalion boys he traveled by way of Sutter's Fort to Salt Lake Valley, where he arrived Oct. 16, 1847. After resting a short time he and a few others continued their journey east with sixteen pounds of flour to the man, and three mules (which Bro. Bunker had brought from California) between them. On this perilous journey they bought some buffalo meat from the Indians and also killed some buffalo for themselves. On arriving at Loupe Fork of the Platte river they found the ice running so thick that they could not cross. They remained in camp all day, exposed to a most terrific snowstorm, and ate their last provisions consisting of rawhides, saddle bags, etc. Continuing their journey through ten inches of snow they finally reached the Pawnee Mission where they crossed the river, but found the mission deserted and the corn all gathered. They succeeded, however, in finding a few ears of frost-bitten corn which the Indians had left. The brethren ate these uncooked and stayed all night in one of the vacated houses without bedding. They finally killed one of their mules and ate it to preserve their lives. Soon they took up their line of March for the Missouri river and arrived at Winter Quarters Dec. 18, 1847, where Elder Bunker found his wife, and a fine son, 11 months old. Soon afterwards he went to Missouri to work for provisions and finally located with his wife on Mosquito creek in , Iowa, where he raised a good crop of corn the following season. Succeeding in getting an outfit, he started for the Valley in the spring of 1850, as a captain of ten in Mathew Caldwell's fifty and Capt. Johnson's hundred. On the journey they were attacked by, cholera and eight of their number died. The company reached Salt Lake Valley Sept. 1, 1850, and Bro. Bunker located in Ogden City. The next year (1851), when a Stake of Zion was organized at Ogden, Bro. Bunker was chosen as a member of the High Council. In June, 1852, he married Sarah R. Browning Lang, widow of James Lung, who owned a small farm adjoining his. In October, 1852, he was called on a mission to England, where he first presided over the Bristol conference and afterwards had the pastoral care of the Sheffield, Bradford and Lincolnshire conference. Still later he was appointed to preside in Scotland, his field of labor including the conferences of Dundee, Glasgow and Edinburgh. He returned to America in 1856, and on the arrival at Iowa City in June, 1856, he was placed in charge of a hand cart company with which he crossed the plains, starting from Iowa City June 28, 1856, and arriving at Salt Lake City Oct. 2, 1856. Most of the Saints in his charge were from Wales, and the company, being short of provisions all the way, would have suffered severely for want of food, had it not been for supplies sent them from the Valley. Soon after his return to Utah, Elder Bunker was chosen as Bishop of the Ogden Second Ward and labored in that capacity until he moved to Dixie in 1861. In April, 1861, he married Mary M. McQuarrie as a third wife, and in the fall of the same year with his wives, Emily and Mary, and their families moved to Dixie, or Southern Utah. His wife Sarah, who remained in Ogden, joined the rest of the family later. In the fall of 1862, Elder Bunker was called to preside as Bishop at Santa Clara, Washington county, and during the following years he and his family suffered many privations and hardships. Bro. Bunker also assisted in establishing a settlement in Clover valley (now in Nevada), and soon after moved part of his family there. Later he bought a place in Panguitch, where he located part of his family when that part of the country was resettled after the Indian troubles. Elder Bunker presided as Bishop of Santa Clara twelve years. During the latter part of his administration the United Order was introduced, which he and most of the members of his Ward accepted. After that, according to counsel received from Pres. Brigham Young he sought out a new location on the Rio Virgen, where he in 1877 settled and built the town of Bunkerville, Lincoln (now Clark) county, Nevada. He was chosen as Bishop of the new settlement from the beginning and presided there until his health failed, when his son Edward succeeded him as Bishop of this place. In starting this settlement all the people worked on the company plan which proved very successful in the beginning, but finally broke up as the Saints did not fully understand the stewardship plan. In May, 1901, Elder Bunker moved to Old Mexico, together with several other families and located at Moreles, where he died Nov. 17, 1901, leaving three wives, 22 children and a host of grand and great grandchildren. Bishop Bunker was one of those faithful and energetic Elders of the Church whose memory will live forever. ( Compiled by Mrs. H. A. Crosby, daughter of Bishop Bunker.)
