Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Capson, Carl Johan

Capson, Carl Johan, one of the first converts to "Mormonism" in Sweden, was born June 16, 1822, in Slemminge parish, Malmöhus lån, Sweden, the son of Mons Capson and Metta Olson. When a youth he learned the avocation of a gardener and was well established in that business when "Mormonism" found him early in 1852. Elder Anders W. Winberg, who at that time had charge of the Swedish Mission, converted him to "Mormonism" and baptized him at Lund, August 10, 1852. A few others were baptized soon afterwards, and when these new converts were organized into a branch of the Church April 30, 1853, Bro. Capson was ordained an Elder by Anders W. Winberg and set apart to preside over the branch which was called the Lund Branch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It was one of the first branches of the Church in Sweden. Prior to this Bro. Capson, who had been ordained a Priest, had worked zealously to spread the gospel truths among his neighbors and others. The first conference meeting ever held by Latter-day Saints in Sweden convened in a barn belonging to Carl J. Capson, June 25, 1853, on which occasion the Skåne conference was organized, which conference has had a continued existence ever since. For the purpose of emigrating to Zion Bro. Capson left his native land, together with his wife and two children, Nov. 26, 1853, and after a short stay in Denmark he continued the journey over England, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Benjamin Adams," which sailed from Liverpool Jan. 22, 1854. The company in which he crossed the plains reached Salt Lake City, Oct. 5, 1854. After his arrival in Salt Lake City, Bro. Capson became a gardener for President Brigham Young. Later he took up a farm in South Cottonwood and still later located in Mill Creek, where he owned a big farm on which he resided until his death. Ever since he became a convert to "Mormonism" in his native land he was a faithful and diligent Church worker. Before he joined the Church in Sweden he married Ingrid Jöranson, who was born March 11, 1882, at Lund. Three children were born to them in Sweden, namely, Wilhelmina, Johan Cornelius and Charles W. Wilhelmina died in Sweden and the other two children accompanied the parents to America, where a third son, Albert (now the Bishop of East Mill Creek) and two daughters, Mary and Elizabeth (twins), were born to them. Afterwards Bro. Capson married Caroline Malmgren, who bore him eleven children, namely, Joseph, Emma, James, Oscar, Celia, Clara, Louise, Edward and Edwin (twins), George and Jettie. Later Bro. Capson married Matilda Cannon, who bore him a son, Alfred, and a daughter, Charlotte. Bro. Capson died Nov. 22, 1901, at East Mill Creek, as a faithful Latter-day Saint.
