Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Chipman, Stephen L.

Chipman, Stephen L., president of the Alphine Stake of Zion, Utah county, Utah, was born March 18, 1864, in American Fork, the son of James Chipman and Sarah A. Green. He was baptized March 19, 1878 by Wm. R. Webb, and after receiving a common school education in the district school in his native town he continued his studies in the B. Y. Academy at Provo. When quite young he was ordained a Priest and was a diligent student in the Ward Sabbath School and Ward Y. M. M. I. A. After being ordained a Seventy by Seymour B. Young, he became a member of the 67th quorum of Seventy. In 1885-1887 he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring principally in North Carolina, Virginia and Tennessee. After returning from this mission he acted as president of the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. and in the spring of 1889 he was ordained a High Priest and set apart to act as second counselor to Bishop George Halliday, which position he held until 1889, when he moved to Provo. He acted as a member of the school board of American Fork and also as a member of the city council. For a number of years he was engaged as salesman and bookkeeper in the Chipman Mercantile Institution of American Fork. At Provo he was chosen as a member of the Utah Stake High Council and also acted as assistant superintendent of the Provo Fourth Ward Sunday School. Still following the mercantile business he acted as superintendent of the Provo East Co-op. In June, 1892, he moved back to American Fork, where he became manager of the Chipman Mercantile Company. He also served as county commissioner and was a member of the Utah Legislature in 1903. He was chosen as second counselor to Edward Partridge in the presidency of the Utah Stake of Zion, succeeding Reed Smoot and acted in that capacity until January, 1901, when the Alpine Stake of Zion was organized, and he was chosen as president of the same, which position he still holds. Under his administration a new tithing office and four fine Ward meeting houses have been built in American Fork and later (1909-1913) the beautiful Alpine Stake tabernacle, the erection of which, including seating, lighting and heating, cost $81,000. During his administration the Alpine Stake has grown from a membership of 8,330 to 9,000 and the number of Wards have increased from 7 to 17. In 1885 President Chipman married Sina Nielsen (daughter of Niels Nielsen and Karen Pedersen), who was born Nov. 7, 1860, in American Fork. The children by this marriage are the following: Zina Annadella, Lorina K., Bessie Fern, Stephen Howell, Alfred Stanley, Elva and Leah. All the children are now living, excepting Alfred Stanley, who died in infancy.
