Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Bunting, James Lovett

Bunting, James Lovett, a member of the Stake presidency and of the High Council of the Kanab Stake of Zion was born Oct. 5, 1832, at Attleborough, Norfolk, England, the third son of Thomas Bunting and Earley Lovett. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism" he was baptized March 7, 1853, by James Flowers at Beccles, Suffolk, England. Soon afterwards he was ordained an Elder by Charles A. Harper and called to labor as a local missionary in April, 1854. After laboring as a traveling Elder in the Norwich and Manchester conferences he was called, in 1857, to preside over the latter conference, holding that position until 1858, when he emigrated to Utah in company with the American Elders who were called home on account of the Johnston Army troubles. In 1859 (May 15th) he married Miss Harriet Dye (a daughter of Robert Dye and Harriet Coman), who subsequently bore her husband twelve children. Bro. Bunting was ordained a Seventy in 1861 by Geo. Snyder and became a president of the 33rd quorum of Seventy. In 1870, he was called to Kanab, together with about twenty-five other families, and for three years he acted as bishop's clerk of the Kanab Stake. He was ordained a High Priest April 18, 1877, by Lorenzo Snow, and acted for several years as a member of the Kanab Stake High Council. Subsequently he acted as second counselor in the Kanab Stake presidency. For several years he was also an active Sunday school officer both in the Kanab Ward and Stake. In 1878-80 he filled a mission to Great Britain, presiding over the Liverpool conference; returning home in May, 1880, he had charge of a company of emigrating Saints. During his presidency in Liverpool a Y. M. M. I. A. and a Relief Society were organized in the Liverpool branch; they are supposed to have been the first organizations of that kind in the British Mission. In 1893 he went to England on a genealogical mission and has succeeded in tracing his genealogy on his mother's side back twenty generations, or to about A. D. 1060. In 1897 he was called to labor as an ordinance worker in the St. George Temple, where he has spent twelve years of his life and at his instance more than one thousand persons have been endowed in the St. George Temple. Of civic offices he has acted as probate judge, been a member of the St. George city council, served as delegate to State conventions, etc. In the meantime he yielded obedience to the higher law of marriage by taking Ann Ashurst and Hester Mayer as plural wives. Elder Bunting is still a resident of St. George. He is the father of thirteen children and has sixty grand children and thirty-two great grand children.
