Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Clark, Ezra James

Clark, Ezra James, one of the Elders of the Church who died in the missionary field, was born Feb. 30, 1846, in Lee county, Iowa, the son of Ezra T. Clark and Mary Stevenson. In 1848 his parents migrated to Great Salt Lake Valley and settled at Farmington, Davis county, where he was reared in the midst of the Saints, and under the influence of good teaching became a much respected youth. He was baptized by Elder Jesse Hobson when eight years old, and afterwards became a member of the 40th quorum of Seventy, and of the Farmington Lyceum and Dramatic Association. On the 6th of April, 1865, he was called to go on a mission to Europe, cheerfully obeying the call. He landed in Liverpool on the 11th of the following August, and was appointed to labor in the Worcestershire conference as a traveling Elder. On the 30th of January, 1866, he was appointed to preside over the Dorsetshire conference, and on the 21st of March, 1867, was removed to the presidency of the Kent conference. In each of these positions he labored faithfully and with earnest zeal, gaining the confidence and esteem of the Saints among whom he labored, and of those who presided over him in the British Mission. His modest, unassuming manner, combined with his truthfulness and circumspect conduct, won for him the admiration and good will of all his associates. On the 30th of June, 1868, he took passage on board the steamship "Minnesota," having been honorably released from his labors in England, with permission to return home. He was appointed first counselor to Elder John Parry, president of the company of Saints on board, and discharged his duty to the best of his ability, although his health was poor during the voyage. He landed in New York on the 12th of July, and exerted himself beyond his strength in assisting those who were unable to help themselves. The heat was very intense when he started with the Saints on the railroad for the west, and at Albany he complained of a severe pain in the head, which rapidly grew worse, and in a few hours he expired in the arms of his brethren on July 14, 1868, at Fonda, N. Y. A year later his remains were shipped to his home in Farmington for interment. He died unmarried, but was known as an exceptionally good and exemplary young man.
