Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Clark, John Alexander

Clark, John Alexander, one of the Latter-day Saint Elders who died in the missionary field, was born Feb. 28, 1871, at Farmington, Davis county, Utah, the son of Ezra T. Clark and Susan Leggett. He was baptized by Oliver Lee Robinson when about nine years of age, and later ordained an Elder. In 1894 (Feb. 2nd) he was ordained a Seventy by Abraham H. Cannon and set apart for a mission to Turkey. He arrived in Liverpool, England, Feb. 17, 1894, on his way to Palestine. Before leaving home Elder Clark had commenced his studies in German at the Brigham Young Academy at Provo. When the first model Sunday School was organized in that institution he was called to teach a class, thus showing the great confidence the instructors had in him. The pupils in his class were heard to speak in his praise for the manner in which he interested them in their lessons, and for the instructions he gave them. His engaging manners and the pleasant spirit he was in possession of endeared him to the Elders there, and they tried to make his stay with them as pleasant as possible. At Leipzig, Germany, he joined Elder E. W. Robinson, who had also been called to labor in the Turkish mission, and traveled in his company to Beyrout, Syria, where the president of the mission, Don C. W. Musser, was at that time. During the summer he labored together with Bro. Robinson among the German speaking population of Beyrout, at the same time studying the Arabic language. In August they went to Haifa, Palestine. Bro. Robinson now being president of the mission, his presence was needed at Aleppo, where there were several members of the Church, and he, therefore, left Bro. Clark alone at Haifa. In a letter written by Bro. Clark, Nov. 10, 1894, he says: "Though I am alone (without a companion) I am having an enjoyable time. I have learned the German language well enough to explain the principles of the gospel to the German colony here. I have carried a tract to nearly every family, and, where allowed, have explained to the people the gospel which I have been sent here to preach On each tract I wrote the time and place of our meetings. Some have read their tracts and made the request for books to read, which I have complied with as nearly as possible. I have written to Bern (Switzerland) for some more books and tracts. Getting out among the people appears to be the only way of reaching them, although I believe they would attend our meetings if held in a public place. In the meantime I shall learn the language better, labor in a quiet way, and also continue my studies in Arabic." Bro. Clark was hopeful of success, and the whole letter breathed the spirit of an earnest worker in the Lord's vineyard. There were a few members of the Church at Haifa, and he writes of the joy he had in meeting with them. He was living with a family named Hilt, but spent much time in his labors among the Arabs in the city of Haifa, and it was among them that he was exposed to the dreaded disease of small-pox which carried him off. He died Feb. 8, 1895, at Haifa, while engaged in the noble work of com bating error, and bringing tidings of great joy to men. He died having his "loins girt about with truth" and with "the sword of the Spirit" in hand. As far as his few years had given him the opportunity to do so, he could say with Paul that he had fought the good fight, and had kept the faith. He died unmarried.
