Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Cottam, Thomas P.

Cottam, Thomas P., Patriarch and first counselor in the presidency of the St. George Stake of Zion and a resident of St. George, Utah, was born Sept. 28, 1857, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Thomas Cottam and Caroline Smith. He was baptized by William Carter when about eight years of age, ordained successively to the offices of Deacon and Teacher; ordained an Elder Sept. 11, 1877, and a High Priest July 1, 1883, by John D. T. McAllister and set apart as second counselor to Bishop David H. Cannon of the St. George Fourth Ward. Prior to this he had acted as president of a Deacons' quorum and a counselor in an Elders' quorum. He was ordained a Bishop by Wilford Woodruff, April 24, 1887, and set apart to preside over the St. George Fourth Ward, which position he held until June, 1896, when the four Saint George Wards were consolidated into one Ward and he was set apart as a counselor to Bishop James Andrus. In 1901 (June 15th) he was sustained as first counselor to President Edward H. Snow of the St. George Stake and set apart by A. O. Woodruff, which position he still holds. Bro. Cottam came to St. George as a pioneer in 1862, together with his parents and has ever since been one of the leading citizens of the town. Thus he served as a member of the city council eleven years, as mayor four years and as assessor and collector in Washington county for a number of years. He also served as a member of the Utah Legislature from 1905 to 1908. Bro. Cottam is a farmer and stock raiser and has also engaged in the plastering business. He had charge of the ornamental plaster work in the Manti Temple. In 1882 (Jan. 26th) Bro. Cottam married Emmaline Jarvis (daughter of George Jarvis and Ann Pryor), who was born March 21, 1863, and became the mother of ten children, namely, Emma, Thomas, Heber, Arthur, Annie, Moroni J., Walter P., Ivins, Clarence and Eva. Bro. Cottam was ordained a Patriarch Dec. 16, 1917, by James E. Talmage and is at present a member of the Stake board of education and assistant to David H. Cannon, president of the St. George Temple.
