Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Crosby, George Henry

Crosby, George Henry, Bishop and Patriarch and a most active member of the Church, was born Oct. 25, 1846, in Kennebec county, Maine, the oldest son of Jesse W. Crosby and Hannah Baldwin. His son, Judge Geo. Henry Crosby, jun., of Mesa, Arizona, writes the following sketch of Patriarch Crosby: "The 'Mormon' frontier Bishop was a type of man such as no other time in the world's history ever did or ever will again produce. Father of the Ward in spiritual affairs, a friend to all in times of trouble and sickness, judge in the disputes of his people, the leader in building canals, reservoirs and roads, and the fencing of the fields, the overseer of the people's amusements and the one who led in giving the initial blessing of childhood and assisted in closing the eyes of the aged in death, devoted in his religion, earnest in his convictions, untiring in his duty and ready to obey the call of the Priesthood, no matter how unglorious the task, such a man was George H. Crosby. He is perhaps the only man in the Latter-day Saint Church who was ever Bishop of four Wards. By nature he was a frontier Bishop, adapted to governing a community in spiritual matters as well as in building canals, reservoirs and roads, laying out townsites and doing other duties incumbent upon a pioneer leader. His parents met and married in Nauvoo, Illinois, but at the time of George's birth the mother was sojourning in Kennebec county, Mo. When he was a few weeks old his parents started West with him and he reached the Salt Lake Valley with the second company of Mormon pioneers, Sept. 25, 1847, on the day he was eleven months old. After living in the old fort, the Crosby family moved into the Seventeenth Ward, where George H. lived, excepting the time of the move, till he was a boy of fifteen years. Then the family went to "Dixie" and helped to settle Saint George. As a youth George H. participated in several Indian expeditions and when Dr. Whitemore was killed, had a life and death struggle with an Indian who fought to throw him over a ledge, but he succeeded in throwing the Indian over. In 1863 he made a trip across the plains with Captain Daniel D. McArthur and again in 1866 he made the same trip in Daniel Thompson's company. In August, 1867, before he was 21 years old, he was elected sheriff of Washington county, and toward the close of his term, and at twenty-three years of age, at the instigation of Erastus Snow, he was sent out on Shoal Creek to be the first Bishop of the Hebron Ward (now Enterprise), which then included Clover Valley (now Barclay), Nevada, as a branch. The young Bishop was a very determined opponent to an organized band of outlaws that hovered near the Utah-Nevada line and in October, 1877, one whose enmity he had incurred, burned the Bishop's home and store. That winter, and again at the suggestion of Bro. Erastus Snow, he was called to act as Bishop of the Leeds Ward in the St. George Stake, where the Church members were about to lose control because of the establishment of Silver Reef as a mining camp. Narrow resources at Leeds and a large family of boys, and his dread of Dixie wine, induced him to seek a new home for the Crosby family, and in the spring of 1886 they migrated to eastern Arizona, and after a sojourn of a few months at Nutrioso, and again at the behest of Elder Erastus Snow, he was called to act as Bishop of the shattered Omer and Amity Wards of the Eastern Arizona Stake, which were united under the name of the Union Ward (now the Eagar Ward) of the St. Johns Stake. The new Bishop quickly put renewed life and energy into the settlement of Round Valley, and under his leadership an excellent co-operative system of canals and reservoirs were built and the new town of Eagar sprung into existence. However, matters, over which he had no control, again broke him up, and in 1899 he was sent to Torrey in Wayne county, Utah (where his son George H. Crosby, jun., had previously located), to be for the fourth time, a Bishop. Torrey was a new town and age wasbeginning to creep on the successful pioneer who had stood so much hardship and the Church authorities released him after a year and a half of service. He then joined his brother Jesse W. in the settlement of the Big Horn Basin in Wyoming in the spring of 1901. During his life, Bishop Crosby filled a considerable number of civil offices. Besides being sheriff he was twice a selectman of Washington county, Utah, and did long service as school trustee and as justice of the peace, and for a quarter of a century was overseer of roads. In 1895 he served as a member of the 18th territorial legislature of Arizona, where he made a local reputation by a determined, though losing fight against the division of his home county of Apache, and in Wyoming he was foreman of the famous grand jury who for six weeks investigated the cruel lynchings that resulted from the range war between the sheep and cattle men of Northern Wyoming. Upon the organization of the Big Horn Stake he was selected as its first Patriarch and was very active in his new calling. He made his home first at Lovell and then at Cowley until 1915, when he returned to his old home in St. George to spend the last part of his toilsome busy life in quiet Temple work, but he had scarcely began that work when his death occurred suddenly, Oct. 10, 1916. Patriarch Crosby was married three times. His first wife was Sarah H. Brown whom he married in 1869; she became the mother of twelve of his children and shared his early pioneer life. His two other wives were Amelia Laney (whom he married in March, 1885, and who accompanied him to Torrey and to the Big Horn Basin), and Mary Lake, whom he married about a year preceding his death. He was the father of fourteen children of whom seven, Benjamin B., George H., jun., Amelia Wiltbank, Jesse E., Charles W., Albert W., and Fred are living, while William H., Lorenzo, John A. and Elizabeth grew to maturity, but have since died. Helaman and Frank and Francis (twins) died in babyhood." (See also Vol. 2, page 44).
