Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Crosby, George Henry junior

Crosby, George Henry junior, formerly a member of the Saint Joseph Stake High Council, and now a resident of Mesa, Maricopa county, Arizona, was born Feb. 29, 1872, at Hebron, Washington county, Utah, the son of George H. Crosby and Sarah H. Brown. At the time of his birth his father was Bishop of Hebron. As a child of five years he was taken by his parents to Leeds in the same county and at fourteen years of age to Round Valley (now Eagar), Apache county, Arizona. His surrounding educational advantages were very poor and his early years in Arizona gave him no chance to attend school, as he had to help support the family by carrying mail; yet by home study and after spending nine weeks at the St. Johns Stake Academy, and getting a start at school, he went to Utah in 1890, and after a few weeks' schooling at St. George went to Salt Lake City where he studied under the tutorage of Dr. James E. Talmage in the L. D. S. College. After a year there he taught school at Eagar, Arizona, and at Ramah, New Mexico; he then returned to Utah for a one year's tuition in the Church University and later studied at the University of Utah, of which he became a graduate. After spending a year in teaching he began the publication of the "Censor" at Richfield, Utah, April 25, 1896, with the primary object of defending the Latter-day Saints against the attacks of an unfriendly paper. During this time he also published a small paper at Loa, in Wayne county, known as the "Loa Advice." Through the advertising medium of these two papers he sought to start a new town in Wayne county on what was known as Poverty Flat and later decided to join in the colonizing of the new town which was named Torrey. Financial reverses brought on by colonizing put him back to newspaper work and he again became an editor at Richfield, this time of the "Richfield Reaper." During all this time he was studying law and in February, 1903, he was admitted to the bar of the Utah Supreme Court. In 1903, with his wife and two children, he again made his home in Arizona, and during the school year of 1903-1904 was principal of the Snowflake Stake Academy. In the fall of 1904 he was elected district attorney of Apache county and lived at St. Johns, where he was also chosen as a member of the Stake High Council. After serving one term as district attorney he took up law practice in Graham county where he was Stake superintendent of the Y. M. M. I. A. for four years, a member of the St. Joseph Stake High Council for six years and county attorney for three years. In the fall of 1914 he was elected judge of the Superior Court of Apache county, being the first Latter-day Saint to be elected to the bench in Arizona. During the time he was judge in St. Johns, he also served as Stake superintendent of the Y. M. M. I. A.. But as the judge's work did not suit him so well as the private practice of law he resigned his position to practice law at Mesa, Maricopa county, Arizona, where he is now located. Life has been activity with Judge Crosby. When only eleven years of age he was secretary of his Ward Mutual, at fifteen he acted as a counselor in the Mutual and as the first Stake secretary of the Sunday schools of the St. Johns Stake. At seventeen he served in the Stake superintendency of the Mutuals. During twenty-six years he has taught a Sunday school class and has been a Mutual class leader for twelve years. Besides this he has had a long service as a school trustee and acted two terms as justice of the peace; twice he served as county chairman and three times as secretary of his political party. In 1899, and again in 1903, he served with the Utah legislature. During his term as judge he successfully headed a movement to build a new court house for Apache county, while he was a leader in the construction of the Smithville Extension Canal in Graham county. In his labors among the young he has a Church distinction, for since 1891, when manuals were first used, he has never gone to a Mutual meeting without preparing his lesson. When a young teacher at a teachers' institute, George H. met Martha Miller, a daughter of Hans P. and Caroline Miller (prominent Scandinavians of Richfield, Utah). At once he loved the sweet country girl and two years later, Aug. 8, 1894, they were married. The union has been a very happy one, the faithful wife helping him to earn the means wherewith to continue his education. Four children, Gwendolyn, Kent and Laprele and Lucile (twins) have been born to them. Judge Crosby was the first Latter-day Saint lawyer in Arizona, the first Latter-day Saint district attorney in territorial days, one of the first two Latter-day Saint county attorneys (when statehood came on) and the first Latter-day Saint judge in the new State (Arizona).
