Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Crowther, William Orson

Crowther, William Orson, sixth president of the San Luis Stake, Colorado, was born Oct. 27, 1866, at Fountain Green, Sanpete county, Utah, the son of Thomas Crowther and Jane Jewkes. He was baptized July 29, 1877, by James Guymon, ordained a Teacher March 3, 1881, and became active as a Ward teacher and a Y. M. M. I. A. worker. He was educated in the common schools and specialized in music under Prof. A. C. Smyth. After moving to Colorado in 1885 he located at Richfield, Conejos county, and took a most active part in the location of Sanford, being elected president of the Sanford Town Company. As one of the first settlers of Sanford he hauled some of the first timber onto the townsite with which to erect the first log meeting house in the new settlement. He also took an active part in the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. and acted as president of that association. He was ordained a Seventy Aug. 4, 1884, by Seymour B. Young at Moroni, Sanpete county, Utah, and after settling in the San Luis Stake, Colorado, he became a member of the 92nd quorum of Seventy. In 1886 (Oct. 1st) in the Logan Temple he married Mary Caroline Mortensen (daughter of Anders J. Mortensen and Christine Anderson), who was born in Parowan, Iron county, Utah, Feb. 21, 1868, and went to Colorado in 1885. Following are the names of the children of this marriage: Wm. Alma, Mary Estella, Sarah Mabel, Thos. Walter, Clara Emily, Jesse Anders, Jane Christine, Horace Clive, Laura Verina and Don Q. Bro. Crowther was ordained a High Priest April 15, 1888, by John Henry Smith and set apart as second counselor to Bishop Sören C. Berthelsen when the Sanford Ward was first organized. He filled this position until 1896 when he was called and set apart by President F. M. Lyman as chorister of the Sanford Ward and leader of the Stake choir which position he filled until he was ordained a Bishop Jan. 31, 1899, by Apostle Abraham O. Woodruff. He succeeded Sören C. Berthelsen as Bishop of the Sanford Ward and acted in that capacity until May 21, 1911, when he was chosen as first counselor to Erastus S. Christensen, president of the San Luis Stake. Later he acted in the same position to President Hyrum S. Harris, and in 1919 (May 25th) he was chosen and set apart as president of the San Luis Stake, which position he still holds. Besides being a most active Church worker President Crowther served as secretary of the district school board for fifteen years and took an active part in the County Council of Defense in the late war. In 1910 he purchased a tract of 480 acres of land north of Sanford. With his oldest son (who had just returned from the German Mission), his second son and a nephew (H. Eugene Mortensen), they formed a partnership and did all their business under the name of Wm. O. Crowther and Sons Co. Afterwards this company added by purchase 440 acres of land to their original purchase, and they now own one of the largest and best ranches in Conejos county, Colorado. They also own several hundred acres of homestead land in the mountains west of San Luis Valley and handle sheep and cattle quite extensively. Although spending a great portion of his time in the interest of the Church, Bro. Crowther has been very successful in financial affairs. During his administration as Bishop of the Sanford Ward a beautiful meeting house was built, and he also took an active part in the building of school houses, roads, etc. President Crowther is a man of great influence, not only among the Saints, but also with non-Mormons, and has gained an enviable reputation for honor and truth among all his associates in life. He and his large family are quite noted for their musical ability and are frequently invited to sing at county festivals and on many other occasions.
