Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Cummard, John

Cummard, John, second counselor in the presidency of the Maricopa Stake of Zion and a resident of Mesa, Maricopa county, Arizona, was born May 16, 1882, in Birchfield street, Liverpool, England, the son of John and Mary Ellen Cummard. He was raised and educated in Liverpool, and at the age of twenty-three he married Eva Anna Thompson (daughter of John Thompson of Norwich, Norfolkshire, England). In 1907 (January 1st) two "Mormon" Elders (William A. Morton of Salt Lake City and Robert Price, now Bishop of Phoenix, Arizona), visited the Cummard home at Needham Road, Liverpool, and on the 15th of April, 1907, Bro. Cummard and wife joined the Church. Bro. Cummard was ordained a Deacon Aug. 10, 1907, and early in 1908 he emigrated with his family, consisting of wife and two children (John and Zena), to Utah, crossing the Atlantic in the steamship "Canada," which sailed from Liverpool Feb. 29, 1908. On their arrival in Utah the family located temporarily in Heber City, Wasatch county, where Bro. Cummard was employed with a lumber company and assisted with the Wasatch Stake amusement hall and the Timpanogas Canal. Bro. Cummard then went to Provo, where he became associated with the Barton and Blake Furniture Company. He was ordained an Elder Oct. 9, 1908, and later ordained a Seventy. He acted as secretary of an Elders' quorum, chairman of the Provo Fifth Ward amusement committee and counselor in the presidency of a Y. M. M. I. A., was a member of the faculty of the B. Y. U., being instructor of physical culture. During the absence of his wife and family in England Bro. Cummard went to Arizona and associated himself with the Intermountain Life Insurance Co. of Utah, locating in Mesa Jan. 2, 1912. During the next four years he traveled in the interest of life insurance, visiting practically every town in Arizona and New Mexico. During this time he was a member of the Maricopa board of Y. M. M. I. A. and in 1916-1918 he acted as chairman of the Stake Amusement Committee and of the Stake Old Folks Committee and teacher of the junior class of Y. M. M. I. A. and scout master. While thus engaged he built the boy scouts' swimming pool at Mesa. In 1916 he was set apart as first counselor to the Stake superintendent of Y. M. M. I. A., and in 1917-1918 he acted as president of that association. During the time of the world war he acted as chairman of the Red Cross work, having under his jurisdiction the entire Red Cross organization of Arizona. He was elected president of the Mesa Commercial Club in 1918. Since 1915 he has been manager and half owner of the Arizona Land Co., and is at present financially interested with both banks in Mesa. He is also director of the South Side Hospital, director of the Maricopa County Realty Board, director of the so-called Dry Land Association and holds other positions in civic improvement affairs. He was the president of the first Arizona Cotton Congress held in Mesa in 1919 and owns and manages large tracts of farming land now planted in cotton. In 1919 (May 31st) he was ordained a High Priest by Chas. W. Penrose and set apart to act as second counselor to President James W. Lesueur of the Maricopa Stake, which position he still holds and is now taking an active part in getting funds for the Arizona Temple. Bro. Cummard is the father of six children, namely, John, Zena, Mable, Nadine, Eva and Leonard Blain.
