Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Cutler, John Christopher

Cutler, John Christopher, a member of the Pioneer Stake High Council, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Feb. 5, 1846, in Sheffield, England, the son of John Cutler and Elizabeth Robinson. His father was an edge tool manufacturer, and both father and mother were Methodists, but becoming converts to "Mormonism" his father was baptized in 1857 and emigrated to Utah, where he remained until 1860 when he returned to England for the purpose of bringing his family to America. In 1864 his parents and six children (including John C.) emigrated to Utah, crossing the plains by ox teams. John C., prior to this (when a little over twelve years of age) was offered a position with S. and J. Watts of Manchester, England, where he remained employed as a clerk until 1864, and during this time, being away from his relatives, he learned economy and dependence upon himself. The day after his arrival in Salt Lake City, he with his brother, Thos. R., and their father commenced digging beets, carrots and potatoes on shares and digging on what is called the Church canal to pay their assessment for water on a small farm which they bought in East Mill Creek. John C. continued at such work until the fall of 1865, when Thomas Taylor, a merchant, offered him a position as clerk. John C. started back with Thos. Taylor to Sweetwater and assisted in bringing in the last company of emigrants that year, and also brought in a stock of goods. In 1866 John C. went to New York and St. Louis to assist as purchasing agent for another stock of goods and continued clerking for Thomas Taylor until 1871, when he was taken into partnership. After that partnership was dissolved by mutual consent in 1879 John C. Cutler took the agency of the Provo Woollen Mills, President Brigham Young kindly renting a portion of the Old Constitution Building to him at a nominal rent, as he wished to encourage the enterprise. The sales of goods the first year amounted to $28,000 and the sales gradually increased until they, in 1884, amounted to $150,000. In 1885 John C. associated himself with his brother, Joseph G. Cutler, under the firm name of Joseph G. Cutler and Bro. as agents for the Provo Woollen Mills and they sold about $100,000 worth of goods that year. In August, 1885, John C. Cutler purchased a portion of the Old Constitution Building, 27 feet front by 124 feet deep, and in the spring of 1886, having remodeled the store and made it one of the most attractive stores on Main St., the firm of John C. Cutler and Bro. moved into it. Later they added a tailoring establishment to their business. The business was incorporated in 1895 under the name of Cutler Bros. and Co. of which John C. was made the president, which proved quite a success. Cutler Brothers and Co. is still one of the best known business establishments in Salt Lake City, manufacturing knitted goods in addition to their wholesale and retail business. In August, 1884, John C. Cutler was elected county clerk of Salt Lake county to which office he was subsequently re-elected a number of times. When political parties in Utah were divided upon national lines John C. Cutler cast his lot with the Republicans. In 1904 he was elected governor of the State of Utah, his term beginning Jan. 2, 1905, and expiring Jan. 4, 1909. For more than forty years Governor Cutler has been one of the most successful business men of Utah. Among the corporations with which he has been connected may be mentioned the Utah Sugar Co., Utah Light and Power Co., Beneficial Life Insurance Company, Home Fire Insurance Co. of Utah, Deseret Savings Bank, Monroe State Bank, Bank of Garland, First National Bank of Murray, and the Utah Hotel Co., in most of which he has held positions as director or one of the executive officers. For many years he was a director in the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society. On May 1, 1911, he was elected president of the Deseret National Bank, which position he still holds. He is a member of the Commercial Club, Salt Lake City, and has served as treasurer of the Latter-day Saints University of Utah. He was baptized in July, 1865, the year after his arrival in Utah, by Henry Skidmore, and soon afterwards ordained to the Priesthood, took an active part in Sunday school work and labored for many years as a block teacher. He was ordained a High Priest and set apart as a counselor to Bishop Sperry of the Fourth Ward, which position he held for a number of years. Later he was chosen as a member of the High Council of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, and when that Stake was divided in 1904 he was chosen as a High Councilor in the Pioneer Stake which position he still holds. In 1890-1892 he filled a mission to Great Britain, laboring in the Manchester conference, part of the time as president of said conference. When the Salt Lake Temple was finished in 1893 he was called to labor in the same as an ordinance worker, which position he held for two years and a half. In 1871 he married Sarah Elizabeth Taylor (daughter of Bishop Thomas Taylor), which marriage has been blessed with seven children, namely, John C., Jr., Elizabeth T. C., Herbert E., Mabel B., Alfred T., Harold Y. and Hazel A. Bro. Cutler is occupying a home on West Temple street which was erected by the late George Romney thirty-five years ago.
