Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Eckersley, Joseph

Eckersley, Joseph, third president of the Wayne Stake of Zion. (Continued from page 348, volume 1 ). Bro. Eckersley continued to labor as Stake superintendent of Sunday schools, Stake clerk and president of the 112th quorum of Seventy until called on a mission to Great Britain, in the spring of 1901. He left Salt Lake City, April 12, 1901, and visited the largest cities in the United States en route to Boston. On his arrival in Liverpool, England, he was assigned to labor for a few weeks in Burnley and Chorley, and during this time visited his mother, brothers and sisters who listened attentively to the teaching of the gospel. He later baptized his mother and other members of the family. On the arrival of President Francis M. Lyman in Liverpool, and the release of President Platte D. Lyman as president of the European Mission, Bro. Eckersley was called by the former to 42 Islington, Liverpool, to assist him, and was assigned to the work of mission clerk and emigration clerk, and to take charge of all office work and preside in the absence of the president. During his labors in this capacity, covering a period of over two years, a great improvement was made under the direction of President Francis M. Lyman in keeping the records and accounts of the Mission. He was appointed to visit the conferences and before he was released to return home, June 30, 1903, he was privileged to attend conferences and preach the gospel in all parts of the British Mission. Shortly after returning from his mission, Nov. 9, 1903, he was ordained a High Priest by Mathias F. Cowley and set apart to act as second counselor to President Willis E. Robison, in the Wayne Stake presidency. May 13, 1906, he was called to be first counselor to President Gearsen S. Bastian, and when the latter was honorably released he succeeded him as president of the Wayne Stake of Zion, being set apart by Francis M. Lyman, Nov. 6, 1910. He still continues to labor in this calling. Bro. Eckersley has held many positions of trust in civil life. For six years he was county superintendent of schools, for four years he served as county attorney, and was State senator from the Tenth district, representing Sevier, Garfield, Wayne and Piute counties in the Tenth and Eleventh sessions of the Utah Legislature, 1912-1916. He is the father of eight children, namely, Joseph Smith, Alice E., George Teasdale, James W., Abraham Cleworth, D. Hermine, Lyman Wilkinson and Hyrum Wilkinson.
