Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Erickson, August

Erickson, August, Bishop of the Salina First Ward (Sevier Stake), Sevier county, Utah, was born Dec. 30, 1872, in Tierp parish, Uppland, Sweden, the son of Erik Erickson and Johanna Person. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism' he was baptized March 16, 1890 ,by A. P. Anderson. Soon afterwards he was ordained to the office of an Elder and called to labor as a local missionary in his native land. He traveled thousands of miles without purse and scrip and passed through many trials and persecutions for the gospel's sake, but was instrumental in making many converts. In due course of time he emigrated to Utah and after residing a short time in Salt Lake City he located in Salina, Sevier county, Utah, where he established himself as a tailor, having learned that trade in his native land. As a diligent and active Church worker he held many positions of a local nature in Salina. Thus he presided over the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. and after being ordained a Seventy he became senior president of the 107th quorum of Seventy. In 1903-1905 he filled a mission to his native land and presided part of the time over the Sundsvall conference. While laboring in that part of Sweden four of the Elders were arrested for preaching the gospel and it fell to the lot of Bro. Erickson to defend them in the police court and in the High Lutheran Ecclesiastical Assembly, which he did in such a manner that the persecutions ended and the Elders enjoyed peace for many years. After his return home Elder Erickson was ordained a High Priest and set apart to act as first counselor to Bishop Kelsey W. Bird of the Salina First Ward and in June, 1916, he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over said Ward which position he still holds. Bro. Erickson is at present engaged in mercantile business and in farming. He is interested in two stores in Salina and one store in Payson, Utah county. These houses of business are known as the "Fair Stores." In 1899 Bishop Erickson married Elizabeth Johanson (daughter of John A. Johanson and Johanna Johanson ), who was born Sept. 24, 1878. This marriage has been blessed with two children.
