Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Bush, Richard Nelson

Bush, Richard Nelson, Bishop of the Clover Ward (Tooele Stake) Tooele county, Utah, was born August 2, 1850, at Farmington, Davis county, Utah, the son of Richard Bush and Maria Pettit. When Richard was twelve years of age his mother died, and his father being a partial invalid, the boy was forced to work his own way through the world. The only education he received was obtained from the proceeds of his own industry and research. In 1865 he drove a four-and six-horse team from Salt Lake City to Los Angeles, Cal.. This trip was very hazardous and travelers along this trail were in constant danger from Indians. On one occasion, while herding the horses at night, he and his traveling companions were attacked by a band of Indians, and although no lives were lost, two of the animals were killed by poisened arrows. During his early life Richard often passed through instances and experiences peculiar to the frontiersman. Later in life he worked for Pres. Brigham Young, and still later helped to build the Union Pacific Railroad through Wyoming. In 1868 he drove a large herd of cattle belonging to his uncle, Lorenzo Pettit, into Tooele county, Utah, for winter pasturage, and there pursued the vocation of a cowboy. At Tooele he met Hannah Maria Green, whom he married Oct. 31, 1870. This marriage was blessed with ten children, two of whom died in infancy, the others living to bring up families of their own. After his marriage he began to acquire land and pursued the industry of farming and stock raising. In 1884 he drove a team to Phoenix, Arizona, to visit his brother John P. Bush, who was located in that territory. En route he fell in with a company of emigrants who made him their captain. He remained in Arizona one year, during which he was employed by the U. S. Government in carrying mail, on tours of exploration and in various other ways. During one of his trips he was ordered by the commander to take a young lady school teacher from Fort McDowell to the Tonto Basin, through the Mezetelle Mountains where they were belated. Having missed the station they camped out all night. The next morning, upon investigation, they discovered that all the people of the station, including the cowboys, had recently been killed and saw the bodies of the dead strewn about the place. Returning to his post and reporting to his commander, he was informed he was the first white man to make that trip without an escort of troops. In early life Bro. Bush had many narrow escapes from drowning and encountered a variety of dangers incident to pioneer life so common during the pilgrimages in unexplored territory. Returning to his home in Utah from Arizona he visited California. During his residence in Clover, Tooele, county, Utah, he has served as constable for a period of 30 years, held the office of school trustee nearly 40 years, acted as registration agent, and in November, 1914, was elected county commissioner of Tooele county for a four-year term. In 1912 he took a trip to New York, New Jersey and other States in search of relatives, and met many of his kinsmen. Early in life Bro. Bush was ordained to several positions in the Priesthood and labored faithfully under the direction of Bishops John J. Child, Geo. W. Burridge and Francis De St. Jeor, successively. He was ordained a Bishop Jan. 1, 1913, by Francis M. Lyman and set apart to preside over the Clover Ward. Bishop Bush continues to retain possession of his lands, which he acquired after his marriage in 1870, and is still a prosperous farmer and stock raiser. He has sustained four of his sons on foreign missions, three (Charles C., Marinus M. and Edward Earl) of them having labored in Hawaii and one ( Lorenzo L. ) in Australia. The names of his children are Richard Randolph, born March 27, 1872; Charles Clarence, born July 5, 1873; John Wesley, born March 5, 1875; Daniel Donovan, born Oct. 17, 1876; Marinus Marion, born April 11, 1878; Hannah Rosamond, born Dec. 25, 1880; Lorenzo Lionel, born May 29, 1883; Laurel Lillian, born June 3, 1886; Edwin Earl, born May 15, 1888, and Ivor Walter, born Dec. 25, 1896.
