Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Gates, Emma Lucy

Gates, Emma Lucy, (now Mrs. Bowen), Utah's greatest singer, was born in St. George, Washington county, Utah, the daughter of Jacob Gates and Susa Young. She was baptized in the Pacific ocean, by her father, while her parents were filling a mission to Hawaii. Showing great musical talent, she went to Europe, where she entered the Royal Conservatory of Music in Berlin; later she became a pupil of the celebrated Madame Blanch Correlli of that city. While specializing in vocal training, Emma Lucy is equally gifted in instrumental music, playing both the piano and violin, in either of which branches she might have excelled. She made her debut in the Royal Opera House, Berlin, as a coloratura soprano, where she sang operas on her repertoire and then went to Kassel, Hessen-Nassau, as leading prima donna, where she gained a still larger experience in her chosen profession. She has sung, both in grand opera and concert in Berne (Switzerland), Vienna (Austria), Wisbaden and other cities in Germany, Ostend (Belgium), London and many other cities in England, Wales and Scotland. She is as popular in Edinburgh and Glasgow as in Salt Lake City. When the war broke out in 1914 she returned to America, where she has established herself as a concert favorite in all the great cities of the United States and has sung in grand opera in New York, Chicago and Newark with the American Singers Society. She has become one of the most popular artists whose tones are recorded on the phonograph and in that way has been heard in thousands of homes. In 1916 (June 30th) she became the wife of Albert E. Bowen of Logan, Utah, and has proved that she is a good housekeeper, as well as a great artist. Notwithstanding that she has gained international fame, she still retains the simple faith of her childhood and loves her home, her family and her religion above all other things, and is deeply interested in the redemption of her dead, visiting the Temples faithfully whenever she has the opportunity. She too, is a pioneer, for as an unknown western girl she was the first of the young sisters of the Church to go to Europe for a musical education and has won her way in the crowded art centers of the Old World by reason of her determination, industry and genius and, above all, through her faith and devotion to the gospel. She inherits from her father a wise, tactful manner, and from her mother much of the artistic gifts and creative powers which characterized their father and grandfather, Brigham Young. Sister Emma Lucy is beloved by all who know her.
