Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Gibbs, John Henry

Gibbs, John Henry, one of the martyrs of the Church, was born July 28, 1853 in the town of Haverford-West, Pembrokeshire, South Wales, the son of George D. and Ellen Phillips Gibbs. He was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Aug. 28, 1860; ordained a Deacon in January, 1862; emigrated to Utah with his parents in 1866, and was ordained an Elder in March, 1871. He married Louisa Obray, daughter of Thomas L. Obray of Paradise, Nov. 2, 1874. He was secretary of the Elders' Quorum, of Paradise, for several years, and was president of the Y. M. M. I. A. in 1879-1880. He commenced teaching school at Richmond in the winter of 1879-1880, and filled that position every winter until called to fill his mission to the Southern States. He was set apart Feb. 26, 1883, left his home for the States Feb. 23, 1883, and departed from Salt Lake City on the 27th of the same month. He received his appointment at Chattanooga to labor in the West Tennessee conference. Having arrived in company with Elder Robert Pearce and Joshua Hawks at Shady Grove, headquarters of the conference, March 6th, he went in company with Elder Thomas Hazen Merrill to Humphreys county to open up a new field. He also traveled in this district with Elder Robert Pearce, and preached the gospel to hundreds of people who had never heard it before, was appointed president of the North Tennessee conference, to succeed President E. R. Miles in May, 1884, and was occupying that position at the time of his martyrdom. Previous to this time he was appointed in company with Elder William H. Jones to lecture in the principal cities of the Southern States on the historical, moral, political and social affairs of the Latter-day Saints. They had good success in this calling. He was requested by the presidency of the mission to come back into the conference to arrange some matters of importance pertaining to the Church, and while performing this last duty, he met his death. While Elders John H. Gibbs, William S. Berry and William H. Jones were at the house of James Condor on Kane Creek, Lewis county, Tennessee, on Sunday morning, Aug. 10, 1884, for the purpose of holding religious services, a body of masked men rode up to the house and fired at the Elders, instantly killing Elders Gibbs and Berry and wounding Mrs. Condor. Martin Condor was also shot and killed, and his half-brother, James R. Hudson, after shooting and killing one of the assasins, met the same fate. Elder Jones, seeing that the only possible chance to save his own life was by running to the woods, fled, followed and fired at by some of the mob, but escaped unhurt. The bodies of Elders Gibbs and Berry were buried but were subsequently disinterred and brought to Salt Lake City. The remains of Elder Gibbs were taken to Paradise, Cache county, Utah, where his family resided, and those of Elder Berry to Kanarra, Iron county, Utah, the home of that Elder.
