Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Granger, Walter

Granger, Walter, Bishop of the St. George, Third Ward (St. George Stake ), Washington county, Utah, was born Aug. 4, 1821, in the city of Edinburgh, Scotland, the son of Robert Granger and Catherine McDonald. His father died when Walter was nine years old, leaving the mother with six children, namely, Peter, Isabella, Walter, Alexander, Catherine and John. When Walter was fifteen years old he left Edinburgh, going to Paisley, Renfrewshire, to learn the trade of a shawl weaver. While there, during the winter of 1839-1840, he first heard the true gospel preached by Elders Samuel Mulliner and Alexander Wright. After investigating, he became a convert to "Mormonism" and was baptized by Alexander Wright, April 15, 1840. When the first branch of the Church was organized in Scotland, May 9, 1840, Walter became a member of that branch (Paisley). Soon after his baptism he began to bear testimony to his associates who became very much imbittered against him. He also became acquainted with Miss Catherine Guthrie, a young lady who had joined the Church and who, like himself, had been shamefully abused by relatives and others, because of having embraced "Mormonism." The two, thus sympathizing with each other, agreed to share the difficulties of life together and were consequently married March 11, 1841. Soon afterwards, Walter was ordained a Teacher, and afterwards an Elder. He performed much local missionary labor and was called to preside over the Paisley branch, which position he held for about six years, until 1855, when he was called to preside over the Glasgow conference which at that time comprised 14 branches and had about 1,100 baptized members. The following year he emigrated to America, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Enoch Train," and from Iowa City he crossed the plains in Capt. Daniel D. McArthur's handcart company, which arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 26, 1856. Taking the advice of Church leaders Bro. Granger left the city for the country settlements, for the purpose of making a home, and first located in Spanish Fork, Utah county, where he commenced farming. In the fall of 1861 he was called to Utah's Dixie to raise cotton, and thus became one of the founders of St. George. When that city in 1869 was divided into four Wards, Bro. Granger was chosen as counselor to Bishop Daniel D. McArthur of the St. George Third Ward, which position he held until he was ordained a Bishop by Apostle Erastus Snow and set apart to succeed Bishop McArthur as Bishop of the Ward. Subsequently, through the changing of boundary lines of the St. George Ward, he was chosen as Bishop of the St. George Second Ward, succeeding Henry Eyring, who had been chosen as a counselor to the Stake president. When it was decided to build a Temple in St. George Bro. Granger was appointed superintendent of grading on the Temple block. Later he was called to be one of the ordinance workers in the Temple and labored thus about thirteen years. In 1892 he moved to Cedar City and later settled at Enoch, where he labored as superintendent of the Sunday school. He resided at this place until the day of his death which occurred May 6, 1904. By his wife, Catherine Guthrie, whom he married in 1841, he had thirteen children, two of whom are still living. He subsequently yielded obedience to the higher law of marriage by taking to wife Annie Kiel, who became the mother of three children, and during the anti-polygamy raid he was arrested and convicted and served a term in the Utah penitentiary from June 1, 1888, to Dec. 1, 1888.
