Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Halliday, Vernee Lorenzo

Halliday, Vernee Lorenzo, a Patriarch in the Ensign Stake, was born Feb. 10, 1852, in Bristol, England, the son of George Halliday and Sarah Jane Kendall. His father was a prominent Elder in the British mission, and was universally known for his eloquence and reasoning powers. Vernee emigrated with his father's family to Utah in 1853 and resided in Salt Lake City until the winter of 1864, when the family moved to Pleasant Grove, Utah. Here Vernee received a common school education and assisted his father on the farm. In 1868 he moved to Provo, Utah county. In 1871 (Nov. 13th) he married Rosetta E. Bunnel. This marriage has been blessed with seven children-namely, Vernee Wallace, Eve, Willard Owen, Sarah Ellen, Stephen Dean, Dora May and Carroll. Bro. Halliday was ordained an Elder by his father (who had been ordained a High Priest by President Brigham Young ), and when only nineteen years of age he was called to labor as a home missionary in the Utah Stake. In 1874-1876 Vernee filled a mission to Great Britain, and after his return he was set apart as president of the First Quorum of Elders in the Utah Stake of Zion, which office he held for over fifteen years, and in 1893 he was ordained a High Priest by Francis M. Lyman and set apart as a member of the High Council of the Utah Stake. He was elected in 1876 a member and chairman of the board of school trustees of the Provo school district, and was re-elected to said office for ten consecutive years. In 1880 he served as enrolling clerk and later as a minute clerk in the Utah Legislature. The same year he was appointed city recorder of Provo City, which office he held by re-election for years and was subsequently elected a member of the city council of Provo. In December, 1881, he received the appointment of deputy county clerk in and for Utah county. Afterwards he was regularly elected to that office for twelve years. He gained the reputation for keeping the best records in any of the counties of Utah. In December, 1884, he was appointed chairman of a committee to establish free reading rooms in Provo City. This committee in six weeks opened a suitable room for said purpose, free to the public on voluntary contributions. In his youth Bro. Halliday learned the trade of plastering and building, which avocation he followed for twenty years. In January, 1895, he moved to Salt Lake City, where he and his wife have been the managers of the Utah-Idaho Viavi Co. for over twenty-five years. In 1906 he was chosen as second counselor in the presidency of the High Priests' quorum in the Ensign Stake and since Aug. 11, 1912, he has held the position of first counselor in said presidency. Elder Halliday is proud of the fact that he has a great-grand-daughter in her fifth year and a great-grandson, ten months old, while he himself is only in his 68th year. He was ordained a Patriarch March 21, 1920, by Heber J. Grant.
