Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Hart, John William

Hart, John William, president of the Rigby Stake, Idaho, was born Nov. 14, 1866, in Ogden, Weber county, Utah, the son of John Isaac Hart and Martha Barton. He was baptized Nov. 14, 1874, by his father; ordained successively to the offices of Teacher, Elder, Seventy and High Priest, the latter ordination under the hands of Mathias F. Cowley; on the same occasion he was set apart to preside over the Menan Ward, which position he held until 1909, when he was made a member of the High Council of the Rigby Stake. At a conference held March 10, 1912, he was set apart as president of the Rigby Stake by Apostle Heber J. Grant. When quite a youth Bro. Hart acted as secretary of a Teachers' quorum, president of an Elders' quorum, secretary and later president of the Y. M. M. I. A. of the West Weber Ward, etc. After moving to Menan, Idaho, in 1895, he was chosen as superintendent of the Ward Sunday school and acted in that position until he was ordained a Bishop. In 1886-1887 he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring principally in Alabama and Tennesee. In a secular way he has filled many positions of honor and responsibility. Thus he acted as justice of the peace in the West Weber precinct, Utah, four years, served as a representative in the sixth session of the Idaho Legislature and as a member of the Eighth session of the Idaho senate and also in the 9th, 10th, 12th and 13th sessions. In the last two sessions he acted as president of the senate. In 1910 he was acting governor of Idaho for thirty days. Bro. Hart also served as secretary of the Board of Idaho Academy for ten years; was a member of the Republican National Committee, being elected in Chicago in 1912 and re-elected in 1916. He is president of the Rigby State Bank, director of the Farmers' and Merchants' Bank of Idaho Falls, president of the Jefferson State Bank of Menan, vice-president of the C. A. Smith Mercantile Co. at Rigby and director and general superintendent of the Wood Livestock Company. In 1885 (Dec. 2nd) President Hart married Elizabeth J. Hogge (daughter of Charles Hogge and Ann Stanger), who was born March 17, 1867, at Farmington, Davis county, Utah. This marriage has been blessed with thirteen children, namely, John W., Elizabeth E., Clarence, Charles O., Vera A., George L., Martha, Sarah Z., Vida L., David F., Cecil E., Joseph I. and Katherine.
