Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Henderson, Wm. Jasper

Henderson, Wm. Jasper, third Bishop of the Cannonville Ward (Panguitch Stake), Garfield county, Utah, was born June 26, 1840, in Nauvoo, Hancock county, Illinois, the son of James Henderson and Annie Harris. His mother died Dec. 3, 1841, and his father died Sept. 8, 1842, both in Nauvoo. As a child he suffered under the persecutions against the Saints in Illinois and came West with the Saints after the exodus, living with his relatives and friends. He was baptized on the frontiers when about eight years old, came to Utah in 1851 with his grandfather and located temporarily in Kaysville and Salt Lake City, where he lived until in the early 60's when he moved to Richmond, Cache county, and there became one of the first settlers. He took an active part in the settling and pioneering of Cache Valley and also in protecting the settlers there against Indian depredations. He served in the so-called Buchanan war during the winter of 1857-1858. In 1862 (July 4th) he married Alvira Aurelia Dickson (daughter of Billa Dickson and Mary Ann Stoddard), who bore her husband twelve children, namely, William Jasper, Mary Annie, Alvira Aurelia, Laura Jane, James Newton, Lucy, George Albert, Frances Evaline, Maggie May, Sarah Marie, Wallace Dixon and Elda Maud. After his marriage he settled in Kaysville again, whence he made a journey to the Missouri river as a teamster to gather the poor to Zion. In 1864 he moved to Richville, Morgan county, Utah, where he engaged in farming and canyon work. In 1874 he moved with his family to Randolph, Rich county, Utah, where he remained until the fall of 1876, when (leaving his family temporarily in Richville) he went to Clifton (now Cannonville), Iron (now Garfield) county, Utah, where he made a new home to which he removed his family in the spring of the following year. He helped to pioneer and build up that part of the country. In 1879, soon after the Cannonville Ward was organized he was chosen as first counselor to Bishop Jonathan T. Packer and served in that capacity until 1880 when he was appointed as first counselor to Bishop Ira B. Elmer. In 1884 he was ordained a Bishop by Francis M. Lyman and set apart to preside over the Cannonville Ward, which position he held until 1891. In 1887 (March 26th) he yielded obedience to the higher law of marriage and married Lydia Drucilla Johnson (daughter of Seth Johnson and Martha Stratton), who was born April 29, 1870, in Hillsdale, Iron (now Garfield) county, Utah. She bore her husband nine children, namely, Lydia Alvira, Parley Harris, Jennie, Ernest, LeRoy, Martha, Alice, Riley and Anthony. In 1889 Bro. Henderson filled a short mission to the Northern States, laboring principally in Iowa and Nebraska. In 1912 he was called to labor as an ordinance worker in the St. George Temple, where for four years he labored without ever being absent or late. Owing to failing health he was then released and returned to Cannonville, where he died early in the morning of Sept. 22, 1919, leaving a large posterity. Bishop Henderson devoted nearly his entire life to Church work and was universally known for his sympathy and kindness. Possessing a special gift of healing he was untiring in his devotion to those in need and spent much of his time visiting among and administering to the sick. At the time of his demise he had twenty-one children, sixty-one grandchildren and forty great-grandchildren.
