Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Hunsaker, Abraham

Hunsaker, Abraham, the first Bishop of Honeyville, Box Elder county, Utah, was born Nov. 29, 1812, in Jonesborough, Union county, Illinois, the son of Jacob Hunsaker and Polly Luce. He married Eliza Collings Jan. 3, 1833. They heard the gospel in the vicinity of his birthplace and were both baptized in November, 1840, by David Evans. When the law of celestial marriage was first whispered to him, he opposed it, exclaiming, "it is of the devil," but God knew his heart and in open day a messenger from heaven with three women clothed in white raiment stood before him several feet from the ground and addressed him thus, "You never can receive a full and complete salvation in my kingdom unless your garments are pure and white and you have three counselors like me." Thus he was convinced that the principle was right and he subsequently married five wives (two of whom survived him) and he became the father of fifty children. Bro. Hunsaker passed through the persecutions to which the Saints were exposed in Illinois, and accompanied the exiles as far as the Missouri river, where he in July, 1846, enlisted in the Mormon Battalion. He endured the trying march across the continent without a murmur and was discharged at Los Angeles, California, one year after enlistment. Making his way to the Valley he reached the present site of Salt Lake City less than three months after the arrival of the pioneers in 1847. He continued his march eastward through many trials and dangers and found his wife Eliza C. near Council Bluffs, Iowa. Next season (1848) he returned to the Valley with his family. In February, 1856, the Indians murdered his son Lewis at the south end of the Utah Lake. The manner of the boy's death was never known, as his remains could not be found. At the April conference, 1856, Bro. Hunsaker was called to settle in Carson Valley (now in Nevada) which mission he filled and returned in time to participate in the Echo Canyon expedition in the fall of 1857. He resided in Brigham City several years and then located in Honeyville, where he in 1877 was chosen as Bishop. He held that important position until the time of his death, which occurred Jan. 3, 1889, he being 76 years, 1 month and 5 days old when he died. The following was published in the "Deseret News" at the time of his demise: "It is said that every past life has a lesson for every life that is left behind, and this seems to be more than verified in the life and death of this noble man of God, the last hours of whose life were particularly interesting. His, too, was a glorious death, because of the blessings and testimonies of a faithful Patriarch which will leave an impression not soon forgotten. His noble deeds and his great heart will doubtless go down to posterity. Some hours before his spirit departed he, Adam like, called his children together, laid his hands upon them, one after another, to the number of 62, and he gave them his blessing; yet at this time his sufferings were almost beyond endurance, and it seemed as though he could not possible rise again. But he took up a chair, and exclaiming that God had given him strenth to bless his family, sat up for some hours. His pain presently ceased, and calling his sons and daughters, one by one, he asked them if they did not want a blessing from their father before he passed from earth. His mind was exceedingly clear, as evidenced by his bright memory, and there was strong proof beyond all doubt that he spoke as the Spirit gave him utterance, even the Spirit of God, as all could testify. He frequently clapped his hands with joy, and praised God for having revealed to him that his work in the Logan Temple-which was considerable-had been accepted; that his sons would hold firmly on to the rod that Lehi saw, and so give him and their mothers joy in the eternal world. He was also the grandfather of 124 children and the great-grandfather of 34. He told his wife Elize C., whom he survived but two months and twenty days, that their work would be done here when he had made one more trip to the Logan Temple, which he afterwards accomplished. This remark was made a few hours before her death and he added that he would "soon follow her." She, too, lived and died greatly beloved by her husband and numerous friends. Bro. Hunsaker had done much in the interests of co-operation. His charity was unbounded; he was loved by all, and looked up to as a noble man whom God had made great through his humble life. He died as he had lived, firm as a rock in the faith."
