Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Jackson, Samuel

Jackson, Samuel, Bishop of the Manassa Ward, of the San Luis Stake, Canejos county, Colorado, was born July 13, 1844, in Manchester, Lancashire, England, the son of Benjaman Jackson and Ann Grimshaw. At an early age he embraced the truth of the everlasting gospel together with his parents and other members of the family. He emigrated to the United States with his parents and a large company of Latter-day Saints, crossing the Atlantic in the old sailing vessel "Horizon," landing at Boston, and safely reaching Iowa City by rail July 8, 1856. The company with which young Samuel crossed the plains under the direction of Captain Edward Martin was outfitted with hand carts at Florence, near Omaha, and this company probably suffered as many hardships and privations during their journey to Salt Lake City as any of the many companies which made this hazardous trip in the early pioneer days. Samuel's older brother, Joseph, died as a result of the hardships of the journey shortly after the company arrived in Utah. After reaching Utah, the Jackson family soon decided to locate at Nephi where Samuel spent many of his boyhood days helping to guard the homes of the Saints against the Indian attacks, which were not uncommon in those days. In the spring and summer of 1863 he made another trip to the Missouri river with ox team to assist in the transporting of other emigrants. On Dec. 31, 1867, he married Hannah Jaques, by whom he had five children, namely, Samuel, jun., William, Bernecia, Lafayette and Mary Hannah. By a plural wife (Martha Ann Jackson) he had three other children (Vida, Fannie and Jessie). He built a home at Nephi and was engaged in freighting and agricultural pursuits. On Sept. 17, 1881, he entered the missionary field, laboring in Tennessee and Alabama where he made many friends and converts, being honorably released in November, 1883. He was ordained a High Priest by Joel Grover Dec. 2, 1885, and was set apart as second counselor to Bishop David Udall of the Nephi Second Ward, which position he held with honor until he decided to make his home in another State, when he was honorably released in 1888. Being a great lover of the western wilds and one who appreciated a big open country, he moved to the San Luis Valley, in Colorado, in the spring of 1888, and spent a year taking up land and preparing a home for his family who followed him a year later. He burned the first kiln of brick made in the vicinity of Manassa, Colorado, built a house on his ranch on the San Antonito river, east of Manassa, and later a fine residence in the town. His first venture in the sheep business was very discouraging, but with the assistance of his sons he persevered until the Jackson flocks became widely known for their superiority. He organized the Jackson Investment Company of which corporation he was president and at the time of his death was vice president of the Colonial State Bank of Manassa, Colorado, which position he had held for a number of years. He was ordained a Bishop of the Manassa Ward Feb. 16, 1896, and held this position until May 6, 1917, when he was honorably released on account of failing health. As a Bishop he was noted for his conscientious hard work and self-sacrifice. He was especially kind to the poor and always encouraged the downcast and disheartened, always seeking the development and upbuilding of the community. Honored and beloved by all, he died at St. George, Utah (where he had gone hoping to benefit his health, May 3, 1919
