Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Jacobs, Henry Chariton

Jacobs, Henry Chariton, a Patriarch in the Church, was born March 22, 1846, on the Chariton river in Iowa (his birthplace suggesting his name) while his mother was in the exodus with the refugees from Nauvoo. His father, Henry B. Jacobs, who was born in Jefferson county, New York, had joined the Church in 1832, his family being among the first to accept the faith. His mother (who was caring for another small boy at the time Chariton was born) later became known as one of President Brigham Young's wives and beloved by the people generally. From the father's side Patriarch Jacobs also inherited sturdiness of character and devotion to the cause of truth. Chariton's grandfather on his mother's side, William Huntington, came of old Revolutionary stock, and he could trace his ancestry back to Simon Huntington, who arrived in America from England in 1620. William Huntington belonged to the High Council at Nauvoo, Illinois, and later presided over the branch of the Church at Mt. Pisgah, Iowa. At Winter Quarters Mrs. Jacobs, the mother of Henry Chariton, was married to President Brigham Young, and came to Salt Lake Valley with him in 1848. Here she soon achieved prominence as a leader and as a wholesouled, sympathetic worker for the general welfare, being president of the Relief Society of the whole Church for a number of years. She lived until 1901 and left behind her a beautiful example of the good that it is possible for a devoted cheerful woman to accomplish. Henry Chariton came to Salt Lake Valley in his mother's arms, and was reared in the home of the illustrious spiritual leader and pioneer, President Brigham Young, as one of his own children. Being naturally a keen observer, and having an ideal mother to guide him, Chariton became imbued with the ideal home atmosphere in which he was reared, and he had indelibly stamped into his life the lessons of breadth of mind, honor, self reliance, thrift and devotion to God. He received frequent recognition, too, from his illustrious stepfather and, being a natural lover of adventure and travel, made several extensive trips with President Young. Important among these early activities, was the mission to Fort Limhi on the Salmon river (now in Idaho) in 1857, at a time when there were no houses between Brigham City and Oregon. At this time Chariton was but eleven years old and the impressions he received strengthened his faith for life. Five years later (1862) he crossed the plains and came back with a company of "Mormon" emigrants led by Captain Ansel P. Harmon. Frequently, too, President Young took young Chariton to St. George and other distant points as a teamster. In this way the young man became well and favorably known to practically all of the leading families of Utah. These wonderful experiences were valuable to Chariton and to others, for the boy never forgot a name, a face, an impression, or an important event, and consequently he could to the time of his death give a sketch of many of Utah's leading families. Perhaps, no resident of Utah was better acquainted with the early history of this State than was Henry C. Jacobs. His position in President Young's family gave him first hand information on every phase of life, for, as is known by all, the great pioneer was not only a spiritual leader, but was the leading figure in industrial, educational and governmental affairs. He, too, controlled and directed amusements and miscellaneous activities. Therefore, young Chariton learned every essential detail in the various lines of community development, and could give the names, dates and important events connected with the progress of the Territory. In 1867, Bro. Jacobs was called to fill a mission to Great Britain, where he labored until 1870, during the last year of which time he presided over the Scottish mission. Upon his return home he was met at the depot by President Young, who accompanied him home and said as they entered the home of the wife and mother, "Zina, here is your son, a better man than when he went away." Patriarch Jacobs was baptized and confirmed a member of the Church by Elder Edmund Ellsworth, March 22, 1854. On April 17, 1862, he was endowed, being ordained an Elder by Bishop Alonzo H. Raleigh, and in the fall of the same year was ordained a Seventy in the Third Quorum of Seventy. On April 25, 1873, he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle Orson Pratt and became a member of the first High Council of the Sevier Stake. He was ordained Bishop of the Ogden Fifth Ward Dec. 24, 1909, and was released May 5, 1914, at which time he was ordained a Patriarch by David O. McKay. As Bishop Bro. Jacobs was known as a loving father to all his people, and as a true servant of God who always sought divine guidance. As Patriarch he enjoyed unusual spiritual power. Patriarch Jacobs was characterized by a spirit of sunshine and cheerfulness. At no time did he admit defeat, and never did he have time to frown and talk of the dark things of life. This characteristic, coupled with a ready, incisive, yet always sensible wit, which was supplemented by a sure insight in human nature, made him a friend and counselor to thousands. In addition to this, system and order were a part of his very fiber. Being endowed with these splendid qualities, he was a natural teacher and friend of boys and girls, and was admirably fitted for the position of district probation officer, which office he held for ten years at Ogden. It is to be doubted if any man in Utah has done more to start unfortunate boys and girls toward true standards of manhood and womanhood than did Patriarch Jacobs, through his labor in the juvenile court. Brother Jacobs lived in Salt Lake City until 1872, when he went to Sevier county and there spent five years as a farmer. From 1877 to 1884 he worked for the Utah and Nevada Railway Company under the direction of William W. Riter, being in charge of the construction and operating department part of the time. In 1884 he became manager of the Utah Lime and Cement Company's kiln, but remained with them but a short time. In 1889 he purchased eight hundred acres of land in Bear River valley, but after one year on the ranch sold his property at a good profit. He then came to Ogden and after being associated with the Boyle Furniture Company for a few years he went to West Weber in 1894 and worked as a very successful farmer until 1900, when he went to Idaho and Canada in response to a call, and assisted in the work of colonization. He returned to West Weber, but moved to Ogden in October, 1904, where he resided until the time of his death, which occurred Oct. 14, 1915. Henry Chariton Jacobs married Susan Stringham, eldest child of Briant Stringham and Susan Ashby, April 23, 1871. Mrs. Jacobs died suddenly, Oct. 26, 1892, leaving her husband and five small children, two children having preceded her to the grave. In 1893 (July 7th) Bro. Jacobs married Emma Rigby, daughter of President William F. Rigby of the Fremont Stake, Idaho, and eight children blessed their home. Patriarch Jacobs was survived by thirteen children. The members of the first family are Henry C. Jacobs, jun. (a merchant in Mount Pleasant), Zebulon W. Jacobs (a practicing attorney in Cardston, Canada), Murray K. Jacobs (a fruit grower in Riverdale, Utah), Elsie (now Mrs. Henniger of Magrath, Canada), and Briant S. Jacobs (a school teacher and fruit grower in Riverdale, Utah ). The sons and daughters of the second family are: Susan, Mary, Emma, Vilate, Oa, Heber Grant, Wm. Rigby and Joseph Smith. Bro. Jacobs was also survived by his wife Emma and a sister, Mrs. Zina Young Card, of Salt Lake City. Patriarch Jacobs was not only a worthy citizen and an active Church worker, but was an ideal father. His family is pointed to as a model in order, love and service. The noble man's last words were appropriately addressed to his dear family when he urged them to cultivate the spirit of God as the greatest of all gifts.
