Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Jensen, James Peter

Jensen, James Peter, Bishop of the Sanford Ward (San Luis Stake), Conejos county, Colorado, was born April 5, 1873, in Fountain Green, Sanpete county, Utah, the son of Jens Jensen and Katrine Christine Miller. He was baptized May 4, 1882, by C. J. Christiansen at Fountain Green, and accompanied his parents to Colorado in 1882, when only nine years old. At Richfield, where the family located, he took an active part in Church matters from his earliest youth. He was ordained a Deacon and acted as secretary, counselor and president of a Deacons' quorum; was ordained an Elder in the Manti Temple by John D. T. McAllister and ordained a Seventy by Francis M. Lyman, Jan. 14, 1896, and set apart for a mission to the Southern States, where he labored 32 months, principally in Alabama. Both before and after filling that mission he was a student in the B. Y. Academy at Provo, Utah. In 1901 he filled a special mission in the interest of Y. M. M. I. A. in the Bannock Stake, Idaho. From his earliest youth he was a diligent Sunday school worker and later a Religion Class teacher. He was ordained a High Priest April 27, 1902, by Albert R. Smith and set apart to act as second counselor to Bishop Coombs in Richfield, Colorado, and served in that capacity until December, 1905, when he moved to Sanford and there acted as Ward clerk and president of the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. He was afterwards chosen as a member of the High Council and Stake president of Y. M. M. I. A. He was ordained a Bishop May 21, 1911, by George F. Richards and set apart to preside over the Sanford Ward, which position he still holds. In 1902 (April 2nd) he married Lettie M. Stevens, daughter of Walter Stevens and Marietta Mace, who was born Sept. 14, 1877. This marriage has been blessed with eight children, namely: Leila, Marba, Melva, James Stevens, Faye, Walter LeGrande, Ardell and Josephine. Bishop Jensen is a farmer and stockraiser by avocation and filled many positions of honor and responsibility in the communities where he has resided.
