Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Johnson, Otto Emmerick

Johnson, Otto Emmerick, an active Elder in the Oneida Stake and a resident of Preston, Franklin county, Idaho, was born June 4, 1855, on the island of Bornholm, the son of Niels Johnson and Anna C. Granlund. His parents had migrated from Sweden to Bornholm about five years previous. Otto, becoming a convert to "Mormonism," was baptized when about ten years of age, and three years later (1867) emigrated to Utah in company with his sister, fifteen years old, crossing the Atlantic ocean in the ship "John Bright" and was seven weeks on the ocean. During the voyage they encountered heavy storm and ran short of food and water. They traveled by railroad as far as Laramie, whence they crossed the mountains in Capt. Chester Loveland's ox train, which arrived in Salt Lake City Aug. 20, 1868. After his arrival in the Valley Bro. Johnson worked awhile for Lorenzo D. Young, near Tooele, and for other farmers in that part of the country, and later he found employment with a number of parties in Salt Lake City. In 1875 (Feb. 15th) he married Annie M. Jensen, after which he resided successively in Brigham City and Snowville (Utah), Malad (Idaho), and Logan (Utah). In 1884 he moved to Preston, Idaho, where he still resides. His wife has borne him nine sons and three daughters, all of whom are living. Two of his sons have already filled foreign missions and two have lately served in the world's war. In his earlier years Bro. Johnson worked as a cabinetmaker, carpenter and millwright and has been an ardent student of music from his youth. Of late years he has made farming his principal occupation. In different places where he has resided he has acted as choir leader, and when he first arrived at Preston he was called by Bishop Wm. C. Parkinson to conduct a choir which was soon afterwards organized. Altogether he has been actively engaged as chorister for about forty years, part of the time having had charge of the Oneida Stake choir. He also taught vocal musicin the Oneida Stake Academy for two years. In 1907-1909 he filled a mission to Scandinavia, laboring in Norway, where he conducted the Christiania branch choir with great success. This choir, which consisted of about sixty members, was and is now known as one of the best Latter-day Saint choirs in the world, outside of the Stakes of Zion. The excellent singing by this choir has brought thousands of visitors to the meetings in Christiania and been the indirect means of making many converts to "Mormonism." Bro. Johnson, during this mission, also worked very diligently otherwise as a missionary and baptized twenty persons; he also confirmed twenty-one converts. Returning home in 1909, Bro. Johnson had charge of a company of Saints and Elders ( fifty-six souls ) who crossed the Atlantic in the magnificent steamship "Megantic," which arrived in Montreal July 30, 1909. After his return home Elder Johnson was called into the presidency of the Scandinavian organization of the Oneida Stake of Zion, which position he occupied until recently, when his Ward duties and other labors rendered it impracticable for him to hold that position any longer. Bro. Johnson, since his earliest youth, has always been a faithful and energetic Church worker, ever willing and ready to respond to any duty required of him in a Church capacity as well as in secular matters.
