Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Capener, Arthur Rigby

Capener, Arthur Rigby, second Bishop of the Garland Ward (Bear River Stake), Box Elder county, Utah, was born Jan. 20, 1869, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Wm. Capener and Ellen Rigby. He removed with his parents to Centerville, Davis county, in 1874. While his home was with his parents he and his brothers spent part of their time working away from home in order to gain a livelihood. Thus Arthur spent a good part of his boyhood days in Salt Lake City. He was ordained a Deacon, afterwards a Priest and still later an Elder, the latter ordination taking place under the hands of Nathan T. Porter Jan. 9, 1891. In November, 1891, he located upon his present homestead in the Bear River valley, which at that time contained only a few families. In 1893 (July 12th) he married Miss Mary Larclda Garn. The first years of their residence in the Bear River valley was rather unpleasant, but after a while ecclesiastical organizations were effected in this locality and Arthur waschosen as superintendent of the Sunday school, which position he held for eleven years. In 1905-1907 he filled a mission to the Northern States, laboring principally in the Southern Illinois conference, part of the time as its president. He was ordained a High Priest and Bishop Oct. 11, 1908, by Rudger Clawson, and set apart to preside over the Garland Ward, which position he still holds. Bishop Caponer's main vocation is that of farming, horticulture and buying and selling cattle, in all of which branches of business he has been very successful. Of civil positions which he has filled in the interests of his fellow-citizens it may be mentioned that he acted as road supervisor for several years, was treasurer of the town of Garland and a member of the town board, and in 1916 was elected for a four year term as county commissioner of Box Elder county. He was also a member of the Bear River Stake. Tabernacle Board and took an active part in the erection of that building in 1914; the building cost $55,000.
