Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Johnson, Seth

Johnson, Seth, a Patriarch in the Panguitch Stake of Zion, and a resident of Cannonville, Garfield county, Utah, was born March 6, 1839, at Carthage, Hancock county, Ill., the son of Joel H. and Annie P. Johnson. In his early childhood he passed through many scenes of suffering in common with so many other Latter-day Saints at that time. When only four years of age he was with the rest of his father's family turned out of the family home by the mob, the home being burned in the sight of its owners. The family fled, leaving bloody footprints behind them in the snow. Bro. Johnson's mother died when he was only 1 1/2 years of age. Seth became well acquainted with the Prophet Joseph, who married his aunt as a plural wife. The family was driven from place to place in Illinois until May, 1848, when they started for the Rocky Mountains. Seth was baptized on the journey by Jedediah M. Grant and passed through all the incidents and hardships that followed pioneer life in the Valley, including the experience with grasshoppers and crickets and raids by the red men. He accompanied George A. Smith on his mission to Iron county in 1850-1851, and afterwards took part in the founding of Cedar City and Summit in Iron county. He was ordained a Teacher in 1856, an Elder in 1857 and a Seventy in 1860. In 1861 he drove an ox team across the plains to the Missouri river to help gather the poor. That year also (Nov. 11, 1861), he married Miss Lydia Ann Smith, daughter of Thomas P. and Mary D. Smith. In 1862 he farmed and raised a large crop of grain. As early as 1857 he enlisted in the territorial militia and served in the same for 37 years. He helped to make a road to the Upper Rio Virgen Valley, southern Utah, in 1859, and crossed the plains again with ox teams to gather the poor in 1863. In 1864 he sold out his farm at Summit, Iron county, and moved south to Virgen City. In January, 1866, he was a member of an expedition sent out against savage Indians who had killed two men and driven off a large number of horses, cattle and sheep. On this expedition he traveled through deep snow in very cold weather and had a number of narrow escapes from being killed by the arrows and bullets of the savages. In June, 1866, he moved to Toquerville, where he lived for nearly six years. While there he carried the U. S. mail for a term of four years from Cedar City to St. George, and while there he held a number of civil offices, such as justice of the peace, superintendent of district schools in Kane county, etc. He also taught school for two years. In 1865 (Oct. 8th) he married Martha Jane Stratten. During the years 1867, 1868 and 1869, he participated in several expeditions against hostile Indians. In November, 1872, he moved to Hillsdale, on the Sevier river, in Iron (now Garfield) county, Utah. There he also taught school for a number of years. When the Panguitch Stake of Zion was organized, April 23, 1877, he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle Orson Pratt and set apart as a High Councilor in that Stake. He was ordained a Bishop by Apostle Erastus Snow, Aug. 2, 1877, and set apart to preside over the Hillsdale Ward. During the following 39 years he acted either as a High Councilor or a Bishop in the Panguitch Stake and also did some home missionary work. Among the many Church and civil offices held by him may be mentioned that he served as superintendent of Sunday schools, president of Y. M. M. I. A.'s, as well as instructor in Sunday schools, mutuals and Priesthood classes. He also served as registration officer and justice of the peace. In 1895 (Sept. 2nd) he was ordained a Patriarch by Apostle Francis M. Lyman. For more than sixty years Bro. Johnson has lived on the frontiers and assisted to build new settlements and protect them from hostile Indians. He is the father of 25 children, 22 of whom grew to man and womanhood. His wife Lydia Ann bore him 14 children, namely, Mary Julia, Seth Alvin, George Washington, Lydia Annie, Joel Hills, Nephi, Sixtus Ellis, Seth, Janet Matilda, Susan Sariah, Saraphine, Thomas Smith, Emily Selesta and Jessie. His wife Martha Jane was the mother of eleven children, namely, Martha Ann, Lydia Drucilla, Jane, Dora, Anthony Sratton, Lydia Ann, Mary Rozilpha, Parley Pratt, Samuel Smith, Francis Marion and Joseph Elmer.
