Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Kimball, Heber Chase

Kimball, Heber Chase, Bishop of Eden (St. Joseph Stake), Graham county, Arizona, was born July 11, 1872, at Paris, Bear Lake county, Idaho, the son of David Patten Kimball and Caroline Marian Williams. He moved with his parents, when four years old, to Arizona and lived on the Walafil indian reservation at Hockberry, Arizona, about two years and then moved to Jonesville, Salt River Valley, and later to the San Pedro Valley, when nine years old. Two years later his father died and at the age of twelve years Heber Chase went to work logging with an ox team at a saw mill in the Hauchua Mountains. That year the Indians were on the war path and on one occasion Heber Chase rode 75 miles on a lame mule, all alone, expecting every moment to be killed by the angry natives. He went to Utah when sixteen years old and later to Star Valley, Wyoming. He returned to Arizona five years later. At the age of 23 he made all preparations to marry, but not being quite satisfied with his choice he sought the Lord in secret prayer, desiring to put a thousand miles between him and his "girl" if she were not the one to make him happy. This led to his removal to St. David, Cochise county, Arizona, where he met Mary Louisa Trejo, whom he married Sept. 14, 1896, at Thatcher, Arizona. This marriage was blessed with five children, namely, Marianna, Heber Chase, jun., Buela Codd, Vera Trejo and Zena Trejo. His wife died in Salt Lake City, but her interment took place at St. David. Bro. Kimball married Sarah E. Trejo (a sister of his first wife) Jan. 1, 1909, who has borne her husband six children, namely, Emily, Louisa, Milton Chase, David Patten, Agnes and Trejo Q. Both Brother Kimball's wives were daughters of Meliton Gonzalos Trejo, a noted Spanish-speaking missionary and translator of the Book of Mormon into the Spanish language. Bro. Kimball filled a mission to the Southern States in 1902-1905, having been ordained a Seventy Feb. 3, 1902, by Andrew Kimball. For several years Bro. Kimball resided at Layton, Graham county, Arizona, but was called from there to act as Bishop of Eden. He was ordained a High Priest and Bishop June 7, 1919, by Apostle James E. Talmage having already moved with his family to the Eden Ward.
