Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Kimball, Quince Knowlton

Kimball, Quince Knowlton, a Bishop of the Houston (now Widtsoe) Ward (Panguitch Stake), Garfield county, Utah, was born Feb. 15, 1867, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of David Patten Kimball and Caroline M. Williams. He was baptized when eight years old in Salt Lake City and about that time accompanied his father's family to Arizona, residing first at Lehi, Maricopa county, and thence moved to Saint David, on the San Pedro river, in Cochise county. At the age of fifteen years, through the death of his father, he shouldered the cares of making a living for his mother and six of her children, and never shirked that responsibility until they were all able to take care of themselves. When eighteen years of age he moved to Thatcher, Graham county, where he engaged in farming and labored as a Ward teacher. He was also ordained a Seventy. Later, he returned to Utah and located temporarily in Logan, Cache county. In 1890 (April 23rd) he married Mary Emily Merrill, after which he took his wife and his mother's family to Wyoming, locating in Bedford, Lower Salt River Valley. There he acted as superintendent of the branch Sunday school and later, when the Ward was organized, he was ordained a High Priest by John Henry Smith and set apart as first counselor to Bishop John Thatcher. He held this position four years, after which he moved back to Cache Valley, locating in the Benson Ward, where he acted as a Ward teacher; he also worked in the Logan Temple. In 1904-1907 he filled a mission to the Central States, laboring principally in Louisiana and Kansas. After his return home he served as a home missionary in the Benson Stake, but moved to Winder, Garfield county, Utah, in 1911 and became practically the founder of that town. There he acted as presiding Elder of the branch from July 30, 1911, to the summer of 1912. He made a temporary move to Cache Valley, Utah, with a part of his family, but returned to Winder (now Widtsoe) in January, 1913, and helped to build an amusement hall and construct a water system on to the townsite. He was ordained a Bishop Nov. 22, 1914, and set apart to preside over the Winder (Widtsoe) Ward, being ordained by Apostle Heber J. Grant at Circleville. He held this position until 1917, when he was honorably released because of business which took him away from home. Bishop Kimball has served as senator in the Utah legislature from the tenth district of Utah, comprising Sevier, Wayne, Piute and Garfield counties.
