Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Lambert, Richard Greves Cannon

Lambert, Richard Greves Cannon, a Patriarch in the Liberty Stake of Zion, was born July 2, 1850, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Charles Lambert and Mary Alice Cannon. As a boy he took part in the early development of the country by herding cows and sheep, driving ox teams, hauling rocks from the quarries and wood from the mountains; he helped to build roads and bridges and at an early day expressed a desire to learn the trade of a blacksmith which avocation he followed for some time. He was apprenticed to the "Deseret News" and learned the art of printing and was almost constantly in the employ of that firm until 1907, except when filling missions. Early in life, under his mother's careful training, he developed a religious desire and became an active Church worker, having been baptized July 14, 1859, by Bishop Jonathan Pugmire, jun. Soonafterwards he was ordained a Deacon and appointed to preside over the Deacons' Quorum of the Seventh Ward. About 1866 he was ordained an Elder by Elder Elias Smith and in 1867 he began his missionary labor in the Sunday schools in behalf of the "Juvenile Instructor" and also acted as assistant superinten dent in the Seventh Ward Sunday school. In October, 1872, Bro. Lambert, together with others (at the suggestion of Pres. Brigham Young and George Q. Cannon) organized a Young Men's Improvement Society in the Seventh Ward, Salt Lake City, of which he was chosen as president and John E. Callister as secretary. The record of this society was taken by Angelo Cram to Kanab and there accidentally destroyed by fire. In October, 1873, Bro. Lambert was called on a mission to the Sandwich Islands, and when the late Apostle Orson Pratt set him apart for that mission he blessed him with a wonderful prophetic blessing which has since been fulfilled to the very letter. At the request of President Brigham Young Elder Lambert married a wife and took her with him to the islands. His choice was Mary Ann Jenkins, daughter of Bishop Thomas Jenkins and Ann Smith. After their arrival on the islands Bro. Lambert worked on the sugar mill at the Laie plantation, assisting in making material improvements. While thus employed he broke wild oxen to the yoke, trained mules to the plough, built a smoke stack and ploughed with twelve yoke of oxen. Besides this he did much missionary labor, traveling extensively on all of the islands of the group; the Hawaiian language came to him as a spiritual gift. He was also especially blessed with the gift of healing and was an instrument of bringing many natives into the Church, among them being the first Maori convert from New Zealand. During his mission, which lasted until 1897, he was instrumental in bringing back into the Church many of those who had strayed away under the administration of Walter M. Gibson. Two sons were born to him while on this mission, namely, Richard J. and Thomas J. After his return from that mission in 1887 Bro. Lambert acted as business agent and assistant manager of the "Deseret News." He was ordained a Seventy in 1873, a High Priest in 1908 and a Patriarch Oct. 20, 1919, by Anthon H. Lund. In his labors on the "Deseret News" and as a missionary Bro. Lambert visited every Stake of Zion and almost every Ward in the Church. He organized mutual improvement associations in the Hawaiian mission and has always been interested in mutual improvement work. He is also a diligent Sunday school worker, and has filled many positions of a secular nature. Thus he served in the Utah Legislature in 1894 and was a member of the constitutional convention in 1895. The constitution of the State of Utah was compiled and published under his direction. His first wife bore him two sons and five daughters, namely, Richard J., Thomas J., Matie, Eva, Pearl and Tessie. His second wife Martha C. Hovey (whom he married October 4, 1884) bore him five children, namely, George Hovey, Hardy H., Joseph H., Martha H. and Karl H.
