Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

MacFarlane, Isaac Chancey

MacFarlane, Isaac Chancey, Bishop of the St. George East Ward (St. George Stake), Washington county, Utah, was born Nov. 3, 1855, in Cedar City, Iron county, Utah, the son of John Macfarlane and Ann Chatterley. He came to St. George with his parents in 1868, when only twelve years old, and was baptized by William Fawcett June 3, 1869. His father was called to lead the St. George choir, succeeding Charles J. Thomas. Isaac was ordained successively a Deacon, Priest, Elder, Seventy, High Priest and Bishop. He acted as president of the Y. M. M. I. A. in the St. George Second Ward, was an officer in the Ward Sunday school and acted as a High Councilor in the St. George Stake, etc. He was ordained a Bishop by Mathias F. Cowley and set apart to preside over the St. George East Ward when that Ward was first organized Dec. 15, 1902. This position he still occupies. Bishop Macfarlane has served in the St. George city council, acted as mayor of St. George two terms, served as county surveyor from 1886 to 1909 and since 1915 he has acted as road supervisor. After serving as county commissioner he acted on the State Land Board for four years. He surveyed the La Verkin Canal and the Washington Field Canal (now the St. George and Washington Canal) and superintended the construction of the same. Next he surveyed a canal to bring Cottonwood Creek into St. George, a distance of 18 miles. He surveyed the Enterprise Canal and Reservoir and the Hurricane Canal; he also estimated the cost of construction of and laid out the Price Bench Canal, and in fact surveyed all canals of importance in Southern Utah. In 1878 (Jan. 9th) Bishop Macfarlane married Hepzibah Smith, who bore her husband five children, namely, Ellen, Charlotte Ann, Della Maud, Isaac Chancey, jun. and Hepzibah. His wife died March 6, 1891, and on March 16, 1892, he married Christina Forsythe. Three children are the issue of this marriage, namely, Christina, Laree and Donald Chatterley.
