Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Mardsen, Lucius Nelson

Mardsen, Lucius Nelson, president of the Parowan Stake, Iron county, Utah, was born Oct. 11, 1862, at Parowan, Utah, the son of William Marsden and Sarah Scovil. He was baptized Dec. 4, 1871, by Wm. Hollyoak; ordained an Elder Dec. 13, 1877, by Wm. Nixon; ordained a Seventy Oct. 23, 1887, by Jacob Gates, and ordained a High Priest April 17, 1909, and was set apart as an alternate member of the High Council. In 1898 he filled a mission to the Southern States, returning early because of sickness. He acted as first assistant to the Sunday school superintendent in the Parowan Ward for a short time, and on Sept. 19, 1909, he was chosen and set apart as president of the Parowan Stake of Zion. He held that position until Sept. 24, 1916, when he was honorably released. During his administration President Marsden organized two Wards in the Parowan Stake, one at Enoch and the other at New Castle, and also organized a branch of the Church at Buckhorn Springs. He was also instrumental in the erection of Ward chapels at Enoch, Summit and Parowan. Among the civil offices held by Bro. Marsden may be mentioned that he served as city councilman in Parowan ten years; acted as mayor two years; member of the district school board ten years; member of the county board of education two years, etc. During the world war period he served as a member of the county draft board. He was manager of the Parowan Equitable Co-operative Association for ten years, was one of the promoters of the Bank of Iron County at Parowan, and after having served as cashier for a year he was chosen as president of the institution in 1910, a position which he still holds. In 1886 (Jan. 6th) he married Mary Matheson (daughter of David Matheson and Mary Craig), who was born Oct. 13, 1865, in Dundee, Scotland. Eight children are the issue of this marriage, namely, William, Mary E., Florence E., Dean, L. Nelson, Albert M., Glenna and Milo S.
