Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Maynes, John Alexander

Maynes, John Alexander, one of the missionaries who died in the mission field abroad, was born in Hull, Yorkshire, England, Oct. 28, 1859, the son of John A. Maynes and Jane Watson. He was baptized when a boy in the Lambeth branch of the London conference. At the age of 20 he emigrated to America, leaving his parents in London, and made his home in Salt Lake City, residing in the 20th Ward at the residence of his sister, Mrs. John H. Burrows. He took an active part in Church affairs from the beginning and also became universally known in business circles. For many years he was employed in Z. C. M. I., where he had charge of the retail jewelry department; afterwards he went into business himself and originated the lace establishment of Maynes, Wells, Schofield Co. of Salt Lake City. Subsequently he became a traveling salesman, in which capacity he made many friends in the cities and towns of Utah. In the year 1901 he entered the employ of J. H. Leyson, as a jewelry salesman, and later became manager of Mr. Leyson's large establishment in Butte, Montana. Two years later this business was absorbed by the Leyson, Pearsall Co. in Salt Lake City and Bro. Maynes then became assistant manager, which position he held until 1913, when he resigned to go on a mission to England, together with his wife who also had been called by the Church authorities to the same mission. Arriving in Liverpool, Aug. 6, 1913, they were assigned to the Birmingham conference and commenced their labors in the Northampton branch. Five months later Bro. Maynes was called to preside over the Birmingham conference, where he continued nearly a year; then he was transferred to the presidency of the London conference, succeeding President Stewart Eccles who had suddenly died at his post. Bro. and Sister Maynes spent the remainder of their mission in the London conference, but owing to the great war in which England was then engaged and the consequent scarcity of new missionaries from Zion, it was not deemed expedient to release them at the end of two years, and President Hyrum M. Smith, of the European mission, desired them to continue longer at their post, until such time as they could better be spared to return home. This desire was cheerfully complied with, and while thus laboring, and by appointment of the mission president, they went on a short visit to Hull, the birthplace of Bro. Maynes, to attend conference. By an unexpected decree of Providence this proved to be the end of Bro. Maynes' earthly mission, for after an illness of only three days he died from an acute attack of pleurisy, in the presence of his griefstricken wife and daughter, Dorothy, Oct. 14, 1915. Thus ended a noble life. Bro. Maynes had filled an honorable mission and received his release from heaven, where his name will be inscribed amongst those noble martyrs who have died for the glorious cause of Christ. During his lifetime he had been ordained to the several grades of the Priesthood and at the time of his death he was a missionary member of the 13th quorum of Seventy. Brother Maynes was a great lover of music and had been for many years a member of the Tabernacle choir, also of the 21st and 20th Ward choirs and a worker in the Sunday school and Mutual Improvement Associations, and an active block teacher in the 20th Ward. His sudden death caused great sadness throughout the British mission and memorial services were held both in Birmingham and London. His body was embalmed, and, like that of his brother Joseph, who had suddenly died in the same mission but three years previously, was brought home to Salt Lake City for burial. Impressive funeral services were held in the 20th Ward chapel on Sunday, Nov. 7, 1915.
