Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Maynes, Joseph Watson

Maynes, Joseph Watson, one of the Elders of the Church who died in the missionary field, was born Aug. 26, 1856, in Hull, Yorkshire, England, the, son of John Alexander Maynes and Jane Watson. His parents moved to London in 1862, where Joseph joined the Church in 1873, at seventeen years of age, commencing a very active career as a minister of the gospel, assisting the Elders in the branch in which he lived, and acting as a local missionary. He came to Utah in 1881, settling in Salt Lake City. On Dec. 13, 1883, he married Emily Elizabeth Keep; they had a family of eight children, namely, Joseph W., Richard J., Alfred S., Charles W., Emily J., John K., James A. and Ivy E. Bro. Maynes was ordained a Seventy May 14, 1894, by Rulon S. Wells, and later became a president of the 4th quorum of Seventy. For many years Bro. Maynes was a most active and energetic worker in the 21st Ward Sunday school, he having lived in that Ward from the time of his marriage until 1899, when he moved to Waterloo. He was an employee of Z. C. M. I. for eleven years, leaving there to enter business withthe Maynes, Wells, Schofield Co.; afterwards he returned to Z. C. M. I. and was employed there until June, 1910, when he left to go on a mission to Great Britain. He was appointed to labor in the Bristol conference at Pontypridd, South Wales, and was afterwards transferred to Gloucester, where he presided over the Gloucester and Cheltenham branches. On Sunday morning, June 9, 1912, while in the full discharge of his missionary duties, he and his companion were on their way to Cheltenham on their bicycles, to conduct Sunday school; the tire on Bro. Maynes' bicycle punctured and the two Elders stopped to repair it, but as they found it was a bad puncture, Elder Maynes suggested that his companion go on and start Sunday school on time and he would follow as soon as possible. These were his last words, as he fell to the ground without uttering another sound, and expired before his companion could summon aid. His remains were brought to Salt Lake City and buried in the family lot in the City cemetery June 30, 1912.
