Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Chamerlain, Thomas

Chamerlain, Thomas, a Patriarch in the Kanab Stake of Zion, and a resident of Kanab, Kane county, Utah, was born July 14, 1854, at Tooele, Tooele county, Utah, the son of Thos. Chamberlain and Hannah Whaile. He was baptized by Geo. Atkins Nov. 9, 1862; ordained a Elder June 26, 1870, by Wm. Heaton, at St. Joseph, Nevada; ordained a High Priest April 20, 1877, by Apostle Orson Pratt, and set apart as one of the original High Councilors in the Kanab Stake of Zion; was ordained a Bishop, August 5, 1877, and called to preside over the Orderville Ward; was chosen as second counselor to Pres. Edwin D. Woolley, president of the Kanab Stake, June 9, 1884, and became first counselor in the Kanab Stake presidency May 24, 1887, serving in the latter position until the reorganization of the Stake Dec. 4, 1910. Bro. Chamberlain's father died when Thomas was three years of age. His mother married again, after which the family moved to the Muddy, Nevada, in 1868. In 1871 they settled in Long valley and subsequently were among the first settlers of Orderville, where they took a very active part in the United Order, Bro. Chamberlain acting as one of the board of directors and for nine years was president of said board. During the Indian troubles he made two trips across the Colorado river to the Moquis and Navajo Indians; he acted as treasurer of Kane county ten years and served as chairman of the board of county commissioners. He also served in the Utah penitentiary six months (in 1888-89) after being convicted of so-called unlawful co-habitation. Bro. Chamberlain was the husband of six wives, five of them still living, and the father of fifty-five children; of this number 24 sons and 16 daughters are still living. Of his 24 sons, ten are registered and three are now (1918) serving in the United States Army; seven sons have filled foreign missions, two of his sons now act as Bishops; another son is a High Councilor, and another a Bishop's counselor, while nearly all of them have or are filling positions in the various auxiliary organizations. His families all have comfortable homes and other property, and the children have all had the advantage of schooling; seventeen have attended high school. Bro. Chamberlain filled many positions of honor and responsibility in the community; thus he acted as school trustee for ten years. He was one of the first dry farmers in Kane county, and was until the time of his demise the most extensive farmer in Southern Utah. He was also a liberal subscriber to the Red Cross and Liberty Bonds, and was always one of the foremost donators to public enterprises. He was a farmer and stock raiser by avocation and also a merchant. Bro. Chamberlain was ordained a Patriarch by Apostle Francis M. Lyman Sept. 8, 1895. He gave several hundred Patriarchal blessings free of charge and kept a neat creditable record of all he did. In this capacity, Patriarch Chamberlain died March 17, 1918, at Kanab, Utah, not quite 64 years old.
