Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Moore, Joseph Webber

Moore, Joseph Webber, Bishop of Bennington, Bear Lake county, Idaho, was born June 1, 1833, at Pomfret, Chautauqua county, New York, the son of Ethan Allen Moore and Sarah Webber. His parents became identified with the Latter-day Saints in the early "thirties" and Joseph was baptized in 1841 when eight years old. The family moved to Kirtland, Ohio, and went west in the so-called Kirtland Camp in 1838. Bro. Moore became acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith when a boy and was present at the meeting held at Nauvoo, Aug. 8, 1844, when Brigham Young, in the eyes of many, seemed transformed into the likeness of the Prophet Joseph. Crossing the plains in 1849, Bishop Moore made his first home at Tooele Valley, Utah, and in the winter of 1850 he located on Battle Creek, Utah county, and thus became one of the pioneers of Pleasant Grove, where he helped to erect the first log house. He was enrolled as a minute man and served during all the Indian troubles in the early days. Late in life he received a pension as a reward for his services in the Walker war. He was one of the guards who accompanied Gov. Brigham Young on his first visit to Sanpete Valley. In 1855 he married Hannah Young, who bore him twelve children, six of whom have passed to the other side; the ones still living are Anna Perkins, Emmeline Huff, William, Malona Oliver, Amy Allred and Ephraim. About 1864 he moved to Idaho and assisted in building St. Charles and Paris in Bear Lake Valley. When the United Order was introduced in those Wards, he put his property into the order, as a result of which he later moved to Bennington to make a home. He acted as Bishop of that place from 1871 to 1880. Disliking the long winters of the Bear Lake Valley, he moved southward in 1880 and settled at Lawrence, Emery county, Utah. At this place he prospered for several years and built a good home, but alkali took possession of his farm until he was induced to move again in 1889, and he then settled at Moab, Grand county, Utah, where he secured a piece of fertile land and lived quietly the rest of his days. Here he died July 24, 1914. Bro. Moore was a man of kind disposition, a lover of peace and a most faithful Latter-day Saint. He loved Utah and her people and always took an active part in public affairs.
