Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Morrell, William Henry

Morrell, William Henry, fifth Bishop of Loa Ward (Wayne Stake), Wayne county, Utah, is the son of William Wilson Morrell and Julia Jacobs, and was born at Kamas, Summit county, Utah, Nov. 27, 1866. He was baptized by Christian Larsen, at Kamas, Utah, and was ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Priest and Elder. His boyhood days were spent upon the farm, assisting in the pioneer work in which his parents took an active part. In 1877 he moved with his parents to Fremont Valley, then a part of the Sevier Stake of Zion, when he was ten years of age, and commenced work at an early age helping his father, the latter being one of the first settlers and respected pioneers of Fremont Valley. In early life he engaged in Church activities and has been constant and faithful in the many years of service he has given to the Church. In 1886 (Dec. 15th) he married Rebecca R. Duncan (daughter of Chapman Duncan and Rosannah Taylor), who was born Sept. 13, 1867, at Washington, Washington county, Utah. Six children were the issue of their marriage, namely, Lettie, William Chapman, Emily R., Eldon P., Nolan Elijah and Stanley. Mrs. Morrell died at Loa, Utah, March 1, 1910, honored and beloved by all. While living in the Fremont Ward Bro. Morrell prospered as a farmer and stockraiser. In 1897-1898 he filled an honorable mission as a preacher of the gospel in the Southern States. He was set apart to labor as second counselor to Bishop Hans M. Hansen of the Fremont Ward, having before been ordained a High Priest in 1893; he continued in this calling until he was called on a mission. He was chosen to be Bishop of Loa Ward and was ordained and set apart to that position by Apostle George Teasdale Aug. 7, 1899. After selling his property in Fremont he moved to Loa, where he has resided ever since. He was honorably released as Bishop of Loa Ward when he was called on his second mission to preach the gospel in 1908. He was an energetic missionary in the Northern States, laboring in Chicago, Illinois, most of the time during 1908-1909. After returning from his second mission, he was chosen and set apart as a regular member of the High Council by President Joseph F. Smith, Oct. 24, 1909, which position he holds at the present time. He has labored as the Stake superintendent of the Y. M. M. I. A. and in other callings, and has always been a diligent worker. Following the death of his wife, April 5, 1911, he married Ann Louise Mathis (a widow), the daughter of James Pace (of Mormon Battalion fame) and Margaret Callahan. She was born April 3, 1868, in New Harmony, Washington county, Utah. Her children by a former husband are Hazel, George, Marguerite,.Elda, Karl Mathis, Beatrice and Preston Taylor. Bishop Morrell has held many positions of civil trust, from constable to State and county road supervisor, and has taken an active part in all progressive movements of a civil and ecclesiastical nature. His motto has been that industry and perseverance, inspired by faith that enables a man to serve God and keep His commandments, leads to ultimate success and happiness.
