Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Morris, Hiram Bowles

Morris, Hiram Bowles, a Patriarch in the Maricopa Stake of Zion and a resident of Mesa, Maricopa county, Arizona, was born Dec. 23, 1821, in Bourbon county, Kentucky, the son of Thomas Morris and Sophia Talbot. Elder Francis D. Pomeroy of Mesa, writes the following sketch of the life of Patriarch Morris: "Hiram Bowles Morris was third in a family of seven children. When about four years of age his parents moved to Illinois, then a frontier country, settling on a farm several miles from the town of Quincy. Here he grew to manhood's estate, laboring on his father's farm, and having but little schooling. He also learned the cooper trade, in which he became an expert, especially in the construction of buckets and tubs, for which there was great demand. In the spring of 1844 he made a trip to Nauvoo, Illinois, and was introduced to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Shaking hands, the Prophet asked him if he was a 'Mormon.' 'No sir,' was the reply. 'But you will be,' said the Prophet, laying his hand on his shoulder. Mr. Morris declared he felt as though an electric shock had passed through him. In 1849, when 27 years of age, the California 'gold fever wave' struck the community where he lived and a party of ten or twelve young men, including Hiram B. Morris, organized and equipped themselves for a trip across the plains to the 'gold diggings.' The company followed the route of the original pioneers, passing through northern Utah, and pitched their camp on the Humboldt river, where they did their first placer mining. From a small crevice, Hiram B. Morris obtained over $500.00 in gold. They remained here about one week, and then followed the 'lure of gold' into the more renowned gold fields of California. Mr. Morris placer mined on the American and the Sacramento rivers and their tributaries for about two years, accumulating several thousand dollars in gold dust panned by his own hands. These were rough days, among rough men. The following incident illustrates the character of Mr. Morris: A young college tenderfoot named Jeff Netherton, arrived in the camp and partly by his superior air, became the butt of the other men, whose 'jibes' became more and more violent, until one evening a mob determined on a more serious line of manhandling, to begin with 'ding-busting' the young man. Hiram B. Morris decided that the affair had gone far enough, and stepping between the man and the crowd, he protested. 'What have you to do with it,' they asked. 'Everything,' said he, and stripping his coat, and telling the young man to 'stay behind him' he prepared to defend him with all the strength of his splendid young manhood. Seeing that he meant business, wiser counsel finally prevailed, and the man escaped, but he never forgot the courage and bravery of the young man who saved him from the brutality of the mob. In returning to the States, via Panama and crossing the isthmus on a 'burro train,' he carried his gold dust in canvass bags, stored away in an old fashioned carpet bag, which he never allowed out of his sight. There were four in his party and they had only one coat, which was worn in turns at the table, as the table rules required a coat. On reaching port in New York they were surrounded by cab men who, recognizing them as miners from California, determined to get them and their 'swag.' Whereupon Mr. Morris pulled an old revolver and waving them aside led his friends through these thugs to safety. He proceeded to his home at Quincy, Illinois, and on the 8th day of August, 1852, he married Eleanor Crawford Roberts, the daughter of Adenijah Roberts and Elizabeth Crawford. He purchased all of their household and kitchen furniture and supplies for starting housekeeping with 'gold weighed out in dust.' In the fall of 1859, his wife Eleanor had been converted to 'Mormonism' and was baptized into the Church; but he had become somewhat prejudiced, owing to treatment accorded one of his sisters, by a 'Mormon,' who after marrying her had gone off and left her. In the spring of 1860, they started west, in Capt. Walling's company. His intention was to go on to California, while his wife's continual prayer was that they would get no farther than Salt Lake City, Utah. Arriving there in August, 1860, they had to lay over, being out of supplies, and Mr. Morris went to work immediately for Bishop Archibald Gardener. The wife begged Bro. Gardener to persuade her husband to go no farther, which he did to such good purpose that in October, 1861, Mr. Morris was baptized and had no desire to continue his journey. They now had one child, Laura Elizabeth, whose birth occurred April 20, 1854, near Quincy, Illinois. They had lost one child (William Edwin) who was born Aug. 18, 1857, and had died on the plains May 29, 1860. In March, 1862, Bro. Morris was ordained an Elder by Dr. Samuel L. Sprague; and in the fall of 1862 he with his family migrated to southern Utah, settling at Rockville, Kane county, where Hiram Bowles Morris jun. was born. Bro. Morris was ordained a High Priest in 1864, by Edw. Duzett. He owned and operated two small farms, one near Rockville and one near Springdale, also a fruit orchard in Rockville. He also engaged in the cooper trade and supplied the community with much needed buckets, tubs and barrels. For twelve years he was scout master in the Indian troubles which periodically broke out in southern Utah. He had many narrow escapes and trying experiences. At one time he went out on a scouting expedition with six men, expecting to be back inside of 24 hours, but his party was led into a trap by the wily savage and surrounded, in a box canyon; and while they were able to fight off the Indians they were hemmed in for eighteen days, but were finally rescued by soldiers in a starved condition. Eleanor Rebecca, born May 14, 1866; Eliza Roberts, born April 10, 1870, and Sophia Isadora, born April 10, 1873, were additions to Bro. Morris' family. Not being satisfied with their 'hemmed in' condition at Rockville, Bro. Morris, in company with George Staples and Frank Rappleye, a son-in-law, made a trip to Mesa, Arizona, in the spring of 1882, and liked the country so well that he purchased a farm. Returning to Utah, as soon as possible, Bro. Morris disposed of his property there and in January, 1883, he started with his family for his new home, having an outfit of four wagons, five teams, twenty-five head of loose horses and fifty head of cattle. He was accompanied by William Brundage and family, William B. Lang and family, Paul Huber and family, Chas. Slaughter and son, Hyrum Smith, Joseph Hearshy and James Wilkins. At St. George the company was organized by Apostle Erastus Snow, with Hiram Morris as captain and William G. Brundage as chaplain. Bro. Morris promised his companions that if they would sing a hymn and have prayers each evening, and be faithful, they would have no serious trouble but would reach their destination in safety, which was fulfilled. They arrived in Mesa, March 3, 1883. Bro. Morris purchased property in Mesa City, on which he built his home and farmed his land. He also did some freighting and arranged for selling produce in the mining camps surrounding. He was ordained a Patriarch in the Maricopa Stake, in 1907, by John Henry Smith, and took great pleasure in blessing the people. In October, 1907, Bro. Morris contracted gangrene in his left foot, and to prevent death as a result, it was decided to amputate his limb. Although he was 86 years of age, it was thought that owing to the clean life he had led (being a strict observer of the Word of Wisdom, and in perfect health) that he could stand the ordeal. The operation was successful-the wound healed nicely -but the shock was more than his nerves could stand, and after much suffering he passed away Jan. 21, 1908, aged 86 years and 29 days. Bro. Morris possessed the love and respect of all who knew him and he died a faithful Latter-day Saint."
