Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Nash, Isaac Bartlett

Nash, Isaac Bartlett, Patriarch in the Oneida Stake, Oneida county, Idaho, was born June 14, 1824, in Kidwelly, Carmarthanshire, North Wales, the son of David Davies Nash and Mary Nash. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he was baptized when still a youth; was ordained to the Priesthood and labored as a local Elder in Wales. He emigrated to America in 1849, crossing the Atlantic ocean in the ship "Buena Vista," which sailed from Liverpool Feb. 25, 1849, with a company of Saints under the direction of Dan Jones. The company landed at New Orleans, whence the emigrants traveled up the Mississippi river to St. Louis, Mo. The morning after they landed at St. Louis, 21 persons were buried who had died with cholera. Altogether 64 died on the way up the river to Council Bluffs. The remnant of the emigrants arrived in Salt Lake Valley in the fall of that year. In 1852 (June 24th) Bro. Nash married Hester Elvira Pool, who was born May 10, 1826, the daughter of John Pool and Mary Cramer, and had emigrated to America in 1850. Bro. Nash was ordained a Seventy Jan. 18, 1850, and became a member of the 70th quorum of Seventy. In 1850 and 1851 he acted as assistant choir leader in the old bowery in Salt Lake City. In 1853 he went to California to engage in mining, but returned to Utah in the fall of 1855 and located in the 7th Ward, Salt Lake City, where he practiced blacksmithing. Joining the State militia, he served in the Echo Canyon war in 1857 and went south as far as Provo in the "move" in 1858. In 1859 he went to the States with the children who had been spared alive in the Mountain Meadows' massacre. He stayed in St. Louis, Mo., until 1864, and then returned to the mountains and settled in Franklin, Idaho, where he acted as choir leader for 33 years and as superintendent of the Franklin Ward Sunday school for a long time; afterwards he acted as assistant Stake superintendent of Sunday schools in the Oneida Stake. In 1867 (Nov. 8th) he married Martha Howland daughter of Henry Howland and Martha G. Case), who was born Dec. 18, 1851, in Flag Town, Illinois. She bore her husband eleven children, eight of whom are now (1920) living. Bro. Nash was ordained a High Priest April 21, 1872, by John Biggs, and a Patriarch Aug. 29, 1897, by George Teasdale. He was one of nature's noblemen, pure and unsullied in heart and guileless as a child. He was a great lover of humanity and lived to benefit and bless all with whom he came in contact. He was zealous and diligent in all of his walks in life, and while passing through trials and adversity his faith in the gospel never wavered or faltered. The result of his labors in Sabbath school and choir work are now recognized wherever there is a branch of the Church from Canada on the north to Mexico on the south. He was a great lover of children and possessed the gift of winning their hearts. He was also a great lover of flowers and took great pride in hav-in the best and latest varieties of flowers which he offered on friendship's shrine on all occasions. To a marked degree he possessed the gift of healing and was often seen at the bedside of the sick and afflicted. He was true and loyal to his friends and his remarkable hospitality was universally known; yet he failed in accumulating much of this world's goods. Physically he knew no fear, was impetuous and spoke quickly, but forgiving as a child. In his trade as a blacksmith he exhibited great skill. He was devoted to his family, as well as to the community at large, and was successful in providing wholesome amusement and pleasures for both old and young. While in St. Louis Bro. Nash and his wife adopted three children, but only one of them lived to testify to the kindness of their foster parents. This one, however, said that if there was any difference in the treatment bestowed, it was in favor of the child of adoption, rather than their own. Patriarch Nash died Aug. 9, 1907, in Franklin, Idaho. At his funeral the casket was carried by his fellow High Priests and preceded by the Sabbath school children he had so loved in life and who still love and revere his memory.
