Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Neff, Ann Eliza Benedict

Neff, Ann Eliza Benedict, president of the Relief Society of the East Mill Creek (Granite Stake), Salt Lake county, Utah, was born Feb. 8, 1845, in Canaan, Litchfield county, Conn., the daughter of Joshua N. Benedict and Fidelia Moses. She came to Utah with her parents when a young girl, where she was baptized in 1855 by Elder Miner G. Atwood. She arrived in Salt Lake Valley on September 10, 1861, and located in East Mill Creek, where she still resides. In December, 1876, she was chosen by Sister Eliza R. Snow to act as president of the East Mill Creek Relief Society, having previously held the office of president of the Re-trenchment Society of East Mill Creek for three years. This was before East Mill Creek became a separate Ward. When the Ward was organized, in 1877, Sister Neff was chosen as president of the Ward Relief Society, which position she held until March 4, 1919, serving in that position for nearly forty-three years. Sister Neff is known as a most remarkable woman, whose history scarcely has an equal in the whole Church. She has labored most faithfullly and unselfishly for the upbuilding of the kingdom of God, untiring in all good works, caring for the sick and ministering to the wants of the needy. Being especially gifted in various ways, she has by example as well as precept taught the ways of salvation to her associates in life. The has chosen for her motto in life, "The only way to have a friend is to be one," and she has been true to this motto until her friends are legion and she is still young both in mind and spirit. Sisters Lydia Roper Osguthorpe and Sarah Eliott Skidmore acted as counselors to Sister Neff for thirty-six years, after which Sisters Eliza H. Neff and Sarah J. Capson acted as her counselors. At the death of Eliza H. Neff, Barbara J. Debenham was chosen as counselor to Pres. Neff. Sister Amelia King acted as secretary to Sister Neff for many years.
