Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Nielsen, Adolph Mosiah

Nielsen, Adolph Mosiah, Patriarch and president of the High Priests' quorum in the Shelley Stake and a resident of Shelley (Bingham county, Idaho), was born June 10, 1848, in Christiania, Norway, the son of Ole Nielsen and Karen Oldsdatter. His mother was one of the first converts to "Mormonism" in Norway. She taught her son the true gospel in his early youth, but, like many other young boys, he was not in a hurry to embrace it, until the Lord in a remarkable dream showed him the necessity of being baptized. In his dream he thought he was in a most beautiful hall where his mother and many other Saints were enjoying themselves, while he stood by the door, not being allowed to participate. Then he thought the Savior appeared in the hall as a most beautiful personage and spoke to the people in a mild way, though with a clear voice, commending them for their faithfulness on earth while passing through much tribulation. Soon a messenger appreached Bro. Nielsen and told him to hurry down to the earth where he should find some one to baptize him. After that he attended meetings frequently with his mother. In 1869 (Oct. 19th) he married Mathea Hansen Mork and on Jan. 10, 1870, both he and his wife were baptized by Niels Isaksen and confirmed by Christian D. Fjeldsted. After his baptism he was ordained a Priest and called to labor as a local missionary. In June, 1871, he emigrated to America, and after residing temporarily in Michigan he arrived in Salt Lake City in October, 1873. There he worked two summers for President Daniel H. Wells. He moved to Hyrum, Cache county, in the fall of 1875 and followed railroad contracting until he was sent on a mission to Scandinavia in 1891. On this mission he labored seven months in Copenhagen, Denmark, and the rest of the time in Christiania and Bergen, Norway. In 1898 he settled in Goshen, Idaho, where he organized a Sunday school and was called to act as presiding Elder of the branch, which position he held until 1904, when he was ordained a High Priest by Apostle John W. Taylor and set apart as a member of the High Council in the Blackfeet Stake. In 1905-1907 he filled another mission to Scandinavia, presiding over the Bergen conference. In 1914, when the Blackfeet Stake was divided and the Shelley Stake organized, he was set apart as president of the High Priests' quorum of the new Stake. In 1915-1917 he filled a third mission to Norway, presiding for eight months over the Bergen and eighteen months over the Christiania conference. In 1918 (May 19th) he was ordained a Patriarch by Apostle Richard R. Lyman. Bro. Nielsen's first wife died Nov. 19, 1907, after his return from his second mission. She had borne her husband eight children of whom seven are still living and all married. In 1908 (Aug. 19th) Bro. Nielsen married Olufine J. Olsen from Bergen, Norway. She is the mother of four children. Patriarch Nielsen is a farmer by avocation, a highly respected citizen of Idaho and a faithful and energetic Latter-day Saint.
