Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Nielson, Frihoff Godfred

Nielson, Frihoff Godfred, presiding Elder in the Bluewater Ward (St. Johns Stake), Velencia county, New Mexico, was born May 3, 1851, in Copenhagen, Denmark, the son of Peter Nielsen and Marie Fredericka Poseman. He emigrated with his parents to America in 1861, crossing the ocean in the ship "Monarch of the Sea" and the plains in Captain Samuel W. Woolley's independent company, which arrived in Salt Lake City Sept. 22, 1861. In 1862 he removed to Morgan county, Utah, and was ordained an Elder by Elias Smith in Salt Lake City May 9, 1870. At Peterson, Morgan county, he acted as Ward teacher, Sunday school superintendent and also as a home missionary and State superintendent of Sunday schools. In a secular way he acted as justice of the peace and taught school for two seasons. Being called on a colonization mission to Arizona, he left Salt Lake City Feb. 2, 1876, together with Lot Smith and others, and settled on the Little Colorado river, where he became one of the founders of Sunset, about three miles east of Winslow, Arizona. Here he acted as secretary and treasurer of the Sunset United Order Company, school teacher, Ward teacher, Sunday school superintendent, etc. When the Little Colorado Stake was organized, Jan. 27, 1878, he was chosen as Stake superintendent of Sunday schools, Stake clerk and home missionary. When the Sunset colony was broken up in the summer of 1884 he moved to Ramah, New Mexico, where he acted as Ward teacher, superintendent of Sunday school, home missionary and teacher in the district school. He was ordained a Seventy by John Morgan, Sept. 6, 1891, and became a president of the 104th quorum of Seventy. In 1894 he bought real estate in the Bluewater country, where a branch of the Church was later organized, and where he located with a part of his family. In 1899-1901 he filled a mission to the Northern States, laboring principally in the Southern Illinois conference and in St. Louis, Missouri. In 1906 (May 27th) when the Saints in the Blue water country were organized as a Ward, he was ordained a High Priest by Rudger Clawson and set apart as first counselor to Bishop Collins R. Hakes jun. In 1917 he was set apart as an alternate High Councilor in the St. Johns Stake and upon the removal of Bishop Lesueur from the Bluewater Ward in July, 1918, Brother Nielson was called to act as presiding Elder. He also acted as Ward clerk and held both these positions until June, 1919, when he moved back to Ramah. For a number of years he served as postmaster at Ramah and later as assistant postmaster at Bluewater, New Mexico. When not engaged in clerical pursuits he has followed the occupation of a farmer and gardener. In 1877 (Oct. 20th) he married Emma Waitstill Mecham, who bore her husband nine children, namely, Frihoff Brigham, Emma Pearl, Joseph Fredrick, Mary Elizabeth, Vera, Maida Vilate, Josephine, Zelmagee and Frihoff Peter. In 1887 (Feb. 3rd) he married Mary Ellen Everett, who has borne him five children, namely, Floyd Schyler, George Edward, Frihoff Ellis, Rachel and Huldah Ruth.
