Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Pectol, Ephraim Portman

Pectol, Ephraim Portman, Bishop of Torrey Ward (Wayne Stake ), Wayne county, Utah, was born May 16, 1875, at Glenwood, Sevier county, Utah, the son of George Peter Pectol and Annina C. Peterson. He was baptized inAugust, 1883, by Volney King; ordained a Deacon when a boy, and later ordained an Elder by Walter E. Hanks. He was ordained a Seventy Dec. 2, 1895, by George A. Burr, and ordained a High Priest and Bishop Aug. 13, 1911, by Francis M. Lyman. From his earliest youth Brother Pectol has been active both ecclesiastically and otherwise. At the age of five years he, with his parents, left the home of his birth, moving to the place known as Clover Flat in Grass Valley, Piute county. Here his school training began in a small room of a log dwelling house, under the hands of his father as school teacher, and here many of the impressions which shaped his future life were received, notably those ecclesiastically under the guidance of noble, true parents. Had it not been for this, he testifies, his life might have been different, for even out in the lonely country are those who give wrong impressions which later in life battle for supremacy. After a few years, with his parents, he again moved, this time to Caineville, Wayne county, Utah, where as a mere boy he acted for several years as president of the Deacons' quorum; later he was Ward clerk, and acted also as secretary and counselor in the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. Here also his matrimonial fate was sealed, meeting his future wife, Dorothy D. Hickman (daughter of Deseret N. Hickman and Dorothy A. Carrell), who was born March 30, 1880, in Bingham, Salt Lake county, Utah, and to whom he was married June 21, 1899. He has filled the offices of superintendent of county schools, county water commissioner, county commissioner, etc., and followed the avocation of school teaching for thirteen years. Otherwise he is a farmer and merchant by avocation. In 1906-1908 he filled a mission to New Zealand, laboring part of the time as president of the Wairarapa conference, and teaching school for 18 months in the Mahia district. Through it, his noble wife with her four children struggled with success at home, truly a help-mate and home-maker. He attributes much of his success to her wise council. They now reside at Torrey, Utah, where Bro. Pectol presides as Bishop. Six children were the issue of his marriage, namely: Florence, Leona, Elenor, Fontella, Golda and Devona. Elenor died at the age of eleven years from heart trouble.
