Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Peterson, Andrew Christian

Peterson, Andrew Christian, Bishop of Thatcher (St. Joseph Stake), Graham county, Arizona, and principal of the Gila Academy, was born Sept. 24, 1870, in Gunnison, Sanpete county, Utah, the son of Thomas Peter Petersen and Maria Tyggeson. His parents were both natives of Denmark and emigrated to America direct from that country, crossing the Atlantic in a sailing vessel and the plains in ox teams. His father engaged in farming until he was accidentally killed May 29, 1873, in Richfield, Sevier county, Utah. Andrew came with his parents to Richfield as an infant, and with his mother he moved to Arizona in 1878 and settled in Brigham City, on the Little Colorado river, living in the United Order. When the settlements on the Little Colorado broke up the Peterson family moved to the Meadows, near St. Johns, and later located In St. Johns. Here Bro. Peterson was ordained a Deacon, later an Elder, and in 1900 he was ordained a Seventy by Seymour B. Young, after which he filled a mission to the Northern States (1900-1902), presiding over the Minnesota conference, and later acting as secretary of the mission. His success in educational work is the more commendable from the fact that previous to his eighteenth birthday he had only nine months of schooling, but his disadvantages were to a great extent overcome by observation and reading, and later he entered the district school at St. Johns, an institution of which he was afterwards the principal. He supplimented this by a normal course at Provo, Utah, which he completed in 1897, after which he became principal of the St. Johns school. He held this position for two years and resigned in 1898, in order to offer his services to the government for the Spanish-American war. He joined Company C of the First Territorial Regiment and was sent to the Whipple barracks, thence to Lexington, Kentucky, and later was stationed with his regiment in Albany, Georgia, where he was mustered out in February, 1899. Bro. Peterson returned to St. Johns, Arizona, and for a time worked upon a farm and taught school until he left for his mission in 1900. After returning from his mission he taught school in Eager, and moved to Thatcher in 1903, where he acted as a teacher in the Gila Academy for two years. In 1905 he became principal, which position he still holds. In 1916 he graduated from the Brigham Young University with the degree of bachelor of arts. He possesses the faculty of imparting to others something of his own zeal and enthusiasm, and as a result the Gila Academy is well organized, well managed and well taught, being fully up to the standard of similar institutions. He has ever taken a part in public affairs, serving as a member of the board of supervisors in Graham county. Bro. Peterson was ordained a High Priest by Charles M. Layton Sept. 11, 1904, and set apart as a High Councilor in the St. Joseph Stake of Zion. He was ordained a Bishop by George F. Richards Dec. 1, 1907, and set apart to preside over the Thatcher Ward, which position he held about two years. Since then he has served as a member of the High Council, and since 1914 he has acted as Stake superintendent of religion classes. In secular matters he has been equally active. Thus he served as State representative from Graham county in the 3rd State legislature of Arizona (1917-1918), and was re-elected for the same position in the 4th legislature (1919-1920); he was elected speaker of the House of Representatives Jan. 13, 1919. Elder Peterson's life has ever been in harmony with the standards of upright manhood and his good qualities have gained for him wide spread respect and esteem and an honored name. In 1903 (June 18th) Bro. Peterson married Eleanor Post of Chicago. They now have seven children: Pearl, Eleanor, Myrtle, Glen, Dale, Arman and Laurel.
