Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Claridge, Samuel

Claridge, Samuel, Patriarch, and former Bishop of the Thatcher Ward (St. Joseph Stake), Graham county, Arizona, was born Dec. 5, 1828, at Leighton-Buzzard, Bedfordshire, England, the son of David Claridge and Elizabeth Hopkins, and baptized June 5, 1851, by George Coleman. He married Charlotte Joy, a refined and superior English girl in 1849. She was born Sept. 28, 1819, at Chatteras, Cambridgeshire, England. Three children were born to his first wife and came with the parents to Utah in 1853. Elder Claridge and family finally settled at Nephi, Juab county. He was ordained an Elder and subsequently became president of the Forty-ninth quorum of Seventy. Directly after being ordained a High Priest by President Wilford Woodruff in August, 1868, he was called on a mission to the Muddy (now in Nevada), where he took a portion of his family and remained until 1871, sharing in the vicissitudes and pioneer struggles of that most difficult of all missions. He did not leave until all were released to return to Utah in 1871. He married for his second wife Rebecca Hughes, born Nov. 15, 1847, in Liverpool, England. They were married July 3, 1865. Returning from the Muddy Bro. Claridge settled in Long valley, Kane county, Utah, locating at Mt. Carmel. When the United Order was started in 1874, Elder Claridge entered therein with heart and soul. He devoted every power of mind and body to the development of this divine plan. That wondrously successful experiment at Orderville will yet be studied as a pattern for the final adjustment of worldly affairs ere the Saints return to build up the Center Stake of Zion. Elder Claridge was appointed first vice president of the Order, and in 1875 became one of the founders of Orderville, where the United Order was continued under the direction of Howard O. Spencer. In 1877 Elder Claridge went to Great Britain on a mission. He left a sick wife and seven small children at home, but nothing daunted the ardor of his testimony or hindered the fulfillment of his glorious purpose. He devoted considerable time while there to gathering genealogy, and laid the foundation for his later tireless labors in the Temples in Zion. After his return he continued for ten years in promoting the interests and labors of the United Order. In 1883 he removed to Arizona and located at Thatcher. His first wife died one year later and was buried at Nephi, their old home. He was ordained a Bishop of the Thatcher Ward. His second wife, Rebecca, who has been his faithful and devoted companion during all his later years, has borne him fourteen children, nine sons and five daughters, twelve of whom are now living at Thatcher, Arizona. His posterity at the present time numbers about five hundred souls. He has performed a truly marvelous work in redeeming his dead, and loves to come to Salt Lake City to rest for a season in the home of his daughter, Mrs. A. W. McCune, while engaging in Temple work for his kindred dead. His second daughter, Lottie, by his first wife Charlotte, was a gifted actress, the wife of B. S. Young; she died several years ago. One of his sons by his second wife, -David Claridge-is now a Bishop and has served one term in the Arizona legislature with dignity and ability. All of his children are exemplary and gifted with intelligence and integrity. Elder Claridge is an Israelite "in whom there is no guile." Unworldly in spirit, faithful in friendship, honest in his dealings with his fellow-men, pure and exalted in his sentiments, he is beloved by all who know him, and as President Joseph F. Smith once said of him: "Brother Claridge was a Latter-day Saint before he came upon this earth." ( Susa Young Gates. )
