Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Pye, Caleb Enoch

Pye, Caleb Enoch, a faithful Elder in the Church, was born Dec. 13, 1856, in Norwich, Norfolkshire, England, the son of Samuel Francis Pye and Ann Blythe. His father being a non-commissioned officer in the British army, stationed in Ireland, he received his education in the regimental schools. When about twelve years of age, he attracted the notice of the wife of the general and entered her service as a page, later going to London as a member of the general's staff. While there he attached himself to the United Brethren and became a Bible reader in that denomination, and later entered into business, becoming manager of an agency for the sale of Indian rubber garments. He was always of a strongly religious temperament and had read the Bible through three times before he made the acquaintance of the Latter-day Saints, at which time he much enjoyed investigating the principles of the gospel from a scriptural standpoint, and, soon becoming a convert, he was baptized in London Dec. 13, 1882, by Charles Henry Rhees. He was ordained a Teacher May 6, 1883, by Ephraim H. Nye, and an Elder Sept. 2, 1883, by Louis P. Lund. In 1884 (Feb. 24th) he was set apart as second counselor to Thomas Cornell, president of the North London branch of the Church, and also chosen as secretary of the North London branch. Having moved to the west end of London, he was set apart as first counselor to Geo. Cross, president of the Lambeth branch, April 26, 1885, and on Nov. 22, 1885, he was set apart by Charles W. Penrose as clerk of the London conference. In 1887 (May 1st) he was set apart as president of the West London branch by Henry Ballard. In 1896 he and his family emigrated to Utah, where Bro. Pye found employment with the Z. C. M. I., Salt Lake City, locating soon afterwards in Center Ward. Here he acted as Sunday school teacher and Ward missionary, having special jurisdiction over the North Point Sunday school, to which place he and his companion, Bro. Ben. Hollingworth, never failed to go, weather conditions making no difference to them at the call of duty. Bro. Pye was especially successful as a Ward teacher and was blessed to a remarkable degree with the gift of prophecy. By his exhortation a number of backsliders and lukewarm members were restored to full fellowship and active membership in the Church. In 1903 (Aug. 9th) he was appointed second counselor to the president of the 13th quorum of Elders in the Salt Lake Stake, having previously acted as theological teacher in that quorum, and was ordained a High Priest April 28, 1912. In 1877 (Dec. 17th) Bro. Pye married Mary Ann Morton, the daughter of William Morton and Jane Elizabeth Hedgewood, who was born May 3, 1854, at Marylebone, London. She bore her husband six children, namely, Lily, Bert C., Daisy Marian, Annie Violet, Elsie Evelyn and Dorothy Ivy, and died in Salt Lake City Oct. 28, 1906. In 1907 (June 20th), Bro. Pye married Mary F. Kelly, a widow (daughter of Robert Dolby Francis and Maria Banks), who was born Sept. 11, 1867, in Allahabad, India, and who bore him one son, John Kelly Pye. Bro. Pye died in Salt Lake City, May 15, 1915, strong in the faith of the gospel and confident that he would in the future receive the blessings pronounced upon him by the servants of the Lord.
