Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Richard, Morgan, Jun.

Richard, Morgan, Jun., Bishop of Parowan (Parowan Stake), Iron county, Utah, was born Sept. 22, 1845, in Merthyr Tydfil, Wales, the son of Morgan Richards and Harriet Evans. His parents having embraced the gospel as restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith, Morgan was baptized when about eight years of age in his native land. With his parents and younger brother, Thomas, he came to Utah in 1854, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Golconda" and the plains in Dr. Darwin Richardson's company, arriving in Salt Lake City Sept. 30th of that year. After the close of the general conference of the Church that fall the family proceeded to Parowan, Iron county, Utah, in company with Bishop Tarlton Lewis of that place, where they arrived on the 26th of October following. Parowan has been their place of residence ever since. Morgan assisted in farming, canyon work and home building for the family and endured the hardships and trials of those early days. He took part in the Indian troubles, being what was termed a minute-man, with horse and saddle, rifle and revolver and two hundred rounds of ammunition on hand. In 1866 he went to the Missouri river as a night-herder in Captain Samuel D. White's train to bring emigrants to Utah. In 1870 (Oct. 3rd) he married Margaret Adams (daughter of William Adams and Mary Ann Leech), who was born Nov. 18, 1853, at Parowan, Utah. This marriage has been blessed with ten children, as follows: Gomer M., Margaret A., Harriet, Mary I., William A., Joseph E., Charles L., Columbia E., Alma W. and Catherine. Bro. Morgan was ordained a Seventy in the 69th quorum, Feb. 22, 1865, and in 1880 he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as first counselor to Bishop William C. Mitchell of the Parowan First Ward. About three years later he was made second counselor to President Thomas J. Jones of the Parowan Stake of Zion and subsequently was promoted to be first counselor in that presidency. When Uriah T. Jones became president of the Stake, Morgan Richards was retained as first counselor, from which position he was honorably released in 1897 on account of a prolonged absence at Salt Lake City. On returning from Salt Lake City he was called to preside as Bishop of the Parowan Ward, in November, 1901, occupying that position until September, 1909. Of the civil positions that he has held the following can be named: State auditor, from 1896 to 1901; member of the lower branch of the State Legislature for 1903; chaplain of the House of Representatives for 1911; selectman, clerk, treasurer, superintendent of schools, etc., in Iron county. He was also a member of the city council and school trustee of Parowan. Bro. Morgan taught school ten years and was with the Parowan Co-op. M. & M. Co. eighteen years, being salesman, secretary, treasurer and superintendent during those years. Industry, absolute honesty, conscientious attention to duty, intense devotion to his religion, deep patriotism and love for a nation most favored of God and a genuine love for all humanity have marked his life. He took part in the Indian troubles and was a farmer and lumber man in his early life.
