Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Satterfield, Ammon Y.

Satterfield, Ammon Y., Bishop of Pocatello Second Ward (Pocatello Stake), Bannock county, Idaho, was born April 18, 1883, in Goldville, Alabama, the son of Andrew Jackson Satterfield and Johanna Lucinda Stalvey. He removed with his father's family to North Texas, where the family was converted to "Mormonism" and Ammon was baptized July 3, 1900, by Frank S. Leavitt, near Sherman, Texas. In April, 1901, the family emigrated to Utah and located in North Ogden, Weber county, where Ammon was ordained an Elder, Nov. 3, 1901, by Newman H. Barker. He removed with his father's family to College Ward, Cache county in the fall of 1902. Here Ammon held positions in the Sunday school and religion classes. Later he became an active member of the Church at Blackfoot, Idaho, and also at Sterling, having removed to Idaho, in 1905. Brother Satterfield was a pioneer of the Sterling district, taking up 160 acres of land under the Carey Act. He was one of the original locaters and incorporators of the Sterling townsite and served for several years as secretary, treasurer and member of the board of directors of that incorporation. He organized the Farmers' Society of Equity, of Idaho and Utah, and some thirty of its incorporated houses, acting as president of the company for several years. He also helped to organize the Intermountain Farmers' Equity and has been its general manager since its organization. He acted as a member of the Pocatello Stake High Council from Aug. 15, 1915, until Sept. 7, 1917, when he was chosen as Bishop. He was ordained a Seventy Jan. 19, 1907, by Joseph W. McMurrin, ordained a High Priest Aug. 15, 1915, by James E. Talmage and ordained a Bishop Nov. 25, 1917, by Heber J. Grant and set apart to preside over the Pocatello Second Ward, which position he still holds. Prior to this he served as a home missionary, was first assistant superintendent of the Sterling Sunday school and also acted as Ward clerk in the Sterling Ward. In 1905 (Nov. 2nd) he married Jane Spence of Wellsville, Cache county, Utah, who has borne her husband seven children, namely, Lucille Hannah, Rulon Spence, Ruby Alice, Charles Y., Aderine Grace, Homer Stuart and Veda Elaine.
