Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Shepherd, Marcus Lafayette

Shepherd, Marcus Lafayette, first counselor in the Beaver Stake presidency and a resident of Beaver (Beaver Stake), Beaver county, Utah, was born Oct. 10, 1824, the son of Samuel Shepherd and Roxie Lane, in Willoughby, Geauga (now Lake) county, Ohio, and christened after the famous hero Marquis de Lafayette, whose title was anglicized to Marcus for the purpose. His parents joined the Church in time to settle in Jackson county, Missouri, in 1832, and were with the ill-fated colonists when they were driven out of that county in the autumn of 1833. Marcus was with his parents through the persecutions of that period down to the final expulsion of the Saints from Missouri. The Shepherds settled near Carthage, Hancock county, Illinois, (where Joseph and Hyrum Smith afterwards were martyred) and later moved to Nauvoo. The father was a wagon maker by trade and prosperous in his business. He had considerable means when he went to Missouri, but was much reduced in circumstances by the persecutions and drivings in that State. At Nauvoo he again prospered. Marcus received but little education in his youth, but later in life acquired, through home study, quite a knowledge of mathematics. Naturally inclined to farming and stock raising, he passed the greater part of his early life upon the farm. He led a sober life, was very industrious, always made money and never wasted it. He attended Sabbath meetings whenever possible and faithfully observed the requirements of his religion. His parents being Latter-day Saints, he was familiar with the doctrines of "Mormonism" from boyhood. In 1837 he was baptized by James Sloan in Caldwell county, Missouri. In the exodus of 1846, he accompanied his migrating people to the Missouri river. When the call came for the Mormon Battalion, Marcus L. Shepherd was one of those who enlisted and performed the unparalleled march undertaken by that devoted body of infantry. After his discharge at Los Angeles, in July, 1847, he found employment, first at whip-sawing and afterwards at gold mining, in California. As soon as practicable he rejoined his people, who were settling on the shores of the Great Salt Lake. Loading up his pack animals-nine horses and five mules-with a stock of groceries and clothing, he started in October, 1848, for Salt Lake Valley. His company consisted of twelve persons, he being the leader. They came by way of Carson Valley and the Humboldt river to Ruby valley, thence across the desert and around the south side of the Great Salt Lake. They had a very prosperous journey, only one incident of an unusual character occurring on the way, when, to use his language, "Indians to the number of two or three hundred formed across the road, ten or twelve deep, and extending for a long way on each side. I saw it was fight or do worse, so we made a charge as fast as the packs could go, with myself and another ahead. We drove them from the ground without a shot." Brother Shepherd first settled in Cottonwood, south of Salt Lake City, and on March 9, 1851, he married Harriet Editha Parrish. The same year he accompanied Apostles Amasa M. Lyman and Charles C. Rich, with many others, to California, where they purchased and settled the ranch of San Bernardino. He returned to Utah in the winter of 1857-1858 at the time of the general return of the Mormon colonists and missionaries, consequent upon the so-called "Buchanan War." He now settled at Beaver City, which was ever since his home. He made the first brick in Beaver county, built the first two-story house in that locality and was the first man in Utah to keep sheep on the moveable plan. He made a number of trips in pursuit of Indians when they raided the stock of the settlers, and when the brethren overtook them, which they did at least on one occasion, Brother Shepherd talked to them in a friendly manner and did them no harm, although they were completely at his mercy. This kind action later proved of great benefit to the settlers. In 1863 Elder Shepherd became major of militia, an office held by him until the general disbandment of that organization in 1870. He was ordained a High Priest in 1853 by Amasa M. Lyman and on March 12, 1869, he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the Beaver First Ward. He held this position until July 26, 1877, when he was chosen as second counselor to President John R. Murdock in the Beaver Stake. Between October, 1881 and June, 1882, he filled a mission to Kansas and Iowa. By his first wife, Harriet Edytha Parrish, daughter of Ezra Parrish and Susanna Sherwin (who was born Sept. 17, 1831, in Brownsville, Jefferson county, New York), he had ten children, namely, Charles Henry, Mary Elizabeth, William Ashworth, Lyman Andrew, Harriet Susanna, Sarah Caroline, Marcus Lafayette jun., Edna Matilda, Samuel Ezra, Julia Esther and Henrietta. In 1869 (Dec. 13th) Brother Shepherd married Cederissa Cartwright (the daughter of Thomas Henry Cartwright and Jane Allen), who was born May 9, 1852, at Cedar City, Utah. She bore her husband seven children, namely, Thomas Oscar, Rhoda Jane, Warren, Carlos, Prescinda, Martha Adeline and Willard. For the sake of his wives and children whom he would not discard, nor repudiate his sacred relations with them, he underwent fine and imprisonment in the Utah penitentiary in 1885, during the prevalence of the anti-polygamy crusade. Elder Shepherd was elected mayor of Beaver in 1893. He died Feb. 5, 1904, universally respected by all who knew him.
