Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Smith, William Cooke

Smith, William Cooke, Bishop of the Snowflake Ward ( Snowflake Stake), Navajo county, Arizona, was born June 1, 1889, at Pacheco, Chihuahua, Mexico, the son of Jesse Nathaniel Smith jun. and Mary Ann Mitchell. He was baptized by his father June 1, 1897, at Colonia Dublan, having previously moved to that colony, where he also received a common school education, and after moving to Arizona he continued his studies in the Northern Arizona Normal school at Flagstaff and finished his education at the B. Y. University at Provo, Utah, graduating June 1, 1917, with an A. B. degree. He had given his summer wages to his family and paid his way through school by doing janitory work and other odd jobs. William was ordained successively to the offices of Deacon, Teacher, Priest, Elder, Seventy and High Priest; he filled a mission to Southern Mexico in 1909-1911, after being ordained an Elder. He had studied the Spanish language at school and at home, but learned to speak it fluently in the missionary field, and after his return from his mission he served as interpreter of Spanish in the Supreme Court of Navajo county, Arizona. Two weeks after his father's death, in 1912, he left Mexico as a refugee, together with his co-religionists and soon afterwards located in Snowflake, Arizona. Leaving Mexico, the company with which he traveled was overtaken by bandits near Dublan. They fired into the camp and Bro. Smith, who rode a horse bare backed, was hit on the leg by a spent ball and slightly wounded. With the assistance of his younger brother he built a home for his widowed mother in Parowan, Utah. In 1917 (Aug. 15th) he married Fernanda Eyring (daughter of Henry Eyring and Deseret Fawsett), who was born Oct. 2, 1891, in Colonia Juarez, Mexico. He commenced teaching in the Snowflake Academy Sept. 20, 1917, and is still an instructor in that institution. Being drafted into the U. S. service in 1918 he trained in Camp Cody, New Mexico, and later at Camp Dix, New Jersey. After that he crossed the Atlantic and served nine months as a soldier in France, returning to America in July, 1919. While in France he had charge of a military school, having fifty men under him, assisted by three other teachers. He also spent four months in the University in Rennes, France. After his return to Snowflake he resumed his former position as instructor in the Snowflake Academy. Before joining the army he was ordained a Seventy and became a member of the 73rd quorum of Seventy. At a meeting held Oct. 5, 1919, he was sustained as Bishop of the Snowflake Ward and on Oct. 26, 1919, he was ordained a High Priest and Bishop by Apostle Melvin J. Ballard and set apart to preside over said Ward.
