Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Snow, Franklin Richard

Snow, Franklin Richard, first counselor in the presidency of the Ensign Stake, Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Sept. 21, 1854, in Salt Lake City, the son of Erastus Snow and Artimesia Beman. He moved to St. George with his parents in 1862 and lived there until 1888. He obtained his early education in St. George, attending school during the winter months and working on the farm, teaming, etc., during the summer. When twenty years of age he began working in the St. George tithing office as bookkeeper and was connected with that position for fourteen years, advancing rapidly until he was chosen as Bishop's agent of the St. George Stake. From 1874 to 1884 he acted as secretary of the Rio Virgen Manufacturing Company and was for a time also assistant manager of the Co-operative Mercantile Institution of St. George. Bro. Snow was ordained an Elder in 1872 and a Seventy Aug. 12, 1883, by Edward Stevenson. In 1883-1885 he filled a mission to Mexico, together with Elder Heleman Pratt, where he had many varied experiences. In 1877 (April 12th) he married Lucy Simmons (daughter of Joseph M. Simmons and Rachel Woolley) in the St. George Temple. This marriage has been blessed with eleven children (three sons and eight daughters), namely, Ralph Franklin, Valentine Simmons, Joseph Marcellus, Lucy, Rachel, Merle, Gertrude, Marguerite, Virginia, Olive and Artemesia. In 1888 Elder Snow moved to Salt Lake City to engage in the wagon and implement business in connection with his brother George A. and others. They organized the Consolidated Implement Company and Franklin was elected secretary and treasurer, which position he held until the business was merged into what is now the Consolidated Wagon and Machine Co. He was elected treasurer of the new organization and also a member of the executive committee and occupied those positions until 1904 when he resigned to engage in the wholesale furniture business. In 1906 he became a member of the Salt Lake Stock and Mining Exchange and remained a member of that organization for thirteen years. At present he is quite extensively engaged in raising and shipping fruit and vegetables, principally cantaloups, from Moapa Valley, Nev. In 1909 he assisted in the organization of the Utah-Moapa Distributing Company and has acted as president and manager of that company since it was first organized. He is also interested in real estate and other business enterprises in Salt Lake City. From his early youth Elder Snow has been engaged in Church work and has filled many offices in the Priesthood; thus he was engaged in Sunday school work for about twenty-two years, was a member of the first Stake superintendency of religion classes organized in the Ensign Stake and later became Stake superintendent. In 1904, when the Ensign Stake was organized, he was chosen as a member of the High Council, having previously (September, 1885) been ordained a High Priest by Bishop William B. Preston. He served as a High Councilor for fifteen years. In March, 1912, he was called to labor as an ordinance worker in the Salt Lake Temple, continuing thus for upwards of three years. In 1918 (Sept. 22nd) he was set apart as second counselor to Richard W. Young in the presidency of the Ensign Stake, and on June 30, 1919, he was set apart as first counselor to President Young. Bro. Snow's wife Lucy died March 4, 1905, and on August 10, 1906, he married Leah Clayton, who died Dec. 23, 1916.
