Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Stapley, Orley Seymour

Stapley, Orley Seymour, first Counselor in the Stake presidency of the Maricopa Stake and a resident of Mesa, Maricopa county, Arizona, was born April 28, 1872, at Toquerville, Washington county, Utah, the son of Thomas Stapley and Mary Ann Bliss. He was baptized July 18, 1880, by James Jackson, in Toquerville, where he also received a common school education. In 1881, when about ten years old, he went with his father's family to Arizona, where his father and brothers labored for some time grading on the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad. Early in 1882 the family located at Mesa and soon after moved into the Alma Ward, near the present site of Mesa, in the Salt Lake Valley. Here Orley S. was ordained a Deacon, when the Alma Ward was first organized, and was also an active member in the Sunday school and Primary Associations, while helping his father in his farming operation. As his father was born partially blind and always had to have a helper near when working, Orley S. had to take the responsibility of the farm and help to take care of the family. In 1889 his father lost all his property, after which Orley S. commenced manipulating financial affairs for his parents and himself, working at first for small wages, doing farm and dairy work, but by this means he learned the dairy business as well as the butcher business proficiently. In 1894 (Aug. 22nd) he married Polly May Hunsaker (daughter of Alexander and Malissa Johnson), who was born Dec. 24, 1874. The children by this marriage are the following: Orley Glenn, Delbert, Leon, Loral, Aaron, Lynn Erwin, Zelda La Rue, Thyrle H., Zola May, Cleo Malissa and Wayne Curtis. Brother Stapley has been active in Church affairs from his early youth. He acted as president of the Alma Ward Y. M. M. I. A. and also after his removal to Mesa in 1895. He was ordained an Elder in 1897 and received his blessing in the Salt Lake Temple. In March, 1897, he went into the hardware business, together with his father-in-law (Alexander Hunsaker), with a capital of $500. This partnership existed until 1898, when Brother Stapley sold out his interests, being called on a mission to the Southern States. He filled this mission from 1898 to 1900, laboring principally in Mississippi. When he was set apart for this mission he was promised that he would be worth more if he responded to the call than he would if he had failed to go. He sacrificed his business in order to fill his mission, and the promise was literally fulfilled, for when he returned and entered into business again he became a most successful merchant. The business which he commenced in 1900 is now worth $300,000. Brother Stapley was ordained a Seventy May 17, 1898, by Seymour B. Young, when he was set apart for his mission. In 1901 he was appointed superintendent of the Mesa Sunday school, which position he held until 1907, during which time he made the unprecedented record of never being late but once in his attendance at the school. In 1908 he was made Stake superintendent of Sunday schools. He also acted as a president of the 90th quorum of Seventy. When James W. Lesueur was chosen as president of the Maricopa Stake, Brother Stapley was ordained a High Priest by Francis M. Lyman and set apart as first counselor to President Lesueur, which position he still holds. Brother Stapley has also been active as a civil officer; thus he served as a city councilman in Mesa for four years and served as senator in the Arizona legislature from 1914 to 1915, assisting to correct extravagance in State affairs and political machinery. He acted as chairman of the appropriation committee and also as chairman of State accounts and methods of business. In 1910 he took a leading part in the prohibition movement, making Mesa the first city in Arizona which "went dry." He continued his efficient work until the whole State was "dry." Saloon-keepers cursed and swore against him all the time, but he won the victory. His present hardware business in Mesa is owned by himself and sons, and he is also connected with several other business enterprises. Thus he acts as vice president and chief shareholder in the First National Bank of Mesa, secretary and treasurer of the South Side Gas & Electric Company, and is director of many other business concerns, doing business also in Phoenix, the capital of Arizona. He is agent for all branches of the International Harvester Company of America in the Salt River Valley and represents other interstate businesses in Arizona.
