Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Sterrett, William Wilson

Sterrett, William Wilson, a Patriarch in the Church and a Utah pioneer, was born Nov. 18, 1825, in Ross, Butler county, Ohio, the son of Alexander Sterrett and Elizabeth Baxter. In a brief autobiography written by Bro. Sterrett he writes: "My schooling consisted of reading, writing and arithmetic; books in those days were scarce. My mother was naturally a good woman and taught me to be honest and respect the name of Deity. Father was worldly-minded, but an honest man. I served two years at the tailoring trade and spent a few years on the Ohio and Mississippi rivers steam-boating. At the commencement of the Mexican war I went to Mexico in the quarter-master's department, and returned to Ohio in 1843. Having heard rumors of the discovery of gold in California, I got the gold fever, and in the spring of 1849 started for California, but only got to Iowa that season. In the spring of 1850 I started again and arrived in Salt Lake City Aug. 8, 1850. In all my ups and downs I had many temptations to pass through, and I also had many reflections in regard to a future state. Always being a diligent reader I read everything that came in my way, and during the winter of 1850 I read the Book of Mormon, the Voice of Warning and other Church works and became convinced of the truth of "Mormonism." There were many Gentiles in Salt Lake City during that winter and some of them joined the Church; they were sometimes called winter Mormons. I held off, not wishing to be known by that appellation, but in May, 1851, I was baptized by Elder Reuben McBride in the waters of City Creek, and married Mary Jane, the daughter of Simeon Crandell. The same fall I was ordained a Teacher by James Hendricks. I continued in that office until 1852, when I was ordained a Seventy by Geo. D. Grant. I helped to break land for the foundation of the Temple and in November, 1853, I went with John Nebeker to Fort Bridger, near which place I helped to build Fort Supply. In December, 1853, when we found that we did not have flour enough to last until spring eight of us were sent with four wagons to Salt Lake City for another supply. The winter set in early and before we got to the top of the Big Mountain the snow became so deep that we had to camp, the oxen not being able to pull the wagons. We counseled together as to what wasbest to do; some were in favor of returning, but others were bent on pushing ahead. Though the snow was about five feet deep and still snowing, six of us concluded to try and tramp a trail to the top of the mountain. We started about 8 o'clock p. m. and took it single file, one keeping the lead as long as he could stand it, and then falling back to the rear. By this means we worked our way, reaching the top the next morning. We then returned and drove our oxen along our trail. On reaching the summit the crust bore them up. We left our wagons there that winter, and sent a man on horseback to the City for help; by 2 o'clock the same day plenty of help came and we reached the City that night. I spent the winter in the City and in the spring went back to Fort Supply, Orson Hyde going with us." In the spring of 1855 Bro. Sterrett was called, together with others on the so-called Elk Mountain Mission, during which he was exposed to great danger but while some of his brethren were killed by the savages he escaped and returned after suffering untold hardships on the return journey to Salt Lake City. (See Elk Mountain Mission. ) In November, 1855 he was sent with a posse to Humboldt, now in Nevada, to arrest Carl Murrey, accused of murder. He captured his man. The following year, Bro. Sterritt experienced famine, the grasshoppers having destroyed the crops. In the spring of 1856 he was called with his family to settle at Fort Supply where he became a successful farmer and operated a saw mill. During the Johnston army trouble he was very helpful in defending his people. In the spring of 1858 he went to Beaver, but returned to Salt Lake City later in the season and engaged in hotel business. In the spring of 1856 he hired out to Major Howard Egan to do duty on the mail line. After residing a short time in Davis county, Utah, he went to Bear Lake Valley in 1863, taking part in the settling of Paris where he subsequently followed merchandizing together with Joseph C. Rich. In 1867 he married Sarah Ann Oakley. In 1869 he filled a short mission to Ohio and in 1871 he moved to Soda Springs. At the organization of the Bear Lake Stake he was ordained a High Priest and became a member of the High Council. He was the first postmaster of Paris and was also postmaster at Soda Springs. He moved to Gentile Valley and was elected justice of the peace. When a post office was established at Cove, he was appointed postmaster. Subsequently he took a contract to carry mail. On July 25, 1898, at a conference held in Gentile Valley, Bannock county, Idaho, he was ordained a Patriarch by Mathias F. Cowley. Patriarch Sterrett died in Bannock county, Idaho, about 1916.
