Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Stewart, Urban Van

Stewart, Urban Van, a Utah pioneer of 1847, was born Nov. 9, 1817, in Overton county, Tennesee, the son of Wm. Stewart and Elizabeth Van Hooser. When five years of age he moved with his parents to Madison county, Illinois, where he lived till 1835, when he went to Missouri, where he, as a convert to "Mormonism," was baptized July 15, 1836, by Seymour Brunson in Log Creek, near Far West, Missouri. He was married in the same place to Lydia Gage Jacobs in 1837. At this time the mob was very hostile and by the advice of the Prophet Joseph Smith the family moved into Far West where Bro. Stewart stood guard during those troublous times. In the early spring of 1839 he moved to Quincy, Illinois, and in 1840 he located on Sugar Creek, Iowa, where his house and nearly everything he had was destroyed by fire. In the spring of 1841 he moved to Nauvoo, working much of the time on the Nauvoo Temple until 1843, when he and his brother Levi were called on a mission to southern Illinois, but were recalled shortly after on account of the death of their mother and Urban's little son Henry. He took part in the trials incident to those times in and around Nauvoo, and besides his labors on the public works he spent much time on guard duty. In 1845 he was ordained a Seventy by Daniel S. Miles and at the time of the exodus in 1846 he traveled west and located temporarily with his co-religionists at Winter Quarters on the west bank of the Missouri river. He went up the river to what was called "Brigham's Farm" and helped to put in crops, and in June, 1847, he left for Great Salt Lake Valley, where he arrived in September, 1847, bringing provisions for eighteen months, together with farming tools and other articles in one wagon. Bro. Stewart took part in the White Mountain Mission and helped to put in crops in Clover Valley, now in Nevada, which place afterwards was given up to the Indians. Bro. Stewart endured the hardships incident to the early settlement of Utah uncomplainingly and frequently subsisted on roots and whatever could be obtained to keep himself and family alive. He was one of the pioneers of Beaver, Utah, where he resided for a great many years, taking a most active part in establishing the institutions of that place. Subsequently he moved to Wayne county and became a resident of Grover, where he acted as presiding Elder and where he died Dec. 25, 1898, eighty-one years old. Bro. Stewart had five families and was the father of thirty-three children, twenty-four of whom survived him. At the time of his demise he also had seventy-four grandchildren, twelve great-grandchildren and a number of great-great-grandchildren. By his first wife, Lydia Gates Jacobs, he had three children, namely, Edna, Henry and Urban Jacobs. By his second wife, Elizabeth Luck, whom he married May 21, 1854, he became the father of six children, namely, Van, Levi, Elizabeth, Rosanna E., Sarah V. and Eunice A. By his third wife, Mary Ann Jones (daughter of William E. and Mary Jones), whom he married March 11, 1860, he became the father of ten children, namely, Mary Jane, Liza Ann, Martha Ellen, William Urban, Daniel Jones, Margaret Caroline, Robert Charles, George Heber, Lewis Jenkins and Clara Bell. By his fourth wife, Ellen Adams (daughter of David R. Adams and Mary Cook), to whom he was married July 14, 1865, he became the father of ten children, namely, Mary Ellen, David James, Urban Van, John Riley, Lydia Catherine, Andrew Adams, Rosa May, Levi, Effie Elizabeth and Walter Ernest. By his fifth wife, Keziah Jones (daughter of William and Mary Jones), whom he married July 16, 1855, he became the father of three children, namely, Margaret, Edward and Susan. Bro. Stewart and his wife Elizabeth Luck also adopted one child, a boy, named Joseph Stewart. Bro. Stewart was a man of stirling qualities, a strict observer of the Word of Wisdom and a faithful Latter-day Saint.
