Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Stohl, Oleen Nilson

Stohl, Oleen Nilson, president of the Box Elder Stake of Zion (Box Elder county, Utah), was born Feb. 19, 1865, in the Sugar House Ward, Salt Lake county, Utah, the son of Ole N. Stohl and Christina Johnson. He was baptized Sept. 14, 1873, by Elijah A. Box; ordained a Deacon Nov. 13, 1882, by Lorenzo Wright; ordained a Teacher May 13, 1885, by C. Martindale; ordained a Seventy June 7, 1885, by Eli M. Lee, and ordained a High Priest Sept. 20, 1897, by Rudger Clawson. About one and a half years after his birth, his parents moved to Brigham City, Utah, where the family has resided ever since. From his early youth Bro. Oleen N. Stohl was an energetic and faithful Church worker, and held many positions in the local organizations. Thus he served as secretary and president of the Brigham City Fourth Ward Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association, and as assistant superintendent and later as superintendent of the Box Elder Stake Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. He also labored as a teacher and secretary of local Sabbath schools, and as a Ward teacher. While holding the office of a Seventy he acted as president of the 58th quorum of Seventy, and labored as a home missionary in the Box Elder Stake. Oleen N. Stohl was industrious and trustworthy from his earliest youth and he soon learned the dignity of becoming a contributor to the family income. As a small boy he herded sheep on the foot hill near his home. Desiring to learn a trade he welcomed the opportunity to enter the Co-op cabinet shop of Brigham City and there learned the trade of cabinet making and carpentry, and while still in his teens he left home for a time to work in Albion, Idaho. He was attracted to Albion by work more remunerative than that which he could obtain in his own community. While residing in Cassia county he was set apart as a traveling local missionary in the Cassia Stake, and though a comparative stranger, and working among non-Mormons, and even anti-Mormons, he always defended the faith and lived his religion so consistently that he won the admiration and friendship of non-Mormons as well as "Mormons." His education was obtained in the common schools of Utah and the Deseret University. For two years he taught school in Brigham City and acted as a bookkeeper for the Bear River Canal Company. Subsequently he became cashier of the Bank in Brigham City. He has also held a number of civil offices. Thus he acted as clerk of Box Elder county for two terms, giving general satisfaction. He also acted as school trustee in Brigham City for six years, during which time the splendid Central school building was erected at a cost of $25,000. He was for a number of years cashier of the Bank of Brigham City, a director and a member of the executive committee of the First National Bank of Brigham City, a director of the Promontory Curlew Co. and a trustee of the B. Y. College at Logan. The culmination of his efforts in business affairs is the Stohl Furniture Co., which institution is largely his creation and in it he held the position of president and manager at the time of his death. In 1889-1891 he filled a mission to Scandinavia, laboring in the Skåne, Göteborg and Stockholm conferences in Sweden. He was a most successful and efficient missionary. In 1892 (Sept. 7th) Elder Stohl married Sarah Peters (daughter of John D. Peters and Louisa E. Bingham). She bore her husband six children, namely, Sarah Edna, Hazel, Anna Laura, Lloyd Oleen, John Raymond and Clark. In 1899 Elder Stohl was chosen to act as second counselor to Charles Kelly, president of the Box Elder Stake, which position he held until May 29, 1905, when he was chosen and set apart as president of the Box Elder Stake, which position he held until the time of his death, which occurred at his home in Brigham City, after a lingering illness, Nov. 28, 1916. Pres. Stohl was affectionate and sympathetic in his nature, possessing the love and confidence of all who knew him. On a certain occasion the late President Joseph F. Smith remarked that there was not a better man living, in or out of the Church, than Oleen N. Stohl. At the time of his death a friend wrote of him as follows: "The passing of President Stohl is one of the greatest losses this community and Stake have ever sustained, his rare gifts and qualities are not easily duplicated and he has become so established in the affections of his people that every member of the Stake will feel a keen sense of personal loss in his demise. He was a man of God who magnified his calling and a leader who presided in love and humility, wisdom and justice."
