Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Stout, HoseaPPStout, Hosea

Stout, HoseaPPStout, Hosea, a prominent and faithful Elder in the Church, was born Sept. 18, 1810, at Danville, Mercer county, Kentucky, the son of Joseph Stout and Anna Smith. When Hosea was about eight years old his father moved with his family to Clinton county, Ohio, and when he was eighteen years of age, he went to Tazewell county, Illinois, where he first heard the gospel, and where he taught school for a number of years. In 1837 he removed to Caldwell county, Missouri, where he was baptized Aug. 24, 1838. He married Samantha Peck Jan. 7, 1838; she was born Oct. 12, 1821. After his baptism, Bro. Stout shared in all the persecutions to which the Saints were exposed in Missouri. He participated in the Crooked river battle and was the first man to approach Apostle David W. Patten, after that hero had been mortally wounded. After the surrender of the Prophet Joseph and others into the hands of the mob militia at Far West in October, 1838, Hosea Stout, who had taken an active part in the defense of the Saints, found it necessary, in company with twenty-five others of the brethren, to flee northward, in order to save their lives, and after great suffering, the weather being cold, Bro. Stout reached Quincy, Illinois, where his wife joined him in the spring of 1839. In the following fall (1839) he settled temporarily on Sugar Creek, Iowa, where his wife Samantha died Nov. 29, 1839. At a meeting held at Commerce (later Nauvoo), Illinois, Oct. 23, 1839, he was chosen as an Elder in the Church, together with many others. In March, 1840, he moved to Nauvoo, where he was appointed to act as clerk of the High Council. In 1840 (Nov. 29th) Bro. Stout married Louisa Taylor, who was born Oct. 19, 1819, and who subsequently bore him eight children, namely, Lydia Sarah (born Dec. 20. 1841, and died in infancy), William Hosea (born April 16, 1843, and died about three years afterwards during the exodus of the Saints, through exposure), Hyrum (born in the fall of 1844 and died at Mount Pisgah, Iowa, May 9, 1846), Louisa (born April 22, 1846, and died Aug. 5, 1847), Elizabeth Ann (born March 19, 1848), Hosea junior (born April 5, 1850), Eli H. (born Sept. 17, 1851) and Joseph Allen, who was born Dec. 30, 1852 and died ten days later. The mother also died Jan. 11, 1853, two days after the baby. When the Nauvoo Legion was organized Feb. 4, 1841, Hosea Stout was chosen as second lieutenant of one of the companies of that organization. Soon he became captain of one of the companies and advanced rapidly until he held the office of colonel and he also did service as acting brigadier-general. When the Missourians tried to kidnap the Prophet Joseph in 1841, Hosea Stout was among those who, at the risk of their own lives, placed themselves in the front ranks to rescue the Prophet from his persecutors. Bro. Stout also served on the Nauvoo police force, part of the time as captain of the force. He was a most active and efficient officer in the defence of Nauvoo during all the mobbings and persecutions which culminated in the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph and others, and finally in the exodus of the Saints from Nauvoo. When the Prophet Joseph, early in 1844, called for volunteers to go to the Rocky Mountains as explorers to seek a new home for the Saints, Hosea Stout was among the first to respond to that call, and though the expedition never started, he would have been willing to undertake any move of that kind in order to serve and save his people. In April, 1844, he was sent on a short mission to Kentucky. Bro. Stout married Lucretia Fisher as a plural wife April 20, 1845, in Nauvoo, Illinois, and on June 30, 1845, he also married Marinda Bennett. Lucretia had no children by Bro. Stout, but Marinda Bennett died in childbed Sept. 26, 1846, while in exile. When a mercantile and mechanical association was organized in Nauvoo in January, 1845, Hosea was elected one of the twelve trustees to control the association, of which he soon afterwards became the general secretary. After the State legislature of Illinois had taken away the city charter from Nauvoo and a small portion of the city was incorporated as the town of Nauvoo April 16, 1845, Hosea was appointed captain of the police in the government of the town. On a certain occasion, in September, 1845, he and a number of other brethren were arrested on a trumped-up charge of treason but, after trial in Carthage, they were acquitted. In December, 1845, Bro. Stout was appointed to labor in the Nauvoo Temple, in which he also received his blessings. He was ordained a Seventy Oct. 24, 1844, under the hands of Benjamin L. Clapp and others and became a member of the 11th quorum of Seventy. Later he was chosen as one of the presidents and finally became the senior president of that quorum. At the time of the general exodus of the Saints in 1846 he, as captain of police, superintended the movements of the Saints in the crossing of the Mississippi river and continued active throughout the exodus, rendering most excellent service. When the first general encampment of the exiled Saints was made on Sugar Creek, Hosea Stout, with about one hundred other men, served as a police force for the encampment, and when the camps arrived on the Missouri river in the summer of 1846 he was appointed to gather up such members of the Nauvoo Legion as could be found at or near Cutler's Park and help to organize them for service. He was appointed lieutenant-colonel of infantry in the Nauvoo Legion Sept. 26, 1846. When the headquarters of the Church were moved from Cutler's Park to Winter Quarters in September, 1846, Hosea again rendered efficient service as captain of the guard, and in November, 1846, President Brigham Young appointed him to select a city guard and police for Winter Quarters with himself as captain. Bro. Stout spent the winter of 1846-1847 with his family (consisting of his wife Louise and her children) at Winter Quarters. Early in 1847 he frequently met in council with President Brigham Young and the other Church leaders as preparations were being made for the pioneers to start west and find a new home for the Saints. He was chosen as one of the pioneers and was even selected to act as captain of the guard on the overland journey, but as his services were needed at Winter Quarters the plan was changed, and he remained to assist the Saints on the frontiers, where hostile Indians sometimes menaced the safety of the Saints, and he participated in more than one expedition against the red man. In the fall of 1847 Capt. Stout with others went out on the plains quite a distance to meet the returning pioneers, whom they escorted safely to Winter Quarters. In January, 1848, Bro. Stout, with many others, signed a petition to the government for the establishment of a post office at Kanesville (the present Council Bluffs). After taking a most active part in assisting the leaders of the Church to organize companies for the westward journey Hosea Stout crossed the plains in Heber C. Kimball's company, doing service as captain of the night guard, and arrived in Salt Lake Valley in September, 1848. When the Nauvoo Legion was re-organized in the Valley May 26, 1849, Hosea Stout was elected first lieutenant of mounted dragoons. In the early Utah days he frequently served as a member of committees appointed to celebrate Independence day, Pioneer day, etc. When the provisional government of the "State of Deseret" was organized in 1849, he was chosen as attorney-general of that government, and in 1851 he was elected a member of the first legislative assembly of the Territory of Utah, being elected as a member from Salt Lake county. In October, 1851, he was appointed a regent of the Deseret University pro tem. At a special conference held in Salt Lake City in August, 1852, Hosea Stout was called on a mission to China. He preached his farewell sermon in the Old Tabernacle, Salt Lake City, Oct. 17, 1852, and soon afterwards started on his mission, acting as captain of a company of missionaries bound for different parts of the world, in traveling over the so-called southern route, or Spanish Trail, and arrived in San Bernardino, California, Nov. 24, 1852. Soon afterwards he and fellow-missionaries secured passage on Pacific ocean ships, and Bro. Stout, together with two other missionaries, arrived in Hong Kong, China, April 27, 1853. They immediately turned their attention to missionary labors, but found that the Chinese were not inclined to receive the gospel. Consequently the Elders returned to America in the fall of the same year and Bro. Stout reached his home in Salt Lake City, Dec. 8, 1853. In 1854 he was again elected a member of the house of representatives of the Utah legislature and did excellent service during that and subsequent sessions. He usually served as a member of the committee on judiciary and in the session commencing in December, 1856, he served as speaker of the house. In 1855 (July 19th) he married Alvira Wilson (daughter of Lewis D. Wilson and Nancy Ann Waggoner), who was born April 21, 1844, in Ohio. She bore her husband eleven children, namely, Lewis W. (born April 27, 1856), Brigham H. (born Sept. 5, 1857), Alfred L. (born July 8, 1859), Allen E. (born Feb. 18, 1861), William H. (born Oct. 10, 1863), Elvira (born June 5, 1866), Frank H. (born June 9, 1868), Edgar W. (born Aug. 2, 1870), Arthur and Ida, twins, (born Feb. 9, 1875) and Charles S. (born Sept. 30, 1876). In January, 1857, Rosen Stout was elected a regent of the Deseret University, and in April following he was appointed judge advocate of Utah by the legislative assembly. At the time of the Johnston Army troubles he was again found in the front ranks and did excellent service as a military man in preparing defences in Echo Canyon, and he also did service as a special messenger between the camps in the mountains and the headquarters of the militia in Salt Lake City. During the noted Judge Cradlebaugh misrule in Provo, Hosea Stout took a bold and fearless stand in defending the rights of his brethren, some of whom were illegally imprisoned. Afterwards Bro. Stout figured prominently as a prosecuting attorney in the Third District Court in Salt Lake City, and continued most active as an attorney until within a short time of his death. While always ready to defend the rights of his people, Bro. Stout was by no means inclined to be aggressive when his own rights were at issue. His integrity to the gospel was unswerving. At one time he got into a controversy with a leading man in the Church. Before the matter could be settled the case was taken before the High Council and the decision of that body was in favor of Bro. Stout's opponent. In conversation upon the subject a few days later, President Brigham Young remarked to him: "I suppose now you will go and apostatize." "Oh no," answered Bro. Stout. "The Church of Christ is as much my Church as it is theirs, and what you or any one else may do cannot effect my Church." In a little time this difference of opinion was settled, but in this matter and throughout his whole life, Bro. Stout insisted that the actions of men, no matter how contrary to his views of right they might be, could in no way effect his faith in the truth of the gospel. Bro. Stout was noted for his fidelity to President Brigham Young, who, especially in matters connected with legal affairs, frequently consulted him. His judgment could always be relied upon as being on the side of right and equity. In 1861 Bro. Stout was called on a colonization mission to southern Utah. Thus he became one of the founders of St. George, where he resided about five years. While a resident of southern Utah he was commissioned as district attorney, a position which he held for four years. In 1866 he returned to Salt Lake City. In 1868 (May 23rd) he married Sarah Cox, widow of David Jones (of Mormon Battalion fame). This wife had no children by Bro. Stout. In 1870 Bro. Stout was ordained a High Priest and chosen as an alternate member of the High Council of the Salt Lake Stake; later he became a regular member of that organization, which position he held until he was released because of failing health. For a number of years he served as judge-advocate on the staff of General Daniel H. Wells, doing excellent service in the Nauvoo Legion until that organization ceased operation by arbitrary orders from the federal officers of Utah. After devoting nearly his entire life to the Church and to the benefit of his fellow-citizens, Hosea Stout passed away March 2, 1889, at his residence in Big Cottonwood. He had spent a long and useful life and left a large family (a wife, nine sons and two daughters) besides quite a number of grandchildren. Hosea Stout was a man of sterling integrity and excellent ability. He possessed great courage, physical and moral, was firm in his convictions, steadfast and loyal as a friend and blessed withal with a genial, kindly humor. In his youth he was very intimate with the Prophet Joseph Smith and served as one of the Prophet's bodyguard. Afterwards he became a true and staunch friend of President Brigham Young, who placed the utmost confidence in his ability and integrity.
