Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Tanner, Nathan, jun.

Tanner, Nathan, jun., historian of the Tanner family, was born Oct. 27, 1845, at Montrose, Lee county, Iowa, the son of Nathan Tanner sen. and Rachel W. Smith. He crossed the plains with his parents in 1848 and settled in South Cottonwood, Salt Lake county, Utah. During his youth and early manhood he assisted his father at freighting and working on the farm. His chances for schooling were meagre and the splendid education he obtained later in lifo was mostly the result of self effort. He married Margaret G. Harrington and located at Ogden where he studied and practiced law. For a number of years he was prominent in his profession and also acted as alderman and attorney for the city of Ogden. Having been baptized when about eight years old, he became an active member of the Church in his early youth and after being ordained to the Priesthood he acted as superintendent of the Ogden Second Ward Sunday school and as president of the 76th quorum of Seventy. In 1884-1885 he filled a mission to the Southern States. Bro. Tanner was a gifted writer and was ever ready and willing to defend the principles of the gospel against the virulent attacks of newspaper editors, which were so common years ago. Along with his legal work he attended to the collections of Scowcroft Sons and the Z. C. M. I., which took him to different parts of Utah and Idaho. On his extensive travels he formed a large acquaintanceship among the Latter-day Saints. Conditions came into his life which deprived him of membership in the Church for a number of years, but not once during his entire life did he lose faith in the gospel, nor the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and as a result of this he regained his fellowship in the Church and had all his former blessings sealed upon him. He obeyed the higher law of marriage by taking Anna Pingree as a plural wife and later he married Jane A. Hamilton. He was the father of thirteen children, and five of his sons have filled honorable missions. During the latter part of his life Bro. Tanner resided at Blackfoot and Springfield, Idaho. In the latter place he passed away peacefully June 16, 1919, in full faith of the gospel. For thirty years Bro. Tanner acted as historian for the Tanner family.
