Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Tietjen, Joseph Engebert

Tietjen, Joseph Engebert, second counselor to Bishop Collins R. Hakes jun. of Bluewater, Valentia county, New Mexico, was born Aug. 22, 1875, at Santaquin, Utah county, Utah, the son of Ernst Albert Tietjen and Emma O. Erikson. He was baptized Oct. 13, 1883, by Samuel E. Lewis. When a boy his father was called to Arizona on an Indian mission and took his family with him; he settled in the little valley in which Ramah is now situated, and while there Joseph was ordained to the office of a Deacon Dec. 12, 1886, by James E. Ashcroft and to the office of a Teacher May 24, 1896, by Samuel E. Lewis. Later his father moved to Bluewater, New Mexico, and purchased a stock ranch and farm in company with others, and as Joseph E. had prevoiusly had experience in handling stock at Ramah he was placed in charge of the stock purchased by his father and made a success of that particular enterprise. He purchased his father's stock and remained in this kind of business the remainder of his life. He was enabled to render financial aid to many and aid his father in his missionary work among the Indians. Joseph E. also became a great favorite among the Indians and was commonly called "the Big White Chief." He married Maud S. Hunt (daughter of Thomas J. Hunt and Martha Miranda Manuel), who was born Oct. 10, 1880, at Payson, Utah. About 1900 he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as second counselor to Collins R. Hakes jun. and remained in that position until after he returned from his mission to Mexico. Being called on a mission to Mexico, Bro. Tietjen was set apart as a missionary Dec. 9, 1909, and labored in Mexico until June, 1910, when he was honorably released on account of ill health. After being confined in a hospital for some time he returned to Bluewater. Bro. Tietjen died at Albuquerque, New Mexico, Sept. 20, 1918. His remains were interred at Bluewater, Sept. 22, 1918. The following children were the issue of his marriage: Josephine Maud, Embert Lehi, Volton Sheldon, Ina, Thomas Jefferson and Gladdus Miranda.
