Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Tolman, Benjamin H.

Tolman, Benjamin H., the second Bishop of Honeyville (Box Elder Stake), Box Elder county, Utah, was born March 15, 1853, in Brigham City, Utah, the son of Benjamin H. Tolman and Sarah Jane Angell. His father died in 1857 (twenty-seven years old). Benjamin was baptized July 30, 1865, was ordained an Elder in 1874, and while living temporarily in Salt Lake City, he was ordained a Seventy in January, 1876. Subsequently he became a president of the 16th quorum of Seventy. In 1876-1877 he filled a mission to Great Britain. Before starting on this mission he married Eliza Bell Grant, a daughter of David Grant and Mary Hunsaker, April 24, 1876. This marriage was blessed with eleven children, namely, Sarah Jane, Benjamin H., David Denmark, Abinadi, Jaron G., Jarvis Truman, Nathan, Mary Theda, Emma Angell, Claudius and Twila. After his return from his mission to Europe he located in Honeyville, where he acted as superintendent of the Sunday school and took a most active part in all the public affairs of the Ward. From 1877 to 1889 he served as first counselor to Bishop Abraham Hunsaker and after the demise of Bishop Hunsaker in 1889 he was chosen as Bishop of Honeyville, which position he filled till 1893. His death occurred June 8, 1913, at Honeyville. About nine years before his death, while working as a carpenter on the power house, at the mouth of Bear River Canyon, he was accidentally burned by electricity. After spending several months in a hospital in Salt Lake City, losing his leg by amputation, he resumed his labors at home and continued active as far as his health would permit till the last. His life was saved after the terrible accident by the power of God, as everybody who saw him at the time believed that almost immediate death was inevitable. Bro. Tolman was highly respected by all who knew him, was a most faithful and ardent Church worker and never faltered in his fidelity to the Church. By his second wife, Mary Neeley, he had two children, namely, Polly Belle and Austin.
