Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Tolton, John Franklin

Tolton, John Franklin, president of the Beaver Stake of Zion and a resident of Beaver, Beaver county, Utah, was born Nov. 14, 1861, at Ephraim, Sanpete county, Utah, the son of Edward Tolton and Mary Ann Tomlinson. He was baptized April 13, 1878, by Thomas Parkinson and spent the first twenty years of his life on a farm in Beaver. At the age of 21 years he attended the B. Y. Academy at Provo and in 1882-1883 he taught school in Beaver. Being called on a mission to Great Britain he left home for Europe April 1, 1884, and labored in Staffordshire, Worcestershire, Hereforeshire and Warwickshire, England. Owing to ill health he was released and returned home Nov. 10, 1885. He then entered upon activities in religious, political and social life and filled many positions of honor and trust. Thus he acted as city councilman at Beaver, U. S. court commissioner, U. S. deputy marshal, county clerk and legislator. In the latter capacity he served four terms and was speaker of the House in 1917. He ran for Governor on the Democratic ticket in 1912. From 1889 to 1890 he served as a member of the High Council of the Beaver Stake and as second counselor in the Beaver Stake presidency from 1891 to 1908. In June, 1908, he was called to act as president of the Beaver Stake of Zion, which position he held until April, 1916. During his term of presidency he was also president of the board of the Murdock Academy and succeeded in having erected a $70,000 new building and also the present Stake Administration Building at Beaver. Bro. Tolton has been engaged in operating the Beaver Woolen Mills four years and has followed mercantile business twenty-five years. He was county surveyor ten years, during which time he did much civil engineering work in Beaver county. He also acted as school trustee of the Beaver schools ten years. Notwithstanding his present duties at home, Elder Tolton has traveled much, having visited 38 States of the Union and also Canada and Mexico. During the late war he acted as chairman of the Beaver County Council of Defence and took an active part in several other war activities; thus he conducted two bond drives and other war interests. In October, 1886, Bro Tolton married Caroline Olivia Hales, who was born Nov. 17, 1861, at Spanish Fork, Utah county, Utah. Seven children were the issue of this marriage, namely, Aubrey Franklin, John Carlisle, Irene, Olivia, Grant Hales and Lulu and LaRue, twins, six of whom are still living. His three sons have all filled honorable missions to the United States. Aubrey Tolton, his eldest son, is state bank examiner and his eldest daughter, Irene, is a member of the faculty of the University of Utah.
