Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Tyler, Frank Newton

Tyler, Frank Newton, Bishop of the Thatcher Ward, St. Joseph Stake, Graham county, Arizona, was born Aug. 26, 1860, at Washington, Washington county, Utah, the son of Oscar Tyler and Harriet Amanda Brown. He was baptized Aug. 26, 1868, by Oscar Tyler, was raised and schooled in Washington, where he also was ordained a Deacon. Subsequently he was ordained an Elder in the St. George Temple and when twenty-two years old he married Mary Adelia Pace, Sept. 20, 1882. She was the daughter of James Pace (of Mormon Battalion fame) and Ann Webb and was born Sept. 18, 1864. The children by this marriage were the following: Amanda Norena, Viola Ann, Lucinda, Frank, James Bliss, Ella, Delbert, Furnando, Jesse Leroy, Flossie and Adelia. Brother Tyler moved to Thatcher, Arizona, in 1832, where he has resided ever since. Here he took an active part in Church affairs, and labored as an officer in the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. Being ordained a Seventy by Seymour B. Young in 1886 he was chosen president of the 89th quorum of Seventy. In 1899-1901 he filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring principally in Florida and Georgia. When Andrew C. Peterson was chosen as Bishop of the Thatcher Ward, Bro. Tyler was ordained a High Priest by Pres. Andrew Kimball and set apart to act as first counselor to Bishop Peterson, which position he held until March 28, 1909, when he was chosen Bishop of the Thatcher Ward and ordained to that office by John Henry Smith. He held that position until Nov. 9, 1919, when the Thatcher Ward was divided into two Wards. Bishop Tyler is a farmer by avocation, but has held many civil offices within the gift of his fellow-citizens. Thus he served for some time as a city councilman at Thatcher. He was one of the promoters and business manager of the Mt. Graham Lumber Co. and was also one of the promoters and president of the Citizens' Bank at Thatcher. He has always taken a most active and efficient part in all public affairs.
