Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Cope, Francis

Cope, Francis, an active Elder in the Church, was born in Birmingham, England, March 31, 1846, the son of John and Elizabeth Cope (nee Markland). He emigrated to Utah in 1869, arriving in Salt Lake City August 20th of that year. The Cope family had been engaged in the business of operating a brass foundry in England, but as there was no openings in this trade it was necessary to accept whatever employment came to hand, and the first work was that of cook for a camp, working for John Snell in building salt works on the Great Salt Lake. Shortly after his arrival in Utah the work of building the Utah Central Railway was commenced by Brigham Young from Ogden south and Bro. Cope was engaged as clerk of construction. After the completion of the road he was employed as telegrapher in the station at Kaysville; afterwards he moved to Salt Lake City, working in the freight house. Later he was promoted to the position of station agent at Ogden. His next advancement was to the Salt Lake City local office, where he acted as agent for the local station. In 1879 he went to England on a mission, serving two years in the Liverpool office, then located at 42 Islington. On his return he was made general freight and passenger agent of the Utah Central Railway, in the place of James Sharp, who had been promoted to the position of general superintendent. On the consolidation of the Utah Central with the Utah Northern Railway of the Union Pacific system, he was advanced to the position of general freight and passenger agent of the consolidated system. He was to have assumed this office on January 1, 1890, but having contracted a fatal illness during the previous month he died on Dec. 27, 1889, at the age of forty-three years. During his lifetime Francis Cope held many prominent positions in civil and religious life. He served as justice of the peace and city councilman and was a member of the bishopric of the Sixteenth Ward, associated with the late Bishop Frederick Kesler. He was associated in the founding of the Zion's Benefit Building Society, the Home Fire Insurance Company, the Latter-day Saints University and other Utah activities. Although deprived of an education in his boyhood by reason of the necessity for early employment he, by personal application, became an educated man, held in high esteem by all who knew him.
