Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Walser, George Jasper

Walser, George Jasper, Bishop of Miami Ward (St. Joseph Stake), Gila county, Arizona, was born Nov. 14, 1878, in Payson, Utah county, Utah, the son of John Jacob Walser and Annie Elizabeth Louisa Schaerrer. He was the fourth child of a family of eleven children. When twelve years of age he accompanied his mother and family to Colonia Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico, to join his father, who had gone to that land the previous year to prepare a new home for his family. There he attended school and helped his father on the farm; was ordained a Deacon Oct. 25, 1891, by George W. Sivey; ordained a Teacher April 16, 1898, by Ernest L. Taylor; was called on a mission to the Northern States in November, 1899, being the first missionary from the Juarez Stake Academy; ordained an Elder March 25, 1900, by his father and was ordained a Seventy April 2, 1900, by Apostle Rudger Clawson. While filling his mission he first labored in the Missouri conference, and afterwards in the Lone Star conference, in Texas, and returned to his home in Juarez, Feb. 25, 1902. After his return he labored as a Sunday school missionary in the mountain settlements in Chihuahua and in the colonies in Sonora. He was chosen as one of the presidents of the 99th quorum of Seventy and as a member of the Juarez Stake Sunday School Board. From 1902 to 1909 he labored as a Ward Sunday school teacher; was a member of the Juarez Ward and Stake choir, and a member of the Juarez brass band, and filled a number of other positions. An an exile he left Mexico with his family July 29, 1912, with the rest of the "Mormon" colonists, and after a temporary residence in El Paso, Texas, he took his family to Miami, Arizona, where he entered the employ of the Miami Copper Company, as a carpenter. In 1913 (Dec. 1st) he was set apart as presiding Elder of the Miami branch of the Globe Ward (St. Joseph Stake), which position he held until March 1, 1914, when the Saints in Miami were organized as an independent branch of the St. Joseph Stake with Bro. Walser as presiding Elder. This position he held until Sept. 3, 1916, when the branch was organized as a Ward with Bro. Walset as Bishop. He was ordained a Bishop Nov. 26, 1916, by Hyrum M. Smith. Under Bishop Walser's administration a beautiful chapel was built in Miami which was dedicated on the day that the Ward was organized. In 1904 (June 29th) Bro. Walser married Nellie Turley (the daughter of Isaac Turley and Clara A. Tolton), who has borne her husband nine children, namely, George Dion, Ruth, Maurice Edward, Gordon Kimberley, Nellie Eva, Robert Eugene, Paul Leroy, Joseph Jasper and Karl Loraine.
