Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Walters, Henry B.

Walters, Henry B., a faithful Elder in the Church, was born Aug. 2, 1827, in London, England, the son of Reese Walters and Ann Booth. He was baptized in August, 1845, by Elder Edward Creer and confirmed Aug. 31, 1845, by Apostle Wilford Woodruff. He labored as a local missionary in Preston, England, in the early fifties and later was appointed to do missionary work in the Liverpool conference under the direction of Thos. Taylor. In 1849 he married Sarah Smalley who bore him seven children, four sons and three daughters. Six of these were born in Preston, England. In his anxiety to emigrate to Utah he arranged for his family to precede him to America and secured their passage on the ship "Antarctic" in 1863. While crossing the Atlantic the wife gave birth to a child, May 18, 1863, and died the same day and was buried in the ocean. The baby, which was named Sarah Jane Antarctic, after the vessel, died ten days after the mother. One child had died in England. The five surviving children were left with their mother's sister, Jane Smalley, who cared for them while crossing the ocean, but she was called by death while crossing the plains and buried on Hams Fork. The children arrived in Utah safely, but the youngest child died six weeks after they arrived. The other four children were well taken care of until Bro. Walters himself arrived in Utah in 1865. After the departure of his family to America, Bro. Walters was appointed to preside over the Lancashire conference in 1864. He married Caroline Francis Feb. 19, 1865, and left England for America a few months later, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Belle Wood" which arrived in New York June 1, 1865. He crossed the plains in Capt. Willey's company which was snowed in at Laramie, Wyoming, but were met by volunteers who brought food and blankets. The wife left in Capt. Orson Arnold's company, which had been sent by Pres. Young to meet the immigrants, while Bro. Walters remained back with Capt. Thos. Taylor to bring in the freight. Sister Walters' first son was born on Green River, Nov. 11, 1865, the child being four days old when the company arrived in Salt Lake City. Bro. Walters arrived Nov. 29, 1865, finding his wife and baby doing well; also his other four children had been well taken care of. He had driven an ox team all the way across the plains. Bro. Walters was a member of the Nauvoo Legion from the time of his first arrival in Utah until his death. Twelve children, namely, five sons and seven daughters, were born to him by his second wife; eleven of these were born in Salt Lake City. Altogether Brother Walters was the father of nineteen children, nine sons and ten daughters. Bro. Walters was ordained a Seventy about 1871, by Bro. Cahoon and for twenty-two years (1884 to 1906) he acted as secretary and treasurer of the 2nd quorum of Seventy. Finally he was ordained a High Priest March 25, 1906, by Wm. Asper. At the time of his death, which occurred in Salt Lake City, Feb. 23, 1913, he had fifty grandchildren and thirty-five great grandchildren living.
