Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Wandell, Charles Wesley

Wandell, Charles Wesley, president of the Australian mission from 1852 to 1853, was born April 12, 1819, at Courtland, Westchester county, New York. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he was baptized Jan. 5, 1837, and ordained an Elder by L. R. Foster, April 6, 1837, at a conference held in New York. He commenced missionary labors soon after his ordination and seemed to be successful in his administration, filling a number of missions to several States. In 1844 he was called on a special mission to the State of New York, being appointed to take charge of the missionary labors in that State, with forty-eight other Elders working under his direction. Among these were Augustus A. Farnham, Daniel Shearer, Samuel P. Bacon, Joseph B. Noble, Horace S. Eldredge, Cyrus H. Wheelock, David H. Redfield and Charles Thompson. After the martyrdom of the Prophet he went to St. Louis, Missouri, where he engaged in the local river trade as a steamboat officer. A few years later he went by water to California (doubling Cape Horn) and there became associated with Samuel Brannan and later with Apostle Parley P. Pratt. In 1851 he was called, together with John Murdock, to open up a mission in Australia; the two Elders arrived in Sydney, October 30, 1851, and after laboring under adverse circumstances they succeeded in raising up a branch of the Church at Sydney and making openings to preach in other places. On the departure of John Murdock for home in 1851, Elder Wandell succeeded him in the presidency of the Australian mission, which position he held until April, 1853, when he left Sydney on his return to America. After spending some time in California, he crossed the southern desert to Utah in 1857. In 1873 Brother Wandell joined the "Reorganites" (Josephites), being baptized into that organization July 6, 1873. Soon afterwards he was called by that organization on a mission to Australia, together with Gland Rodger. On the voyage these two men visited the Society Islands, where they found a number of Latter-day Saints, as a remnant of the work commenced many years before by Elders Addison Pratt and Benjamin F. Grouard. They continued their voyage to Sydney, Australia, where they arrived in January, 1874. Here Charles W. Wandell took sick and died, March 14, 1875. (Reorganized "Journal of History," Vols. 3 and 4. )
