Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Ward, Elijah Barney

Ward, Elijah Barney, famous trapper and pioneer, was born in Virginia about the year 1820. At the early age of fifteen years he left the parental home and went west, where he fell in with trappers and mountaineers. Crossing the plains he reached the Rocky Mountains in 1835. Here he helped to build Fort Hall, on Snake river, now in Idaho, and also worked at Astoria, near the mouth of the Columbia river, Oregon. He was a companion of Kit Carson, Jim Bridger, Baker, Smith and other prominent mountaineers of those early times and he spent many years of his life among the Indians, becoming master of several Indian languages. His life naturally abounds in adventure and thrilling experiences. One day, while in a section infested by hostile Blackfoot Indians, he was discovered and pursued by a number of warriors. As they were noted for their fleetness of foot he knew that he could not outrun them so he left his horse and took to the rocks and timber. He hid in the bushes, jumped from rock to rock, waded in streams, etc., in order to hide his tracks, and finally climbed a tree, concealing himself in its foliage. While here the Indians came so near that he could hear them talking, but they did not discover him. During the night he waded down the creek and next day came in sight of an Indian village. He waited until evening, not knowing to what tribe they belonged, but with all his caution he was discovered by a squaw who had come down to the creek for water. She hurried back to camp and he heard her tell in the Flathead language, which he understood, of seeing a white man. The Flatheads being friendly, he went at once into the village, where he was kindly received and learned from them that a train of emigrants on their way to Oregon were camped near by. The next morning, a Flathead Indian came in and reported that the Blackfoot warriors had attacked the immigrants. Mr. Ward quickly mustered a company of Flatheads and hurried to their rescue. The emigrants were camped in a canyon and the Blackfoot warriors were attacking them from the higher ground. Ward and his company managed to get in the rear of the hostile Indians, and thus they were completely trapped. After a brief but fierce battle the Blackfeet surrendered, having lost twenty killed and a number wounded. Ward's loss was three killed and several wounded. Having recovered his horse, he accompanied the emigrants until they were out of danger. Mr. Ward is next found journeying to Santa Ann and San Pedro, Southern California, with Kit Carson and others, for the purpose of buying horses and supplies. The party returned to Fort Bridger by the old California route. Here he remained for some time among the Snake Indians. During this period a very dear friend of his, a Mr. Exervid, a Frenchman, died. Just before his death he called Mr. Ward to his bedside and confided to his care his young wife, a handsome Indian girl, and also his little daughter, Adelaide. Mr. Ward accepted the trust and was true to his charge, in time marrying the woman by whom he subsequently had two daughters, Polly and Louisa Jane. He lived with the Indians until the "Mormon" pioneers arrived, soon after which he moved to Great Salt Lake Valley, bringing his family with him. He joined the Church and became an intimate friend of President Brigham Young and others of the Church leaders. Later, he moved to Provo where he acted as Indian interpreter. When Fort Supply was founded by the brethren in 1853, near Fort Bridger, Brother Ward became one of the early settlers of that place, and remained there until the approach of Johnston's army. For a while it appeared as if all the "Mormons" would be wiped out by the soldiers and Indians, so Brother Ward's wife concluded that she would be safer among her Indian relatives. She therefore absented herself from her husband, but while sojourning with a tribe of Indians she took sick and died. Thus Bro. Ward was left alone with his Indian children, to whom he proved a dear and affectionate father and in due course of time they all grew up and married white men. Bro. Ward participated in the battle with the Indians at Fort Utah (Provo) in the spring of 1850, for which the Indians ever after had a grudge against him. At the general move south in 1858 Bro. Ward went as far as Payson, Utah, and located at Fairview, and later at Gunnison, Sanpete county. He resided in the latter place with his two daughters when the Black Hawk war broke out and was still acting as Indian interpreter. Having no fear of the Indians he went unarmed up Salina Canyon April 10, 1865, in company with a young man by the name of James Anderson to search for cows. Not returning that night a searching party was sent out the next morning. They found the bodies of both men, terribly mutilated and scalped, they having met death at the hands of the hostile Black Hawk Indians. The remains were brought to Salina and prepared for burial, theirs being the first bodies to be deposited in what is now the old Salina cemetery. After the killing of Bro. Ward, the two daughters were taken into the family of President Brigham Young, where they remained a number of years, and finally moved to Ogden, where their half-sister, Adelaide, who had married James Brown (a son of the late Capt. James Brown of Mormon Battalion fame), lived. There both Polly and Louisa Jane lived until they were married. Bro. Ward, being a true and devoted friend of President Young, had served as a member of his body guard and accompanied him on several trips through the Territory. While in Salina, shortly before his death, President Young tried to locate the burial place of Bro. Ward, but for several years it could not be found. When at last it was located, Bishop Jensen of Salina mentioned the matter to President Wm. H. Seegmiller of the Sevier Stake, who informed the First Presidency, and they at once directed that a suitable monument be erected at the expense of the Church, to the memory of Bro. Ward, which was done. Bro. Ward's stepdaughter, Adelaide, who married James Brown, became the mother of nine children, one of these being the late Bishop Moroni Brown of the Ogden First Ward. Adelaide died in Ogden about 1899. Polly, Bro. Ward's oldest daughter by his Indian wife, was born at Fort Bridger July 15, 1847. She afterwards married John Perry Williams of Ogden and bore her husband five children. Her husband died May 12, 1918, and the widow now resides with her son, Frank, in Ganett, Idaho. Bro. Ward's second daughter, Louisa Jane, married James Daly and lived in Ogden. She bore her husband three children and died about 1880 in Ogden.
