Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Whipple, Edson

Whipple, Edson, one of the original Utah pioneers of 1847, was born Feb. 5, 1805, in the town of Dummerston, Windham county, Vermont, the son of Timothy Whipple and Elizabeth Safford. He married Lavinie Goss Feb. 16, 1832, and, becoming a convert to the restored gospel, he was baptized by Benjamin Winchester in Phialadelphia, Pa., June 15, 1840, and confirmed by Lorenzo D. Barnes. He was ordained a Priest by Orson Hyde, Oct. 17, 1840; ordained a High Priest and set apart as first counselor to Benjamin Winchester in Philadelphia by Hyrum Smith, April 6, 1841, and removed to Nauvoo, Ill., in September, 1842. Bro. Whipple writes: "I was called at the general conference held in Nauvoo in April, 1844, to go on a mission to Pennsylvania, in company with David Yearsley, to canvass that State and present to the people Joseph Smith's views on government, and also to advocate his candidacy for the presidency of the United States. I left Nauvoo, May 4, 1844, and returned the following November. During my absence the Prophet had been murdered in Carthage. I assisted in building the city of Nauvoo and the Temple and was among the defenders of our homes against the mob. I was present at the laying of the capstone of the Temple and received my endowments in that sacred edifice. During the winter of 1845-1846 I worked under Captain Charles C. Rich, making wagons, and was organized for traveling in his ten. I crossed the Mississippi river May 15, 1846, on my way to the Rocky Mountains with a family of four, consisting of myself, wife and child and my mother. We stopped at Garden Grove, Iowa, two weeks and then continued the journey to Council Bluffs, overtaking Bishop Hale's company on the way. We arrived at the Bluffs about the middle of July, but before arriving there we met Pres. Brigham Young returning from the Bluffs to raise volunteers for the Mormon Battalion. On our arrival on the Missouri river we were counseled to locate for the winter on Pony creek, down the river about 30 miles, but on our arrival there we found the place very unhealthy and thus unfit for habitation. My mother (Basmath Hutchens Whipple) died Sept. 9, 1846. She was born Sept. 7, 1769, in Massachusetts. A few days later (Sept. 13, 1846) my wife died. She was born July 7, 1811, in Dummerston, Vermont. Of the whole camp consisting of 14 families all but two persons were sick, and while there we buried some whole families. We finally moved to another place, about four miles distant. My little girl (Maria Blanch), when twenty-two months old, died at our new location, Dec. 8, 1846, and her remains were taken to the place where her mother was buried. She was born Feb. 15, 1845; her remains were placed in a coffin made of split plank (bugswood tree). Driven from our comfortable homes in Nauvoo to be exposed as we were to the heat and storms, and deprived of all comforts of life, was more than our people could endure. Thus my whole family died as martyrs for the cause of Christ. In the spring of 1847 I was called, in company with 142 others, to lead the way to the wilderness in search of a new home for the Saints. I left Winter Quarters April 9, 1847, and traveled in the first ten of the second division under Captain Appleton M. Harmon, in which company Pres. Heber C. Kimball also traveled. I took my turn to guard the camp every third night, half the night. When the pioneers returned from their temporary stay in the Salt Lake Valley I was called to remain to take charge of the property left by the pioneers and also the family of Heber C. Kimball and other families which followed the pioneers. Having buried my whole family on the journey, I farmed for Heber C. Kimball the first season and raised some four hundred bushels of grain for him. I was a member of the first High Council organized in Salt Lake City. Oct. 13, 1848, I started, in company with eleven others, for the States on business for myself and the discharged members of the Mormon Battalion. While in the States Elder Wilford Woodruff was sent back east with an epistle of the Twelve containing instructions to gather out the saints from the East. I was called to assist him in visiting the saints and help gather them. I had been laboring in Maryland, where I baptized several and organized a branch of 16 members. Visiting Bro. Woodruff in Boston, I was requested to cross the plains in his company in the summer of 1850. I met him at Bethlehem, at the crossing of the Missouri river, where his company was organized with captains of tens, fifties and hundreds. I was appointed captain of fifty. Each fifty traveled separate, but sometimes we camped together on Sundays. Captain Leonard W. Hardy had charge of the first fifty in which Bro. Woodruff started. I had a blacksmith in my company, and when we arrived at Ash Hollow, he (having ten wagons loaded with merchandise and machinery which required repairing ) moved them and his family wagons into my fifty and traveled with me the rest of the way. We arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 13, 1850. I had then been absent from the Valley over two years. Soon after I arrived I married again, having remained single from the time I buried my companion in the Pottawattamie lands in 1846. I was now called to go with George A. Smith to settle Iron County. Consequently I left Salt Lake City Dec. 9, 1850, with about a hundred wagons and we all arrived at the place where Parowan now stands in January, 1851. When Iron County was organized Geo. A. Smith was appointed county judge and I was chosen as associate justice. In the military organizations I was chosen as captain of the company organized to do home guard duty. Geo. A. Smith requested the brethren to present plans for laying off a fort and for building our houses. I, among others, presented a plan, and mine was accepted and adopted, and Parowan was built up according to my plan. Bro. Brimhall and I built a thrasher and a water power, getting a grant from the Parowan City Council to use the water of the creek. We threshed the first crop raised in Parowan. I was elected a member of the Parowan city council in May, 1851. When Pres. Young and company visited Parowan in 1851 Pres. Kimball advised me to move north, and consequently I settled in Provo." Edson Whipple died May 11, 1894, at Colonia Juarez, Mexico.
