Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Wilhelmsen, Niels

Wilhelmsen, Niels, president of the Scandinavian Mission, and the first Elder from Zion who died while filling a mission in Scandinavia, was born April 21, 1824, at Feuling, Denmark, the son of Wilhelm Christensen and Else Nielsen. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism" he was baptized by Frederik Phister in Copenhagen, Denmark, Aug. 30, 1854, labored as a local missionary in Denmark about six years, during which he occupied some of the most important positions in the mission among which was that of counselor to Pres. Carl Widerborg; he emigrated to Utah in 1861, and after residing at different places settled at St. Charles, Bear Lake county, Idaho. In 1865-1867 he filled a mission to Scandinavia, laboring as a traveling Elder in the whole mission. On his return to America he led a large company of emigrating Saints to Utah. Having been called on a second mission to Scandinavia in 1879, he presided over the Scandinavian mission until his death, which occurred in Copenhagen, Denmark, Aug. 1, 1881. He was buried at Copenhagen, but twenty years later his body was removed to St. Charles, Bear Lake county, Idaho. Elder Wilhelmsen married two wives; his first wife was Anna Christine Nielsen, whom he married May 5, 1854; his second wife was Kirstine Margrethe Stephensen, who was married to him June 27, 1868; the names of his children by these two wives are: Eliza Wilhelmina, Christian William, Joseph Jabez, Dan Nephi, Annima Theresia, Benjamin, Anna Eleanore, Nelson Edward and Orson. Bro. Wilhelmsen was ordained a Deacon Nov. 27, 1854, a Priest Jan. 29, 1855, and an Elder April 27, 1855. During most of his life he followed the occupation of a mason and farmer. Among the many civil offices held by him may be mentioned that he was county commissioner, justice of the peace, school trustee, etc. Elder Wilhelmsen was one of the most successful missionaries that ever labored in Scandinavia and was up to the time of his death highly respected and beloved by all who knew him.
