Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Wilkes, Albert Lester

Wilkes, Albert Lester, a faithful Elder in the Church who died while laboring as a missionary in the Sandwich Islands, was born May 14, 1894, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Albert Wilkes and Josephine Simmons. His father is a well known photographer in Salt Lake City, where the son received a good common school education and took an active part in Church work from his early youth. He was baptized May 22, 1902, by Charles W. Worthen, confirmed May 24, 1902, by Charles R. Savage, and ordained an Elder May 1, 1913, by Merrill Nibley. When lacking one week of being nineteen years old he left home to fill a mission to Hawaii, May 8, 1913. On his arrival there he quickly mastered the Hawaiian language and showed great zeal and energy In his work, being appointed to various positions of trust and responsibility. After laboring nine months at Hilo, he was appointed president of the Kauai conference, where he labored for one year, and was then appointed to labor in the Waikiki branch. Every week he wrote to his parents and otherloved ones at home, and his letters always told of his excellent health and the joy he was taking in his missionary labors. While in the discharge of his duties as president of the Waikiki branch he was stricken with sickness and died from blood poisoning Aug. 28, 1915, at Honolulu. His remains were shipped to his home in the Ensign Ward, Salt Lake City, and interred in the Salt Lake City cemetery. Elder Wilkes was a bright and promising young man, and while on his mission he wrote several articles which were published in the "Improvement Era." In one of these published in the issue of that paper dated Jan. 19, 1917, he gave an interesting description of the volcano Kilauea on Hawaii. Just prior to his death, he wrote a very interesting letter to his younger brother, Joseph, who later entered the service of his country and gave his life for the cause of liberty, being killed on the battle fields of France, June 8th, 1918. This young man was cited for conspicuous gallantry in action and was awarded the Croix de Guerre by the French government. The first American Legion Post of Salt Lake City has been named "The Joseph Simmons Wilkes Post No. 2," in his honor. The letter which Albert Lester wrote to his brother was printed in the "Improvement Era" of July, 1917.
