Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Davidson, Robert

Davidson, Robert, Bishop of the Logan Third Ward, Cache county, Utah, was born Jan. 31, 1839, in Dundee, Fifeshire, Scotland, the son of Thomas and Annie Davidson. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," together with his parents in 1852, he emigrated to America in 1853, and crossed the plains in Capt. Jacob Gates' company, the so-called Ten-Pound Company. In 1857-58 he participated in the Johnston campaign in Echo canyon and settled at Logan, Cache valley, in 1859. Here he took part in all kinds of pioneer labor, including guard duty against Indians. In 1861 he married Ada Hemenway, which union was blessed with nine children, namely, Herbert S., Elvira D., Annie, Ada, Amy, Robert, Isabelle and John (twins), and Jennie. After laboring as Ward clerk in the Logan Third Ward about two years, he was chosen as first counselor to Bishop Thos. Tarbet of the Logan Third Ward, and held that position until the death of Bishop Tarbet, which occurred in November, 1872. He was then chosen as acting Bishop of the Ward, and at an important meeting held May 20, 1877, he was ordained a High Priest and Bishop by Apostle Franklin D. Richards and set apart to preside over the Logan Third Ward, which position he held until his death. Bro. Davidson served as a school trustee for several years. In 1880 he married Janet McNeil, who bore him five children, namely, Thomas, Joseph, George, Nettie and Edna. During the anti-polygamy prosecutions he passed through severe trials. In 1886-88 he filled a mission to Great Britain, laboring in Scotland and later in the Liverpool office. After his return to Utah he was arrested on a charge of unlawful cohabitation and sentenced Dec. 5, 1888, in the First District Court at Ogden, to four months' imprisonment in the Utah penitentiary and to pay a fine of $100. Having served his sentence he was released April 15, 1889, after which he followed the vocation of a farmer, stockman and dairyman, and for a time also served as manager of the United Order dairy. He was one of the pioneers in dry farming in Cache valley, developing a tract of land at Cache Junction, long before the whistle of a locomotive was heard in that part of the valley. By his untiring energy and faithfulness he did much good for the community in the building of Church edifices such as meeting houses, tabernacles, and the Logan Temple. In the latter he labored much for the dead. Bishop Davidson closed his life's labor Dec. 23, 1899, after serving as Bishop of the Logan Third Ward about thirty years.
