Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Winsor, Anson Perry

Winsor, Artson Perry, Bishop and Patriarch, was born Aug. 19, 1818, at Elliotville, New York, the son of Abraham Winsor and Sophia Bigelow. Being converted to "Mormonism," he was baptized May 15, 1842, and gathered with the Church at Nauvoo, Illinois, where he became intimately acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith and acted as one of his body guards. In 1842 (March 20th) he married Emeline Zenatta Brower (daughter of John Brower and Delight Smith), who was born March 2, 1824. This marriage was blessed with nine children, namely, Walter J., Ida R., Margaret E., Anson P. jun., Samuel A., Emeline G., Phoebe P. and Lucy D. Bro. Winsor emigrated to Utah in 1852 with his family and soon afterwards located in Provo, where he in 1855 married Mary Nielsen (daughter of Peter Nielsen), who was born in Denmark. The children by this marriage were the following: Joseph F., Andrew N. and Mary J. In Provo Bro. Winsor served as city councilman, and in 1857 he was appointed wagon master of President Brigham Young's Express Company. He was sent to the States in charge of a company and arrived at Fort Leavenworth May 1st, 1857. From that place he wrote a letter to President Brigham Young, notifying him that Johnston's army had started for Utah. This letter was sent with Abraham O. Smoot, who delivered the same to President Brigham Young July 24, 1857, at the memorable celebration in Big Cottonwood Canyon. Bro. Winsor was sent to Echo Canyon in October, 1857, to guard against the invaders and to assist in making fortifications. The following spring (1858) he was again sent into Echo Canyon, this time with 300 men to release those who had been on duty during the previous winter. In 1861 he was called on a colonization mission to southern Utah and settled at Grafton on the Rio Virgen river, where he in 1863 was appointed to preside as Bishop. In the spring of 1869 he was appointed to build a fort as a protection against the Indians at Pipe Springs and to collect tithing cattle and take charge of them. He was with the parties who went out to secure the bodies of Dr. James M. Whitmore and Robert McIntyre, who had been killed by Indians. Previous to this he had been appointed colonel in the Third Regiment of Militia under General Erastus Snow, and participated in several battles with the Indians. In 1877 he was called to St. George to labor as an ordinance worker in the Temple, and he remained active in this work as long as his physical strength would permit him to do so. He was one of the first ordinance workers in the St. George Temple and performed baptism for the dead for more than 100,000 people. For a number of years he acted as first counselor to Bishop Charles A. Terry of the St. George Third Ward. In 1880 (Jan. 29th) he married Martha N. Knight. Bro. Winsor died at St. George June 17, 1917, 98 years and 10 months old. He was quite active until within two days of his death and retained his faculties until the last. He was able to read without glasses and right up to the day of his demise his mental faculties were so well preserved thathe could converse freely upon all phases of the great world's war.
