Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Davis, Edward

Davis, Edward, a Patriarch in the Boise Stake of Zion, Idaho, was born Nov. 11, 1842, at London, England, the son of George Davis and Mary Anthony Timpson. He was baptized in the early fifties by J. H. Harrison, and become a member of the Whitechapel Branch, London. When about eleven years of age he had to assist in helping his father's family, whose circumstances in life were poor. He was employed as a doctor's errand boy and also worked in a sugar factory in London. At the age of sixteen he went into training on the old British man of war "Neptune," which lay moored off Greenwich, during which service he became an expert at knotting and splicing rope, furling, setting and reefing sails, setting up masts, crossing yards, etc., and also learned the use of firearms. Later he was drafted into the merchants' service and made many voyages to the different countries in Europe and also to the West Indies and Africa. He finally landed in Queensland, Australia, in February, 1863, where he remained eleven years, mostly engaged in freighttng, later he engaged in mercantile business. During all his travels and experiences in life the testimony of the divinity of the gospel of Jesus Christ as restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith never left him, though for sixteen years he was isolated from the Church. He was rebaptized by Mark Lindsey in 1874 in Salt Lake City, was subsequently ordained an Elder and still later a Seventy, becoming a member of the 3rd quorum of Seventy. From 1874 to 1881 he was a member of the Salt Lake Tabernacle choir and also led the Fourteenth Ward choir; where he acted as a Ward teacher and was an active member of the Y. M. M. I. A. from its first organization. In 1881 he moved to Paris, Bear Lake county, Idaho, where he acted as a clerk of Seventies for four years. He also acted as a Ward teacher, Sunday school officer, etc. In 1885-1887 he filled a successful mission to Great Britain and succeeded William Horsley as the president of the London conference. During this mission he baptized ten persons. Bro. Davis was ordained a High Priest June 10, 1888, by William Budge, and set apart as a member of the High Council of the Bear Lake Stake. After moving to Rexburg, Idaho, in 1891, he became an alternate member of the High Council in that Stake. In 1892 he moved into the Teton basin, where he acted as Ward chorister and teacher in the theological class; he also taught a district school during the winter of 1892-93. He moved back to Paris, Idaho, in 1894, and to Star valley, Wyoming, in 1895. Here he acted as a member of the High Council and also labored in the Stake Sunday School Board. In 1894 he moved to Carry, Idaho, where he also became a diligent Sunday school worker. In 1909, when a branch Sunday school was organized in Roseville, he was chosen as its superintendent. Finally he was ordained a Patriarch Feb. 22, 1914, by Apostle Geo. F. Richards at Boise City. At the present time he is busily engaged in his calling as a Patriarch, traveling and visiting the different Wards in the Boise Stake.
