Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Adams, Hyrum

Adams, Hyrum, an active pioneer and Church worker, was born May 28, 1855, at Layton, Davis county, Utah, the son of Elias Adams and Belinda Raileigh. His father was a soldier in the Revolutionary War of 1812, and, becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he emigrated to Utah with his family in 1850. Hyrum Adams was baptized June 20, 1866, by Richard Pilling and later ordained to the different offices in the Priesthood. As a boy, he worked on his father's farm and experienced the hardships and adventures of a pioneer. He enjoyed hunting and was well known for his shrewdness and excellent marksmanship, which was proven in many instances. He was captain and first baseman in the baseball team that won credit throughout Davis county for many years. In 1877 (Jan. 15th) he married Rosa R. Higgs (daughter of David Higgs and Eliza Dodwell), who was born April 25, 1858, in Cheltenham, England. This union wasblessed with six children, namely, Hyrum Rufus, Eliza Selecta, Elias Andrew, Alma John, Lottie Rosa, and Emery David. Sister Adams died Dec. 25, 1887, at her home in Layton, Utah. Four of her children preceded her to the "great beyond." In 1889 (June 13th) Brother Adams married Annie Laura Penrod (daughter of William H. H. Penrod and Lucene Bird Bybee), who was born April 29, 1870, in Mountain Green, Morgan county, Utah. This marriage has been blessed with eight children, namely, Delbert Hyrum, Frank David, Bird Belinda, Clay Quincy, Annie Blanche, Blaine William, Bessie Amanda and Bonnie Catherine. Frank D. has filled a successful mission in the Eastern States and later served as a lieutenant and an aviator in the late World War. Bro. Hyrum Adams has been prominent in the building up of Davis county and has followed the occupation of farming and stock raising. In the early eighties he entered the sheep industry, which he still pursues; he was also one of the first dry farmers in Davis county, using oxen to plow the sod, as horses were unavailable at that time. He has also filled many positions of trust and responsibility in the community. Thus he acted as school trustee, director and manager of Holmes Creek Irrigation Co. for many years, manager of a threshing machine company for 25 years, and superintended the building of the Layton Ward chapel. He was the prime mover in establishing the Layton water system, of which he is now a director. and was associated with the building of the first reservoir (now known as the Adams reservoir), in Davis county. It is the largest and most important reservoir in that county, being supplied with water from a small mountain stream entering the valley through Adams Canyon (thus named in honor of the Adams family). For his family Hyrum Adams has built a beautiful home, and has always been a liberal provider. Through his patience and affection he has won the esteem of all his associates in life and many have shared his unbounded hospitality. He is a man of strong physique and at the age of sixty-four he indulged in a buffalo hunt on Antelope Island, on which he was successful in killing two buffalos. Bro. Adams is now a High Priest in the Church, having been ordained to that office by Joseph A. Clark.
