Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Alder, Godfred

Alder, Godfred, an Elder who died in the missonary field, was born July 20 1848, in Schwelbuum, Appenzell, Switzerland, and was the son of John Ulrich Alder, and Susanna Barbara Zuberbubler. He was baptized Feb. 1, 1862, by John Huber and emigrated to America in 1869. Soon after his arrival in Salt Lake City he married Anna R. Ruesch, who had emigrated in the same company with him. Afterwards they made their home at Manti, Sanpete county, Utah, where they had born to them four sons and three daughters. Elder Alder was set apart for a mission to Germany, April 22, 1898, by Brigham H. Roberts, and was a faithful missionary. At the time of his sickness and death he was laboring alone in Chur, the most remote part of the Swiss Mission. During this sickness he had his home with Brother Braun and family of that district, who gave him all the kindly care he could have had in his own family. When the symptoms became unfavorable, medical aid was called and a letter sent to President Bowman at Bern, who immediately wrote to Elder Keller to go and see Brother Alder forthwith, he being near him. Besides being old and warm friends, they were raised, emigrated and lived in Manti together, and sent on their mission at the same time. March 13, 1898, brought a telegram, that Brother Alder's case was critical, when Brother Bowman started immediately, reaching the bedside of the sick man some time before Brother Keller, his absence from home when the letter arrived being the cause of his delay. The disease had developed into pneumonia, one lung and half the other being clogged, and a high fever resulting so that sleep had been out of the question; yet, after administration, Brother Alder rallied and for some time seemed so much better that Elder Bowman returned to Bern, assured of his ultimate recovery. However, relapse set in, and on Saturday, March 18, 1898, at 10 a. m., he peacefully passed away. The remains were placed in a hermetically sealed casket and every thing was done in accordance with the legal requirements of the country, so that removal could be made, if desired. At a later date the remains, as well as those of other Elders who had died in the European countries, were removed to the homes of the deceased in the land of Zion.
