Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Allen, Albern

Allen, Albern, a member of the Mormon Battalion, was born May 22, 1802, in Cornwall, Litchfield county, Connecticut, the son of Daniel and Clarissa Allen. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he was baptized in Cattaraugus county, New York, in 1835. The next year (1836) he moved to Missouri with his family and located in Caldwell county, where he passed through the persecutions and hardships which befell the Saints at that time. Thus he was with his brethren at Far West when they were betrayed into the hands of their enemies and laid down their arms. When the Saints were expelled from Missouri, in 1839, he located temporarily in Adams county, Illinois, and became a resident of Nauvoo, Hancock county, in 1840. In Nauvoo he was ordained an Elder and afterwards a Seventy and filled a short mission to the South. As a military man he served as a lieutenant in one of the companies of the Nauvoo Legion. In 1846 he became an exile, together with his co-religionists, after sharing in the sufferings of the Saints at Nauvoo. He went with the body of the Church to Council Bluffs, Iowa, where he enlisted in the Mormon Battalion, leaving his family sick in a wagon on the prairie. He marched with the Battalion to California, and, having been mustered out of service, he made his way to Great Salt Lake Valley in the fall of 1847, expecting to meet his family there. In this, however, he was disappointed, as his family did not arrive in the Valley until the fall of 1848. During his absence from his family, serving in the Battalion, he lost two of his younger children by death. Locating in Ogden, he was chosen as senior president of the 33rd quorum of Seventy, and later he served two terms in the Utah legislature as a member from Weber county. In the spring of 1857, being called on a mission to Canada, he crossed the plains, together with a company of other missionaries with hand-carts. On arriving on the Missouri, he was detained there to preside over a small branch of the Church. After his return to Ogden, in 1858, he acted as a counselor to Bishop Edward Bunker of the Ogden Third Ward. As a faithful and exemplary Latter-day Saint, he died at Ogden June 2, 1867, leaving quite a large family of children, he having married several wives. Brother Allen was known universally as a liberal and broad-minded man, always willing to render both financial and spiritual aid whenever it was needed.
