Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Allen, Joseph S.

Allen, Joseph S., a member of Zion's Camp, was born June 25, 1810, in Oneida county, New York, the son of Daniel Allen and Nancy Steward. He moved with his father to Thompson, Geauga county, Ohio, where he became a convert to "Mormonism" and was baptized in February, 1831. Soon afterwards he was ordained a Teacher. He remained in Ohio till the spring of 1834, when he marched to Missouri as a member of Zion's Camp, led by the Prophet Joseph Smith. After Zion's Camp was disbanded, Bro. Allen remained in Clay county, Missouri, where he was married Sept. 2, 1835. In the spring of 1838 he moved to Far West, Caldwell county, and in the summer of the same year he was ordained a Seventy by the Prophet Joseph Smith and became a member of the first quorum of Seventy. In February, 1839, being driven from Missouri, he moved to Illinois and settled in the town of Lima, Hancock county. In June following he went on a preaching mission to Indiana and was absent four months. After his return home he was chosen as a member of the High Council at Lima. In consequence of mob threatenings he, in company with Isaac Morley, went to Nauvoo to consult the Prophet Joseph. While returning home with horse and buggy they were waylaid and assaulted by three armed men, one of whom seized the horse's bit. Bro. Allen took out one of his pistols and ordered the mobbers to desist, which they did. According to the Prophet's council, Bro. Allen moved to Nauvoo, where he took a prominent part in defending the lives and property of the Saints. Early in 1846 he left Nauvoo with his family for the west. After stopping for a short time at Mount Pisgah, Iowa (where he put in a crop), he went on to Council Bluffs and passed the winter herding Church stock up the Missouri river, together with ten other men. In the spring of 1847 he moved to the so-called Summer Quarters where he raised a crop and acted as a counselor to Bishop Houston. While thus staying on or near the Missouri river he buried four of his children. In 1848 he migrated to the mountains in President Young's company and wintered in Salt Lake Valley. In October, 1849, he was called, together with Isaac Morley and others, to settle Sanpete Valley. Thus he became one of the founders of Manti and was appointed a member of the High Council at that place. In 1854 he moved back to Salt Lake Valley and located on the Little Cottonwood, where he put in a crop, which was destroyed by crickets. Later he located at Santaquin, Utah county, where he remained three years and acted as counselor to Bishop Holman. Next he became a settler at Glenwood, Sevier county, where he passed through many hardships and dangers during the Black Hawk war. In 1866 he moved to Moroni, Sanpete county, where he on a certain occasion was involved in a fearful fight with three Indians, while standing guard. The savages rushed on the guards with clubs and knives, and while Bro. Allen's companion fled for his life he stood his ground and with his six shooter killed two of the Indians on the spot and wounded the other in the foot as he ran away. The latter was captured the next day. In the struggle Bro. Allen lost several of his teeth through a blow from a rack stake in the hands of one of the Indians. His hat and vest were cut full of holes by knives and other sharp weapons. In the latter part of 1866 he went to the Muddy, now in Nevada, with his whole family. Here he took an active part in building up settlements in that part of the country. In due course of time he returned to Utah and remained active in the Church until his death, which occurred at Huntington, April 25, 1889. He died a faithful Latter-day Saint and was 80 years and ten months old at the time of his demise.
