Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Andrus, MiloPPAndrus, Milo

Andrus, MiloPPAndrus, Milo, a Patriarch and a most successful missionary, was born March 6, 1814, in Pleasant Valley, Essex County, New York, the son of Ruluf Andrus and Azuba Smith. In 1818 he moved with his parents to Huron county, Ohio. His parents were adherents to the Calvinistic creed, but Milo dissented from that faith at the age of fourteen and for several years after that he was studying religion, without being able to decide which sect to join, but as soon as he heard the doctrines of the restored gospel preached, he became a convert and was baptized March 12, 1832, by Gideon H. Carter. About two months later he was ordained an Elder and performed a number of short missions. In 1834 he marched to Missouri in Zion's Camp. After his return to the East he was appointed to preside over the Florence branch, New York, which position he held until 1837. He was ordained a Seventy and became a member of the first quorum of Seventy. He also attended grammar school in Kirtland and received his blessings in the Kirtland Temple in 1836. When the Kirtland Temple was dedicated he beheld a glorious vision and saw cloven tongues of fire descending upon the brethren, until the whole house was filled with the glory of God. A number of the saints spoke in tongues and prophesied. in 1837 he was appointed to lead the saints of the Florence branch to Missouri; they arrived in Far West in the spring of 1838. Here Bro. Andrus became subject to the terrible persecutions which the saints had to endure in Missouri and was finally compelled to leave the State with his co-religionists in 1839. He then became one of the early settlers of Commerce (afterwards called Nauvoo), Hancock county, Illinois. In 1840 he went on a mission to the State of Ohio; later he was sent to Canada on a mission and in the spring of 1844 he was sent on a mission to Ohio. While filling that mission the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum were murdered in Carthage. After his return to Nauvoo, Milo Andrus was set apart as a president of the tenth quorum of Seventy and labored diligently, together with many others, on the erection of the Nauvoo Temple, in which he, after receiving his own blessings, became an ordinance worker. After enduring the persecutions to which the saints in Illinois were subjected he started with the rest of his people for the Rocky Mountains, arriving at Council Bluffs, Iowa, in the fall of 1846. He was then called on a mission to England and crossed the sea with Apostle Orson Pratt. After his arrival in Liverpool, he attended a general conference of the British Mission and was appointed to preside over the Liverpool conference, which position he occupied until he returned home in 1850. During his presidency four hundred and sixty souls were added to the Church by baptism. Returning to America, he crossed the Atlantic in the ship "Argo," which arrived in New Orleans March 8, 1850. He reached the frontier in May, when he was appointed captain of fifty-six wagons and five hundred souls, with which he crossed the plains and arrived in Salt Lake City Aug. 31, 1850. His wife, Sarah Ann Miles, had accompanied him on this mission to Great Britain. Brother Andrus remained in the Valley until the spring of 1854, acting a part of the time as a counselor to Bishop David Brinton of Big Cottonwood. In 1854 he was appointed by the general conference of the Church to preside over the St. Louis conference. He responded to the call, crossed the plains once more and attended to his duties in Missouri until 1855, when he was appointed to bring another company of saints across the plains. He arrived in Salt Lake City in October of that year with his company. After his return he labored for sometime as a home missionary and as acting Bishop, but in the fall of 1860 he was called to take another mission to England. On his arrival at mission headquarters he was appointed to travel in the south part of England and in the Welsh principality. Later he presided over the Birmingham district, which embraced a number of conferences. Returning home he was placed in charge of seven hundred saints, who crossed the Atlantic on the ship "Underwriter," which arrived in New York, May 22, 1861. From New York he and his company journeyed inland to Florence, Neb., where he helped fit out the emigration for the plains and finally led a company of saints to the Valley. After his return home he located on Dry Creek and he was again appointed to labor as a home missionary. In 1869-70 he filled a short mission to the States. In the winter of 1873 he went to St. George, southern Utah, and the following year he moved a part of his family to St. George, where he later tried to work in the United Order. In 1874 he was appointed a member of the High Council in the St. George Stake, and held that position until 1881, when he was called to take charge of a mission to Green River in Emery county. This mission, however, did not succeed, and he therefore returned to Salt Lake City. In the fall of 1882 he was appointed chaplain of the council of the Utah Legislature. In 1883 he moved to Cache Valley and located in Oxford in 1884. When the Oneida Stake of Zion was organized in 1884, he was chosen as a member of the High Council of that Stake and also appointed to preside over the High Priests' quorum. He was ordained a Patriarch in 1884. Ripe in years and faithful and true to his Church to the last, Patriarch Andrus died at Oxford, Oneida county, Idaho, June 18, 1893, leaving a large posterity. Brother Andrus was universally known among the saints as an eloquent expounder of the gospel; he possessed the gift of speech to a marvelous extent and exercised influence for good wherever he associated with other men. He was one of the most successful missionaries known in the Church. His missionary activities are summed up in the following: Southern Ohio (1833), five months; Zion's Camp (1834), six months; Temple worker at Kirtland (1834), six months; State of New York (1835), five months; Canada (1841), six months; Ohio (1844), seven months; Nauvoo Temple (1845, eight months; Great Britain (1848), two years; St. Louis, Mo. (1854), nine months; Salmon River, Idaho (1856), two months; Great Britain (1859), two years, and Ohio (1869), five months.
