Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Armstrong, William

Armstrong, William, Bishop of the Eleventh Ward (Ensign Stake), Salt Lake City, Utah, was born March 12, 1870, at Ashfield, New South Wales, Australia. His parents joined the Church in his childhood and he was baptized when about eight years by Fred J. May, a missionary from Salt Lake City. Emigrating to America, he arrived in Salt Lake City, May 16, 1888. Six months later he was followed to Utah by the rest of the family, consisting of his mother, a brother and four sisters. Soon after his arrival in Utah, William was ordained a Priest by Bishop James Watson of the 19th Ward, Salt Lake City, and labored for some time as a Ward teacher. He also acted as one of the officers of the Ward Y. M. M. I. A., and later as a teacher in the Sunday School. Afterwards he was ordained an Elder and subsequently a Seventy and chosen as one of the presidents of the 30th quorum of Seventy. He spent one year in the L. D. S. High School in Salt Lake City and during the winter of 1893-1894 he was called to take the M. I. A. course at the Brigham Young Academy in Provo. About this time he worked as a line man for the old Deseret Telegraph Company, served as a clerk in Hardy Young and Co's. store on Main Street, Salt Lake City, and spent two or three years in the photographic business, principally with Charles R. Savage of Salt Lake City. Later he went to work as a bookkeeper, etc., for Barton & Co., clothiers. After filling a successful mission to Australia (where he presided over the Queensland conference for nearly two years), he was called to go to Mercur, a mining camp in Tooele county, to hold meetings with the Saints who were located there, and in the winter of 1898-1899 he filled a mission to Sanpete county in the interest of the M. I. A. cause. After this he took charge of the mining department of the "Deseret News" and was thus employed until 1901, when he married Emma L. Armstrong (daughter of Francis Armstrong of Salt Lake City) and went to work in the Utah Commercial and Savings Bank. Eighteen months later he became secretary and treasurer of the Taylor, Romney & Armstrong Co., which position he held until January, 1906. When the Ensign Stake was organized in 1904 Bro. Armstrong was ordained a High Priest and set apart to act as a High Councilor in that Stake. In 1906 he was called on a second mission to Australia, this time to preside over the Australian mission; he was accompanied by his wife and two small children. After spending three years in Australia, he returned to Utah and identified himself with the old firm of Asper, Noall & Co., through the purchase of the interest of the late William Asper. He was ordained a Bishop Oct. 13, 1912, and set apart to preside over the Eleventh Ward. Bishop Armstrong has a family of six children, two boys and four girls. The names of his children are Helen, Marion, William, Louise, Robert and Kathryn.
