Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Arnold, Henry

Arnold, Henry, presiding Elder at Herriman, Salt Lake county, Utah, and otherwise a prominent man in the Church, was born Feb. 15, 1822, at Kenchester, near Hereford, England, the son of Henry Arnold and Elizabeth Monk. He was baptized by William Kay, Feb. 4, 1841, and soon afterwards ordained to the Priesthood, after which he commenced a useful career in England as a local missionary. In the spring of 1842 he was called on a mission to Wales, and thus, together with his missionary companion, Elder Wm. Allen, was one of the first Latter-day Saint Elders who preached the gospel in South Wales. They raised up a branch of the Church consisting of 17 members in Pembrokeshire. Subsequently Elder Arnold presided over several branches in Herefordshire, England, and later was appointed to labor as a traveling Elder in the Mars Hill (formerly Froomes Hill) conference, under the direction of Elijah F. Sheets, whom he subsequently succeeded as president of the conference. He also organized a branch of the Church in the city of Hereford. In 1848 he emigrated to St. Louis, Mo., where he presided over the 2nd Ward or district of the St. Louis conference, and four years later he journeyed to Utah, crossing the plains in Capt. John Parker's company, which arrived in Salt Lake City Aug. 28, 1852. He located in the Fifteenth Ward. Oct. 8, 1852, he was ordained into the 17th quorum of Seventy, and in the spring of 1853 called on an Indian expedition to the southern settlements in Utah, where he assisted the people to fort up as a means of protection against the savages. Elder Arnold served the entire summer in Capt. L. W. Hardy's rifle company, under the command of Cols. Geo. A. Smith and Wm. H. Kimball. In the fall of that year he located with his family in the Butterfield Settlement, subsequently known as Fort Herriman, Salt Lake county. There he took a very active part in opening up the canyons, making water ditches, building forts, etc. In the winter of 1857-58 he participated in the Echo canyon expedition as first lieutenant in Capt. Elijah Allen's company, remaining out until the greatest danger was over and the majority of the brethren returned to their homes. When the general move of the Saints south took place in 1858, he took his family to Pondtown (Salem), Utah county, but returned to Herriman as soon as peace was established. Shortly afterwards he was ordained to the office of a High Priest, under the hands of A. O. Smoot and L. W. Hardy, and set apart to act as second counselor to Bishop Alexander F. Barron at Herriman. He filled that position from 1858 to 1861, after which he had charge of the Saints in Fort Herriman under the presidency of Bishop Archibald Gardner of the West Jordan Ward until 1866, when he removed to Salt Lake City, and during the following ten years had charge of the Warm Springs bathhouses under the direction of the Salt Lake City council. During that time the present bathhouse buildings were erected. In 1877 he purchased the Globe Bakery from the administrators of the late Richard Golightly, where he carried on quite an extensive business for many years. In the spring of 1870 Elder Arnold was set apart to act as second counselor to Bishop A. H. Raleigh of the 19th Ward, Salt Lake City. Subsequently he acted as a counselor to Bishop R. V. Morris, and in June, 1882, he was called to act as first counselor to Bishop James Watson, this position he held until his death which occurred in Salt Lake City Sept. 24, 1888. Since he first became identified with the 19th Ward, Bro. Arnold took an active part in all local affairs. For a number of years he officiated as a Ward teacher, and served several terms as a school trustee, taking a leading part in the erection of public buildings and improvements of a general nature. In 1885 he was called on a mission to Great Britain. As an active and zealous Elder in the Church he won the confidence and good will of the Saints generally wherever he was known. His fidelity to the cause of truth was well established by his teachings and example. During his eventful life Brother Arnold married six wives, all of whom bore him children. At the time of his demise he had nineteen living sons and daughters and a host of grandchildren. In consequence of his family relations he was exiled from his home for several years and passed through many hardships.
