Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Bachman, Emuel

Bachman, Emuel, the third Bishop of Harrisville ( North Weber Stake ), Weber county, Utah, was born August 17, 1862, in Bern, Canton Bern, Switzerland, the son of Jacob Bachmann and Elizabeth Suter. He emigrated with his parents from Switzerland to America as an infant and located with them in Liberty, Ogden valley, Weber county, Utah; later the family moved to Eden in the same valley. Emuel was baptized when about eight years old; later he was ordained a Deacon and subsequently an Elder, still later was made president of an Elders quorum. He took an active part in Church affairs from his early youth. In December, 1884, he married Mary Jane Henniger (the daughter of Rees T. Henniger and Frances Jane Southern), and the next year (1885) he moved with his family to Lewisville, Bingham county, Idaho, where his first and only child (Emuel jun.) was born, Nov. 1, 1885, and his wife died, Nov. 6, 1885, in childbed. In 1888 (Oct. 31st) he married Elizabeth Taylor, of Farr West, Weber county, Utah. Soon afterwards he was ordained a Seventy and subsequently chosen as a president of the 106th quorum of Seventy. In 1893-1895 he filled a mission to the Northern States, laboring in West Virginia, Pennsylvania and Maryland. After his return from this mission he was chosen as president of the Lewisville Y. M. M. I. A. and also labored as a home missionary for a number of years. In 1897 (Jan. 3rd) he was appointed Stake superintendent of religion classes in the Bingham Stake of Zion, which position he held until June, 1904, when he again (responding to call) left home to fill a mission to Great Britain. He returned in 1906. During the time of his residence in Idaho he was a farmer and canal builder; he served a number of times as a director and president of board of directors of canal companies, was also water master and filled other positions of responsibility in Bingham county. In April, 1907, he moved to Harrisville, Weber county, Utah, where he soon afterwards was appointed superintendent of the Harrisville Sunday School, and when the North Weber Stake of Zion was organized, in 1908, he was chosen as a member of the High Council of said Stake. In 1909 he was ordained a Bishop by David A. Smith and set apart to preside over the Harrisville Ward, which position he held for nearly five years. During the time of his administration he spent nearly six months in Nevada, doing missionary work. Being released from his Bishopric in 1913, because of other duties, he was again appointed a member of the High Council. This position he held until September, 1919, when he moved to Salt Lake City to do Temple work. Since that time he has been busily engaged in performing Temple ordinances for the dead. He is now a resident of the Second Ward, Salt Lake City, and acts as Ward genealogist, home missionary, etc.
