Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Ballard, Henry William

Ballard, Henry William, Bishop of the Benson Ward (Cache Stake), Cache county, Utah, was born Sept. 20, 1864, at Logan, Cache county, Utah, the son of Henry Ballard and Margaret McNiel. He was baptized by his father, Henry Ballard, when about eight years old, and ordained a Deacon June 30, 1877, in which capacity he later presided over a quorum of Deacons in the Logan Second Ward. He was ordained an Elder Oct. 1, 1884, by his father and the next day (Oct. 2nd), married Elvira Davidson (daughter of Bishop Robert Davidson and Ada Hemmingway), who was born in 1865 in Logan. This marriage has been blessed with six children, namely: Ada, Heny W. jun., Margaret E., Melvin Joseph, Robert. LeRoy and Leona, Bro. Ballard was ordained a Seventy Jan. 4, 1876, by his father and labored as a Ward teacher, Sunday School teacher and M. I. A. officer in the Logan Second Ward until March 9, 1891, when he was ordained a High Priest and Bishop by Moses Thatcher and set apart to preside over the Benson Ward, which position he held until 1912, when he was honorably released. Since that time he has presided over the local organization of High Priests and been a very diligent Sunday School teacher and otherwise taken a most active part in Church affairs. He has also labored as a home missionary in the Cache Stake and assisted in the building of the Logan Temple. Among the many civil offices held by Bishop Ballard at different times may be mentioned that he has acted as constable, justice of the peace, road supervisor, school trustee, etc. Bishop Ballard ranks as a most successful farmer. He was one of the chief promotors of the West Cache Canal which taps Bear river immediately below the Riverdale bridge, near the junction of Mink creek with Bear river. Together with Jacob Jörgensen Bro. Ballard built the upper three miles of that canal which represented the most difficult job on the whole canal line. This canal irrigates an extensive strip of land on the west side of Cache Valley.
