Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Barney, Lewis

Barney, Lewis, one of the original Utah pioneers of 1847, was born Sept. 8, 1808, in Niagara county, New York, the son of Charles Barney. At the age of three years Lewis moved with his father's family to Knox county, Ohio, and later they resided in Fayette county, Ohio. In 1825 the family moved west to Sangamon county, Illinois, where they resided until 1839, when they moved to Henry county, Iowa, where they secured title to 2000 acres of land. Here they learned of the "Mormon" persecutions and began to investigate the principles of the gospel, which led to their conversion. Lewis was baptized in the spring of 1840 and was confirmed by the Prophet Joseph Smith. He at once became an active member of the Church, furnished a team and wagon to haul rock for the Nauvoo Temple and donated liberally also for the Nauvoo House. He bought 160 acres of land near Carthage and bought two city lots of Hyrum Smith in Nauvoo, where he spent his winters, while he worked on his farm in the summer. After the completion of the Temple, he receivedhis endowments and in February (1846), he crossed the Mississippi river with two wagons and teams to assist the Twelve and others on their way to the Rocky Mountains. On Sugar Creek, Iowa, Lewis was organized into the Pioneer camp under Col. Stephen Markham. After traveling west as far as Garden Grove, he returned to Nauvoo after his family and again joined the camps of Israel on the Missouri river, soon after the Mormon Battalion had left. He spent the winter of 1846-1847 hauling provisions from Missouri to the Saints in the wilderness, and in the spring of 1847 he crossed the Missouri river to see the Twelve at Winter Quarters, and he was then chosen as one of the pioneers to hunt a new resting place for the Saints. To this call he responded cheerfully and made the famous march with the pioneers to Great Salt Lake Valley, arriving there in July, 1847. In Utah Brother Barney became an active citizen, moved his residence a number of times, and died Nov. 5, 1894, in Mancos, Colorado.
