Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Barton, Walter H.

Barton, Walter H., one of the Elders of the Church who died in the missionary field, was the son of John Barton and Sarah Flint, and was born in Kaysville, Davis county, Utah, April 15, 1869. He was baptized Aug. 5, 1877, by Elder Thomas F. Rousche and later ordained to the Priesthood. He was set apart Dec. 15, 1893, for a mission to the Southern States and left the following day, being previously ordained a Seventy. Elder Barton arrived at Chattanooga, Tennessee, on the 22nd of December and was assigned to labor in Pike county, Mississippi, with Elder J. M. Phelps, of Idaho. For the next two weeks immediately following he appeared to be in the best of health and numerous remarks were made concerning his robust condition. There was an extraordinary circumstance, however, in connection with his condition and that was that he was gaining flesh at an unusual rate. His rapid increase to corpulency was the occasion of numerous good-natured remarks and jokes at his expense, and he was frequently heard to state that unless there was a change his clothes would all be too small for him. One day he stepped onto a pair of scales and made the rather astonishing discovery that he had not increased in weight. That disclosure was the occasion of apprehension on the part of his friends and he was asked if he was ill and he repeatedly replied in the negative. But the swelling of his body continued and dropsical symptoms developed. Finally he complained of not being well and was obliged to take to his bed at the residence of John Crane, a member of the Church. There he received every possible attention. On the 8th of February, 1894, a letter reached the Chattanooga office, announcing his illness. Particulars were immediately telegraphed for and on the 10th a dispatch was received conveying tho alarming information: "We fear he will not improve." Elder Geo. Albert Smith then took the next train from Chattanooga to McComb City, a distance of 450 miles, arriving at the bedside of the sick Elder the day following. He thought he found him improving, as he was assured by the attending physician, Dr. Grattin, that he had passed the danger line and that all that was necessary to his complete and speedy recovery was careful nursing. On the 16th Elder Smith returned to Chattanooga, the doctor again informing him that the patient would recover unless he should become the victim of a relapse. At noon on the 18th he received a telegram to the effect that Elder Barton had died that morning at 8 o'clock. He immediately wired to have the body embalmed, a process that was promptly attended to by a competent undertaker, and forwarded in an air-tight casket. The preliminary arrangements were all attended to and the body brought home in charge of Elder Geo. Albert Smith. Elder Barton's labors were characterized by zeal and energy, and he was faithful in the fulfillment of the exalted calling whereunto he had been chosen.
