Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Bigler, Henry William

Bigler, Henry William, a member of the Mormon Battalion, was born Aug. 28, 1815, in Harrison county, West Virginia, the son of Jacob Bigler and Elizabeth Harvey. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he gathered with the saints at Nauvoo, Illinois, and shared in the expulsion of the saints from Nauvoo. He was one of the heroic 500 who enlisted in the famous Mormon Battalion in 1846, and marched from the Missouri river to the Pacific coast during the war with Mexico. He was mustered out in Los Angeles in July, 1847, and with other members of that command was proceeding northward, on his way to the Valley of the Great Salt Lake, when word was received from the authorities of the Church advising all who could not bring provisions for the winter to remain in California until the following spring, A number of these men, described by a California historian as "sober, orderly, peaceful and industrious," found employment at New Helvetia or "Sutter's Fort," with Captain Sutter, who was building a flour mill near the Fort, also a sawmill in Coloma valley, 45 miles distant. About half a dozen of the Battalion boys were sent, in charge of James W. Marshall, Sutter's partner in the sawmill venture, to Coloma to build the sawmill, young Bigler being one of them. At one stage in the proceedings, the mill having been practically completed and the water having been turned into the race by way of test and to wash out the loose dirt, etc., Mr. Bigler took occasion to make this historic entry in his diary: "Monday, January 24 (1848). This day some kind of metal was found in the tail race that looks like gold, first discovered by James Marshall, boss of the mill." Six days later, he made the next entry in his journal as follows: "Sunday, 30-Clear and has been all the last week. Our metal has been tried and proves to be gold. It is thought to be rich. We have picked up more than a hundred dollars worth last week." In a most interesting article written for the "Century Magazine" of February, 1891, by Mr. John S. Hittell, a photographic reproduction of this page of the Bigler diary is given, together with pictures of Mr. Bigler, Azariah Smith (another Battalion member of the party) and also the author of a diary which is confirmatory of Bigler's entries), Marshall, Sutter and other persons connected with the great event. Hittell says that Mr. Bigler's is not only the first record that was made of the discovery, but the only one made on the actual date of its occurrence, and from it Marshall's own account was corrected, he having variously given the date as about the 18th, 19th or 20th of January. Mr. Hittell adds that the Bigler journal, "kept during his service in the Mormon Battalion and his subsequent stay in California, is one of the most valuable historical documents of the State." After spending a short time in Utah, Henry W. Bigler once more went to California, whence he was called on a mission to the Sandwich Islands, in 1850, together with Geo. Q. Cannon and others. While some of the missionaries became discouraged because the whites on the islands would not embrace the gospel and left, Bro. Bigler and others decided to remain and preach to the natives, a decision which resulted in the harvest of thousands of human souls. Later, Brother Bigler filled two missions to the United States. He was called on a colonization mission to southern Utah and thus became one of the pioneer settlers of St. George, where he resided until his death, which occurred at St. George Nov. 24, 1900. Bro. Bigler was a faithful worker in the St. George Temple during the latter years of his life. He was an honest, unassuming, humble, useful man, beloved by everyone who knew him, and died as a faithful Latter-day Saint.
