Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Bingham, Brigham Heber

Bingham, Brigham Heber, the first Bishop of the Wilson Ward (North Weber Stake), Weber county, Utah, was born Dec. 15, 1841, at La Harpe, Hancock county, Illinois, the son of Erastus Bingham and Lucinda Gates. With his parents he shared in the persecutions of the Saints in Illinois and came west with his father's family at the time of the general exodus in 1846. After wintering at Running Water in what is now the State of Nebraska, he crossed the plains in 1847 in Daniel Spencer's hundred, located in Salt Lake City and spent the winter in the Old Fort. After that the family became pioneer settlers in the Second Ward, Salt Lake City. As a boy Brigham H. passed through all the hardships occasioned by grasshoppers, crickets and Indians and often went short of food. Still a member of his father's family he settled in Weber county in 1850 and was among the first settlers in Bingham's Fort, Weber county. He was baptized in December, 1850, by Chas. Hubbard in Farr's mill pond, was ordained to the different grades of the Priesthood and belonged to the Nauvoo Legion (or Utah militia). In 1858 he participated in the move south and on Dec. 24, 1861, he married Angeline Theresia Aldous ( daughter of Robert Aldous and Mary Ann Parkin), who was born Dec. 27, 1844. She bore her husband eleven children, namely: Brigham Heber jun., Edwin Aldous, Angeline Maria, Robert, Elijah N., Edna, Joseph, Georgianna, Mary Ann, Lucinda and Erastus. In 1886 (June 23rd) Bro. Bingham married Mary Alice Lomax (daughter of Joseph Lomax and Matilda Wignal), who was born Dec. 10, 1861. She bore her husband six children, namely: Ethel Exile, John Brigham, Minerva Alice, Maude Ellen, Dora Jane, and Mary Elizabeth. About 1860 Bro. Bingham moved to Huntsville and became one of the founders of that place. In 1868 he worked on the Central Pacific Railroad as a sub-contractor under Benson, Farr and West, doing about three miles of grading. In 1869 he located in what is now the Wilson Ward and took an active part in building up that part of the country in the construction of canals, the building of school houses, etc. In his early youth he was ordained an Elder and afterwards a Seventy, becoming a member of the 38th quorum of Seventy. He also acted as president of the Ward Y. M. M. I. A. and was active in all Church affairs. At one time, when he acted as a Ward teacher, he had a teacher's beat in his charge seven miles in length. When the Wilson Ward was organized in 1882 he was ordained a Bishop by Franklin D. Richards and set apart to preside over said Ward. Having married a plural wife in 1886 he was forced to take the "underground" and in 1890 he removed with part of his family to Mexico, where he resided twenty-two years, most of the time in Colonia Pacheco and Colonia Garcia. In the latter place he was one of the founders and assisted in erecting school houses in Garcia, Pacheco, Diaz and Dublan. At the time of the general exodus of the Saints from Mexico in 1912 he located temporarily at Tucson, where he resided for seven years and helped to build a meeting house and make many other improvements. He finally returned to Utah in 1919 and located again in Wilson, where he still resides.
