Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Bingham, Erastus

Bingham, Erastus, Bishop of Lynne, Weber county, Utah, was born March 12, 1798, in Concord, Essex county, Vermont, the son of Elisha Warner Bingham and Sallie Perry. He married Lucinda Gates, daughter of Thomas Gates and Patty Plumly, which marriage was blessed with nine children, namely, Mary, Sanford, Erastus junior, Thomas, Lucinda, Maria Louisa, Willard, Edwin and Jacob. Bro. Bingham's father died when Erastus was about four years old and he had to work on the farm while quite young to help maintain the family. He did not affiliate with any religious denomination until the spring of 1833, when the restored gospel was preached to him by Elder John F. Boynton. He read the Book of Mormon, was converted and was baptized November 11, 1833, together with his wife, in St. Johnsbury, Vermont. Erastus was the only one of his father's family who ever joined the Church. In the spring of 1836 he sold his farm and in the following June he started with his family (accompanied by Willard Snow and others) for Kirtland, Ohio. Here they remained until September, 1836, when they continued the journey to Far West, Missouri, where they arrived Nov. 4, 1836. Soon afterwards Bro. Bingham rented a farm on Shoal Creek, about two and a half miles from Far West, where he built a log house, into which he moved his family. The following spring he fenced his farm, which he cultivated until the fall of 1838, when the exterminating order of Governor Lilburn W. Boggs was issued, and he and the rest of the Saints had to leave the States in 1839. He was appointed a member of a committee at Far West to dispose of what furniture and other property the exiled Saints could not take with them. Leaving Far West in the latter part of March, 1839, Brother Bingham arrived in Hancock county, Ill., in April, 1839. He rented farms in the neighborhood of LaHarpe until the spring of 1845, when he bought a farm a few miles nearer Nauvoo, where he resided during the summer, but the next year, when the saints were compelled to leave the State, Brother Bingham sold his farm for a very small sum, in order to get a team with which to depart with his family into the wilderness. He left Nauvoo May 6, 1846, and wintered among the Ponca Indians, near Running Water, about one hundred and fifty miles above Winter Quarters. In the spring of 1847 he went back as far as Winter Quarters and made trips to Missouri to buy provisions. In June, 1847, he joined the general emigration, and crossed the plains and mountains as a captain of ten in Ira Eldredge's fifty and Daniel Spencer's hundred, arriving in Salt Lake Valley Sept. 19, 1847. Early in April, 1850, he moved to the Weber river and made a farm, but when President Young located the city of Ogden where he had chosen his farm, he sold his claim and moved to what was called Farr's Fort, north of the Ogden river, where he built a house, in which he and his family spent the winter of 1850-1851. In 1851 (Jan. 26th) he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the saints who had located on the north side of Ogden river, his Ward extending as far north as the present north line of Weber county. In the spring of 1851 he located on a parcel of land northwest of Farr's Fort; this new location was afterwards called Bingham's Fort in his honor, but is now called Lynne. Brother Bingham continued as Bishop, discharging his duties to the best of his ability, and to the satisfaction of the authorities of the Church until the fall of 1868, when all the Bishops of Weber county were released, except Chauncey W. West, who at that time was chosen Bishop of the whole Stake. Bishop Bingham held different positions of a civil nature in the community and served one term in the Territorial legislature as a representative from Weber county. As a faithful and true Latter-day saint he died at Lynne, Weber county, May 2, 1882. Bishop Bingham was an honest, truthful and temperate man, who never indulged in profanity nor drank liquor or used tobacco, either before or after he joined the Church. He was also industrious and cautious in his financial affairs.
