Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Bodily, Robert

Bodily, Robert, a faithful and philanthropic member of the Church and a resident of Kaysville, Davis county, Utah, was born Dec 30, 1815, at Blakesley, Northamptonshire, England, the son of Daniel Bodily and Ann Page. In December, 1845, he emigrated to Cape Colony, Africa, with his wife and two children, landing at Cape Town, Easter Sunday, 1846. Here he followed the business of an engineer in the royal service for about two years, sometimes having one hundred men working under him. During that time most of the batteries in Cape Castle were rebuilt and every gun reset in the vicinity of Capetown. Mr. Bodily then moved to Port Elizabeth, where he carried on building business and acted as a contractor; he also bought a fine farm about forty-eight miles east of Port Elizabeth, where he was living when the gospel found him in 1857. Becoming a convert, he was baptized with his family by John Stock in the Bushman river, May 3, 1857. Before his baptism he was opposed to emigrating to America, he being the owner of one of the finest farms in the country, but as soon as he was baptized, he told the Elders that he desired to emigrate to Zion. He also carried on blacksmithing and wagon making, being on the main road between Port Elizabeth and Graham Town. He sold his farm and business in 1860 for about six thousand dollars. Ever since he joined the Church his home had been a regular rendezvous for the Elders who frequently partook of his hospitality for months at a time. Emigrating to America he crossed the Atlantic in the ship "Electric," Captain Cooper, sailing from Port Elizabeth and landing in Boston. From Boston he traveled inland to Florence, Nebraska, and thence crossed the plains as captain of the Saints emigrating from Africa. The African Saints had fifteen wagons. With Nephi Johnson as captain of the whole train and Wm. Budge as chaplain, the company arrived in Salt Lake City Oct. 5, 1860. Throughout the long and arduous voyage and overland journey by ox teams he showed his generosity on numerous occasions by aiding his poor brethren and there was probably not one of that company who did not hold him in grateful remembrance. On one occasion while at Florence he contributed a thousand dollars to aid the emigration. Brother Bodily spent the winter of 1860-1861 in Salt Lake City, and in June, 1861, he bought a farm in Kaysville, Davis county, where he resided until the time of his death. Here he acted as a ward teacher and as a counselor in the presidency of the, High Priests quorum. Brother Bodily died in Kaysville April 15, 1892. His character was beautiful in its rugged simplicity and honesty, stern and uncompromising in the presence of evil, pleasant and genial in the society of friends; he was a man whom to intimately know was a pleasure, and to possess his esteem was an honor. One of his characteristics which harmonized with the beauty of his life was his love of flowers. He was often heard to say jocularly that if he could not have a flower garden in heaven, he did not care to go there. After joining the Church, he followed almost literally the Savior's injunction, "Sell all that thou hast and give to the poor and follow me." After he had become an aged man he met with financial reverses and had to make a new home under new conditions and circumstances, but he went to work with phenominal energy and until his last sickness the history of his life was one of great labor under circumstances which to many others would have been discouraging. Through all he remained consistent; prosperity could not spoil him, and adversity could not swerve him. His course was straight forward, his objects the glory of God and his own salvation. Bro. Bodily left a family of eleven children, seventy grandchildren and nine great-grandchildren.
