Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Bronson, Henry Donerald

Bronson, Henry Donerald, one of the Elders of the Church who died in the missionary field, was born Aug. 16, 1877, in Willard, Box Elder county, Utah, the son of Edward Henry Bronson and Lydia Ann Cole. He was baptized on his eighth birthday anniversary by his father, and moved with his parents to Fairview, Idaho, where he resided until he was called to fill a mission to the Southern States. Elder Bronson was set apart for this mission April 19, 1899, by Christian D. Fieldsted, and departed for his field of labor with a firm desire to do his duty and discharge every trust with honor and the good of the kingdom of God. He labored faithfully in this calling until Oct. 5, 1900, when he met his death by drowning, while crossing the Oconee river in Georgia. On that fatal day Elders Bronson, Butler, Mayhew and Manasseh Smith were traveling to their assigned fields of labor in the lower counties of Georgia, when they came to the Oconee river, near a place called the Long Shoals Factory; here they called to a ferryman on the other side of the river, but failed to get a reply. After waiting an hour and a half, Elder Bronson and Elder Butler decided to swim the river and bring a boat over for their companions. When about one-third of the way over Elder Bronson turned and began to swim back saying he could not make it. As he called for help, Elder Butler immediately turned to assist his companion and did all in his power to save him, but being so nearly exhausted himself he had hard work to save his own life, and Brother Bronson disappeared beneath the water. The body was not found until the morning of the 9th, when it was properly encased and taken to Fairview, Idaho, by Elder John F. Perkins, a companion of the deceased. Elder Bronson was a young man who was respected by all his companions. He was unmarried and left a loving father and mother to mourn the loss of a dutiful son. His whole desire was to do his duty and be a faithful defender of the gospel.
