Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Bulkley, Newman

Bulkley, Newman, a member of the Mormon Battalion, was born Aug. 18, 1817, in the town of Catharine, Tioga county, New York, the son of Noah Summers Bulkley and Anna Newman. At the age of five years he moved with his parents to Pennsylvania, where he remained until he was nearly twenty-one years of age. He then moved to the State of Missouri, where he remained five months and then had to leave because he and his family were "Mormons." He next moved to Scott county, Illinois, and later to Pike county, in the same State. Here he met Jane Draper, whom he married Jan. 7, 1844. In July, 1845, he moved to Golden's Point and resided there until the exodus of the Church from Nauvoo took place in 1846. He traveled with the camps of Israel to Council Bluffs, Iowa, and when the call came for the Mormon Battalion, he enlisted in the same in defense of his country's cause, leaving his wife and a six months' old child. When he took his departure his wife was so sick that she could scarcely sit up, and only had provisions to last her and child about one month. Brother Bulkley marched to California and there received his discharge. Along with other comrades he made his way to Great Salt Lake Valley, arriving there Oct. 16, 1847. He remained in the Valley until Aug. 15, 1848, when he started for Kanesville, Iowa, after his family, arriving in good season, and found his wife working out to maintain herself and child. He next went to work to make an outfit with which to return to the Valley. It took him four years to earn sufficient means for that purpose, but finally he crossed the plains and arrived with his family in the Valley Oct. 9, 1852. He settled in Springville, Utah county, which became his permanent home. Brother Bulkley passed through the hard experiences which was the lot of the pioneers of Utah. About the year 1880 his health began to fail him and he never, after that, fully regained his former strength. His last illness lasted about eighteen days and he died in Springville March 13, 1893. Bro. Bulkley never wavered in the cause of truth and his dying testimony to his family and all others was that he knew the gospel to be true, and enjoined his children to be true to the same. His wife preceded him to the Great Beyond. Brother Bulkley was a hard worker and produced much material for building purposes. Together with Abraham Noe he opened the so-called "Slide" (still bearing his name ) north of Springville, whence thousands of feet of lumber were procured that entered into the construction of the first houses in the town. He was a mountain worker for years, until his health failed, owing to the extreme exposures to the mountain blasts and snow.
