Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Cannon, David Hoagland

Cannon, David Hoagland, an Elder who died while filling a foreign mission, was born April 14, 1871, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Geo. Q. Cannon and Elizabeth Hoagland. At the age of eight years he was baptized by his uncle, Angus M. Cannon, and grew up firm in the faith, having been tutored in the knowledge of the gospel. He was a young man of s u p e r i o r gifts and extraordinary promise. On the 8th day of April, 1892, he was set apart by his brother, Abraham H., for a mission to Germany, and towards the latter part of the month he set out upon this mission and immediately began his labors in the northern part of the German empire. From the very outset he evinced uncommon zeal, and as a result of a persistent striving for the spirit that aforetime characterized the labors of the Elders, he resolved to travel without purse and scrip. Writing home, he declared that he felt he would be under condemnation if he did not thus place his trust in God; he doubted not the power of his Heavenly Father to supply his needs. After much prayer, and in spite of the discouraging advice given him by some of his associates, he resolutely entered upon this line of action-this, too, before he had mastered or even had sufficient time to partially master the German language. He gave to the poor all his clothes, save those in which he stood, and to the same purpose devoted all his pocket money. Even with this he was not content. He wrote home, requesting his father to cause that the money coming to him there be given in the same way and that the family, instead of sending means to him, expend it in the manner suggested. Early in October, 1892, while laboring faithfully in the discharge of his duties, still traveling without purse and scrip, he was compelled, because of illness, to cease his labors when at Sorau, Silesia. On Friday, Oct. 14, 1892, his Brother Hugh J., who was also laboring in Germany, was called to his bedside; he found his brother David very sick at Sorau, suffering from throat trouble, scarcely able to speak a word and quite delirious. The people with whom he stayed, who were members of the Church, Were very kind and watched over him as they would have done for their own son. On Sunday, Oct. 16th, he was much better until towards night, when he began to grow worse, and the next morning (Oct. 17th, 1892) he quietly passed away. The immediate cause of his death was heart-failure. After being properly embalmed and enclosed, the remains were brought to Salt Lake City for burial, under care of Elder Hugh J. Cannon, brother of the deceased. Memorial services were held Nov. 13, 1892, in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, over the remains, and in memory of all those who had died for the truth in the missionary field, laboring for the cause of Zion. These services were of an unique and impressive character and the congregation was one of the largest ever seen within the walls of the Tabernacle, every available space being occupied.
