Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Cannon, Lester Jenkins

Cannon, Lester Jenkins, an Elder who died while filling a foreign mission, was born July 4, 1888, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Abraham H. Cannon and Sarah Ann Jenkins. He was baptized July 4, 1896, by George Q. Cannon, and resided in Cannon Ward, Salt Lake City, when he was called on a mission to the Netherlands, being set apart for that mission July 7, 1909. On his arrival at mission headquarters, he was assigned to labor in the French-speaking part of the Netherlands Mission, first in Belgium and later in France. He became very proficient in the French language and did considerable interpreting for other Elders. Having been a worker in the Sunday school and Y. M. M. I. A. from childhood, he was a boy of strong faith, was possessed of indefatigable industry and an exceptionally powerful physique, on whom it would seem that disease could make no attack. Besides this he was of a sunny and lovable disposition, making friends wherever he went, but he was stricken unexpectedly during a visit to Brussels, Belgium, May 8, 1911, with severe pain. After consulting physicians, who pronounced the case to be appendicitis, complicated with peritonitis, it was decided that he should undergo an operation. The young Elder stood the ordeal well and rallied, until he could converse freely with his associates, but toward noon the following day alarming symptoms appeared and he passed peacefully away at Lille, France, May 6, 1911. His body was embalmed and sent home for burial. From letters written to his mother a few days before his death, it seems that Elder Cannon had recently had a number of very remarkable dreams, which indicated plainly that he was soon to pass to another sphere of action. His letter so impressed the mother that she was prepared for the news of his death before the sad message reached her. Funeral services were held over his remains in the Pioneer Stake Hall, Salt Lake City, June 7, 1911.
