Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Carter, Gideon Haden

Carter, Gideon Haden, one of the martyrs of the Church, was born in 1798 in the town of Benson, Rutledge county, Vermont. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism," he was baptized Oct. 25, 1831, at Orange, Cuyahoga county, Ohio, by Joseph Smith and confirmed by Sidney Rigdon. After being ordained a Priest by Oliver Cowdery, he performed missionary labor in Amherst, Brownham, Florence and New London. He attended the conference held Jan. 25, 1832, at Amherst, Ohio, where he was ordained an Elder and was commanded by revelation (Doc. and Cov. 75:34) to labor in the ministry, together with Brother Sylvester Smith. They started from Kirtland on their mission April 5, 1832. In going through the northeastern corner of Pennsylvania, near Lake Erie, they held four meetings and administered to a sick sister, who recovered immediately. Continuing their journey through western New York, they preached in Westfield and other places and baptized several persons. They extended their fields of labor into Vermont and returned to Kirtland Aug. 24, 1832. During this year Elder Carter's wife (Hilah Burwell) died, strong in the faith, and subsequently (in 1833) he married Charlotte Woods, who survived him and afterwards became the wife of Isaac Higbee. In 1838 Bro. Carter was a resident of Far West, Caldwell county, Missouri. Late in the evening of Oct. 24, 1838, news reached Far West that the Rev. Samuel Bogart, with a mob of about seventy-five men, were committing depredations on Log Creek, destroying property and taking prisoners. The trumpet sounded and the brethren assembled on the public square in Far West about midnight, when Capt. David W. Patten, Parley P. Pratt, Charles C. Rich and many others started for the south to rescue their brethren who had been taken prisoners. It came to a pitched battle with Bogart's mobocrats early in the morning of Oct. 25, 1838, in which Gideon H. Carter and Patterson O'Banion were killed outright and David W. Patten mortally wounded; a number of others, who were wounded, afterwards recovered. After the battle Gideon H. Carter, who had been shot in the head, was found dead on the ground, so defaced that his comrades did not know him, but as soon as it was discovered who he was, his body was brought away and buried.
