Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Christophersen, Martin

Christophersen, Martin, president of the Scandinavian Mission ( 1912-1914 ), was born April 13, 1850, in Lommedalen, Borum, Akershus amt, Norway, the son of Christoffer Pedersen and Ellen Hansen. Becoming a convert to the restored gospel, he was baptized June 26, 1865, by Ole Pedersen Belte, ordained a Teacher in 1867 and appointed to labor as a local missionary in the Christiania branch and afterwards in the Frederikstad branch, where he presided over the branch and had good success. While there he was arrested and imprisoned on bread and water diet for baptizing. He was ordained an Elder by Christian D. Fjeldsted in 1868, emigrated to Utah in 1871 and located in Salt Lake City, where he was employed as a gardener by B. F. Walker, Esq. He was ordained a Seventy in 1872 by John Needham. In 1883-1885 he performed a mission to Norway, laboring in the Drammen branch for a short time, after which he assisted in the mission office in Christiania, and later took charge of the Christiania conference for about thirteen months. At home he has always been active in Church matters, filling a number of important positions in the Priesthood. For several years he acted as counselor to Anders W. Winberg and Janne M. Sjodahl in the presidency of the Scandinavian meetings in Salt Lake City. In 1893 he was elected county commissioner for Salt Lake county, and when the Granite Stake of Zion was organized, Jan. 28, 1900, he was ordained a High Priest by Francis M. Lyman and set apart as a High Councilor, which position he filled until 1914, when he was chosen to act as first counselor in the presidency of the High Priests' quorum, which position he held until May, 1919, when he moved to the 27th Ward, Salt Lake City, where he still resides. In 1912-1914 he filled a second mission to Europe, this time presiding over the Scandinavian Mission, with headquarters at Copenhagen, Denmark. In 1874 he married Janet Leddingham (daughter of Alexander Leddingham and Janet Parke), who was born June 14, 1867, at Edinburgh, Scotland. This marriage has been blessed with nine children, namely, Einor M., Willard Alexander, Christian Victor, Walter, Alvin, Jessie, Ella, Norma and Edna. All these children are alive and married, and four of his sons have filled missions to Scandinavia and one served four years in the U. S. army. Bro. Christophersen has been a most successful florist and horticulturist, having made special efforts to discover what plants, shrubs and trees were best suited to the soil and climatic conditions of the State of Utah.
