Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Cole, Thomas J.

Cole, Thomas J., an Elder who died in the missionary field, was born July 21, 1881, at Victoria, Coffee county, Alabama, the son of Daniel Briston Cole and Margaret Simmons. He was baptized Jan. 11, 1902, by Charles Angle. The Cole family emigrated from Virginia to Arizona about 1897, when Thomas was fifteen years old. From his early youth he was active in Church circles, being assistant superintendent of the Thatcher Ward Sunday School, acting teacher, and a member of the 89th quorum of Seventy. In 1912 he was called on a mission to the Southern States, and after being set apart March 25, 1912, at Thatcher, he left his Arizona home to fill said mission. On his arrival at the headquarters of the Southern States Mission, he was assigned to labor in the State of Georgia, where he took hold of the work of the ministry with zeal. On July 4, 1912, he accompanied a picnic party of Elders and saints of the Buchanan branch to the Tallapoosa river, near Buchanan, Georgia. The party had chosen a beautiful spot on the bank of the river for their outing, and Elder Cole, in company with others, attempted to drag a seine in the river for a fish fry. They went into the river with this seine at a point where the water was shallow and waded down the stream until they came to a hole near the bank where the water was deep. It being only a few feet away from shallow water, Elder Cole decided to swim across the deep place. Casting away his end of the seine, he struck out for the place where he could resume wading, but he had made only a few strokes, when his feet caught in the seine and despite his efforts and the efforts of three of the Elders and the local brethren, he sank to the bottom of the river under ten feet of water. The fish seine was held down with an iron chain or weight to keep it close to the river bottom. The river at this point is about seventy feet wide. The body of the unfortunate Elder was in the water about fifteen or twenty minutes, and for more than an hour afterwards the brethren employed every means known to them to revive him, but all in vain. One of the local brethren was nearly drowned in attempting to save Elder Cole. As soon as Pres. Charles A. Callis learned of the shocking accident, he obtained the services of an undertaker and went to the place where the accident occurred. The body was embalmed, brought to Chattanooga, prepared for burial, and sent home to Arizona in care of Elder Cole's missionary companion, Elder Lee, who lived in the same town. Elder Cole left a wife and two children, the older, a son, seven years of age, and the younger, a daughter, fourteen months old. His parents and three married sisters were also living in Thatcher, Ariz., at the time of his demise.
