Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Cummings, Benjamin Franklin, junior

Cummings, Benjamin Franklin, junior, an active Elder, journalist and genealogist, was born Aug. 22, 1855, in Ogden, Weber county, Utah, the son of Benjamin Franklin Cummings and Catherine Hall. While he was still a boy, his family moved from his birthplace in Ogden and took up their residence in the Fourteenth Ward, Salt Lake City. A year or two in the common schools and a few months in a business college constituted his scholastic training. He entered the mechanical department of the "Deseret News" before he was in his teens and held the positions of reporter, editorial writer, manager of the eastern advertising department and State editor. When a young man he resided for several years in Logan, where he rounded the "Logan Leader" (later the "Logan Journal"). After studying law he was admitted to the bar in Logan and held the office of justice of the peace for several terms. He also served in two or three sessions of the State Legislature. During his life he filled three missions, two to the Eastern States, and one to the Central States as editor of the "Liahona," published in Independence, Mo. Besides his writing and missionary work at home and abroad, his most conspicuous service was in the field of genealogy and Temple work. He was the first Latter-day Saint to travel extensively in search of family records and he compiled histories of many prominent Utah families. He was known both in the East and West as an expert genealogist. Particularly in the late years of his life he devoted himself to the furtherance of Temple work, holding the position of Stake genealogist and secretary of the Genealogical Board of Granite Stake at the time of his death, which occurred March 11, 1918, In Salt Lake City, Utah. Bro. Cummings was a teacher of the gospel. First of all he lived it-inflexibly convinced of its divinity, humbly reverent of its grandeur, faithfully obedient to its laws, and then, with a rare gift of pen and speech, he patiently, intelligently and earnestly explained its principles to all who sought the truth. To the fullest extent, which opportunity permitted, he brought every secular activity in which he engaged to bear directly or indirectly on the mission of teaching the gospel. He traveled extensively, both in his home State and throughout the country, earning his livelihood. But wherever he went he was the disciple of Christ, modest and unassuming, yet watchful and persistent in searching out fertile spots on which to drop the seeds of truth. This dominating motive of his life can be seen in every trace he has left. In his writings, in the memories held of him by his children, in the record of a long and varied ecclesiastical career, there is found, as the deepest and noblest impression, his fidelity to his people and his God. He wrote clearly and forcibly, yet with a warm, human touch. His delicacy of thought and expression were intuitive, and trained almost entirely by his own efforts, for he had but little schooling. He exercised this talent as a writer on the "Deseret News" for many years, as author of numerous articles in Church magazines and as founder and first editor of the "Liahona." While the greater part of his work was prose, he wrote several poems that rank with the finest produced by "Mormon" writers for their purity of rhythm ann diction, loftiness of thought and deep poetic feeling. Elder Cummings married Emily, daughter of Bishop David and Sarah Williams, who for many years were residents of Price, Scofield and Winter Quarters, Utah. Following are the names of the children who survived him: Benjamin Franklin jun., David Williams, Nephi Willard, and James Moroni. Four children (Benoni, Alma, Emily and Wilford) died in infancy.
