Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Elder, Henry Benson

Elder, Henry Benson, ninth Bishop of the Second Ward (Liberty Stake), Salt Lake City, Utah, was born Nov. 18, 1863, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Joseph Benson Elder and Margaret Elizabeth Joiner. He was baptized in May, 1872, by his father; ordained a Deacon Feb. 8, 1878, and a Teacher April 1, 1881 (both ordinations being performed by Bishop Thos. Taylor). Later he was ordained a Priest. In 1888 (Sept. 10th) he was ordained an Elder by Geo. M. Cannon and subsequently served in the presidency of the fifth quorum of Elders. In 1902 (March 4th) he was ordained a Seventy by Apostle Geo. Teasdale and afterwards served as one of the presidents of the second quorum of Seventy. From 1902 to 1903 Bro. Elder filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring principally in Ohio and Georgia. He was ordained a High Priest Nov. 24, 1907, by Nephi L. Morris and ordained a Bishop April 13, 1919, by Charles W. Penrose and set apart to preside over the Second Ward, Salt Lake City, which position he still (1920) holds. While a resident of the Fifteenth Ward, Bro. Elder acted as superintendent of the Ward Sunday school for a number of years and acted in a similar capacity for some time while a resident of the Fourteenth Ward. When Religion Classes were first organized in the new Salt Lake Stake, he was chosen as Stake superintendent and continued in that position (laboring with great fidelity for twelve years) until he removed to the Liberty Stake in 1912. Bro. Elder was engaged in the contracting and building business for fifteen years, having been previously in the employ of the Taylor, Romney & Armstrong Lumber Co. for twenty years. During the World War he served the government on the draft board for one year. In 1888 (Oct. 31st) Bro. Elder married Alice J. Fenton (daughter of Thomas Fenton and Clarissa Combes), who was born Feb. 12, 1866, in Salt Lake City, Utah. The following named children were born to them: Alice Loise, Lilian Sibyl, Clayburn Combes, Henry Fenton, Ernest Alfred and Clarissa Evelyn. Bishop Elder is a man of great faith, unostentatious in his manners and known for his sympathy and kindness. He has been especially successful in his labors among children, over whom he has always wielded an influence for good.
