Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Evans, Abel John

Evans, Abel John, second counselor in the presidency of the Alpine Stake and a resident of Lehi, Utah county, Utah, was born Dec. 20, 1852, at Lehi, the son of Abel Evans and Mary Jones. At the age of twelve years his father went on a mission to Great Britain, and in November, 1867, died there, thus becoming a martyr for the cause of his Master, and leaving Abel John, the eldest of nine children, to take the lead in all the hardships which the people of that time were forced to undergo. He had had but very little time to attend school, and indeed the opportunities of those days were but poor for those able to go. He worked on the farm and in the canyons, and at other manual labor, such as he could find to do. At the age of twenty-one years, on Jan. 26, 1874, he was ordained to the office of an Elder, under the hands of Andrew Smith Johnson, and on the same day married Louisa Emeline Zimmerman in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City. He afterwards became the father of eleven children, three boys and eight girls, seven of whom are still (1920) living, namely, Harriet Mindwell (Mrs. Heber Webb), William Erastus, Robert James, Rose Ethel (Mrs. Angus Elmer Peterson), Hazel Julia (Mrs. George F. Holmstead), Vervene June, and Winifred Erma. Soon after becoming an Elder, he was chosen as one of the counselors to Lot Russon, who was president of the Elders quorum at Lehi; on Dec. 30, 1883, he was ordained a Seventy under the hands of Andrew A. Peterson: and in 1889 filled a short mission to Great Britain. On Jan. 15, 1892. he was ordained a High Priest, under the hands of Abraham H. Cannon, and called to the High Council in the Utah Stake of Zion. He acted in that position until the Alpine Stake of Zion was organized, Jan. 13, 1901, at which time he was made one of the Stake presidency, the position he now occupies. In the industrial line, Bro. Evans has always been a strong advocate of home industry and local institutions, being a stockholder in the following companies: Provo Woolen Mills, Utah-Idaho Sugar Company, Utah Banking Company, State Bank of Lehi, Bank of American Fork, American Fork Co-op., Intermountain Life Insurance Company, Provo Reservoir Company, Utah Lake Irrigation Company, Salt Lake & Utah Railroad Company, and many other minor enterprises. Bro. Evans was a member of the city council at Lehi four terms, 1881-1888; during the last three terms he was alderman, which included the duties of justice of the peace, and in 1891 he was elected mayor, this time running on a Democratic ticket, being the first election since the division of the people on national party lines. He served as a member of the county court for four years, 1892-1896, at which time he was elected a member of the Utah Constitutional Convention and there took a prominent part in framing the State constitution. He served as a senator in the first, second, third and fourth State legislatures of the State of Utah, and at the last session was chosen president of the senate by the unanimous vote of his party. Although Elder Evans had very few educational opportunities in his youth, by determination and study, pursued at odd times, he has risen into the ranks of professional men. Although he never attended a high school nor a law school a day in his life, yet on May 13, 1901, he was the happy recipient of a certificate from the Supreme Court of the State of Utah, which entitles him to practice law in all of the courts of the State.
