Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Fjeld, Andrew

Fjeld, Andrew, Bishop of the Lehi Fifth Ward (Alpine Stake), Utah county, Utah, was born May 30, 1856, in Lehi, son of Carl J. E. Fjeld and Anna Olsen. He was the only child of his mother growing to maturity. After receiving his education in the public schools of Lehi, he learned the mason trade, at which he has labored successfully most of his life. Being baptized when about eight years of age, he was ordained to the lesser Priesthood and as a young man he took an active part in several kinds of Church work, occupying the positions of counselor to Michael Vaughan, president of the Priests quorum, later holding the office of president of the quorum with Andrew Peterson and Walter L. Webb as counselors. In the Y. M. M. I. A. he at various times held the office of treasurer, counselor and president. He was a teacher in the Sunday school for some time and on Jan. 9, 1893, he became a member of the first class to take the Sunday school course in the Brigham Young University at Provo. The following year he was again called to attend the University. On his return he introduced the new idea and methods into the Sunday school in Lehi and was called, on Nov. 18, 1894, to succeed William Yates as the superintendent of the school, with James Kirkham and Joseph S. Broadbent as assistants. Under his management the school grew and prospered until it was the largest in the Church, having an enrollment of 1250 members. Being called to Australia on a mission, he was released from the Sunday school Jan. 9, 1899, and set sail from San Francisco on the 26th of the month on the S. S. "Mariposa," landing in Sydney, Australia, Feb. 19, 1899. He labored as traveling Elder in the New South Wales conference for thirteen months and as president of the Queensland conference until Nov. 28, 1900, when he was called by President Lorenzo Snow to preside over the Australian Mission. In this capacity he visited all the principal cities of Australia and Tasmania and was relieved by James Duckworth, who had come to preside over the mission, Aug. 4, 1901. He set sail from Sydney, Australia, on the steamship "Ventura" Aug. 13, 1901, calling en route at Auckland, Pago Pago, and Honolulu. Landing in San Francisco, he was met by his wife and her father and mother, Sept. 3, 1901, and arrived in Lehi on the 13th day of the month. He was set apart as a president of Seventy in the sixty-eighth quorum Sept. 21, 1902, and on the 23rd of the following November he was ordained a High Priest and set apart as second counselor to Bishop Thomas R. Cutler. Upon the division of the Lehi Ward, Dec. 20, 1903, he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the Lehi First Ward with Robert John Whipple and Geo. Schow as counselors. When the Lehi Fifth Ward was organized, Feb 29, 1920, he was released from presiding over the First Ward and set apart to preside over the Fifth Ward with Morgan S. Lott and William L. Worlton as counselors, which position he still holds. He was a member of the school board for one term and as a member of the Lehi Pioneer Committee was one of the chief promoters of the History of Lehi. He spent the greater part of four winters gathering data for this work, interviewing old settlers and reading old records. In 1890 (Feb. 19th), Bro. Fjeld married Eliza Ann Broadbent, a daughter of Joseph and Sarah Dixon Broadbent, who was born Aug. 17, 1870. He is the father of nine children, six of whom are living, namely, Virgil Andrew, Leona Sarah, Edna Amanda, June, Allan Edward, and Velma.
