Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Gardner, Henry Archibald

Gardner, Henry Archibald, first counselor in the presidency of the Nebo Stake of Zion, Utah county, Utah, was born Sept. 21, 1887, in Spanish Fork, Utah county, Utah, the son of Henry Gardner and Elizabeth Martell. After his education in the common schools of Spanish Fork he attended the Brigham Young University at Provo for two years. He spent the early part of his life on his father's farm, and later labored three years in the sugar business as foreman. He was baptized Oct. 13, 1895, by Henry Tilley; ordained a Deacon Nov. 4, 1899, by George H. Jex and set apart as president of the first quorum of Deacons in the Spanish Fork First Ward, Dec. 4, 1901; ordained a Priest March 8, 1903, by George H. Jex, and ordained an Elder in November, 1906, by Henry Gardner (his father). In 1906, when only nineteen years of age, he was called on a mission to the Southern States, during which he labored in the Alabama conference, part of the time as president of said conference. After his return home in June, 1909, he was chosen as a member of the Stake Board of Y. M. M. I. A., which position he held for two years, and also labored as a home missionary. He was ordained a Seventy Dec. 8, 1910, by Jonathan G. Kimball and ordained a High Priest and Bishop May 27, 1917, by Apostle Orson F. Whitney and set apart to preside over the Spanish Fork Second Ward, succeeding the late Bishop Benjamin Argyle. Although he only acted as Bishop one year, he won the love and esteem of the Saints in his Ward, who supported him loyally. When the Nebo Stake presidency was reorganized Feb. 24, 1918, Bro. Gardner was chosen as first counselor in the Stake presidency, which position he still holds. In January, 1919, he left the sugar business to accept a position as assistant cashier in the Commercial Bank of Spanish Fork, which position he still occupies. He has held a number of positions of a civil nature, and acted as city councilman of Spanish Fork two terms. He was one of the promoters of the Spanish Fork Building and Loan Association, which was organized in 1912 for the purpose of encouraging young men and assisting them to become owners of their own homes, and now acts as the treasurer of this association. In 1910 (Sept. 28th) Bro. Gardner married Grace Brockbank (daughter of Samuel Brockbank and Mary Jane Thomas of Spanish Fork), who was born at Spanish Fork, Utah, Jan. 18, 1889. This union has been blessed with two children (Grace and Wallace Henry). Bro. Gardner is an active and energetic young man with a great future before him. His integrity to the Church is unquestioned, and in his business affairs he has won the confidence and good will of the community in which he resides.
