Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Gillet, Collins Moore

Gillet, Collins Moore, an Elder of the Church who died while filling a mission, was born Nov. 4, 1837, at Neversink, Sullivan county, New York, the son of Horace Gillet and Sarah E. Moor. In the year 1854 he, with the family moved to Great Salt Lake Valley, where he was baptized Nov. 19, 1854, by Elder Seth Taft. While on the journey to the Valley his father sickened and died, leaving Collins, who was then only in his seventeenth year, to assume the responsibility of looking after his surviving mother and the family younger than himself. To his mother he was all that a son could be, his affection and unvarying kindness to her and the family going far to mitigate the bereavement which they had suffered in the loss of the husband and father. At the April conference in 1863, Collins M. was called, with many other young men, to take a mission to Europe. Arriving in Liverpool July 29, 1863, he was appointed to labor as a traveling Elder in the Southampton district, and afterwards appointed president of the Reading conference. From the latter conference he was shortly afterwards removed to the Sheffield district, his trustworthiness, sound judgment and other qualities designating him-though with limited experience at that time in the ministry-as suitable to fill the important position of president of the district. Over the district he continued to preside until the time of his departure from England, giving perfect satisfaction to those who presided over him, and securing the love and confidence of the saints. On the 30th of April, 1866, he sailed from Liverpool on the ship "John Bright," as president of the company of emigrating saints, which numbered 764 souls. In the discharge of his new duties on shipboard, and also from New York to the frontiers, he continued to exhibit the wisdom, faithfulness and zeal which had characterized his previous labors. While crossing the plains, together with other returning missionaries, he took sick and died Aug. 20, 1866, twenty-three miles west of Fort Kearney. Elder George Q. Cannon writes: "I, with many others who had opportunities of becoming acquainted with the studious disposition and exemplary habits of Elder Collett anticipated a long career of usefulness for him. His future seemed to be unusually rich with promise. But in the providence of our Almighty Father he has been called away from us. His labors, however, are not lost. In the sphere to which he has gone he will find ample opportunity for the exercise of his talents in forwarding the great work which during his mortal life he loved so well."
