Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Grant, Rachel R.PPGrant, Rachel Ridgway Ivins

Grant, Rachel R.PPGrant, Rachel Ridgway Ivins, wife of Jedediah Morgan Grant, was born March 7, 1821, at Hornerstown, N. J., the daughter of Caleb Ivins and Edith Ridgway. Her parents died before she reached the age of womanhood, and she made her home with her cousin, Joshua Wright, at Trenton, N. J. Some time later than her eighteenth year, while residing with a relative at Hornerstown, N. J., she attended a meeting at which she heard for the first time "Mormon" Elders preach. She related that she went home and prayed that the Lord would forgive her for doing such a thing on the Sabbath. However, her soul was too receptive to the voice of truth not to recognize the sound thereof; and she continued to attend the Latter-day Saint meetings, even though threatened with being disfellow-shipped from her church, the Baptist, for so doing. Eventually she was baptized, and later became personally acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith. She emigrated to Utah, in company with her sister Anna and a number of other people who had been former residents of her neighborhood and who had joined the Church. The company in which she traveled arrived in Salt Lake City Aug. 10, 1853. Two years later she married President Jedediah Morgan Grant, second counselor to President Brigham Young. Toward the end of the following year, her son Heber Jeddy, now the seventh President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was born. Nine days later her husband died, and she found herself in very poor circumstances, but with characteristic courage and determination she bore her sorrow bravely, and started to earn a livelihood for herself and child by sewing and keeping boarders. With devoted care she guided the steps of her boy through the days of infancy and childhood, instilling into his mind the principles of faith, honesty, and steadfastness of purpose, and, above all, devotion to the gospel and loyalty to the Church. For thirty-five years Sister Grant served as president of the Relief Society of the Thirteenth Ward, Salt Lake City, and always manifested great interest in the Relief Society as a body, knowing it to be an organization that had been instituted by the Prophet Joseph Smith for the development of the women in Israel, and for their service in ministration to the afflicted. During the later years of her life Sister Grant suffered from deafness, which affliction was a source of great sorrow to her, as she loved music and found in the association of her friends one of the supreme joys of her life. Notwithstanding this affliction, no murmuring word ever passed her lips, and the sunny smile was ever fresh upon her face. Sublime resignation was among her prominent characteristics. Sister Grant, who was affectionately known as "Grandma Grant," died at the residence of her granddaughter, Mrs. George J. Cannon, in Salt Lake City, Jan. 27, 1909, as a result of pneumonia.
