Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Gudmundson, Gudmund

Gudmundson, Gudmund, the first Latter-day Saint missionary sent to Iceland, was born March 23, 1825, in Iceland, the son of Gudmund and Gudrun Gudmundson, His parents were poor, but devout and pious people. Gudmund was the youngest child of ten brothers and sisters. When about sixteen years of age he went to Copenhagen, Denmark, where he learned the trade of a goldsmith, and after having served his apprenticeship he worked at that trade for about seven years. While thus engaged he heard of a religious sect called "Mormons," recently introduced into Denmark, and Gudmund, being of a religious turn of mind, went one Sabbath to hear them. He writes, "It was then that I, for the first time, heard and saw our beloved Apostle Erastus Snow. I understood and believed the doctrines taught by him and his companions, and I was baptized in the most devoted sincerity and repentance Feb. 15, 1851, by Peter O. Hansen. I testify before God and men that my heart was renewed, and I realized that the gospel was the power of God unto salvation. At a fast meeting held in Copenhagen, April 18, 1851, I was ordained a Teacher by Erastus Snow and called to preach the gospel to my countrymen. Having found the fruits of the gospel more sweet and desirable than any other fruit, I expected that every person would believe my testimony, especially my own relatives, but alas, when I arrived in Iceland I preached to my brothers and sisters in vain; they would not receive me, and as my pious parents had died, I felt myself left alone, like 'Elijah of old in the cave.' However, I soon found a few believing friends, who, notwithstanding strong opposition on the part of the priests, were ready to embrace the truth. I was often rebuked, spit upon and mocked by enemies, but being full of the love of God, I felt no anger or indignation against those who persecuted me. I will mention one singular incident: One of my most violent adversaries, a 'very wise man,' like Zeezrom of old, spoke many hard words to me, and even mocked the Holy Ghost, saying that I might just as well say that I had ascended a certain mountain (near our place) and there received the Holy Ghost. I left him with singular feelings, without answering him, but felt that God would judge him and that he was a hypocrite. A few days later this man ascended the mountain mentioned, and when he had almost reached the top, he took hold of a rock, which seemed to be solid and strong, but the rock yielded and the man rolled downward about a mile. He broke a bone and his whole body was bruised. For a year or so he suffered great pain, but he finally recovered and made another attempt to ascend the mountain, where his sheep were pasturing. Two men followed him and two went before him. As he was climbing, the strength of his legs failed him and he fell headlong, again breaking his leg. Afterwards he began to examine what we published, and he told his sister that he would never forget the harsh words he had spoken against me." Soon after landing on Iceland, Bro. Gudmundson's missionary companion was accidentally drowned, leaving him alone without the authority to baptize, as he only held the office of a Teacher. Bro. Gudmundson remained on Iceland upwards of three years (from April, 1851, to July, 1854). In the meantime he had been joined by Elder John P. Lorensen, who ordained him an Elder and after baptizing nine persons he returned to Denmark and then spent about eighteen months as a missionary on Sjælland. While doing missionary labors in the city of Kallundborg, he was arrested and imprisoned for about seven weeks, and when the prosecutors were unable to prove anything against him, except that he had baptized some persons and preached the gospel, he was liberated, but was immediately drafted into service as a soldier, much against his will, for four years. He was conducted by the police to Copenhagen, forced to put on military attire and given a gun and a sabre. Being weakened from confinement in prison, he found the military training exceedingly hard, and besides he was constantly exposed to the ridicule and sneers of his fellow-soldiers because of his being a "Mormon." These were trying experiences for Bro. Gudmundson, who at times thought that the Lord had forsaken him; yet he continued to pray for deliverance. After he had been in the military service thirteen months, his friends contributed 300 rigsdaler to buy him free from further military service, but as the effort proved ineffectual he gave the money to the poor. Finally he took sick and was placed in the hospital, where he preached the gospel to his room-mates; among his converts was a corporal, who was baptized before he left the hospital. Elder Gudmundson writes: "After I had been in the hospital a long time, I was presented to the physicians and the general of the battalion, who pronounced me unfit for military service on account of weakness in the lungs. They then gave me a passport and I appeared in a conference of the saints in Copenhagen, to the astonishment of everyone, and I was really astonished myself, because I knew that my lungs were as healthy as they could possibly be. I realized then that it was the work of the Lord, in fulfillment of certain promises made to me, that if I kept the commandments of God and did my duty, I should be liberated. Brothers Hector C. Haight and Ola N. Liljenquist and others rejoiced exceedingly to see me free and it was proposed that I should emigrate to Zion. Together with a large company of saints I left Copenhagen April 18, 1857, crossed the Atlantic in the ship 'Westmoreland' and arrived in Salt Lake Valley Sept. 13, 1857." Among Bro. Gudmundson's converts in Iceland was a family of the name of Garff, well-to-do people and highly respected, but as soon as they joined the Church they became objects of special hatred on the part of their nearest relatives and their neighbors generally. The Garffs decided to leave for Utah in 1857 on the same ship with Elder Gudmundson. Sister Garff went to bid her parents goodbye, but none of her relatives, of whom there were many, would have anything to do with her, except her mother, who came to the wharf and bade her daughter farewell with all the feelings of a loving mother. Sister Garff was at that time in a delicate condition and in embarking the family took with them a nurse and midwife. Sister Garff gave birth to a baby boy in mid-ocean, May 3, 1857, and by request of the captain of the ship, the infant was given the name of D Westmoreland Garff, the given names being the names of the captain and of the ship. After landing in America, Bro. Gudmundson, with the family, started across the continent. On the way Bro. Garff took fatally ill, Calling Elder Gudmundson to his death bed, he requested him to take care of his wife (Marie) and the children, consisting of four boys and one girl, and gave special instructions that he should not allow her to go back to her people in Iceland. "I want her to go to Zion and be with God's people," was his dying request. Bro. Garff was buried along the pioneer trail, and just a few days later Sister Garff buried her only daughter, a few miles further along. In 1858, soon after the company arrived in Utah, Bro. Gudmundson married Sister Marie Garff, and from that union was born three sons, who were named respectively Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Jacob died at the age of three years, Abraham is following the trade of his father, that of a goldsmith. Isaac entered the mercantile business and acted until a recent date as Bishop of the Burley Second Ward, Cassia county, Idaho. Bro. Gudmundson resided for many years in Lehi, Utah county, Utah, where he followed his trade as a goldsmith. The last part of his life he spent at Logan, Cache county, Utah, and worked at his trade until a few days before his death, which occurred Sept. 21, 1883. He died in full faith of the gospel, leaving a wife and several children.
