Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Haacke, Rulon C.

Haacke, Rulon C., an Elder who died while filling a foreign mission, was born Jan. 15, 1890, in Salt Lake City, Utah, the son of Charles C. Haacke and Hedvig L. Grellet. He was baptized in April, 1898, by Elder Christensen, and resided in the Second Ward, Salt Lake City, when he was called on a mission to New Zealand, being set apart for that mission May 14, 1909. He became a diligent and efficient Elder and labored in the field one year and ten months, when he was stricken with diabetes, prominent physicians of Auckland, who were called in, pronounced the case a hopeless one. Consequently Elder Haacke was released from his missionary labors and in company with nine other Elders started for home Feb. 15, 1911, on board the steamer "Aorangi." Elder Haacke seemed to improve until the ship had left the Society Islands, and as the vessel had to lay by for repairs, the sick Elder began to decline rapidly, owing to the excessive heat of the tropics and because he lost heart at the delay. He became unconscious Feb. 24, and died the following afternoon, Feb. 25, 1911. A consultation was held among the Elders, and the captain of the ship was offered three fares if he would allow the body of Elder Haacke to be taken to San Francisco, Cal., but as the maritime law only allowed a dead body to be kept on a vessel twenty-four hours, the captain could not grant the request, as the ship could not reach port for ten days at best. Consequently, a funeral service was held on the after deck of the ship, which all the passengers attended, Elder Oscar B. Evans conducting the exercises. In preparing the body for burial at sea it was wrapped in strong canvas with two hundred pounds of iron so placed around the body as to keep the feet lower than the head. Elder Haacke was a talented young man with a seemingly bright future, being especially proficient as a violinist. He had many friends, both at home and abroad. His father waited in San Francisco, Cal., for his son's return, and had no knowledge of his death until the arrival of the ship.
