Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Haag, Adolph

Haag, Adolph, one of the Elders of the Church who died while filling a foreign mission, was born Feb. 19, 1865, in Stuttgart, Wurttemberg, Germany, the son of Adolph Haag and Louisa M. Molt. He was baptized April 19, 1881, by C. C. Schramm. After emigrating to Utah, he settled in Payson, Utah county, Utah, where he resided in 1892, when he was called on a mission to Turkey, being set apart Feb. 19, 1892. He had previously been ordained a Seventy. On his arrival in Liverpool, England, his health was not the best, but he nevertheless proceeded to the headquarters of the Swiss and German Mission, where he remained for some time and then proceeded to Constantinople, where he joined Elder Don C. W. Musser, who had also been called to Turkey on a mission. Elders Haag and Musser remained in Constantinople until August, 1892, when they started for Haifa, Palestine. On the way they visited Smyrna (Asia Minor), Athens (Greece), and Alexandria, Cairo and Port Said in Egypt; thence they proceeded to Palestine, arriving at Haifa Aug. 31, 1892. After his arrival in Haifa Bro. Haag's state of health became worse and his heart was very much affected. When his condition was reported to mission headquarters in Switzerland, he was promptly released to return home, but a few days later (Oct. 3, 1892) he died at the home of Brother and Sister Hilt at Haifa with typhus fever. Although Brother Haag had been in Haifa only a short time, he had made a host of friends, as evidenced by the large concourse of people who attended his funeral, among them being the German consul and his wife, who had been very kind to the Elders. The mayor of Haifa, who had also entertained the Elders, listened to the testimonies of the brethren, and in fact, nearly every one in the colony was in attendance at the funeral. Subsequently a monument was erected on Elder Haag's grave in the German cemetery at the foot of Mount Carmel. It consists of a neat cube of rock supporting a white broken marble column. Elder Hang was an able and faithful missionary. He was twenty-seven years of age when he died and left a wife and two children.
