Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Hale, Solomon Eliphet, jun.

Hale, Solomon Eliphet, jun., an Elder who died in the missionary field, was born July 1, 1881, in Gentile Valley, Oneida county, Idaho, the son of Solomon E. Hale and Helen Louisa Hunter, and baptized by E. M. Lee July 6, 1889. The greater part of his life was spent in the town of Oakley, Idaho. The people of all classes and creeds learned to love the young man for his noble traits of character. For a number of years he attended the Cassia Stake Academy, and in 1899 he went to Salt Lake City, where he attended the L. D. S. Business College and while there made rapid progress in his chosen studies. In the spring of 1900 he was called home to take a position as bookkeeper in the People's Union Store of Oakley and remained in that position till he was called to take a mission to the Eastern States. He was set apart for this mission Aug. 8, 1900, and left Salt Lake City the following day. Shortly after arriving in his field of labor he was taken sick, but continued to do the work to which he had been called until the body refused to obey the spirit, and on the 23rd day of October, 1900, "he was transferred from the Eastern States Mission to the Great Beyond, there to continue his missionary work for the good of his fellow-men." He died at Great Falls, Maryland, while serving as an ambassador of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The remains were sent home, funeral services held in Oakley, Idaho, Oct. 30, 1900, and reverently laid in the silent tomb in the presence of parents, kindred and a host of sympathetic friends. Elder Edward H. Snow, who at that time was president of the Eastern States Mission, wrote of the deceased as follows: "Elder Hale had been in the field but two months, but in that time endeared himself to all whom he had met. He was cheerful, hopeful and entered into the spirit of the work with faith and zeal. He died battling for the right; his end was peaceful and apparently painless as if he had fallen asleep."
