Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Hansen, Hans James

Hansen, Hans James, third Bishop of the Richfield Third Ward (Sevier Stake), Sevier county, Utah, was born Nov. 6, 1873, in Richfield, the son of Hans N. Hansen and Caroline Marie Hansen. He was baptized when about eight years old and subsequently ordained to the offices of Deacon, Teacher and Elder. In his youth he took an active part in Sunday school work, being teacher and secretary in the Richfield Sunday school for several years. He also acted as secretary of the Richfield Y. M. M. I. A. and later as secretary of the Stake organization of Y. M. M. I. A. In 1902 he was called on a mission to Scandinavia, and was ordained a Seventy by Seymour B. Young, when he was set apart for that mission. On his arrival in Copenhagen, Denmark, he was appointed to labor in the Trondhjem conference, Norway, where he presided a part of the time over the Trondhjem branch. He was present when the mission houses were dedicated in Copenhagen, Denmark, and Stockholm, Sweden. After his return home in December, 1904, he was called to act as second assistant in the Stake superintendency of the Sunday schools and later as Stake superintendent. he also labored as a home missionary in the Sevier Stake, acted as clerk of Richfield Third Ward and officiated as one of the presidents of the thirty-sixth quorum of Seventy. On June 28, 1919, he was ordained a High Priest and Bishop by Anthony W. Ivins, and set apart to preside over the Richfield Third Ward, which position ne still holds. Bishop Hansen has followed farming as an avocation, but he learned the carpenter trade as a young man and in 1900, together with his brother Peter C., he founded the Sevier Valley Planing Mill and Lumber Co., which carried on a successful business until 1917. During that year they disposed of the controlling interest in this business, which was then incorporated and is now known as the Citizen's Lumber Company. In February, 1919, together with his four brothers, he incorporated Hansen Bros. Planing Mill, which is still doing a good business in Richfield. Bro. Hansen has also been active in civil affairs and served eight years as treasurer of Richfield and one term as a member of the Richfield city council. In 1895 March 13th), he married Sarah Christensen (daughter of Lars Peter Christensen and Anna Marie Lee), who was born March 17, 1876. This marriage has been blessed with nine children, namely, James Orvin, Ireta Marie, Norman Utah, Teddie Carlos, Sarah Lue, Mildred, Don Lamar, Elbert DeWane and LaVonda.
