Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Hogan, Joseph, jun.

Hogan, Joseph, jun., an Elder who died while filling a foreign mission, was born Jan. 11, 1876, at Bountiful, Davis county, Utah, the son of Joseph Hogan and Sarah A. Ellis, and was baptized by his father Jan. 11, 1884. Early in the year 1897 he was called on a mission to the Netherlands and was set apart April 23, 1897. He arrived in his field of labor in May following and immediately set about to master the Dutch language and to make himself useful in the missionary field. He was very energetic and whatever he did was done with his whole soul and strength. Through his industry and humility he won the hearts of all his fellow-laborers and the saints and was able to find many friends among strangers. He had been in the missionary field, "spreading the light of truth and dispelling darkness" for more than two years, when he met his sad and sudden death. He was laboring at that time in the Arnhem conference under the direction of Conference President William W. Francis, when he was accidentally drowned in the river Rhine. The following detailed account of his death wes related by Pres. Francis, who was with him when the accident occurred: "We have made it a practice of late, since the warm weather set in and the Rhine lowered, of taking a bath in what we had always considered a very safe place in the river, between two cribs extending into the river about twenty yards, leaving shallow water where one could get any depth of water to swim or bathe without swimming. Today after dinner, at the suggestion of Elder Hogan, he and I went to this usual bathing place, outside the limits of the city of Arnhem, while Elder Weston preferred returning to the office. We had been bathing some seven minutes in the shallow water, when I took a swim a little further out nearer the main body of the river, while Elder Hogan remained in the shallow water, making his way toward the crib, as he was unable to swim. I turned my head and saw that Elder Hogan had lost footing and was struggling to get out. I was eight or ten yards, at least, from him, and swam with all the strength I had to reach him before he should sink out of sight, and succeeded in getting to him as he came up. I threw my arm around his neck and began swimming ashore with him, but found the suction of the water against me, as he had in his struggling surged with the current into deeper water. For want of strength, I having swum vigorously a long distance in still water, or through entanglement, we both went down to the bottom. On striking the bottom, depth about two feet over my head, I grabbed him around the legs with my arms, shoving his head above water, and attempted to walk out with him, wading under water myself; but I soon lost my strength through my efforts under water without breath. Giving him a shove towards the shore, I came up half drowned myself, and could get no sight again of Brother Hogan. called for help at once, and within eight minutes the boatsmen from the other side were on the spot, and by two minutes' searching he was found. We worked with him for half an hour, but without a sign of life. I sent a messenger to the city at once for Elders Lau, Weston and Pistorius, and also to the head police station for assistance, as they said it would be unlawful to remove the body without an officer. On the arrival of an officer it was decided that the accident had taken place within the limits of Oosterbeek, and Arnhem officers could do nothing without permission from the mayor of Oosterbeck. By this time Brothers Weston and Lau had arrived. Brother Lau and I went to the nearest point, the sugar factory, with the officer, and telephoned to Oosterbeek, but could get no permission. We then had to await an officer from Oosterbeek. The officer arrived about half past seven with a vehicle and took the remains to Oosterbeek, while two of us made every effort to get them transferred to Arnhem for embalming. Not being able to succeed in Arnhem or by telephone, Elders Weston, Pistorius and I took the car to Oosterbeek, where we worked and plead until 11:30 o'clock p.m., giving security and signing papers, when we got possession of the body, at least to bring it to Arnhem to get it embalmed; but being disappointed at the city hospital, where we were recommended to go, we took the remains with the same carriage with which we brought them to Arnhem, to Brother Lau's residence, where they are guarded until we can proceed further in the morning." The remains of Elder Hogan were properly embalmed and brought to Utah in the care of a returning Elder.
