Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Holden, Elijah E.

Holden, Elijah E., a member of the Mormon Battalion, was born March 27, 1826, in Pendleton county, Kentucky, the son of Edward and Sarah Holden. His father died March 26, 1827, after which Elijah and his mother moved to Shelby county, Ohio, where they lived for four years and then moved to Stark county, Illinois, where Elijah lived until he was eighteen years old. The family then moved to Hancock county, where Elijah joined the Church. Before that time he had never professed any religious conviction. In 1845 he was ordained a Seventy and became an exile with his co-religionists in 1846. After arriving at Council Bluffs, he enlisted as a member of the Mormon Battalion, and served in that organization until it was disbanded He arrived in the Valley soon after the pioneers in 1847. In 1848 (October 5th) he married Catherine Mary Thatcher and moved to Provo, Utah county, in 1849, where he remained until he was sent to Fillmore. During the Indian war of 1853 he served as a captain of militia and rendered efficient military service in that capacity. Being called on a mission to England he left home April 13, 1856. A few days after his departure his wife died, April 28, 1856. After his arrival in England, he was appointed to labor in the London pastorate, and on the 1st of January, 1857, he was appointed to take pastoral charge of the Southampton and Dorsetshire conferences. He returned home the following summer. In 1857 (October 12th), he married Eliza Hallet. He left Nephi, Juab county, for his home in Holden, Millard county, Sept. 5, 1858, in company with Thomas Bailey, a young man whom he had hired. Soon after starting, a heavy storm came on, rain fell all night and the next day it snowed. The boy was found dead about four miles from the Sevier river, near the Round Valley Ridge, and on the 12th Elder Holden was also found dead, about seven miles north of Cedar Springs. As there was no mark of violence upon either of the bodies, the coroner returned a verdict of accidental death from fatigue and cold. It appeared from circumstances that Bro. Holden at the time the boy tired out, took off his overshirt and wrapped it around the boy, leaving himself with only shirt and pantaloons on. In this condition he started home for help, but lost his way in the darkness of the night and storm and perished. Bro. Holden left a wife and four children.
