Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Hubbard, John

Hubbard, John, an Elder who died in the missionary field, was born Oct. 22, 1843, in Nauvoo, Hancock county, Illinois, the son of Charles W. Hubbard and Mary Ann Bosworth. He was baptized in 1851 by his father and was set apart for a mission to England April 22, 1864. He arrived in Liverpool July 17, 1864, and acquitted himself as a diligent and efficient Elder. After receiving an honorable release in 1866, he returned to his home in Willard, Box Elder county, Utah, where he continued to perform active duties for the welfare of the kingdom of God and the salvation of mankind. Early in the year 1877 he was again called to do missionary labor, this time being appointed to the Indian Territory; he was set apart March 9, 1877. The summer following his arrival in that field he was severely attacked with the chills and fever, so prevalent in that section of the country, and after an intermittent illness of about seven weeks he passed away Sept. 12, 1877. Brother Matthew W. Dalton, his missionary companion, states that on a certain occasion it became necessary for Brother Hubbard to get some horses, preparatory to hitching them up for travel. In doing this, he tried to head off the animals in order to stop them, but had hardly taken sixteen steps when he suddenly, without a moment's warning, fell down and instantly expired. Brother Dalton sprang to his side in a moment and did all he could to revive him, thinking that perhaps he had just fainted or become suddenly unconscious, but all his efforts were fruitless. In order to pay proper respect to the body of his companion, Brother Dalton procured the best casket that money could buy in the neighborhood and had it lined with metal, preparatory to having the body shipped to Utah for interment. He had completed all necessary preparations to this end, when he received instructions from home to have the remains of Elder Hubbard buried in the Indian Territory, which consequently was done. He was buried on an elevated spot near Wichita. Elder Hubbard was an honest, humble, and unassuming young man with a profound love for the principles of the everlasting gospel. At the time of his death he was a member of the 59th quorum of Seventy.
