Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Huber, Emil Julius

Huber, Emil Julius, an Elder who died while filling a foreign mission, was born March 7, 1885, at Paris, France, the son of Emil Kaspar Huber and Marie Moor. He moved with his parents to Zurich, Switzerland, where he was converted to "Mormonism" and was baptized Sept. 27, 1901, emigrated to Utah in the spring of 1905, and became a resident or the Third Ward, Salt Lake City. Having graduated from a technical school in Winterthur, Switzerland, he was known to have unusual skill in engineering lines and became an employe at the city engineer's office in Salt Lake City. Being called on a mission to Turkey, he was set apart for the same July 23, 1907, and started for Europe. After a short visit with his parents in Switzerland, he proceeded to Athens, Greece, and thence traveled via Alexandria, Egypt, to Aleppo, Syria, in March, 1908. Soon after his arrival in Aleppo he began to complain of pain in his back, neck and lungs. The best physicians in the town were consulted, but in the all-wise providence of God, the young Elder was not to recover. He died May 16, 1908, in Aleppo, from lung trouble, typhus and other complications. His funeral was attended by about seven hundred persons, including the American consul and many other prominent citizens with whom Elder Huber had become acquainted. Bro. Huber was a gifted and energetic Elder and judging from all appearance would have become a star in the community, had his life been spared. While in Salt Lake City he became engaged to Miss Martha Gunther, a native of Leipzig, Germany. At the last Sunday services which Elder Huber attended in Aleppo, he spoke with a trembling voice under the power of the Holy Spirit, bore his last testimony and, among other things, addressing his audience, said: "I know the gospel is true and you cannot deny it, having heard it preached by a humble servant of the Lord." That sentence is inscribed on the base of a beautiful monument, which has been erected to his honor in the Christian cemetery, northwest of the city of Aleppo.
