Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Israelson, Andrew Martin

Israelson, Andrew Martin, first counselor in the Hyrum Stake presidency, was born Jan. 9, 1857, at Kasfjorden, near Harstad, Tromso amt, Norway, the son of Teller J. Israelsen and Maren Dorthea Marcusen. He emigrated to Utah with his parents (who had been converted to the gospel) in 1864, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Monarch of the Sea" and the plains in Captain Christoffersen's freight train. The family settled in Hyrum, Cache county, Utah, where Andrew M. has resided ever since. He was baptized when nine years old and ordained an Elder when only sixteen years of age. He took an active part in Church affairs from his earliest youth and acted for many years as a Ward teacher. He also presided over the Hyrum Ward Y. M. M. I. A. In 1882 (Nov. 23rd) he married Boletta Wilson (daughter of John G. Wilson and Lucy Benson), who was born March 16, 1863, at Hyrum, Utah. This union has been blessed with ten children, namely, John Andrew, Orson Winso, Elizabeth Frances, Agnes Lucy, Victor Eugene, Edith Elverett, Vernon Lycurgus, Mary Boletta, Eilert Kenneth and Alice. In 1883-1884 Elder Israelson filled a mission to the Southern States, laboring in Alabama; later he was ordained a Seventy by Seymour B. Young, and still later chosen as a president of the sixty-second quorum of Seventy, which position he held until he was ordained a High Priest. In 1891-1893 he filled a mission to Norway, laboring principally in Drammen, Tromso and Christiania, the latter part of the time as president of the Christiania conference. After his return from that mission he was chosen as a member of the Stake board of religion classes in the Cache Stake and assisted in organizing religion classes in many of the Wards in Cache Valley. He also labored as a home missionary. When the Hyrum Ward was divided into three Wards in 1901, Bro. Israelson was ordained a High Priest by William C. Parkinson and set apart as first counselor to Bishop Harold F. Liljenquist of the Hyrum First Ward. He held that position until Dec. 30, 1904, when he was chosen as first counselor to President William C. Parkinson in the Hyrum Stake presidency, which position he still holds. Bro. Israelson, whose main avocation is that of a farmer and stock raiser, has also held a number of secular positions. Thus he has acted as a member of the Hyrum city council, and as justice of the peace in the Hyrum precinct, etc. He has also served four years as a county commissioner, being chairman of the board. While occupying that position he took a leading part in amalgamating all the schools of Cache county into one district. Twice he was nominated on the Republican ticket for a representative to the State legislature, but his party was defeated in both instances. Bro. Israelson is a good sample of a genuine Norseman. Standing over six feet tall, he commands respect from his personal appearance and is known in public affairs as a forceful and logical speaker. Both at home and abroad he has had opportunities to show his ability as a debater, having defended the truths of the gospel in discussions with a number of opponents, in which he has always come off victorious. Of Bro. Israelson's sons three have filled successful missions, and another one (Orson W.) now acts as the head of the irrigation and draining department of the Agricultural College at Logan.
