Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Jensen, Christen

Jensen, Christen. (Continuation from Vol. 1:550.) Brother Jensen continued his labors faithfully as Bishop of the Eastdale Ward until that settlement was broken up by the advice of the Church authorities in 1909. He then located at Manassa, Conejos county, Colorado, where he has resided ever since. In 1909 (Oct. 24th) he was set apart as a member of the High Council of the San Luis Stake, which position he still holds, and on Aug. 20, 1911, he was ordained a Patriarch by Apostle Orson F. Whitney. For a number of years he has acted as Stake representative of the Genealogical Society of the San Luis Stake and as secretary and treasurer of the San Luis Stake Academy. Bro. Jensen has also filled many positions of a secular nature. Thus he has acted as justice of the peace, police magistrate, school trustee, member of the Manassa town board, president of the Colonial State Bank of Manassa, etc., and has always been active in the growth and development of the settlements of the saints, both in Utah and Colorado. His son, Christen Israel Jensen, died while faithfully filling a mission in the Central States in 1910. Two other sons and a daughter have also filled missions for the Church in the Central States. His wife, Helena Sophia, died at Eastdale Sept. 31, 1902; his wife, Mary Sophia, died in Manassa, March 5, 1909, and his wife, Carrie, died at Manassa August 23, 1919. Thus Elder Jensen is left without a wife, and is now laboring as an ordinance worker in the Salt Lake Temple, being blessed and set apart for that purpose May 11, 1920. Since 1862, when Patriarch Jensen first became a convert to "Mormonism," he has spent at least half his time in the interest of the Church and for the public good, but he realizes that he has been abundantly blessed by the Lord for his efforts, both spiritually and temporally. He is naturally spiritually-minded and a man of strong faith. Up to date he has given a great number of Patriarchal blessings.
