Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Jensen, Christen Israel

Jensen, Christen Israel, an Elder who died in the missionary field, was born Oct. 6, 1886, in Moroni, Sanpete county, Utah, the son of Christen Jensen and Helena Sophia Rundquist. He was baptized Oct. 6, 1895 by his father and received a common school education in Eastdale, Castilla county, where his father acted as Bishop. From his earliest youth he took an active part in the auxiliary organizations of the Church, and was known as a good, honest boy who had the love and confidence of his associates. In due course of time he was ordained an Elder and in the breaking up of the Eastdale settlement he moved with his parents to Manassa, where he resided in 1909, when he was called on a mission to the Central States. He was set apart for his mission in Salt Lake City Oct. 19, 1909, being then on his way to his field of labor. On his arrival at mission headquarters in Independence, Mo., he was assigned to Little Rock, Arkansas, and while in the discharge of his duties as a minister of the gospel, early in 1910, he complained with pains in his head, but after a few days' treatment in a hospital at Little Rock, he resumed his missionary labors. He was thus engaged at Little Rock, Jan. 24, 1910, when he disappeared mysteriously, and for quite a while no trace of him could be found. His father, Bishop Christen Jensen of Manassa, Colorado, went to Little Rock as soon as the news of his disappearance reached him and with the aid of the Elders of that mission, together with the police, detectives and fishermen hunted the river for six weeks, endeavoring to get trace of the missing man, without success. But six weeks later, news came that a negro boy had found the body stranded on a sand bar in the Arkansas river, eight miles below Little Rock, April 17, 1910. The coroner and undertaker were notified and they immediately secured the body. President Samuel O. Bennion of the Central States Mission took the first train to Little Rock and identified the corpse, which was remarkably well preserved, and accompanied the body home. In the clothing of the young missionary were found his testament, journal, map of Arkansas, personal cards and photographs, all well preserved. The supposition is that he was sandbagged by some thug and thrown into the Arkansas river, where for three months his body was probably caught in a whirlpool and covered with sand. The remains of Elder Jensen were laid to rest in the Manassa cemetery. Elder Jensen died unmarried.
