Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Jensen, Ole Christian

Jensen, Ole Christian, a Latter-day Saint Elder who died while filling a foreign mission, was born May 7, 1830, in Ringkjobing, Denmark, the son of Morten Jensen and Hedvig Olsen. Becoming a convert to "Mormonism" he was baptized in 1871 by Niels Jepsen and after emigrating to Utah he located in Mayfield, Sanpete county. Being called on a mission to Scandinavia, he was ordained a Seventy by George Reynolds, Dec. 3, 1897, and set apart for his mission. He arrived in Copenhagen, Denmark, Dec. 25, 1897, and was appointed to labor in the Aarhus conference. His labors were mostly confined to the Grenaa branch, where he had some relatives. His general health was very good for a man of his age, and he was very energetic in his labors. He took an extensive trip to the west of Jutland in company with Elders Marius Mickelson and Jens C. Breinholt, and although urged by his brethren to spare himself, he would perform his part of the work, and seemed to feel quite well, excepting a little fatigue. Upon their return they stopped a few days in Randers. Brother Jensen attended Sunday school May 22, 1897, and, not feeling right well, stepped into the yard. Here he was seized with a violent attack of illness and would have fallen but for the assistance of a brother who was with him. He remained at the rooms of the brethren for several days, but in order that he might have better care and more comfort, he was moved to the home of a Sister Andersen near by, and this family did all in their power to alleviate his sufferings. The Saints in general, and many strangers, were very solicitous of his welfare. He was administered to repeatedly by the Elders, and also had the care of a physician, but he sank steadily and passed away peacefully on the afternoon of May 30, 1898, the doctor pronouncing his case "inflammation of the lungs." Bro. Jensen was about 68 years old when he died; he left a wife and several grown-up children.
