Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Jenson, Joseph Henry

Jenson, Joseph Henry, a Latter-day Saint Elder who died while filling a foreign mission, was born Oct. 22, 1870, in South Cottonwood, Salt Lake county, Utah, the son of Peter Jenson and Ellen Johnson. He was baptized in September, 1880, and was set apart for a mission to Scandinavia May 22, 1896, by Seymour B. Young. He arrived in Copenhagen, Denmark, on his mission, June 16, 1896, and was appointed to labor in the Göteborg conference, Sweden, where he did successful missionary work in Jonkoping, Halmstad and Trolhattan, and lastly in Vestervik, where he presided over the branch. He seemed to enjoy good health until the middle of February, 1898, when he took sick. It began with pain in the stomach and frequent vomiting. For a couple of weeks he was in bed most of the time at the branch headquarters; then his companion, Elder Charles M. Olson, concluded that it would be best to take him to Göteborg, where he could receive better treatment. They started on March 4th, and arrived at Göteborg on the 5th, after riding on the train about 180 miles. Here they were received by Elder H. M. Pearson, president of the Göteborg conference, and Elder Jenson was taken to the home of a Brother Soderberg, where he was given the best possible care, Brother and Sister Soderberg dong all in their power to alleviate his suffering. A physician was called in, who at once pronounced his condition very critical, stating that he had inflammation of the bowels. Bro. Jenson was administered to by his brethren from time to time during his illness, and after his arrival in Göteborg the brethren and the Saints fasted and prayed for him and administered to him, and he seemingly rallied, but failing again, passed away on Tuesday morning, March 8, 1898. He retained his consciousness to the last. Elder Johnson (a resident of Union, Salt Lake county, Utah), was unmarried. He was a good, faithful man, had labored in the mission field nearly two years and bore an excellent character.
