Andrew Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, vol. 3 ( 1920)

Kay John Moburn

Kay John Moburn, an Elder of the Church who died while returning from a foreign mission, was born Oct. 6, 1817, in Bury, Lancashire, England, the son of James Kay and Betty Moburn. His father, James Kay, was a foundry man, and the boy himself, at the early age of six years, entered his uncle's iron and brass foundry in Bury, mastering the trade and getting journeyman's wages at seventeen. His musical ability was manifest at an early day, both vocally and instrumentally. He had a fine, healthy physique, and was so agile in jumping and in other manly sports that he was called the "India rubber man." The only schooling he received was in Sunday school. His jovial nature and keen sense of humor, frequently displayed in harmless, practical jokes, made him one of the most entertaining of men. His spirit was chivalrous and he would always defend the oppressed. It was partly due to his disposition that he became a Latter-day saint. One of his fellow employees (Samuel Croyer) at St. Helens, to which town he had removed to work in a foundry, was a member of the "Mormon" church, and being a small, timid man, he was ridiculed by his shopmates, who went so far as to offer him violence. Without knowing anything about his religion, John Kay defended him and thrashed his leading assailant. Curiosity then led him to inquire into the little man's faith. The result was his conversion and baptism in the fall of 1841. He was immediately ordained an Elder, and for some time labored in the ministry, but in September, 1842, he sailed for America, reaching Nauvoo, Ill., in the ensuing spring (1843). There he became a major in the famous Nauvoo Legion; also a member of the Nauvoo brass band and the police force. Owing to his musical talent and his genial social qualities, he was often invited by the Prophet Joseph Smith to assist in the entertainment of visitors. In the exodus from Illinois, he was with President Young's company, which he and others helped 'to sustain by going into Missouri and giving concerts, from the proceeds of which supplies for the destitute people and hungry animals were obtained. He afterwards joined Bishop Miller's company and spent the winter of 1846-47 among the Ponca Indians. On the way back to Winter Quarters he came near starving, and the cold was so intense that his feet were badly frozen. He and another messenger had been sent after provisions for the hungry people at Ponca. John Kay crossed the plains with his own teams, but traveled in the company led by President Young in the emigration of 1848, arriving in Salt Lake Valley on the 20th of September, 1848. He settled permanently on the corner of South Temple and Fourth East streets, where a portion of his family still resides. His trade of moulding and pattern-making in iron and brass came at once into play, and in the winter of 1848-1849 he made, by request of President Young, the paraphernalia of the mint, which he was instructed to operate. The steel for the dies was furnished by Joseph L. Heywood, and Bro. Kay was assisted in the blacksmithing work by Alfred Lambson. Says Mr. Heywood, who was Utah's first United States marshal: "In 1850 I presented some of the Utah coins at the United States Mint in Philadelphia, where the mechanical work of John M. Kay was highly praised." Bro. Kay is said to have made the first brass casting in Utah, also the first iron casting, assisted by Phillip Margetts and another worker. He rendered service in the early Indian wars, sometimes acting as surgeon, for he had studied surgery and dentistry, which he practiced during the remainder of his life. In 1855-1858 he was absent upon a mission to Europe, from which he returned in company with Orson Pratt and other Elders by way of the Isthmus of Panama and the State of California, arriving in Salt Lake City in January, 1858. He saw service in Echo Canyon, as one of Governor Cumming's escort to Salt Lake City, appointed specially to entertain his Excellency; and was on guard in the city when Johnston's army passed through. In the fall of 1860 he went upon another mission to Europe, where he labored as before in his native land, though on the former occasion he had traveled some on the continent. This last mission extended through four years. Honorably released, he set out to return to Utah, but did not reach home alive. It was at the head of a company of emigrating saints that he sailed from London June 3, 1864, on the ship "Hudson." After reaching New York July 19th, his labors were very arduous. He was a large man, weighing about two hundred and fifty pounds, and the weather was extremely warm. The Civil War was closing, and some of the troops encountered by the emigrants on the way to the outfitting camps at Wyoming, Neb., manifested much bitterness towards them. At one point they drove them through a river, with the rain descending in torrents, which exposure caused much sickness and some deaths in the company. Expostulating with the soldiers on their conduct, Elder Kay said: "If you have no respect for the living, will you not look with mercy on the sick and dying, and consider the sacred dead?" In reply one of the soldiers said, "If you say another word, I will rip you up, if you were Jesus Christ himself." After reaching the point where he was relieved of his command by the arrival of the Church teams from Salt Lake Valley, the devoted Elder fell sick-some sqid with mountain fever. He traveled on with the rest, however, and seemed to improve up to the evening before his death, when he stood in his tent door and sang, as he had often sung, to cheer the hearts of his fellow pilgrims to Zion. He died suddenly and apparently without pain, at 2 o'clock in the morning of Sept. 27, 1864, at a point seven miles west of Little Laramie, in what was then the Territory of Colorado. They buried him at the foot of the Black Hills, taking a board from each wagon until sufficient lumber was procured to make a coffin in which to enclose his remains. His death caused profound sorrow in Utah and England, and wherever he was known. John M. Kay was not only a man of gifts.; he was also a man of integrity. A fitting epitaph to his noble life is found in his own words, uttered to a friend on leaving England. "With all my faults, I never saw a moment since I knew the truth that I did not love it, and was not willing to place my body in the gap to save my brethren from danger." By vocation a foundryman and by nature a musician of marked ability, John M. Kay was one of the picturesque figures of early times in Salt Lake City. He was a born master of song, the possessor of a melodious and stentorinn voice, and his soul-stirring vocalism in the sacred songs of Zion not only charmed the fireside circle and larger social gatherings, but gladdened the hearts of thousands of homeless pilgrims, plodding their way over barren plains and bleak mountains to the haven of their hopes in the West. As a singer and an actor he appeared frequently upon the stage of the Social Hall and was known as a comedian of rare merit. Scarcely second to his musical and dramatic gifts was his skill as a mechanic, a worker in metals. He made the dies and the tools with which the dies were made for the mint which coined in 1849 out of California gold dust, the first gold coins used in the intermountain region. When only nineteen years of age, Bro. Kay married Ellen Cockroft, an English girl, who bore him six children, namely, Sarah (who married Leo Hawkins), Elizabeth (who married William H. Shearman), Mariah (who died on the plains in 1848), Ellen (who married Dr. J. K. Robinson), and two boys who died in infancy. While in Nauvoo, Illinois, he married Susan Miller as a plural wife, but had no children by her, and after his arrival in the Valley he married Ellen Partington, who bore him four children, namely, James Willard, who died seventeen years of age as a result of an accident, Annie (who married Rufus H. Hardy), Susan Amelia (who married Heber Brewer Aldous), and Leo (who died in infancy). Bro. Kay also married Martha Royal, who died soon after her marriage and left no children. Notwithstanding the strenuous efforts which have been made, by his family, the exact location of the grave of Bro. Kay is still unknown.
