Hyrum L. Andrus, Principles of Perfection ( 1970)

2

The Spiritual Power of the Restored Gospel

. . . our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance.—PAUL.

The gospel of Jesus Christ as given to the world through Joseph Smith was not only a challenging and meaningful theological system but also a body of related principles and ordinances through which man could acquire spiritual truth and power from God. The promise of divine truth and power was inseparably associated with the message of the gospel. The restored gospel called for the renewal and regeneration of man in Christ; and when living faith in the Master was expressed, that faith was accompanied by the manifestation of enlightening spiritual powers and gifts which stirred the heart of man and transformed his life.

Expressions Of Gospel Power

Unique Spiritual Powers of Restored Gospel

The spiritual powers of the restored gospel had no equivalent in the contemporary world. This Joseph Smith pointed out editorially. [^1] Several of his associates made similar explanations. Brigham Young observed that but few men understood the nature of those spiritual powers. [^2] John Taylor agreed: "There is a feeling and Spirit resting upon the Saints that is not known nor experienced among any other people," he declared, while maintaining that "all the kings, potentates, and powers" in the world were "entirely ignorant" of the new spiritual forces. [^3] Lorenzo Snow stated: "This gift of the Holy Ghost is a different principle from anything that we see manifest in the sectarian world." [^4] So obvious was this fact, George Q. Cannon asserted, that if men would honestly inquire into the matter and judge the new spiritual powers that were manifested through the restored gospel by their tangible operations and effects they would be constrained to acknowledge the presence of something different from anything else known in the world. [^5]

The Holy Spirit as a substance of life, or a living substance, which gives man divine attributes and powers that lead to eternal life, has been discussed earlier in this study. [^6] Since the Spirit endows man with new attributes and powers of life, Joseph Smith could point out that there is "nothing unnatural" in its influence upon man. Consequently there can be "nothing indecorous" in the actions of those who partake of this divine power of truth and life. [^7] Instead, man is given increased powers and attributes of life through the Spirit. To the man of faith, the influence of this divine substance is much like that of sunlight upon the vegetable kingdom; it is a natural but phenomenal power which stimulates spiritual growth and leads man upward to God, the giver of life. The Prophet referred to the Spirit as a powerful agent capable of greatly "expanding the mind, enlightening the understanding, and storing the intellect with present knowledge." [^8] So potent is its influence, Brigham Young explained, that "it swallows up the organization which pertains to this world," opening the vision of man's mind so that "all things are made new." [^9] John Taylor observed: "When the Spirit that dwells in the bosom of the Almighty dwells in ours, and an intercourse is open between heaven and us, we are then placed in a position to understand that which it would be impossible to comprehend upon any natural principle known to us." [^10]

There can be little doubt that the spiritual powers of the restored gospel greatly influenced the lives of the Saints. Orson Pratt said: "The gift of the Holy Ghost . . . gave me a testimony concerning the truth of this work that no man can ever take from me." [^11] He declared that the gift and power of the Holy Ghost "is the greatest evidence any man or woman can have concerning the kingdom of God." [^12] Brigham Young was equally emphatic. "The eye, the ear, the hand, all the senses may be deceived, but the Spirit of God cannot be deceived," he observed; "and when inspired with that Spirit, the whole man is filled with knowledge, he can see with a spiritual eye, and he knows that which is beyond the power of man to controvert." [^13] For this reason Charles W. Penrose declared that his testimony of the restored gospel did not depend upon Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, or any other man. Having "bowed in obedience" to the gospel, he explained, "I received a testimony for myself of its truthfulness, and that testimony has never departed from me." [^14] Here, observed John Taylor, "is a secret that the world does not comprehend." [^15] Upon this "peculiarity," George Q. Cannon asserted, the new system was being built. "Legions of witnesses" could testify unanimously that "by the outpouring of the Holy Ghost upon them" God had given them a knowledge of the truthfulness of the latter-day work "as strong as the knowledge that they themselves live[d]." [^16]

Spiritual Powers Attest to Book of Mormon

Joseph Smith claimed that the Book of Mormon was brought forth by the gift and power of God to be a tangible witness of the new dispensation, containing "the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews also." [^17] Because of the clarity of the gospel principles which it contains, the Prophet declared "that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book." [^18]

The Spirit of God is inseparably associated with the word of God; [^19] and since the Book of Mormon claimed to be the word of God, it was given to the world with the admonition that man should test its authenticity with a spiritual criterion. Before concluding the record of the Nephites, Moroni, the last surviving prophet of that ancient culture, wrote to those who would read that record in the latter days: "When ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost." [^20]

Upon this basis the Book of Mormon, as a new witness for Christ and His gospel, was to be judged. "Wherever that book is candidly perused," Parley P. Pratt affirmed, "the Spirit will bear record of its truth." [^21] On this assumption, missionaries delivered their message to William and Emeline Anderson, "with the admonition to pray to God who would reveal whether the doctrine was true or false." [^22] And when Luman Shurtliff inquired regarding the divine origin of the Nephite scripture, he was told: "Ask God and he will show you." [^23]

Having presented the claim of the new scripture to the world for a number of years, Orson Pratt and Charles W. Penrose each declared that by this divinely established means "scores of thousands have proved the divinity of this work." [^24] For example, Wilford Woodruff reported that as he read the Book of Mormon "the Spirit bore witness that the record which it contained was true." [^25] Parley P. Pratt observed: "The Spirit of the Lord came upon me, while I read, and enlightened my mind, convinced my judgment, and rivetted the truth upon my understanding, so that I knew that the book was true, just as well as a man knows the daylight from the dark night." [^26] Brigham Young also affirmed: "I knew it was true, as well as I knew that I could see with my eyes, or feel by the touch of my fingers, or be sensible of the demonstration of any sense." [^27] While not yet a member of the Church, William W. Phelps wrote from Canandaigua, New York, to an acquaintance in Ohio: "I had ten hours discourse with a man from your state, named Sidney Rigdon, a convert to its [the Book of Mormon's] doctrines, and he declared it was true, and he knew it by the power of the Holy Ghost." [^28] After embracing the faith, Phelps said of that volume: "Who can . . . estimate the worth of such a book? He only who is directed by the Holy Ghost in all things." [^29]

In addition to providing a testimony of the new dispensation of the gospel, the spiritual powers associated with the Book of Mormon enlightened the minds of men to see the message of salvation as it was given in both ancient and modern times. "By that book," William W. Phelps wrote, "I found a key to the holy prophets; and by that book began to unfold the mysteries of God, and I was glad." [^30] Joseph Holbrook, another early convert, also expressed the point that the Nephite scripture was "a key to the Bible"; and by the light it shed upon the prophetic and doctrinal themes of the Jewish record, the Bible became "a new book, having the seals broken, [with] light and life and salvation on its pages." [^31] Having read the Book of Mormon, Sarah De Armon Pea was so "astonished at its contents that," said she, "it left an impression upon my mind not to be forgotten" [^32] And of its impact generally, Elder Phelps observed: "When the Book of Mormon came forth, those who received it, and embraced its truths, saw new light upon the scriptures, and a true beauty in holiness; and they began to have confidence in the promises of God; faith in prayer; faith in miracles, and a holy anxiety to share in the glory that should follow, after much tribulation." [^33]

The Saints and Gift of the Holy Ghost

In addition to the initial enlightening witness of the Holy Spirit which was given to those who read the Book of Mormon and inquired of God in faith concerning its divine claims, Bishop Edward Partridge reported that those who accepted the restored gospel "have this further testimony: they receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." [^34] According to Oliver Cowdery, the promise that this would be the case was given to Joseph Smith by the angel Moroni in 1823. [^35] This promise was reaffirmed in the Book of Mormon [^36] and in several revelations given to the Prophet; [^37] and thereby the reception of the Holy Ghost was made a fundamental proposition upon which the new dispensation was founded. Lorenzo Snow observed: "I noticed that Joseph Smith assumed a position which no false prophet would dare, viz: that he had received the visitation of three angels: Peter, James and John, who . . . authorized him to preach the gospel, administer its ordinances, and promise the Holy Ghost which would impart a knowledge of his authority, and divine mission, and, his right to organize the church of God on the earth." [^38]

Because man's acceptance of the new dispensation rested upon a spiritual foundation, John Taylor declared that the claims of the restored gospel were "susceptible of proof." Just as a farmer might know if a certain seed were good by planting it and properly cultivating the plant that developed from it, so could a person know if the new covenant's law of spiritual regeneration were true by complying with its requirements. It would admit to "as strong evidence as anything in nature." [^39]

There is ample proof that spiritual manifestations accompanied the proclamation of the restored gospel. John Murdock, who was baptized November 5, 1830, wrote: "The Spirit of the Lord sensibly attended the ministration, and I came out of the water rejoicing and singing praises to God and the Lamb." [^40] When he and about thirty others were confirmed members of the Church and received the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, he testified: "I knew for a certainty that the Spirit rested upon me as it had never done before, and others said that they had glorious visions and saw the Lord." [^41] John Corrill visited Kirtland, Ohio, about that time and found the new converts enjoying "the gift and power of the Holy Ghost." Shortly thereafter, while he was still unwilling to believe, he went again to Kirtland and "watched every movement with a jealous eye." He later wrote:

I attended several meetings, one of which was the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, which, I thought, would give me a good opportunity to detect their hypocrisy. The meeting lasted all night, and such a meeting I never attended before. They administered the sacrament, and laid on hands [for the gift of the Holy Ghost]. . . . I watched closely and examined carefully, every movement of the meeting, and after exhausting all my powers to find the deception, I was obliged to acknowledge, in my own mind, that the meeting had been inspired by some supernatural agency. [^42]

The Saints and Gifts of the Holy Ghost

Having received the gift of the Holy Ghost, the Saints were entitled to receive its supernatural endowments—the gifts of the Holy Ghost. Concerning those who would embrace the restored gospel, the angel Moroni said to Joseph Smith in 1823: ". . . with signs and with wonders, with gifts and with healings, with the manifestations of the power of God, and with the Holy Ghost shall the hearts of the faithful be comforted." [^43]

Joseph Smith made reference to the spiritual endowments which accompanied the latter-day work when he observed that the first missionaries "began to preach as the Spirit gave them utterance, and though weak, yet were they strengthened by the power of God." Of the impact of these spiritual powers upon the early converts, he then said: "They saw visions and prophesied, devils were cast out, and the sick healed by the laying on of hands." [^44] The spiritual powers which were manifested at the first conference of the Church, in June, 1830, were typical of those that were identified with the work as the new dispensation was ushered in. The Prophet wrote of that conference:

Much exhortation and instruction was given, and the Holy Ghost was poured out upon us in a miraculous manner—many of our number prophesied, whilst others had the heavens opened to their view, and were so overcome that we had to lay them on beds or other convenient places; among the rest was Brother Newel Knight, who had to be placed on a bed, being unable to help himself. By his own account of the transaction, he could not understand why we should lay him on the bed, as he felt no sense of weakness. He felt his heart filled with love, with glory, and pleasure unspeakable, and could discern all that was going on in the room; when all of a sudden a vision of the future burst upon him. He saw there represented the great work which through my instrumentality was yet to be accomplished. He saw heaven open, and beheld the Lord Jesus Christ, seated at the right hand of the majesty on high, and had it made plain to his understanding that the time would come when he would be admitted into His presence to enjoy His society for ever and ever. When their bodily strength was restored to these brethren, they shouted hosannas to God and the Lamb, and rehearsed the glorious things which they had seen and felt, whilst they were yet in the Spirit. [^45]

The Saints boldly testified that signs and gifts truly followed those who received the restored gospel. Writing to his children from Adams county, Illinois, David Foote repudiated popular religious emotionalism and contended that "there is something in the religion of Jesus which is sound; it cannot be moved by every wind of doctrine." Continuing, he explained: "It is that which gives a man an assurance that he is doing the will of God; his mind will expand, the mysteries of the kingdom will open to his view, and if he continues to travel on in this way he will attain to the ministering of angels and all the gifts of God mentioned in scripture." [^46] On this subject, Edward Partridge wrote to his old friends in Painesville, Ohio:

I assure you that the signs do follow in this, the church of Christ, who receive the book of Mormon as the fulness of the gospel of Christ. In many instances the sick have been healed by the laying on of the elders' hands, and also devils cast out. Many speak with new tongues, or in other languages; some speak in a number of different languages shortly after they receive the gift; others are confined to one or two—These are not idle assertions; I know that these things are so. Some have the gift of interpretation and some have not, as yet. But say you these gifts are strange things! Well strange as they may appear, they are the gift of the Holy Ghost. [^47]

Speaking in tongues was one of the more interesting (but for church members in general, less useful) gifts of the Holy Ghost. John Corrill stated that he witnessed the expression of this gift among the Saints at Kirtland, Ohio, in the fall of 1830:

I heard them prophesy and speak in tongues unknown to me. Persons in the room who took no part with them, declared, from the knowledge they had of the Indian languages, that the tongues spoken were regular Indian dialects, which I was also informed, on inquiry, the persons who spoke had never learned. [^48]

Another similar report was given by Vilate Kimball. In 1831, five Latter-day Saint missionaries began to proselyte in the town of Victor, about five miles from Mendon, Monroe county, New York, where Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball lived. The two men went to hear them; and Vilate Kimball, the wife of Heber, said: "At their meetings Brigham and Heber saw the manifestations of the Spirit and heard the gift of speaking and singing in tongues." Desiring to learn more of the new faith, they then went with their wives and others to Columbia, Bradford county, Pennsylvania, in January, 1832, a distance of about 125 miles, where a branch of the Church had been established. Vilate wrote: "They stayed with the church about six days, saw the power of God manifested and heard the gift of tongues, and then returned rejoicing, bearing testimony to the people by the way." [^49]

The Saints in the Columbia branch may have enjoyed the gift of tongues before the above visit, for Brigham Young later wrote that these early converts "were the first in the Church who received the gift of tongues." [^50] Having been baptized and ordained April 14, 1832, Elder Young said:

A few weeks after my baptism I was at brother Kimball's house one morning, and while family prayer was being offered up, brother Alpheus Gifford commenced speaking in tongues. Soon the Spirit came on me, and I spoke in tongues, and we thought only of the day of Pentecost, when the Apostles were clothed upon with cloven tongues of fire. [^51]

That fall Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and others went to Kirtland, Ohio, to see the Prophet. As they visited branches of the Church along the way, Brigham Young spoke in tongues at the meetings. [^52] Upon meeting the Prophet at Kirtland, Elder Young again spoke in tongues while in prayer. He later reported:

As soon as we arose from our knees the brethren flocked around him [Joseph Smith], and asked his opinion concerning the gift of tongues that was upon me. He told them it was the pure Adamic language. Some said to him they expected he would condemn the gift brother Brigham had, but he said, "No, it is of God, and the time will come when brother Brigham Young will preside over this Church." The latter part of this conversation was in my absence. [^53]

In his report of this meeting, the Prophet said: "Brother Brigham Young and John P. Greene spoke in tongues, which was the first time I had heard this gift among the brethren; others also spoke, and I received the gift myself." [^54]

Thereafter the gift of speaking in tongues became general among the Saints in Ohio. The Prophet wrote of a conference held January 22, 1833:

The gifts which follow them that believe and obey the Gospel, as tokens that the Lord is ever the same in His dealings with the humble lovers and followers of truth, began to be poured out among us, as in ancient days;—for as we . . . were assembled in conference, on the 22nd day of January, I spoke to the conference in another tongue, and was followed in the same gift by Brother Zebedee Coltrin, and he by Brother William Smith, after which the Lord poured out His Spirit in a miraculous manner, until all the Elders spake in tongues, and several members, both male and female, exercised the same gift. Great and glorious were the divine manifestations of the Holy Spirit. Praises were sung to God and the Lamb; speaking and praying, all in tongues, occupied the conference until a late hour at night, so rejoiced were we at the return of these long absent blessings. [^55]

During the period the Saints resided at Kirtland, the spiritual gifts were manifested to a great degree. Eliza R. Snow wrote: "There we had the gift of prophecy—the gift of tongues—the interpretation of tongues—visions and marvelous dreams were related—the singing of heavenly choirs was heard, and wonderful manifestations of the healing power, through the administration of the Elders, were witnessed." [^56] Of the meetings in Kirtland in which the Saints gathered to fast and pray, she said:

These, called fast-meetings, were hallowed and interesting beyond the power of language to describe. Many, many were the pentecostal seasons of the outpouring of the Spirit of God on those days, manifesting the gifts of the gospel and the power of healing, prophesying, speaking in tongues, the interpretation of tongues, etc. I have there seen the lame man, on being administered to, throw aside his crutches and walk home perfectly healed; and not only were the lame made to walk, but the blind to see, the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, and evil spirits to depart. [^57]

Prescindia Huntington related that her family was visited at Kirtland by a skeptical cousin who wanted to go to a fast meeting to hear someone speak or sing in tongues. She expected to "have a hearty laugh" as a result of the experience. Prescindia recalled:

Accordingly we went with our cousin to the meeting, during which a Brother McCarter rose and sang a song of Zion in tongues; I arose and sang simultaneously with him the same tune and words, beginning and ending each verse in perfect unison, without varying a word. It was just as though we had sung it together a thousand times.

After we came out of meeting, our cousin observed, "Instead of laughing, I never felt so solemn in my life." [^58]

The gifts and blessings of the Spirit were also given to the Saints in other areas of the Church. Writing of conditions in Jackson county, Missouri, in the winter of 1831-32, Parley P. Pratt said: "We enjoyed many happy seasons in our prayer and other meetings, and the Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon us, and even on the little children, insomuch that many of eight, ten or twelve years of age spoke, and prayed, and prophesied in our meetings and in our family worship." [^59]

"In June, 1833," John Whitmer recorded, "we received the gift of tongues in Zion [Missouri]." [^60] Among those who lived in Missouri at this time was Mary Elizabeth Rollins, who records the expression of this gift by the Saints on several occasions. [^61]

The gifts of the Spirit were not restricted to members in the main bodies of the Church, but those who received the gospel in outlying areas were also given these intelligent endowments. Having baptized eight people at Henderson, Jefferson county, New York, in March, 1833, David W. Patten said: "When hands were laid upon them, the Holy Ghost fell on them, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied." [^62] Orson Pratt spoke in tongues in the city of New York while ordaining Wandle Mace to the office of Elder. [^63]

Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were preaching in the vicinity of Mount Pleasant, Brant county, Ontario, Canada, in October, 1833. On the evening of Monday the 28th, members of the family of Freeman A. Nickerson were seated with some friends around the wide old-fashioned fireplace in the parlor listening to the Prophet's words. "I would be so glad if some one who had been baptized could receive the gift of tongues as the ancient Saints did and speak to us," Moses Nickerson said.

The Prophet replied: "If one of you will rise up and open your mouth, it shall be filled, and you shall speak in tongues."

Everyone then turned as if by a common instinct to Lydia Bailey and said with one voice, "Sister Lydia, rise up."

And then the great glory of God was manifested to this weak but trusting girl. She was enveloped as with a flame, and, unable longer to retain her seat, she arose and her mouth was filled with the praises of God and His glory. The spirit of tongues was upon her, and she was clothed in a shining light, so bright that all present saw it with great distinctness above the light of the fire and the candles. [^64]

Among the gifts of the Holy Spirit, that of healing was significantly manifested in behalf of those who believed in the restored gospel. Ezra Booth, a minister of another faith in northeast Ohio of "much more than ordinary culture and with strong natural abilities," went with others to see the Prophet in 1831. One of the visiting group, a Mrs. Johnson, had been afflicted for some time with an injured arm and was not able to lift her hand above her head. During the interview, the conversation turned to the supernatural gifts which were given to the Saints in New Testament times. At length someone said: "Here is Mrs. Johnson with a lame arm; has God given any power to men now on earth to cure her?" Shortly thereafter, according to A. S. Hayden, the Campbellite historian, the Prophet arose and, taking Mrs. Johnson by the hand, said in the most solemn and impressive manner: "Woman, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ I command thee to be whole." And while the company looked on in awe, he left the room as the woman rejoiced in the natural strength and vigor that she again possessed in her limb. [^65]

Incidents of this kind could be multiplied at length, but a few cases will suffice to illustrate the manifestations of the power of the restored gospel among the Saints. In his journal for the spring of 1831, Jared Carter wrote:

About this time we witnessed some display of the power of God in a miraculous manner in the Church in Thompson, [Ohio]. One case I will mention which happened in my own family under the instrumentality of Joseph the Seer. My youngest child was distressingly sick at the time Joseph came to visit my house, and I told him that I had faith that the babe might be healed; he then spoke in the name of the Lord and said that it should be to me according to my faith; the child was healed immediately. On the same day, one of our sisters was healed from blindness by his instrumentality. [^66]

After returning from a mission to the East in the fall of 1832, Elder Carter reported that since he had been identified with the latter-day work he had witnessed "many marvelous manifestations of the power of God, in more than eighty instances." One instance of healing took place in the state of New York. Having been requested to visit a woman whose breast was infected with cancer which had eaten and disfigured it in a most painful manner, and which "was threatening the very dissolution of her body," Elder Carter reported:

I administered to her and prayed my Heavenly Father in the name of Christ to heal her. A few moments later she told me that all pain had left her, and she also told me that a peaceful happy feeling rested upon her, and a pleasant sensation around the afflicted part. I visited her again a few days later, when she informed me that she had been entirely healed, and that all there was left of the cancer was a little scar which was fast healing up. [^67]

Benjamin F. Johnson wrote of another incident of healing which occurred in his father's family under the instrumentality of Elder Carter, in the year 1834:

In the course of the summer Elder Jared Carter, a man then of mighty faith, came with other elders to our house, and seeing sister Nancy upon her crutches commanded her in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth to leave her crutches and walk, which she at once did, and never again did she use them, although for years she had borne no weight upon her broken joint. We all knew it to be the power of God, and almost felt to shout Hosanna! to think our beloved sister was again sound in limb and able to walk. [^68]

While in New England in the spring and summer of 1833, Orson Pratt recorded in his journal several instances of healing under his administration, one of a woman who had been afflicted for about ten years. [^69] Erastus Snow visited another woman, in Boston, who had been "pronounced incurable" by a council of physicians. He wrote:

We anointed her with holy oil, laid our hands upon her and prayed and rebuked the disease; and it departed. This being in the evening. She arose next morning and dressed herself, walked the house and the next day was out of doors, much to the surprise of her physicians and joy of her family. [^70]

Before leaving on a mission to England in 1837, Willard Richards and others were instrumental in healing two children, one a suckling child that "lay at the point of death." Elder Richards reported:

I took it in my arms and presented it before the Elders who laid their hands upon it. While in my arms we healed it in the name of Jesus Christ. I then returned it whole to its mother. The other child was also healed; and the parents praised God for his goodness. [^71]

Philo Dibble was critically wounded in an encounter with a mob which drove the Saints from Jackson county, Missouri, in 1833. An ounce ball and two buck shot entered his body to the right of his navel, causing him to bleed internally until his body was filled with blood. When he finally received medical attention two days later, the physician, who was a veteran of the Black Hawk War, said he had seen a great many wounded men but never one in this condition who had recovered. Thereupon he pronounced Dibble a dead man. The wounded man later said:

After the surgeon had left me, Brother Newel Knight came to see me, and sat down on the side of my bed. He laid his right hand on my head, but never spoke. I felt the Spirit resting upon me at the crown of my head before his hand touched me, and I knew immediately that I was going to be healed. It seemed to form like a ring under the skin, and around the first bullet hole, also the second and third. Then a ring formed on each shoulder and on each hip and followed down to the ends of my fingers and toes and left me. I immediately arose and discharged three quarts of blood or more, with some pieces of my clothes that had been driven into my body by the bullets. I then dressed myself and . . . from that time not a drop of blood came from me; and I never afterwards felt the slightest pain or inconvenience from my wound, except that I was somewhat weak from the loss of blood.

The next day I walked around the field, and the day following I mounted a horse and rode eight miles, and went three miles on foot. [^72]

The spring of 1839 was a trying time for the Saints, but the 22nd July was remembered by them as a day when the power of healing was manifested to a phenomenal degree through the Prophet. Thousands of Latter-day Saints had been driven from the state of Missouri in the winter of 1838- 39, and many of them had gathered to Commerce, Illinois, (later named Nauvoo) where a new gathering place had been designated. Many were seriously ill from exhaustion, the exposures they had suffered in being driven from Missouri, and the poor living conditions under which they were endeavoring to build a city on the swampy banks of the Mississippi River. Scores of people were living in wagons, in tents, and on the ground; and the Prophet had given up his log cabin to the sick and moved his family into a tent, while he ministered day and night to the needs of the afflicted. [^73]

On the 22nd of July, Joseph arose and, reflecting upon the situation of the Saints, he called upon the Lord in mighty prayer in their behalf. The Spirit rested upon him in a powerful manner, and he went forth healing all who were in his house and yard. Accompanied by Sidney Rigdon and several members of the Quorum of the Twelve, "he went through among the sick lying on the bank of the river, and he commanded them in a loud voice, in the name of Jesus Christ, to come up and be made whole, and they were all healed." The Prophet then crossed the river to Montrose, Iowa. [^74] The first home he entered was that of Brigham Young, who later wrote: "He . . . commanded me in the name of Jesus Christ to arise and be made whole. I arose and was healed." [^75] From there the group went to the house of Elijah Fordham. Wilford Woodruff, who was present [^76] and whose account agrees with the statements of others who were witnesses, later said:

Brother Fordham had been dying for an hour, and we expected each minute would be his last. I felt the power of God that was overwhelming His Prophet. When we entered the house, Brother Joseph walked up to Brother Fordham, and took him by the right hand; in his left hand he held his hat. He saw that Brother Fordham's eyes were glazed, and that he was speechless and unconscious. After taking hold of his hand, he looked down into the dying man's face and said: "Brother Fordham, do you not know me?" At first he made no reply, but we could all see the effect of the Spirit of God resting upon him. He again said: "Elijah, do you know me?" With a low whisper, Brother Fordham answered, "Yes!" The Prophet then said, "Have you not faith to be healed?" The answer, which was a little plainer than before, was: "I am afraid it is too late. If you had come sooner, I think it might have been." He had the appearance of a man waking from sleep. It was the sleep of death. Joseph then said: "Do you not believe that Jesus is the Christ?" "I do, Brother Joseph," was the response. Then the Prophet of God spoke with a loud voice, as in the majesty of the Godhead: "Elijah, I command you, in the name of Jesus of Nazareth, to arise and be made whole!" The words of the Prophet were not like the words of man, but like the voice of God. It seemed to me that the house shook from its foundation. Elijah Fordham leaped from his bed like a man raised from the dead. A healthy color came to his face, and life was manifest in every act. His feet were done up in Indian meal poultices. He kicked them off his feet, scattered the contents, and then called for his clothes and put them on. He asked for a bowl of bread and milk, and ate it; then put on his hat and followed us into the street to visit the others who were sick. [^77]

The company next went to the home of Joseph B. Noble, who also lay very sick in his bed. Brigham Young reported: "He was healed in the same manner." [^78] Wilford Woodruff related:

As soon as we left Brother Fordham's house, we went into the house of Joseph B. Noble, who was very low and dangerously sick. When we entered the house, Brother Joseph took him by the hand, and commanded him, in the name of Jesus Christ, to arise and be made whole. He did arise and was immediately healed. [^79]

When Joseph Smith and those who accompanied him from Nauvoo were about to re-cross the Mississippi to their homes, a man who was not a member of the Church requested the Prophet to go and heal his twin children about five months of age, who were "both lying sick nigh unto death." Joseph turned to Wilford Woodruff and said: "You go with the man and heal his children." The Prophet then gave Elder Woodruff a red silk handkerchief from his pocket and instructed him to wipe their faces with it when he administered to them, and they would be healed. "I went with the man and did as the Prophet commanded me," Elder Woodruff related, "and the children were healed." [^80]

Spiritual Powers As Aids In Spreading The Gospel

The restored gospel challenged men to express living faith in God, with honest hearts, and believe "in the power of Jesus Christ." [^81] Though the doctrines of the new dispensation appealed to many, the fact that dynamic, intelligent powers were associated with the work caused others to join with the Saints; and the spiritual blessings which were given to those who believed created in them a desire to spread the gospel abroad. Of the effect of the manifestations of the Spirit during the first conference of the Church, Joseph Smith said:

Such scenes as these were calculated to inspire our hearts with joy unspeakable, and fill us with awe and reverence for that Almighty Being, by whose grace we had been called to be instruments in bringing about, for the children of men, the enjoyment of such glorious blessings as were now at this time poured out upon us. To find ourselves engaged in the very same order of things as observed by the holy Apostles of old; to realize the importance and solemnity of such proceedings; and to witness and feel with our own natural senses, the like blessings of the Holy Ghost, and the goodness and condescension of a merciful God unto such as obey the everlasting Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, combined to create within us sensations of rapturous gratitude, and inspire us with fresh zeal and energy in the cause of truth. [^82]

Though spiritual gifts properly follow rather than precede the expression of faith in Christ, to the observer they may supply the evidence that is required to stimulate faith. [^83] Here the incentive to believe comes as a gift to the responsive soul, made possible by those who have previously expressed saving faith. E. D. Howe, a bitter critic of the Prophet and his work, observed sarcastically: "Hundreds were soon convinced of the truth of the whole [message of the restored gospel] by hearing of and seeing the manner in which the 'tongues' were performed, although the trick would seem more susceptible to discovery than any previous one." [^84]

Though the unbeliever was free to assign the origin of the spiritual manifestations which the Saints claimed to enjoy to some clever device or to the action of an unperceived natural agent, Joseph Smith challenged the world to believe; and he promised, as did the emissaries of the Christian message in New Testament times, that signs would follow those who expressed living faith. "I am God, and mine arm is not shortened," a revelation through the Prophet stated, "and I will show miracles, signs and wonders unto all those who believe on my name." [^85] The restored gospel was to "be preached unto every creature, with signs following them that believe." [^86] While proselyting in Michigan Territory, the Prophet therefore declared: "If you will obey the-Gospel with honest hearts, I promise you, in the name of the Lord, that the gifts as promised by our Savior will follow you, and by this you may prove me to be a true servant of God." [^87] Of the realization of this promise, Edward Stevenson said:

I am, with others, a witness that these gifts did follow many in the branch of the Church which was raised up in Pontiac. Among them was Deacon Samuel Bent of the Presbyterian Church, who was the first one baptized (and who afterwards became President of the High Council in Nauvoo, Illinois). His daughter, Mary, was the first one who spoke in tongues in his branch. Besides Mary Curtis, Joseph Wood, Elijah Fordham and others also enjoyed that gift. We felt that we were blessed above kings, rulers, and potentates of the earth, and truly we were a happy branch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Our souls were full of joyous thanksgiving, and our songs of gladness rejoiced the heart by day, dispelled the gloom of night and welcomed the coming morn. [^88]

The Prophet's associates took a similar position in their proselyting efforts. Orson Pratt continually "preached upon the subject of more revelations and miracles and the New Covenant." [^89] Ambrose Palmer wrote from New Portage, Medina county, Ohio, that when Sidney Rigdon preached in that area in April, 1833, he "opened the scriptures to our understanding in that clear light in which we had never before understood them, even by showing us the fruits which the Gospel produced in former ages, as also the gifts that were in the Church—such as visions, revelation, the ministering of angels, the gift of the Holy Spirit, and prophecy—and that these were again restored to the world and found in the Mormon Church." [^90]

When Luther Barney, who had previously been converted to the restored gospel, reasoned with his father's family and friends in western Illinois "upon the gifts and blessings of the Gospel enjoyed by the former-day Saints," he contended "that it was the privilege of the church now to enjoy the same gifts and blessings, and if the church was not in possession of that power it was not the true church and was not acknowledged of God as His church." As the people searched the scriptures, they became "convinced of these things" and were baptized; and in a short time there was a branch of about thirty members in that area. [^91]

In his report of the progress of the work in New York City in 1837, Parley P. Pratt also testified of the spiritual basis upon which the restored gospel was presented:

It has been with much exertion that the truth has taken root in this city, but at length the Spirit of the Lord is beginning to manifest itself in mighty power and showing that He is able to do His own work. On last Sunday we, while preaching at the house of a good old Cornelius [See Acts 10], who had not yet obeyed the Gospel, but was seeking and believing, while I yet spake he was carried away in a vision and saw the two sticks representing the two books [the Bible and the Book of Mormon] and the light and glory of God shining around them; to this he arose and testified in the power of the Spirit and immediately spake in tongues and interpreted the same, speaking of the two records and the remnant of Joseph and how they would soon come to the knowledge of the truth; and nearly all present believed and glorified God, and several are intending to obey the ordinance. The gift of healing is also beginning to be enjoyed here in some degree, and we are now preaching daily. [^92]

The above incidents are representative of the basic methods of conversion which many missionaries employed in spreading abroad the program of the restored gospel. When John F. Boynton and Evan M. Greene were requested to bless an afflicted woman with a painful stomach disorder, they "commanded the disease in the name of Jesus to depart from her." Continued Elder Greene:

Then I prayed that the cloud of darkness might be broken, and I exhorted and contended for the gifts of the Church. Then, for the first time in this place, the Lord poured out his Spirit in mighty power and gave the gift of tongues unto the public, and we had a glorious time. Some were convinced of the power of God. [^93]

Shortly thereafter when another expression of these gifts occurred, two people who were present requested to be baptized. [^94]

Similar manifestations with like results accompanied other missionaries in that vicinity. [^95] And from Columbiana county, Ohio, Lorenzo D. Barnes later wrote that as the Saints and others in that area met to fast and pray,

The Spirit of the Lord came down in power, and seldom have the Saints in the last days witnessed a more glorious time. It was a little Pentecost indeed: some spake in tongues, and some prophesied, some interpreted, and some cried out as in former times: Brethren what shall we do to be saved? Five went forward immediately and were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for a remission of sins. [^96]

In Willsboro, Essex county, New York, there lived a woman who had been lame and unable to walk for some time. When she began to believe the testimony of Jared Carter concerning the restored gospel, she remarked that her physical condition would prevent her from being baptized. Elder Carter thereupon assured her that if she would obey the gospel the Lord would give her power to walk. She having made this promise, he reported: "I then took her by the hand and commanded her in the name of Jesus to walk, and the God of Heaven gave her power to do so." [^97]

In his journal, Orson Pratt recorded several incidents of healing in which the person thereafter embraced the gospel. While proselyting in New England, in 1833, he visited a family where there was a young woman who "had been sick about 12 weeks, and vomited much blood; and it was supposed by many that she could not live many days." She desired Elder Pratt to "pray for her that she might be healed, at the same time covenanting before God to obey the gospel." He said: "Therefore I prayed for and laid my hands upon her in the name of Jesus Christ, and she was immediately healed." Three days later she was baptized. [^98]

The following Sunday Elder Pratt wrote:

I was invited to tarry through the night with Mr. Kelsey whose wife lay sick of a disease with which she had been afflicted 5 or 6 years. She covenanted to obey the gospel if the Lord would heal her. I prayed for and laid my hands upon her in the name of Jesus, and she began to recover and a few days after was baptized. [^99]

In a letter to his daughter written from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, July 10, 1843, Heber C. Kimball reported the healing of an English woman in Cincinnati, Ohio, who immediately went through the neighborhood "telling the people what had been done." Shortly thereafter Elder Kimball was awakened at night by a man whose daughter was ill. The modern apostle wrote: "I laid hands upon her and she was healed and went to sleep. She was well in the morning, and they were all believing." Before leaving Cincinnati, Elder Kimball baptized the man and his daughter. [^100]

David W. Patten possessed the gift of healing to a remarkable degree and often employed it in a way that would encourage people to consider the merits of the restored gospel. While a missionary in the East, he reported:

When we found any sick, I preached to them faith in the ordinances of the gospel; and where, the truth found place in their hearts, I commanded them in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to arise from their beds of sickness and be made whole. In many instances the people came after me to lay hands on their sick, because of this gift which the Lord had bestowed upon me, and almost daily the sick were healed under my hands. A woman who had an infirmity for nearly twenty years was instantly healed. [^101]

Wilford Woodruff and Abraham O. Smoot observed the labors of Elder Patten and later said that they never knew of an instance in which his humble petition for the sick was not answered. [^102] Of Elder Patten's visit to the afflicted wife of Ezra Strong while on the above mission, his biographer wrote: "After the usual testimony and questions respecting her faith in the gospel, David rubbed and anointed her eyes, when immediately she was restored to sight; and so thoroughly was she healed that she prepared dinner for the household." [^103] Concerning this period of his ministry, Elder Patten again said:

The Lord did work with me wonderfully, in signs and wonders following them that believed in the fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, insomuch that the deaf were made to hear, the blind to see, and the lame were made whole. Fevers, palsies, crooked and withered limbs were healed by the power of God, that was manifested through His servants. [^104]

Summary

The restored gospel was much more than a system of theology; it was a formula of enlightening and regenerating spiritual power by which those who embraced the plan of life and salvation were given the revelations and visions of God, and the supernatural gifts which were part of the Christian system in New Testament times—visions, healings, the gift of tongues, prophecy, etc. Man was challenged to believe in Christ, to obey the saving ordinances, and to apply the principles of the gospel in his life as a means of acquiring divine truth and power. He could then know of the truthfulness of the program by the intelligent manifestations of the Spirit unto himself, while those who did not believe were left to doubt and to question in spiritual darkness. This was the real issue of the message and program which was given to the world through Joseph Smith. The fact that the proclamation of the restored gospel was accompanied by the manifestation of spiritual gifts did much to spread its message abroad and to establish the truth of the new dispensation in the hearts of those who believed.

Footnotes

There are . . . scores of thousands who know as well as they know they have an existence, that the Book of Mormon is a divine record; that the Bible is a divine record; that the revelations given through the Prophet Joseph Smith, published in the Doctrine and Covenants, are divine; they know it. Would they be willing to suffer martyrdom? I think they would.—Ibid., p. 174.

Where in all the world can you find a class of ministers that dare take the position our elders do? Where is the man or the set of men that can be found that dare to present themselves before the world and say that they have been authorized by God to administer certain ordinances from God? Any one announcing a doctrine of this kind would soon be found out if he were an imposter—he would place himself in a very dangerous position, and would soon be discovered if he held no such authority. Our elders, however, dare take this position. We have taken this position for nearly fifty years.—JD, XX, p. 331.

Wilford Woodruff made a similar statement in reference to the ministration of Peter, James, and John to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery: "These angels told Joseph Smith to . . . preach the gospel as taught by Jesus Christ and the Apostles, and the Lord would back up their testimony; that when they laid hands upon those who had been baptized for the remission of sins, and who had received their testimony, they should receive the Holy Ghost."—Ibid., XXIV, pp. 241-242.

Joseph arose from his bed of sickness, and the power of God rested upon him: he commenced in his own house and dooryard, commanding the sick in the name of Jesus Christ to arise and be made whole, and they were healed according to his word; he then continued to travel from house to house, and from tent to tent upon the bank of the river, healing the sick as he went, until he arrived at the upper stone house, where he crossed the river in a boat, accompanied by several of the quorum of the Twelve, and landed in Montrose.—Journal History, under date.

See also journal of Wandle Mace, op. cit.

The first house they went into was President Brigham Young's. He was sick on his bed at the time. The Prophet went into his house and healed him, and they all came out together.—Journal History, op. cit.

As they were passing by my door, Brother Joseph said: "Brother Woodruff, follow me." These were the only words spoken by any of the company from the time they left Brother Brigham's house till we crossed the public square, and entered Brother Fordham's house.—Ibid.

Elijah Fordham . . . was supposed to be dying by his family and friends. Joseph stepped to his bedside, took him by the hand and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ to arise from his bed, and be made whole: his voice was as the voice of God. Bro. Fordham instantly leaped from his bed, called for his clothing and followed us into the street.—Ibid.

In his report, Wandle Mace said:

They went next to the house of Elijah Fordham who was sick nigh unto death. He was unable to speak and seemingly unconscious. Joseph took his hand and held it some time in silence. A change came over brother Fordham, and he regained consciousness. Bro. Joseph then asked him if he knew him. He faintly answered, "Yes." He then asked him if he wished to live. He replied "Yes," but feared it was too late. Still holding his hand, Joseph stood a few moments, and then with a loud voice said, "Brother Fordham, I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to arise and be made whole."

He immediately arose from his bed, and shook from his feet the onion poultices which were on them, and with assistance put on his clothes, and walked with the company of brethren a few rods to the house of Joseph Bates Noble, who was laying very sick.—The journal of Wandle Mace, op. cit. Still another report, made some years later, was given by William Farrington Cahoon, who said of the Prophet:

I have seen the sick healed under his administrations in many instances. I have seen cripples healed immediately, and leap for joy after being administered to. I was present and well remember a case of healing at Montrose, Iowa. One day about two o'clock in the afternoon, I was down at Brother Fordham's to see if he was still alive, (he being very low,) and as I was going home I saw Brother Joseph, the Prophet, coming up from the river. He went immediately to the house of Brother Fordham, opened the door and went in. I then, with two or three of the brethren, went back to Fordham's immediately. The Prophet went to Brother Fordham's bedside and said, "Are you very sick Brother Fordham?" But he could not speak; he made a little motion with his head. The Prophet then laid his hands upon the sick man's head, and said, "Brother Fordham, in the name of the Son of God, and the Holy Priesthood which I hold, be thou made well from this very moment."

In a few minutes the Prophet said, "Brother Fordham, get up, put on your clothes, and go with me to visit some more sick people. And all saw the Prophet and Brother Fordham, going off to another house together. I am willing to testify to this before God, and angels, and all men at any time.—The Juvenile Instructor, XXVII (August, 1892), p. 492.

A short time thereafter Elder Smith was called to bless a child in that neighborhood that had been given up in its illness as being beyond recovery. Upon his arrival, he knelt down and laid his hands upon the unconscious infant and "rebuked its disease in the name of Jesus Christ, and then hurried off to fulfill an appointment." A few days later the Elder met Mr. Rood, who informed him that a miraculous thing had occurred as a result of his administration. Said Rood: "I hid myself behind the curtain that you might not know that I was there, and I know that the child was healed, for you had not passed the gate until he got up and called for food, and then was dressed and within an hour afterwards went to his grandmother's, a mile distant, and has continued sound ever since." Elder Smith then inquired if he was ready to embrace the faith as he had promised. The hesitant witness replied: "I know it is as notable a miracle as any recorded in the New Testament. Now if I only knew the devil did not perform it, I would receive the work." Elder Smith concluded: "I have never since desired that any unbeliever should see miracles to convince him of the truth."—Journal of George A. Smith, following the entry made on date of July 4, 1836.

Brother Orson Pratt and myself were called upon to visit a very sick woman; she could not turn herself in bed. We anointed her with oil in the name of the Lord, and she was healed and made whole. She did not belong to the Church, nor her husband; but in two days after she and her husband were baptized and fourteen others.—Helen Mar Whitney, "Early Reminiscences," Woman's Exponent, X (February 1, 1882), p. 130.

---
Notas:
[^1] HC, III, pp. 389-390.
[^2] Ibid., p. 379.
[^3] 2 Nephi 33:1.
[^4] HC, I, p. 442.
[^5] See D&C 8:1; 11:10.
[^6] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter four entitled "Witnesses to the Ancient Record."
[^7] D&C 5:15-16.
[^8] Lectures on Faith, No. 2.
[^9] D&C 29:42.
[^10] Lectures on Faith, No. 2.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] Alma 12:28-30.
[^13] Moroni 7:22-26.
[^14] Moroni 7:30-32.
[^15] For example, a revelation declared that the Book of Mormon was "confirmed to others [besides the Prophet] by the ministering of angels, and is declared unto the world by them."—D&C 20:10.
[^16] D&C 14:8.
[^17] Lectures on Faith, No. 3.
[^18] Ibid., No. 2.
[^19] Joseph Smith placed this requisite and the two that follow under one general heading in his Lectures, but for the purpose of better organization in this work the writer has placed each of these requisites under separate headings.
[^20] Lectures on Faith, No. 3.
[^21] Ibid., No. 4.
[^22] Ibid., No. 3.
[^23] Ibid. (Italics in the original.)
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] Ibid.
[^26] Ibid.
[^27] Ibid.
[^28] Ibid.
[^29] Ibid.
[^30] Ibid., No. 4.
[^31] Ibid.
[^32] Ibid.
[^33] Ibid.
[^34] Ibid.
[^35] Alma 33:10.
[^36] Lectures on Faith, No. 4.
[^37] Ibid.
[^38] Ibid.
[^39] Ibid.
[^40] For a discussion of the perfections of God, see Volume I of this study, the section in chapter five entitled "The Perfection of Deity."
[^41] Lectures on Faith, No. 5.
[^42] See, for example, D&C 93:19-20, 28; 3 Nephi 19:29.
[^43] Ibid.
[^44] Lectures on Faith, No. 3.
[^45] Ibid., No. 6.
[^46] Ibid.
[^47] Ibid.
[^48] Ibid.
[^49] D&C 103:28.
[^50] D&C 98:14-15.
[^51] Lectures on Faith, No. 6. On the subject of sacrifice, Brigham Young said:
[^52] Ibid.
[^53] Ibid.
[^54] HC, I, pp. 296-297.
[^55] Ibid., pp. 322-323. They assembled again on the next day and enjoyed "much speaking, singing, praying, and praising God, all in tongues."—Ibid., p. 323. Zebedee Coltrin, who was among the above group, wrote in his journal that he heard Joseph Smith speak and sing in tongues. See the journal of Zebedee Coltrin, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah, p. 50.
[^56] Eliza R. Snow Smith, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow (Salt Lake City, 1884), p. 11.
[^57] Tullidge, op. cit., p. 100. Again Eliza R. Snow said of the Kirtland period: "Many times have I witnessed manifestations of the power of God, in the precious gifts of the gospel,—such as speaking in tongues, the interpretation of tongues, prophesying, healing the sick, causing the lame to walk, the blind to see, the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak."—Ibid., p. 65.
[^58] Ibid., pp. 208-209.
[^59] Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, (3rd ed.; Salt Lake City, 1938), pp. 76-77.
[^60] The Book of John Whitmer, chapter 10; original in the Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^61] See the diary of Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner, typewritten copy, Brigham Young University Library, pp. 5-6.
[^62] Journal History, March 25, 1833.
[^63] See the journal of Wandle Mace, 1809-1890, typewritten manuscript in Brigham Young University Library, p. 21.
[^64] Related by Lydia Bailey, later the wife of Newel Knight, Journal History, October 29, 1833. In his private journal, the Prophet wrote on that date: "One of the sisters received the gift of tongues, which made the Saints rejoice exceedingly. May God increase the gifts among them for his Son's sake."—Ibid. See also HC, I, p. 422.
[^65] A. S. Hayden, Early History of the Disciples' Church in the Western Reserve (1876), pp. 250-251. Hayden referred to this incident as a "well-attested fact."
[^66] Journal History, June 8, 1831.
[^67] Ibid., October 19, 1832.
[^68] Benjamin F. Johnson, My Life's Review (Independence, Mo., 1947), pp. 17-18.
[^69] See the journal of Orson Pratt, June 15, 23; July 3, 4,; and August 7, 1833. Original in the Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^70] The journal of Erastus Snow, October 18, 1842.
[^71] Journal History, June 12, 1837.
[^72] Ibid., November 4, 1833.
[^73] Ibid., July 22, 1839. In reporting these incidents Wandle Mace said: "At this time all were sick, no one was able to walk about except a negro called Black Jack and myself."—The journal of Wandle Mace, 1809-1890, typewritten copy in Brigham Young University Library, p. 42.
[^74] As reported later by Wilford Woodruff, Journal History, July 22, 1839. Brigham Young said:
[^75] Journal History, op. cit. Brigham Young states that he then followed the Prophet on his healing mission. In reporting this phase of the Prophet's mission, Wilford Woodruff said:
[^76] After the company left the home of Brigham Young, Wilford Woodruff said:
[^77] Ibid. Of this incident, Brigham Young said:
[^78] Journal History, op. cit.
[^79] Ibid.
[^80] Ibid.
[^81] D&C 11:10.
[^82] HC, I, pp. 85-86.
[^83] This is not to say that all who witnessed the gifts and manifestations of the Spirit believed. While proselyting in Ohio, George A. Smith had a discussion with a Mr. William Rood, who finally acknowledged that the doctrines set forth by the Saints "were strictly scriptural" and that "the Church was organized precisely according to the true pattern" revealed in the New Testament. But he raised the issue that the new system might be "a form without the power" and stated that "if he could see one sick person healed he would then be satisfied the work was of God." Replied Elder Smith: "You would then query." "No," said the investigator. "I pledge myself that I will receive it and spend my life to spread it abroad."
[^84] E. D. Howe, op. cit., pp. 132-133.
[^85] D&C 35:8.
[^86] D&C 58:64. See also D&C 63:10-11; 68:10; 84:65; 124:98.
[^87] Journal History, October 16, 1834.
[^88] Ibid.
[^89] See, for example, the journal of Orson Pratt under the dates of June 11, 12, 13, 22, 30, July 1, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 16, 18, 20, August 8, 15, September 1, 4, 1833.
[^90] Journal History, January 28, 1835.
[^91] "History of Lewis Barney," by himself, typewritten copy in the Brigham Young University Library, p. 18.
[^92] Journal History, October 3, 1837. Under date of February 19, 1840, Heber C. Kimball wrote from New York City to his wife, Vilate, in Nauvoo, Illinois:
[^93] Journal History, January 15, 1833.
[^94] Ibid.
[^95] See Ibid.
[^96] Ibid., October 8, 1837.
[^97] Ibid., October 19, 1832.
[^98] The journal of Orson Pratt, June 15, 18, 1833.
[^99] Ibid., June 23, 1833. Having recorded other incidents of healing under his administration, Elder Pratt wrote on date of August 7, 1833: "The 7th, prayed for and laid my hands upon a young woman who was sick, and the Lord healed her; and a few days after she was baptized."—Ibid., under date.
[^100] Woman's Exponent, XI (August 1, 1882), p. 40.
[^101] Journal History, November 9, 1832. See also Lycurgus A. Wilson, Life of David W. Patten (Salt Lake City, 1904), p. 14.
[^102] Wilson, op. cit., p. 7.
[^103] Ibid., p. 16.
[^104] Ibid.
