Hyrum L. Andrus, Principles of Perfection ( 1970)

3

The Requisites for Faith in God

Faith comes by hearing the word of God, through the testimony of the servants of God; that testimony is always attended by the Spirit of prophecy and revelation.—JOSEPH SMITH.

Joseph Smith taught that since the beginning of the world, preparations have been made by the Lord to induce man to reach up to God and acquire the living powers and attributes of the Spirit to enlighten his mind and transform his fallen nature. These preparations are concerned with the methods by which faith in Jesus Christ can be engendered and matured within the human soul. Thereby the hope of immortal glory can be awakened in man, and he can be induced to begin the upward climb into the presence of God.

Testimony The Basis Of Faith

Testimony and Teaching the Gospel

"Whenever salvation has been administered," Joseph Smith explained, "it has been by testimony." [^1] The Prophet taught that "faith comes by hearing the word of God, through the testimony of the servants of God." But testimony is not sustained by man alone; it "is always attended by the Spirit of prophecy and revelation." [^2] Nephi wrote: "When a man speaketh by the Holy Ghost, the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the children of men." [^3] Those who hear and respond to such testimony by inquiring of God with true desire concerning its truth have their minds enlightened by the Spirit so that they can see the kingdom of God. "I know that His [God's] Spirit will bear testimony to all who seek diligently after knowledge from Him," Joseph Smith declared. [^4] In this way, they can determine whether or not they wish to enter into the kingdom of God and partake of its divine truths and powers eternally.

There is a technical point of some significance in Nephi's statement above. He did not say that the Holy Spirit would carry the divine message "into" the heart of man, but "unto" the heart of man. The Holy Ghost would bring the message of truth, as it were, to the door of man's heart, but it would not establish the truth therein except by the individual's consent. There apparently is a divine restriction placed upon the Spirit by which the freedom of the individual is held inviolate. It is given to each person to accept or reject the message of truth, with its accompanying power. Though testimony may be given and though the Holy Ghost may carry it unto the heart of man, each heart must open by its own volition to receive that which is extended. A man whose heart is not right before God may reject the divine witness by shutting out the enlightening power of the Spirit. He may resist the Spirit; and by the expression of his agency, he may prevent the Holy Ghost from revealing its enlightening truth and power in his life. Consequently, he must be left to doubt the message of salvation and even to fight against God. But when man opens his heart to God, the hope which he expresses makes it possible for the Spirit to enter into his heart with its several divine manifestations and powers.

Upon this basis salvation is given to man. By the enlightening power of the Spirit which accompanies the message of life, responsive souls can be awakened to ponder the word and inquire of God concerning its truth and its meaning in their lives. All who do so in hope and humility, with honest hearts, [^5] are given the revelations of the Holy Spirit personally, by which they may acquire faith and come to know the truth of God's work in their day. This was why Joseph Smith was commanded to show the gold plates containing the record of the Nephites only to special witnesses, who then gave their testimony to the world. [^6] A revelation described the way the message of the gospel within the Book of Mormon would be given to the world:

. . . the testimony of three witnesses will I send forth of my word. And behold, whosoever believeth on my words, them will I visit with the manifestation of my Spirit; and they shall be born of me, even of water and of the Spirit. [^7]

Role of Testimony

To illustrate these points, the Prophet explained the way in which faith in God was first implanted in the heart of man on earth. Though Adam transgressed the law of Eden and fell from the presence of God, the latter-day Seer emphasized that "his transgression did not deprive him of the previous knowledge with which he was endowed relative to the existence and glory of his Creator." "Neither did God cease to manifest his will unto him." [^8] The Lord said: "I, the Lord God, gave unto Adam and unto his seed, that they should not die as to the temporal death, until I, the Lord God, should send forth angels to declare unto them repentance and redemption, through faith on the name of mine Only Begotten Son." [^9] "Adam, thus being made acquainted with God," Joseph Smith continued, "communicated the knowledge which he had unto his posterity; and it was through this means that the thought was first suggested to their minds that there was a God, which laid the foundation for the exercise of their faith, through which they could obtain a knowledge of his character and also of his glory." [^10]

Having been given evidence of the existence of God through the testimony of their father, the children of Adam "were dependent upon the exercise of their own faith for a knowledge of his character, perfections, and attributes." Only those who acted with hope upon the testimony which they received through Adam were given a personal witness from God concerning His existence and the plan of salvation. Those who received a knowledge of God testified, in turn, of that knowledge to others. In this way, the plan of salvation was perpetuated. In discussing "upon what foundation the testimony was based which excited the inquiry and diligent search of the ancient saints to seek after and obtain a knowledge of the glory of God," Joseph Smith concluded: "It was the credence they gave to the testimony of their fathers, this testimony having aroused their minds to inquire after the knowledge of God." [^11]

Alma explained the above points to the people of Ammonihah. Having spoken of the judgments of God upon man as a result of Adam's transgression in Eden, he continued:

. . . after God had appointed that these things should come unto man, behold, then he saw that it was expedient that man should know concerning the things whereof he had appointed unto them [for their salvation];

Therefore he sent angels to converse with them, who caused men to behold of his glory.

And they began from that time forth to call on his name; therefore God conversed with men, and made known unto them the plan of redemption, which had been prepared from the foundation of the world; and this he made known unto them according to their faith and repentance and their holy works. [^12]

Faith stimulated by evidence and acquired through the manifestations of the Spirit perpetuates testimony. To establish faith in the world after the fall of Adam, God sent angels to converse with man, and they caused man in his fallen state to behold the glory of God. Thus the knowledge of God which Adam possessed before the fall was reaffirmed to man in mortality, giving him a hope of the glory of God. With this hope, the Lord gave man the plan of salvation; and to the degree that man expressed faith, God revealed Himself unto him.

In the generations which followed Adam, God continued to manifest Himself to men according to these principles so that, by their faith, they could lay hold upon the gifts and blessings of the gospel. Mormon wrote:

God . . . sent angels to minister unto the children of men, to make manifest concerning the coming of Christ; and in Christ there should come every good thing.

And God also declared unto prophets, by his own mouth, that Christ should come.

And behold, there were divers ways that he did manifest things unto the children of men, which were good; and all things which are good cometh of Christ; otherwise men were fallen, and there could no good thing come unto them.

Wherefore, by the ministering of angels, and by every word which proceeded forth out of the mouth of God, men began to exercise faith in Christ; and thus by faith, they did lay hold upon every good thing; and thus it was until the coming of Christ.

And after that he came men also were saved by faith in his name; and by faith, they become the sons of God. And as sure as Christ liveth he spake these words unto our fathers, saying: Whatsoever thing ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is good, in faith believing that ye shall receive, behold, it shall be done unto you. [^13]

Having made this general explanation, Mormon spoke specifically of the ministry of angels and their function in establishing a basis for man to exercise faith in God:

. . . they are subject unto him [Christ], to minister according to the word of his command, showing themselves unto them of strong faith and a firm mind in every form of godliness.

And the office of their ministry is to call men unto repentance, and to fulfill and to do the work of the covenants of the Father, which he hath made unto the children of men, to prepare the way among the children of men, by declaring the word of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they may bear testimony of him.

And by so doing, the Lord God prepareth the way that the residue of men may have faith in Christ, that the Holy Ghost may have place in their hearts, according to the power thereof. [^14]

The following points should be noted in Mormon's explanation: First, in establishing the program of salvation in the world, God raises up chosen oracles who are men of strong faith and a firm mind in every form of godliness. Second, God declares His word to these chosen men, by the ministry of angels. Third, the chosen oracles are then required to bear testimony of Christ, giving others the evidence which will stimulate in them a hope for God's mercy and glory. [^15] (Their testimony is accompanied by the enlightening power of the Holy Ghost.) Fourth, testimony stimulates inquiry in others. Fifth, by inquiring of God with an honest desire to know concerning the truth of the divine message, others can receive for themselves a witness of its truth by the power of the Holy Ghost. In this way the Father brings to pass His purposes among men in their probationary state. Man's actual faith is proved, and salvation is given only to those who humbly respond to the Holy Spirit and follow its enlightening influence until they attain the presence of God.

The divine process is continued when those who receive a witness of the truth bear testimony in turn to others. In a revelation given through the Prophet to David Whitmer, Christ said: "It shall come to pass, that if you shall ask the Father in my name, in faith believing, you shall receive the Holy Ghost, which giveth utterance, that you may stand as a witness of the things of which you shall both hear and see, and also that you may declare repentance unto this generation." [^16]

Foundations Of Living Faith

Idea that God Exists

Joseph Smith explained that certain knowledge or ideas "are necessary in order that any rational and intelligent being may exercise faith in God unto life and salvation." First, man must possess the idea that God actually exists. Of the basis of faith among the ancient saints and prophets, the latter-day Seer said: "It was by reason of the knowledge of his [God's] existence that there was a foundation laid for the exercise of faith in him." "Faith," he concluded, "could not center in a Being of whose existence we have no idea, because the idea of his existence in the first instance is essential to the exercise of faith in him." [^17]

As stated previously, the knowledge that God actually exists was given to Adam when he dwelt in the presence of God; and after the fall, Adam retained that knowledge and taught it to his children. "From this we see that the whole human family in the early ages of their existence, in all their branches, had this knowledge disseminated among them," Joseph Smith explained; "so that the existence of God became an object of faith in the early ages of the world." [^18] God then supplemented this early knowledge by revealing Himself to men of faith in later generations. In this way and through the ministry of angels, the knowledge that God actually exists was established and has been perpetuated in the world as a necessary basis for engendering faith in Him.

Correct Idea of Character of God

The second thing [^19] a rational and intelligent being must know to exercise true faith in God is "a correct idea of his character." Man is indebted to God for the revelations He has given concerning His character, the Prophet maintained, for, without these revelations, "no man by searching could find out God." [^20] "Without correct ideas of his character," man could not acquire sufficient power with God to exercise faith unto eternal life. Joseph Smith therefore concluded: "Correct ideas of his character lay a foundation, as far as his character is concerned, for the exercise of faith, so as to enjoy the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Jesus Christ even that of eternal glory." [^21]

Having examined the subject of God's character from the testimony of ancient and modern scripture, the Prophet concluded the following respecting the character of God: (1) "that he was God before the world was created, and the same God that he was after it was created"; (2) "that he is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, abundant in goodness, and that he was so from everlasting, and will be to everlasting"; (3) "that he changes not, neither is there variableness with him"; (4) "that he is a God of truth and cannot lie"; (5) "that he is no respecter of persons: but in every nation he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted of him"; and (6) "that he is love." [^22] In discussing the importance of these points of God's character as a basis for man to exercise faith in deity, Joseph Smith said:

An acquaintance with these attributes in the divine character, is essentially necessary, in order that the faith of any rational being can center in him for life and salvation. For if he did not, in the first instance, believe him to be God, that is, the Creator and upholder of all things, he could not center his faith in him for life and salvation, for fear there should be a greater than he, who would thwart all his plans, and he, like the gods of the heathen, would be unable to fulfill his promises; but seeing he is God over all, from everlasting to everlasting, the creator and upholder of all things, no such fear can exist in the minds of those who put their trust in him, so that in this respect their faith can be without wavering. [^23]

Of the need for man to understand that God is gracious and slow to anger in order to exercise faith in Him, the Prophet said:

Unless he was merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, long suffering, and full of goodness, such is the weakness of human nature, and so great the frailties and imperfections of men, that unless they believed that these excellencies existed in the divine character, the faith necessary to salvation could not exist; for doubt would take the place of faith, and those who know their weakness and liability to sin, would be in constant doubt of salvation, if it were not for the idea which they have of the excellency of the character of God, that he is slow to anger, and long suffering, and of a forgiving disposition, and does forgive iniquity, transgression and sin. An idea of these facts does away [with] doubt, and makes faith exceedingly strong. [^24]

Concerning the need for man to be assured that God does not change, the latter-day Seer said:

It is equally as necessary that men should have the idea that he is a God who changes not, in order to have faith in him, as it is to have the idea that he is gracious and long suffering. For without the idea of unchangeableness in the character of the Deity, doubt would take the place of faith. But with the idea that he changes not, faith lays hold upon the excellencies of his character with unshaken confidence, believing he is the same yesterday, to-day and forever, and that his course is one eternal round. [^25]

Regarding the acquisition of faith in God, Joseph Smith stressed the importance of the knowledge that He is truthful:

The idea that he is a God of truth and cannot lie, is equally as necessary to the exercise of faith in him, as the idea of his unchangeableness. For without the idea that he was a God of truth and could not lie, the confidence necessary to be placed in his word in order to the exercise of faith in him could not exist. But having the idea that he is not man, that he cannot lie, it gives power to the minds of men to exercise faith in him. [^26]

About the need for man to understand that God is no respecter of persons in order to exercise faith in him, the Prophet said:

It is also necessary that men should have an idea that he is no respecter of persons; for with the idea of all the other excellencies in his character, and this one wanting, men could not exercise faith in him, because if he were a respecter of persons, they could not tell what their privileges were, nor how far they were authorized to exercise faith in him, or whether they were authorized to do it at all, but all must be confusion; but no sooner are the minds of men made acquainted with the truth on this point, that he is no respecter of persons, than they see that they have authority by faith to lay hold on eternal life, the richest boon of heaven, because God is no respecter of persons, and that every man in every nation has an equal privilege. [^27]

Finally, the latter-day Seer spoke of man's need to realize that God is a being of love:

Lastly, but not less important to the exercise of faith in God, is the idea that he is love; for with all the other excellencies in his character, without this one to influence them, they could not have such powerful dominion over the minds of men; but when the idea is planted in the mind that he is love, who cannot see the just ground that men of every nation, kindred and tongue, have to exercise faith in God so as to obtain eternal life? [^28]

Joseph Smith held that the foregoing description of the character of God is that which is given in the Lord's revelations to both the former-day saints and the Latter-day Saints. And here, he concluded, "there is a sure foundation for the exercise of faith in him among every people, nation, and kindred, from age to age, and from generation to generation." Men in every dispensation have had essentially the same basis upon which to exercise faith in God, "because the same character" respecting God has been revealed to men in all ages whenever the plan of life and salvation has been sent forth from heaven. [^29]

Correct Idea of Attributes of God

After making the above points, Joseph Smith proceeded "to show the connection there is between correct ideas of the attributes of God, and the exercise of faith in him unto eternal life." To begin, he said: "Let us here observe, that the real design which the God of heaven had in view in making the human family acquainted with his attributes, was, that they, through the ideas of the existence of his attributes, might be enabled to exercise faith in him, and through the exercise of faith in him, might obtain eternal life; for without the idea of the existence of his attributes which belong to God, the minds of men could not have power to exercise faith in him so as to lay hold upon eternal life." He therefore concluded that "the divine communications made to men in the first instance were designed to establish in their minds the ideas necessary to enable them to exercise faith in God, and through this means to be partakers of his glory." [^30]

The Prophet listed the major attributes of God as knowledge, faith or power, justice, judgment, mercy, and truth, and then analyzed them separately as a basis upon which man can build faith in God. Of the first of these attributes, he said: "Without the knowledge of all things, God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning to the end, that enables him to give that understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God had all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him." [^31]

Of the need for man to understand that God possesses the attribute of faith or power, the Prophet said:

Unless God had power over all things, and was able by his power to control all things, and thereby deliver his creatures who put their trust in him from the power of all beings that might seek their destruction, whether in heaven, or earth, or in hell, men could not be saved. But with the idea of the existence of this attribute planted in the mind, men feel as though they had nothing to fear who put their trust in God, believing that he has power to save all who come to him to the very uttermost. [^32]

Besides possessing the idea that God is a being of knowledge and power, man must understand that He is just and equitable in all that He does. The Prophet explained: "Without the idea of the existence of the attribute justice in the Deity, men could not have confidence sufficiently to place themselves under his guidance and direction; for they would be filled with fear and doubt, lest the Judge of all the earth would not do right; and thus fear, or doubt, existing in the mind, would preclude the possibility of the exercise of faith in him for life and salvation." But when man possesses the idea that God is just, there is no room for doubt in his heart. Consequently, "the mind is enabled to cast itself upon the Almighty without doubt, and with [the] most unshaken confidence, believing that the Judge of all the earth will do right." [^33]

The idea of the attribute of judgment in God is equally important as a basis for man to exercise faith in Him. Joseph Smith said of man's need to possess an understanding of this attribute of God:

Without the idea of the existence of this attribute in the Deity, it would be impossible for men to exercise faith in him for life and salvation, seeing that it is through the exercise of this attribute that the faithful in Christ Jesus are delivered out of the hands of those who seek their destruction; for if God were not to come out in swift judgment against the workers of iniquity and the powers of darkness, his saints could not be saved; for it is by judgment that the Lord delivers his saints out of the hands of all their enemies, and those who reject the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. But no sooner is the idea of the existence of this attribute planted in the minds of men than it gives power to the mind for the exercise of faith and confidence in God, and they are enabled, by faith, to lay hold on the promises which are set before them, and wade through all the tribulations and afflictions to which they are subjected by reason of the persecution from those who know not God, and obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: believing that in due time the Lord will come out in swift judgment against their enemies, and they shall be cut off from before him, and that in his own due time he will bear them off conquerors, and more than conquerors, in all things. [^34]

There is no place in Joseph Smith's thought for the view that the faithful will forever be thwarted in their righteous aspirations. Individual dignity and righteous self-realization are dominant themes within the restored gospel. But these objectives must be attained by the proper exercise of faith in God; and to this end the righteous must possess the idea that judgment is an attribute of deity—that God will come out in judgment against iniquity and oppression, and that righteousness and human dignity will finally prevail. For this reason, Alma quoted in his discourse on faith the prophet Zenos, who exclaimed to God: "Thou hast also heard me when I have been cast out and have been despised by mine enemies; yea, thou didst hear my cries, and wast angry with mine enemies, and thou didst visit them in thine anger with speedy destruction." [^35]

In order for man to exercise faith in God unto salvation, it is also important for him to understand that God possesses the attribute of mercy. The latter-day Seer observed:

Without the idea of the existence of this attribute in the Deity, the spirits of the saints would faint in the midst of the tribulations, afflictions and persecutions which they have to endure for righteousness' sake; but when the idea of the existence of this attribute is once established in the mind it gives life and energy to the spirits of the saints: believing that the mercy of God will be poured out upon them in the midst of their afflictions, and that he will compassionate them in their sufferings; and that the mercy of God will lay hold of them and secure them in the arms of his love, so that they will receive a full reward for all their sufferings. [^36]

Last, and very important to the exercise of faith, is the idea that God is a being of truth. The Prophet said of man's need to understand this attribute:

Without the idea of the existence of this attribute the mind of man could have nothing upon which it could rest with certainty: all would be confusion and doubt; but with the idea of the existence of this attribute in the Deity, in the mind, all the teachings, instructions, promises and blessings become realities, and the mind is enabled to lay hold of them with certainty and confidence: believing that these things, and all that the Lord has said, shall be fulfilled in their time; and that all the cursings, denunciations and judgments, pronounced upon the heads of the unrighteous will also be executed in the due time of the Lord: and by reason of the truth and veracity of him, the mind beholds its deliverance and salvation as being certain. [^37]

Finally Joseph Smith summarized the relationship that exists between a correct idea of the several attributes of God and the exercise of faith in Him unto eternal life:

Let the mind once reflect sincerely and candidly upon the ideas of the existence of the before mentioned attributes in the Deity, and it will be seen, that as far as his attributes are concerned, there is a sure foundation laid for the exercise of faith in him for life and salvation. For in as much as God possesses the attribute knowledge he can make all things known to his saints necessary for their salvation; and as he possesses the attribute power he is able thereby to deliver them from the power of all enemies; and seeing also, that justice is an attribute of the Deity, he will deal with them upon the principle of righteousness and equity, and a just reward will be granted unto them for all their afflictions and sufferings for the truth's sake. And as judgment is an attribute of the Deity also, his saints can have the most unshaken confidence that they will, in due time, obtain a perfect deliverance out of the hands of all their enemies, and a complete victory over all those who have sought their hurt and destruction. And as mercy is also an attribute of the Deity, his saints can have confidence that it will be exercised toward them; and through the exercise of that attribute toward them, comfort and consolation will be administered unto them abundantly, amid all their afflictions and tribulations. And lastly, realizing that truth is an attribute of the Deity, the mind is led to rejoice amid all its trials and temptations, in hope of that glory which is to be brought at the revelation of Jesus Christ, and in view of that crown which is to be placed upon the heads of the saints in the day when the Lord shall distribute rewards unto them, and in prospect of that eternal weight of glory which the Lord has promised to bestow upon them when he shall bring them into the midst of his throne to dwell in his presence eternally.

In view, then, of the existence of these attributes, the faith of the saints can become exceedingly strong: abounding in righteousness unto the praise and glory of God, and can exert its mighty influence in searching after wisdom and understanding, until it has obtained a knowledge of all things that pertain to life and salvation.

Such, then, is the foundation, which is laid through the revelation of the attributes of God, for the exercise of faith in him for life and salvation. [^38]

Like the revelation of the character of God, the foregoing attributes are those which the Lord has manifested to man in all ages of time, whenever He has spoken from heaven. Since it is by the revelation of these attributes that a foundation is laid for the exercise of faith in God unto life and salvation, Joseph Smith concluded his discussion of this subject by stressing "that all men have had, and will have, an equal privilege" to acquire faith unto eternal life. [^39]

Correct Idea of Perfections of God

Having shown the importance of having a correct idea of God's character and attributes before man can exercise faith in Him, Joseph Smith then treated man's need to possess an undertanding of the perfections of God [^40] and to be assured that man, too, can acquire the character and attributes of God in their perfection by receiving the blessings and powers of the Holy Spirit and by maturing in them until he is given eternal life.

The several attributes of God in their perfection are integral parts of His glory and power. They constitute essential elements of the divine intelligence that centers in Him and which is manifested throughout universal space by means of the Holy Spirit. By strict obedience to the will of the Father, Christ attained a fulness of the perfections of the Father; and through Christ man may also acquire the glory of God. To this end, Joseph Smith emphasized that man must understand that the Father's glory dwells within Christ in its fulness; and that by growing in the blessings and endowments of the Holy Spirit man may also come to possess the same mind, glory, and power which Christ possesses. Thereby man may be "transformed into the same [divine] image or likeness, even the express image of him who fills all in all; being filled with the fullness of his glory, and become one in him, even as the Father, Son and Holy Spirit are one." Joseph Smith explained further:

The saints have a sure foundation laid for the exercise of faith unto life and salvation, through the atonement and mediation of Jesus Christ; by whose blood they have a forgiveness of sins, and also a sure reward laid up for them in heaven, even that of partaking of the fullness of the Father and the Son through the Spirit. As the Son partakes of the fullness of the Father through the Spirit, so the saints are, by the same Spirit, to be partakers of the same fullness, to enjoy the same glory; for as the Father and the Son are one, so, in like manner, the saints are to be one in them. Through the love of the Father, the mediation of Jesus Christ, and the gift of the Holy Spirit, they are to be heirs of God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. [^41]

Since the endowment of man with the glory and power of the Father is a major objective of the plan of life and salvation, man must have an assurance that he can achieve this goal if he is to be able to exercise faith unto eternal life. He may acquire this assurance by studying the promises of God [^42] and by relying upon the promise that if he receives the Holy Spirit through the gospel and continues to mature in his spiritual union with Christ he will be endowed with a fulness of glory in the resurrection, according to the promise of God. [^43] If the Spirit is real in man's life on earth, the glory of God in its fulness will be equally real in his life in the resurrection.

Knowledge that Man's Course is Divinely Approved

If man is to continue to exercise faith in God unto salvation the Prophet taught that he must have "an actual knowledge that the course of life which he is pursuing is according to his [God's] will." [^44] He explained:

This knowledge supplies an important place in revealed religion; for it was by reason of it that the ancients were enabled to endure as seeing him who is invisible. An actual knowledge to any person that the course of life which he pursues is according to the will of God, is essentially necessary to enable him to have that confidence in God, without which no person can obtain eternal life. It was this that enabled the ancient saints to endure all their afflictions and persecutions, and to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing, (not believing merely,) that they had a more enduring substance. Heb. 10:34.

Having the assurance that they were pursuing a course which was agreeable to the will of God, they were enabled to take not only the spoiling of their goods and the wasting of their substance joyfully, but also to suffer death in its most horrid forms; knowing, (not merely believing,) that when this earthly house of their tabernacle was dissolved, they had a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. Second Cor. 5:1.

Such was and always will be the situation of the saints of God, that unless they have an actual knowledge that the course that they are pursuing is according to the will of God, they will grow weary in their minds and faint; for such has been and always will be the opposition in the hearts of unbelievers and those that know not God, against the pure and unadulterated religion of heaven, (the only thing which ensures eternal life,) that they will persecute, to the uttermost, all that worship God according to his revelations, receive the truth in the love of it, and submit themselves to be guided and directed by his will, and drive them to such extremities that nothing short of an actual knowledge of their being the favorites of heaven, and of their having embraced that order of things which God has established for the redemption of man, will enable them to exercise that confidence in him necessary for them to overcome the world, and obtain that crown of glory which is laid up for them that fear God. [^45]

As man exercises faith in God, the Lord reveals truth and light to him. With these the man of faith walks continually in spiritual union with God. Being in the path of life and salvation, he is aware of that fact by the revelation of the Holy Spirit; and such knowledge becomes, in turn, a means by which he can act with greater faith in God. It also sustains him against trials and tribulations. "For a man to lay down his all, his character and reputation, his honor, and applause, his good name among men, his houses, his lands, his brothers and sisters, his wife and children, and even his own life also—counting all things but filth and dross for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ—requires more than mere belief or supposition that he is doing the will of God," the Prophet stressed; "but actual knowledge, realizing that, when the sufferings are ended, he will enter into eternal rest, and be a partaker of the glory of God." With such knowledge, so that he "most assuredly knows that he is doing the will of God, his confidence can be equally strong that he will be a partaker of the glory of God." [^46]

Need to Sacrifice All Things

Faith, as will be discussed in the next chapter, is not mere belief, but is synonymous with power—the power of the soul to operate in the realm of the Holy Spirit. To acquire faith unto eternal life, man must be willing to give all he possesses to obtain the divine gift. To this end sacrifice is necessary. "A religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has power sufficient to produce the faith necessary unto life and salvation," Joseph Smith declared; "for, from the first existence of man, the faith necessary unto the enjoyment of life and salvation never could be obtained without the sacrifice of all earthly things." [^47] Continuing, he declared:

It was through this sacrifice, and this only, that God has ordained that men should enjoy eternal life. . . . When a man has offered in sacrifice all that he has for the truth's sake, not even withholding his life, and believing before God that he has been called to make this sacrifice because he seeks to do his will, he does know, most assuredly, that God does and will accept his sacrifice and offering, and that he has not, nor will not seek his face in vain. Under these circumstances, then, he can obtain the faith necessary for him to lay hold on eternal life. [^48]

From a careful reading of the Prophet's statement it is apparent that he does not mean that man must actually give his life as a martyr to the cause of truth in order to obtain faith unto eternal life, but that he must manifest a willingness to sacrifice all he possesses, including his life should it be necessary, to sustain the kingdom of God upon the earth. This sacrifice is primarily one of mind or of attitude. But it must be genuine and without reservation. To attain salvation, man must place all he possesses as a sacrifice upon the altar of his heart. The danger of worldly wealth or power is that man often sets his heart upon that which is temporal at the exclusion of that which is eternal. When he does this, faith in God wanes and doubt begins to prevail in his mind, and the gift of eternal life is lost. By revelation the Lord said: "Whoso is not willing to lay down his life for my sake is not my disciple." [^49] Again: "I have decreed in my heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy. For if ye will not abide in my covenant ye are not worthy of me." [^50]

Only by complying with the principle of sacrifice can man acquire the knowledge that his course in life is divinely approved. Having stated this principle, the Prophet concluded:

Those, then, who make the sacrifice will have the testimony that their course is pleasing in the sight of God; and those who have this testimony will have faith to lay hold on eternal life, and will be enabled, through faith, to endure unto the end, and receive the crown that is laid up for them that love the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. But those who do not make the sacrifice cannot enjoy this faith, because men are dependent upon this sacrifice in order to obtain this faith: therefore, they cannot lay hold upon eternal life, because the revelations of God do not guarantee unto them the authority so to do, and without this guarantee faith could not exist.

All the saints of whom we have account, in all the revelations of God which are extant, obtained the knowledge which they had of their acceptance in his sight through the sacrifice which they offered unto him; and through the knowledge thus obtained, their faith became sufficiently strong to lay hold upon the promise of eternal life, and to endure as seeing him who is invisible; and were enabled, through faith, to combat the powers of darkness, contend against the wiles of the adversary, overcome the world, and obtain the end of their faith, even the salvation of their souls.

But those who have not made this sacrifice to God do not know that the course which they pursue is well pleasing in his sight; for whatever may be their belief or their opinion, it is a matter of doubt and uncertainty in their mind; and where doubt and uncertainty are there faith is not, nor can it be. [^51]

Summary

Joseph Smith taught that there must be a proper foundation laid if man is to exercise faith in God. The hope of immortal glory must be awakened in man, and he must be stimulated to reach up to God for the divine truth and power necessary for his return to the presence of God. For this reason, salvation can be administered only by testimony.

For testimony to be given, chosen oracles must be raised up to whom God ministers, by His own voice and by messengers sent from His presence. The chosen oracles must then testify to others of that which they know to be true, and their testimony must be accompanied by the power of the Holy Ghost, which stimulates additional inquiry in others. When those who hear such testimony inquire of God with an honest heart and a true desire concerning the truth of the divine message, they are given a witness of its truth by the power of the Holy Ghost. In this way, man is proven in his desire for righteousness, and salvation is given only to those who respond to the Holy Spirit and develop its divine blessings in their lives until they attain the presence of God.

As a basis upon which the above program can best function, some general requisites must exist, if man is to acquire faith unto salvation: First, man must possess the idea that God actually exists. Second, he must have a correct idea of the character of God. Third, he must have a true concept of the attributes of God—knowledge, faith or power, justice, judgment, mercy, and truth. Fourth, he must have a correct understanding of the perfections of God. Fifth, he must know by the Spirit of revelation that the course which he is pursuing in life is according to the will of God. Finally, man must live a consecrated life; that is, he must hold all else as secondary to Jesus Christ and the establishment of His kingdom in the earth, and he must genuinely feel disposed to sacrifice all things, his own life not excluded, to sustain the testimony of Christ and the program of His kingdom in the earth. Only then can man's faith become perfect unto salvation.

Footnotes

Suppose we were called to leave what we have now, should we call it a sacrifice? Shame on the man who would so call it; for it is the very means of adding to him knowledge, understanding, power, and glory, and prepares him to receive crowns, kingdoms, thrones, and principalities, and to be crowned in glory with the Gods of eternity. Short of this, we can never receive that which we are looking for.—JD, II, p. 7.

---
Notas:
[^1] Articles of Faith, No. 4.
[^2] D&C 1:21.
[^3] Orson Pratt, The True Faith (Liverpool, England, 1856), p. 3. There are exceptions to this general statement. Elder Pratt noted:
[^4] Alma 32:27.
[^5] Latter-day Saint thought distinguishes between true and false belief. True belief results from authentic evidence, accurate perception, and sound thinking. False belief, on the other hand, is the product of false evidence, faulty perception, or immature thinking. Man's challenge is to examine carefully the evidence of God and to perceive cautiously and logically, with true and righteous desires, the meaning of that evidence. Only in this way can he acquire faith.
[^6] Matthew 17:20; Luke 17:6. See also Matthew 21:21; Mark 11:23.
[^7] Ether 12:30.
[^8] D&C 88:118.
[^9] See D&C 17:3-7.
[^10] See D&C 5:24, 28; 44:2; 104:80.
[^11] See D&C 35:19; 61:18.
[^12] See D&C 43:12.
[^13] JD, I, pp. 90-91; VII, pp. 178-179; XI, pp. 22-23; XIII, p. 336; XVI, p. 46; XXV, pp. 40-41.
[^14] Alma 32:29.
[^15] HC, III, p. 379.
[^16] Ibid., VI, p. 77. In the History of the Church, the name of the recipient of the Prophet's letter is spelled "Bennett," but his signature on letters now preserved in the Church Historian's Library is spelled "Bennet."
[^17] Alma 32:27.
[^18] Moroni 7:40.
[^19] Moroni 7:41.
[^20] Ether 12:32. See also Alma 13:29.
[^21] Alma 5:10.
[^22] Jacob 4:6.
[^23] Enos 1:1-5. To raise one's voice high unto heaven as did Enos need not mean to shout verbally, but to commune spiritually with God by the energy of one's soul.
[^24] Ether 12:4.
[^25] Ether 12:8-9.
[^26] Alma 25:16.
[^27] Moroni 7:42.
[^28] Moroni 8:25-26.
[^29] Alma 32:17-18, 21.
[^30] The view that the great scientific discoveries of modern times are produced by the influence of the Spirit will be discussed in volume III of this study.
[^31] Alma 32:26-28.
[^32] Alma 32:29.
[^33] Alma 32:34-35.
[^34] Alma 32:29.
[^35] Alma 32:35-36.
[^36] Alma 32:37-40.
[^37] Alma 32:41-43.
[^38] Alma 33:1.
[^39] Alma 33:22.
[^40] Alma 33:23.
[^41] Lectures of Faith, No. 1.
[^42] Ibid. By this the Prophet meant that faith "is the assurance which we have of the existence of unseen things."—Ibid. In his Inspired Revision of the Bible, he corrected the passage in Hebrews to read: "Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen."—I. R., Hebrews 11:1.
[^43] Ether 12:4.
[^44] Lectures on Faith, No. 1.
[^45] Ibid.
[^46] Ibid.
[^47] D&C 84:45; 88:66.
[^48] D&C 88:5-13; 93:16-17.
[^49] Moses 1:32. See also Moses 2:1-3, 5.
[^50] Lectures on Faith, No. 1.
[^51] Ibid., No. 7.
