Hyrum L. Andrus, Principles of Perfection ( 1970)

5

The Preparatory Gospel

The preparatory gospel . . . is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins.—REVELATION TO JOSEPH SMITH

Joseph Smith taught that the Saints would never leave the first principles and ordinances of the gospel behind as they traveled the road to perfection in the kingdom of God. [^1] Nevertheless, part of the plan of life and salvation is designated as the preparatory gospel. The purpose of this phase of the gospel plan is "to prepare the way for a greater revelation of God." [^2] It does not function independent of the higher principles and ordinances of the gospel, but in conjunction with them.

Place Of Faith In Preparatory Gospel

Faith the First Principle of the Gospel

Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is not designated specifically as part of the preparatory gospel, [^3] yet Joseph Smith declared that it is the first principle in the over-all program of life and salvation [^4] and "the foundation of all righteousness." [^5] For these reasons, it is the basis of the preparatory gospel.

Faith the First Ordinance of the Gospel

As the first principle of the gospel, faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is also the initial ordinance in the plan of life and salvation. [^6] An ordinance is a religious rite or ceremony which, among other things, is a channel through which divine mercy and power are given to man. In this sense, faith in Jesus Christ qualifies as an ordinance: First, it is a channel through which divine power is given to man. [^7] Second, it is the basis of the over-all program by which the full blessings of salvation are given to man. In confirming the fact that the gifts and signs of the Spirit follow those who express true faith, the Lord said in a revelation to Joseph Smith:

. . . I am God, and mine arm is not shortened; and I will show miracles, signs, and wonders, unto all those who believe on my name.

And whoso shall ask it in my name in faith, they shall cast out devils; they shall heal the sick; they shall cause the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, and the lame to walk. [^8]

The Book of Mormon holds that before man can express true faith he must perform a divinely prescribed ritual or sacrifice. This sacrifice, however, is to be performed within man—within the privacy of his own heart—rather than outwardly where it may be viewed by others. To the Nephites, Jesus instructed: "Ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit." [^9] This sacrifice Christ substituted in place of the outward rite of blood sacrifice which the law of Moses required, and He made it clear that it is the initial ritual that man must perform in order to embrace the gospel. [^10] The Nephites who offered this sacrifice and complied with its related principles and outward ordinances in the plan of salvation were promised that they would be baptized "with fire and with the Holy Ghost. [^11] In this way, faith in Christ was to be to them a channel to divine mercy and power.

Man's sacrifice of a broken heart and a contrite spirit is symbolic of the sacrifice which Jesus made when, with humility, sorrow, and a broken heart, He fulfilled His atoning mission on earth. In like manner, man must offer as a sacrifice a broken heart and a contrite spirit as he is brought to see the nature of his fallen state and the gravity of his sins, and as he realizes his need for the mercy and power of Christ to cleanse him from sin and enable him to return to the presence of God and be made like Him. Lehi therefore declared of the mission of the Messiah: "Behold, he offereth himself a sacrifice for sin, to answer the ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit; and unto none else can the ends of the law be answered." [^12]

Repentance Toward God

Meaning of Repentance

When coupled with faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, the principle of repentance becomes the second ordinance of the gospel. [^13] As a ministering angel, John the Baptist conferred "the keys . . . of the gospel of repentance" upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, on May 15, 1829, [^14] which gave them and those whom they commissioned authority to call men to repentance and to have their message binding upon the world.

To repent is to turn, often with sorrow, contrition, regret, or remorse, from a past course of action to one that is based upon rectitude and truth. A revelation to Joseph Smith said of repentance: "By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them." [^15]

In its true form within the plan of the gospel, repentance is not a negative or an abstract principle, but a positive and spiritual one. Several revelations implied that the purpose of repentance was to "bring souls" to Christ. [^16] A person who begins to believe in Christ not only seeks to repent of error, but, more specifically, he repents toward God. The Twelve in the Prophet's day classified among the first principles of the doctrine of Christ the principle of "repentance towards God." [^17] Joseph Smith reaffirmed the biblical doctrine that true repentance is based upon the atonement of Jesus Christ. [^18] Therein man takes Christ as his standard; and by faith in the Savior, he conforms his life to the pattern which was set by Jesus. Man also begins to utilize the truth and power of the gospel in a positive way in his effort to become like the Son of God. To do this, he must get the spirit of repentance, which is that spirit that comes as a result of a broken heart—the spirit of sorrow and contrition for sin. It is also the spirit of desire and hope for the righteousness of God. Those who express the spirit of repentance by looking with hope to Christ are given divine power to strengthen them in the battle against sin and the weaknesses of the flesh, and to cleanse them from the effects of sin in their lives. [^19] The faith which they then acquire leads to repentance.

Necessity of Repentance

It is not the design of God to save man in his sins, but to save him from his sins. [^20] Helaman explained that there are "conditions of repentance" which bring men "unto the power of the Redeemer, unto the salvation of their souls." [^21]

According to Joseph Smith, God declared to Adam in the early ages of the world why man must repent. "All men, everywhere, must repent," the Lord explained; "or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence; for . . . Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man [of Holiness]." [^22] Joseph Smith made the same point when he wrote by revelation: "We know that all men must repent . . . or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God." [^23] To the Saints he explained:

If you wish to go where God is, you must be like God, or possess the principles which God possesses. . . .

Is not God good? Then you be good; if He is faithful, then you be faithful. [^24]

In a revelation to the Prophet, God declared: "I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance; nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven." [^25] As a divine being perfect in righteousness, God cannot sanction the least variation from the path of virtue and truth. Nevertheless, man has been placed in a fallen state so that he might receive a physical body and be proved in the endowments of the flesh; and since man possesses a corrupt body in mortality through which sin is conceived in his heart, [^26] repentance must be granted to him, if he is to be saved in the kingdom of God. Alma therefore described mortality as a probationary state which is given to man that he might repent. [^27] Amulek explained:

. . . behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; . . . therefore, I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end. . . .

Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world.

For behold, if ye have procrastinated the day of your repentance even until death, behold, ye have become subjected to the spirit of the devil, and he doth seal you his. [^28]

The Prophet also advised against procrastinating repentance. "Repentance is a thing that cannot be trifled with every day," he declared. "Daily transgression and daily repentance is not that which is pleasing in the sight of God." [^29] Again he said:

We should take warning and not wait for the death-bed to repent, as we see the infant taken away by death, so may the youth, and middle-aged . . . be suddenly called into eternity. Let this, then, prove as a warning to all not to procrastinate repentance, or wait till a death-bed, for it is the will of God that man should repent and serve Him in health, and in the strength and power of his mind, in order to secure his blessing, and not wait until he is called to die. [^30]

Repentance a Divine Process

True repentance is a divine, rather than a mere human, process. This is true of each phase of the over-all gospel program. First, there can be no genuine recognition of error by man unless Christ's standard of truth and righteousness has been clearly set forth. Without a standard, morality becomes a relative thing to be determined by the judgment or whim of each individual, or by the group with which he associates.

Second, there can be no remorse capable of effecting the kind of genuine sorrow for sin which works repentance without the knowledge of divine law and justice.

Third, man cannot be induced to reach up and acquire the goodness of God unless he realizes that in mortality he is in a fallen state and that he must rely upon Christ for mercy, truth, and power.

Fourth, only when man clearly understands his fallen nature and state in mortality, and understands the blessings of life and glory which are promised to those who obey the gospel, can he fully resolve to come to the fountain of all truth and righteousness.

Fifth, being under the bondage of sin, man cannot by himself restore that which he has lost by sin. If he is to be free from the baneful effects of sin, he must reconcile himself to Christ.

Finally, fallen man is severed from the presence of God, and his physical body is corrupted by the fall of Adam. Unless he is renewed spiritually and is sanctified by the power of the Holy Ghost, he cannot permanently refrain from sin.

For these reasons, the natural man in mortality cannot by his own efforts attain the righteousness of God. Repentance must of necessity follow the expression of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ as a basic principle within the divine plan by which man can partake of the mercy, the enlightening truth, and the transforming power of God.

Repentance a Gift of God

In many ways, repentance is a gift of God: First, God gave man a divine gift in the standard of righteousness exemplified by Jesus.

Second, Christ paid the debt of divine justice for man's sins so that man could repent and be forgiven. A revelation declared: "Behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him." [^31] Without the atonement, repentance would be impossible, and it could have no ultimate value to man. Unmitigated divine justice would still consign him to a state of spiritual darkness.

Third, repentance is a gift of God in that the Spirit of God strives with man to bring him to a state of righteousness until such time as man may turn away from God and harden his heart against the divine influence. [^32] When man responds to the uplifting influence of the Holy Spirit and seeks to come unto Christ, the Lord gives him strength and power to repent. Joseph Smith taught that by faith those who are weak may be made strong. [^33] The Book of Mormon stresses the same point. Of those who would rely upon His grace, Christ said to Moroni: "I [will] make weak things become strong unto them." [^34]

Finally, repentance is a divine gift in the blessing of forgiveness that results from the act of repentance when it is done in conjunction with the program of the gospel.

Scriptural R's Of Repentance

Recognition of Christ

The divine process of repentance can be outlined by listing the major steps within it under six R's. The first R in the divine program might stand for Recognition of Jesus Christ. The Master is the center of all righteousness for man, the beginning point in his quest for the truth and righteousness of God. In teaching a group of people who had assembled on the hill Onidah the beginning point in achieving salvation, Alma said of man's need to recognize Christ and of His place in the divine plan of life and salvation:

. . . begin to believe in the Son of God, that he will come to redeem his people, and that he shall suffer and die to atone for their sins; and that he shall rise again from the dead, which shall bring to pass the resurrection, that all men shall stand before him, to be judged at the last and judgment day, according to their works. [^35]

To recognize Christ, man must accept the declaration of Nephi: "As the Lord God liveth, there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ, . . . whereby man can be saved." [^36] A revelation to Joseph Smith also stressed: "Behold, Jesus Christ is the name given of the Father, and there is none other name given whereby man can be saved." [^37] For this reason Nephi wrote: "My soul delighteth in proving unto my people that save Christ should come all men must perish." [^38]

To recognize Christ, man must also accept and sustain His Church on earth—the Church of Jesus Christ. To the Nephites, Jesus said: "Whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name, . . . [for] how be it my church save it be called in my name?" In His explanation to the Nephites, Jesus set forth the essential requisites for His church. "If it be called in my name then it is my church," He observed, "if it so be that they [the members] are built upon my gospel." [^39] Here is a simple, but intelligent, declaration that cuts across jarring creeds and contending opinions and goes directly to the heart of the issue. Simply stated, Christ's church must (1) be called by His name and (2) be built upon His gospel. In expressing a third criterion by which man may recognize His church, Jesus said: "If it so be that the church is built upon my gospel then will the Father show forth his own works in it." [^40] To recognize Christ, man must accept these plain and logical conclusions.

Remorse for Sin

Remorse for sin is the second R in the divine process of repentance. Recognition of Christ carries with it the obligation to look to Him as the one who exemplified to perfection obedience to the law of God. To the Saints, the Lord instructed: "Look unto me in every thought." [^41] When man looks seriously to Christ, he begins to see the need for repentance in his own life. And as he measures his own conduct in life against the Master's example of obedience to the law of the Father, man is made aware of his mortal weaknesses and his inability, alone, to conform to the perfect standard of conduct which the law of God ultimately requires of those who are given salvation in the kingdom of God. Recognition of these facts should produce remorse for sin in the heart of a conscientious person. For this reason, Alma declared that the knowledge of God's just law brings "remorse of conscience unto man." [^42]

Alma's own experience illustrates the remorse that can come to the sinner who is brought to recognize Christ. Having been brought, in a dramatic way, to realize the truth of the gospel after he had openly opposed the church of God, Alma said of his feelings:

. . . I was racked with eternal torment, for my soul was harrowed up to the greatest degree and racked with all my sins.

Yea, I did remember all my sins and iniquities, for which I was tormented with the pains of hell. . . .

And now, for three days and for three nights was I racked, even with the pains of a damned soul. [^43]

Reliance upon Christ

Remorse of conscience can stimulate man to reach up to Christ, in humility and in hope, for divine mercy and for power to overcome the flesh and the world. In logical sequence, the next R in the scriptural process of repentance stands for Reliance upon Jesus Christ. It is at this stage of the program that remorse for sin can have a constructive purpose in the experience of man, as is well illustrated in the conversion of Alma. In the midst of his torment, Alma finally remembered that he had heard his father "prophesy unto the people concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ, a Son of God, to atone for the sins of the world." He said:

. . . as my mind caught hold upon this thought, I cried within my heart: O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness, and am encircled about by the everlasting chains of death.

And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more.

And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain!

Yea, I say unto you, . . . that there could be nothing so exquisite and so bitter as were my pains. Yea, and again I say unto you, . . . that on the other hand, there can be nothing so exquisite and sweet as was my joy. [^44]

Since Jesus paid the debt of sin for all men, and is the light and the life of the world, He is the only source of mercy or power by which man may be redeemed to the presence of God. To rely upon Christ, man must place his hope and trust in the Savior, believing implicitly that He will do all that He has promised to do for the salvation of man. Lehi explained: "Wherefore, all mankind were in a lost and in a fallen state, and ever would be save they should rely on this Redeemer." [^45] Nephi also observed that man can come unto salvation only by "relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save." [^46] This was the position which was taken by the Nephite church. Of those who identified themselves with the Church of Jesus Christ among the Nephites, Moroni said: "Their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith." [^47] In relying upon Christ, man begins to form that relationship by which he can be sanctified in Christ, perfected in Him, and finally glorified in the God of this earth. [^48]

Resolution to Come unto Christ

With reliance, there must be Resolution to come unto Christ, which is the fourth R in the divine process of repentance. Christ's invitation to the sinner is "Come, follow me." [^49] Because the resolution to do this is an indispensable factor in the divine plan, Moroni wrote of those who were given the benefits of the gospel among the Nephites: "And none were received unto baptism save they took upon them the name of Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end." [^50] The same resolution was required of those who received the gospel through Joseph Smith. Before baptism, they were required to manifest a willingness "to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end." [^51] In warning men to flee from modern spiritual Babylon, the Lord said: ". . . he that goeth, let him not look back lest sudden destruction shall come upon him." [^52]

Reconciliation to Christ

The fifth R stands for Reconciliation to Jesus Christ. The need for reconciliation is based upon the fact that except for the merciful intervention of the great Redeemer, fallen man would be estranged from God and would remain so throughout eternity. But in making His infinite atonement, Jesus reconciled the demands of divine law for Adam and his posterity. In this way, He became the Savior of the world. Man's obligation in the divine plan of salvation is to reconcile himself to Christ, by repentance and obedience to the gospel. Only in this way can man receive the mercy and power of God unto salvation. The Nephite prophet Jacob advised: "Wherefore, my beloved brethren, reconcile yourselves to the will of God, and not to the will of the devil and the flesh; and remember, after ye are reconciled unto God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved." [^53]

The works of righteousness which man may perform on earth, including the works of repentance, neither remit his sins nor save him. Only as they are a means of reconciling him to Christ do works of righteousness become effective in helping man on his path to salvation. It is the Son of God who remits sin by the power of His atonement. In recognition of this fact, Nephi said: "We labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." [^54] Having stated that he had charity for both Jew and Gentile, Nephi again declared: "But behold, for none of these can I hope except they shall be reconciled unto Christ, and enter into the narrow gate, and walk in the straight path which leads to life, and continue in the path until the end of the day of probation." [^55]

Before man can be reconciled to Christ, he must be reconciled to his fellow man for any injustice he may have done. After warning His disciples on the Western hemisphere against being angry with a brother, Jesus instructed the Nephites: "Therefore, if ye shall come unto me, or shall desire to come unto me, and rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee—Go thy way unto thy brother, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I will receive you." [^56]

To reconcile himself to his fellow men, one must confess his transgressions and make restitution as far as it is possible. In cases of continued abuse, when the offended person has not retaliated, the offender may be required to restore fourfold before the law of God is satisfied. [^57]

Finally, before man can be reconciled to Christ, he must enter by baptism into a covenant relationship with the Master. Not only is repentance a necessary prelude to baptism, but within the gospel program baptism is the consummation of repentance and the official act by which man is reconciled to Jesus. Mormon declared that "the first fruits of repentance is baptism." [^58] Here the interrelationship of the principles and ordinances of the gospel may be seen.

Renewal of Man in Christ

The final R in the process of repentance stands for the Renewal of man in Christ. When man truly repents, God enters with mercy and transforming power into his quest for righteousness: the conditional benefits of the atonement are extended to him; [^59] he receives the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of his sins; [^60] and, by the power of the Spirit which is given to him in the gospel, he is changed from the carnal and fallen state which prevails on earth to a righteous state of spiritual life in Christ. When the people to whom Alma taught the gospel repented, God "changed their hearts" and "awakened them out of a deep sleep" so that the bands of spiritual death were broken, and "their souls were illuminated by the light of the everlasting word." [^61] In this way, also, the Lamanites whom Ammon converted were renewed and transformed so "that they had no more desire to do evil." [^62] Mormon observed: ". . . and they became a righteous people." [^63] As new creatures in Christ, they could refrain from wilful sin and grow up spiritually in the Master.

Illustration Of Scriptural R's Of Repentance

An illustration of the divine process of repentance can be seen in the experience of the Nephite people under King Benjamin. Before anointing his son Mosiah to rule in his place, King Benjamin called his people together and taught them the message an angel had given him concerning the great plan by which fallen man could be renewed spiritually in Christ. [^64] Because man must begin to repent by recognizing Christ as the God of the earth, King Benjamin admonished his people:

Believe in God; believe that he is, and that he created all things, both in heaven and in earth; believe that he has all wisdom, and all power, both in heaven and in earth; believe that man doth not comprehend all the things which the Lord can comprehend.

And again, believe that ye must repent of your sins and forsake them, and humble yourselves before God; and ask in sincerity of heart that he would forgive you. . . . [^65]

As a result of King Benjamin's teaching and admonitions, the people felt great remorse of conscience for their sins. The "fear of the Lord" came upon them, and they "viewed themselves in their own carnal state, even less than the dust of the earth." [^66] They realized that without Christ they were nothing. They therefore relied upon Christ as they cried out: "O have mercy, and apply the atoning blood of Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins, and our hearts may be purified; for we believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who created heaven and earth, and all things, who shall come down among the children of men." [^67]

Not only did the people express their reliance upon Christ, but they resolved to come unto Him, for King Benjamin had stressed: "And now, if you believe all these things see that you do them." [^68]

By their willingness to come unto Christ, the people were reconciled to Him, and their reconciliation was evidenced by the spiritual blessings which they received. The record states: "It came to pass that . . . the Spirit of the Lord came upon them, and they were filled with joy, having received a remission of their sins, and having peace of conscience, because of the exceeding faith which they had in Jesus Christ." [^69] Finally, their repentance was accompanied by a renewal of their lives in Christ. When King Benjamin inquired if they believed the words which he had spoken to them, they cried out: "Yea, we believe all the words which thou hast spoken unto us; and also, we know of their surety and truth, because of the Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent, which has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually." [^70]

Baptism

Nature of Baptism

Baptism as the third principle and the first outward ordinance of the gospel follows as a logical concomitant of true repentance. When man begins to exercise living faith in Jesus Christ, the desire to be baptized springs up in his heart as a result of his contrition of soul and his desire for spiritual union with the Master. For this reason, Mormon, after designating baptism as "the first fruits of repentance," declared: "And baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling of the commandments." [^71] Having exercised faith in Christ and repented of his sins, the penitent soul is required by divine commandment to enter into a covenant with Jesus that he will follow the Lord and give evidence of his spiritual renewal by an outward ordinance, as a sign or symbol of his new profession. This symbol, which is designed in the plan of redemption to represent a cleansing of man from sin, is baptism in water.

"Baptism," the Prophet explained, "is a sign to God, to angels, and to heaven that we do the will of God." [^72] In baptism, man covenants that he will seek with all his heart to observe the laws of God and to serve Him until the end of his mortal probation. [^73] Thus Alma admonished the people of Gideon: "Come and go forth, and show unto God that ye are willing to repent of your sins and enter into a covenant with him to keep his commandments, and witness it unto him this day by going into the waters of baptism." [^74] Of the specific obligations man takes upon himself in baptism, the elder Alma said to a group he had been instrumental in converting to the gospel:

Behold, here are the waters of Mormon . . . and now, as ye are desirous to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light;

Yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even until death, that ye may be redeemed of God, and be numbered with those of the first resurrection, that ye may have eternal life—

Now I say unto you, if this be the desire of your hearts, what have you against being baptized in the name of the Lord, as a witness before him that ye have entered into a covenant with him, that ye will serve him and keep his commandments, that he may pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon you? [^75]

Mode of Baptism

The true mode of baptism is another point of doctrine that was made clear in the new dispensation. Joseph Smith explained: "The gospel requires baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, which is the meaning of the word in the original language—namely, to bury or immerse." [^76] He said: "Let us understand that the word baptise is derived from the Greek verb baptiso, and means to immerse or overwhelm, and that sprinkle is from the Greek verb rantiso, and means to scatter on by particles." [^77]

Several latter-day scriptures teach that baptism must be performed by immersion. A revelation to the Prophet states that to receive celestial glory in the resurrection, man must be baptized after the manner of Christ's "burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given." [^78] Another revelation which discloses early events in the history of the world states that in being baptized, Adam was carried by the Spirit "down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water." [^79] When Nephi, the grandson of Helaman, was baptized in accordance with the instructions of the resurrected Christ, he "went down into the water and was baptized," after which "he came up out of the water." [^80] In like manner, Alma, Helam, and others "were buried in the water, . . . and came forth out of the water." [^81]

The specific procedure of baptism is twice set forth in modern revelation. One explanation is found in Christ's instructions to the Nephites at the time He ministered to them after His resurrection. [^82] The other is in a major revelation to Joseph Smith, which sets forth the doctrine and practices of the Church in this dispensation. This statement, which gives the same procedure as the first, explains:

Baptism is to be administered in the following manner unto all those who repent—

The person who is called of God and has authority from Jesus Christ to baptize, shall go down into the water with the person who has presented himself or herself for baptism, and shall say, calling him or her by name: Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Then shall he immerse him or her in the water, and come forth again out of the water. [^83]

Symbolism of Baptism

The Prophet wrote by revelation that all things in life "have their likeness, . . . that they may accord one with another." [^84] Baptism is symbolic of the central events in the divine plan of life and salvation. This holy ordinance by which man enters that stage of life which leads to eternal life is made symbolic of the birth process by which he acquires a physical body in this mortal sphere. [^85] The renewal of innocence which accompanies baptism is also symbolic both of the innocence of Christ and the innocence of man in his infant mortal state.

In addition, baptism is symbolic of Christ's death, burial, and resurrection. As Jesus voluntarily submitted His body to the cross, so must those who follow Him crucify the natural man by true repentance and thus die according to the man of sin. Like the Son of God who submitted His body to the silent tomb, each one who crucifies the old man must be buried with Jesus by baptism into death. [^86] Enveloped in water, with the normal life functions of his body momentarily suspended, man is in a state which is symbolic of the sealed tomb, and his body is made like the lifeless tabernacle of the Master. Then, like the Son of Man who was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father [^87] to enjoy the full spiritual powers of celestial or eternal life, man must come forth from the watery grave of baptism to walk in the newness of life which the gospel makes possible. Man's emergence from the baptismal tomb is symbolic of Christ's triumphant rise from the dead; and the renewal of spiritual life within the man of faith is symbolic of the glory which Jesus received in the resurrection. As the Father extended His glory to raise up the Son of God from the tomb, so does Christ give His Holy Spirit to raise up spiritually those who are baptized in His holy name and to place them upon the path which leads to eternal life or glory. Jesus went from earth life to the full presence of the Man of Holiness by passing through the tomb. So may man enter into a newness of life by passing through the watery grave of baptism to the spiritual realm of life that leads to immortal glory.

Age for Baptism

Those who are born into the Church should be baptized when they are eight years of age. A revelation instructed parents in Zion and her stakes to teach their children the first principles and ordinances of the gospel early in life, then added: "And their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on the hands [for the gift of the Holy Ghost]." [^88]

Need For Baptism

Baptism an Essential to Salvation

"Upon looking over the sacred pages of the Bible, searching into the prophets and sayings of the apostles," Joseph Smith observed, "we find no subject so nearly connected with salvation as that of baptism." Continued the latter-day Seer:

As it is well known that various opinions govern a large portion of the sectarian world as to this important ordinance of the gospel, it may not be amiss to introduce the commissions and commandments of Jesus Christ Himself on the subject.—He said to the Twelve, or rather eleven at the time: Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: Thus it is recorded by Matthew. In Mark we have these important words: Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptised shall be saved, and he that believeth not shall be damned. And to show how the believers are to be known from the unbelievers, he continues and says: And these signs shall follow them that believe: in my name shall they cast out devils: they shall speak with new tongues: they shall take up serpents: and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them: they shall lay hands on the sick and they shall recover. And in Luke we find the finishing clause like this,—that it was necessary that Christ should die and rise the third day—that remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And ye are witnesses of these things. [^89]

Jesus had also said to Nicodemus, a member of the Jewish Sanhedrin: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." [^90] Having quoted this declaration, Joseph Smith commented:

This strong and positive answer of Jesus, as to water baptism, settles the question: If God is the same yesterday, today, and forever; it is no wonder He is so positive in the great declaration: He that believes and is baptised shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned! There was no other name given under heaven, nor no other ordinance admitted, whereby men could be saved: No wonder the Apostle said, being "buried with him in baptism," ye shall rise from the dead [in the likeness of His glorified body]! No wonder Paul had to arise and be baptised and wash away his sins: No wonder the angel told good old Cornelius that he must send for Peter to learn how to be saved: Peter could baptize, the angels could not, so long as there were legal officers in the flesh holding the keys of the kingdom, or the authority of the priesthood. [^91]

The view that man's salvation depends upon his obedience to the requirements of baptism is taught repeatedly in modern scriptures. By revelation to Joseph Smith, the Lord said: "As many as repent and are baptized in my name, which is Jesus Christ, and endure to the end, the same shall be saved." [^92] Of the doctrine of Christ, the Nephite prophet Jacob said: "He commandeth all men that they must repent, and be baptized in his name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God." [^93] Mormon also quoted Jesus as saying: "Repent all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me, and be baptized in my name, and have faith in me, that ye may be saved." [^94] As Jesus ministered to the Nephites after His resurrection, He said in unequivocal terms:

. . . whoso believeth in me, and is baptized, the same shall be saved; and they are they who shall inherit the kingdom of God.

And whoso believeth not in me, and is not baptized, shall be damned.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my doctrine, and I bear record of it from the Father. . . . [^95]

The Nephite scripture makes the Savior's baptism at the hands of John a point of special significance in showing the need for man to be baptized. Though Christ did not have any sins to be washed away in baptism and though He was conceived in the flesh with the glory of the Father within Him, He nevertheless subscribed to the ordinance of baptism in order "to fulfill all righteousness" [^96]—to show others the gate into the kingdom of God and to honor the established way. Only in this way could He say to others, "Come, follow me!" Centuries before this exemplary act occurred, Nephi foretold the baptism of the Savior and explained how righteousness would thereby be fulfilled:

. . . I would ask of you, my beloved brethren, wherein the Lamb of God did fulfil all righteousness in being baptized by water?

Know ye not that he was holy? But notwithstanding he being holy, he showeth unto the children of men that, according to the flesh he humbleth himself before the Father, and witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments.

Wherefore, after he was baptized with water the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the form of a dove.

And again, it showeth unto the children of men the straightness of the path, and the narrowness of the gate, by which they should enter, he having set the example before them.

And he said unto the children of men: Follow thou me. Wherefore, my beloved brethren, can we follow Jesus save we shall be willing to keep the commandments of the Father?

And the Father said: Repent ye, repent ye, and be baptized in the name of my Beloved Son. [^97]

Joseph Smith also cited the Lord's baptism as evidence that man must be baptized. Having referred to Christ's request to John, "Now let me be baptized: for no man can enter the kingdom without obeying this ordinance: for thus it becometh us to fulfil ALL RIGHTEOUSNESS," the Prophet remarked: "Surely, then, if it became John and Jesus Christ, the Savior, to fulfill all righteousness to be baptized—so surely, then, it will become every other person that seeks the kingdom of heaven to go and do likewise; for he is the door, and if any person climbs up any other way, the same is a thief and a robber!" [^98]

Requirement of Divine Authority to Baptize

In order for baptism to be efficacious the officiator must have authority from God to perform this holy ordinance. "There is no salvation between the two lids of the Bible without a legal administrator," Joseph Smith explained. [^99] This view is expressed in the Book of Mormon. When Alma baptized in the waters of Mormon, he stated that he had "authority from the Almighty God" to do so. [^100] And when Jesus ministered to the Nephites, ushering in a new dispensation of the gospel, He said to those whom He had chosen to conduct the affairs of His kingdom: "I give unto you power that ye shall baptize this people when I am again ascended into heaven." [^101] In performing this sacred ordinance, the officiator therefore states specifically that he has been commissioned, or given authority, of Jesus Christ to baptize the candidate. [^102]

Of the need for divine authority to officiate in the things of God, Brigham Young explained:

When people are filled with understanding to discern and comprehend the principles by which the worlds were made, and by which they are governed and controlled, they realize that there is a vast difference between the man who assumes his authority and the one who is appointed by his master to go and transact business. Suppose that a number of individuals having no appointment, credentials, or authority, should come from any foreign country to the capital of our nation, and pretend to be ministers of the government from whence they came, what attention would be paid to them by our Government? None, officially; though they would probably be treated kindly, and as gentlemen, if they behaved themselves. But when a minister from the English or any other European court comes with his appointment, credentials, recommends, &c., the President of the United States, the Congress, and officers of state are ready to receive him with the respect due to his position. So it is in the kingdom of God. [^103]

Those who perform the ordinance of baptism must be ordained ministers of Jesus Christ acting in the authority of the Aaronic Priesthood and under the direction of the living prophet who holds the keys of this holy function on earth. This priesthood, with its keys and powers, was restored to the earth in the new dispensation by John the Baptist. As a heavenly messenger, he ordained Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, stating: "Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which hods the keys of . . . baptism by immersion for the remission of sins." [^104]

Purposes Of Baptism

Man Accepts Name of Christ

Baptism serves several basic purposes. Latter-day scriptures accord with the Bible in declaring that in baptism the faithful "put on Christ." [^105] Nephi taught that the divine plan of salvation requires man to take upon himself "the name of Christ, by baptism." This man must do by following Jesus "down into the water, according to his word." [^106] Joseph Smith also wrote by revelation that those who are "willing to take upon themselves the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end," were to "be received by baptism" into Christ's church. [^107]

This requirement is made of all who desire to obtain eternal life in the kingdom of God. When the Nephites inquired of the Lord by what name they should be called, they were informed:

Have they not read the scriptures, which say ye must take upon you the name of Christ, which is my name? For by this name shall ye be called at the last day; and whoso taketh upon him my name, and endureth to the end, the same shall be saved at the last day. [^108]

A revelation in modern times also explained:

Behold, Jesus Christ is the name which is given of the Father, and there is none other name given whereby man can be saved;

Wherefore, all men must take upon them the name which is given of the Father, for in that name shall they be called at the last day;

Wherefore, if they know not the name by which they are called, they cannot have place in the kingdom of my Father. [^109]

In taking upon themselves the name of Jesus Christ in the covenant of baptism, the obedient enter as sons and daughters into the divine family of the Son of Man. Having observed that his people who had made such a covenant were "called the children of Christ," King Benjamin explained:

. . . therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters.

And under this head ye are made free, and there is no other head whereby ye can be made free. There is no other name given whereby salvation cometh; therefore, I would that ye should take upon you the name of Christ, all you that have entered into the covenant with God that ye should be obedient unto the end of your lives.

And it shall come to pass that whosoever doeth this shall be found at the right hand of God, for he shall know the name by which he is called; for he shall be called by the name of Christ.

And now it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall not take upon him the name of Christ must be called by some other name; therefore, he findeth himself on the left hand of God. [^110]

Man Enters Path to Eternal Life

By accepting Christ in baptism (which must be followed by the baptism of the Holy Spirit), man enters the path that leads ultimately to eternal life. Many years before the earthly ministry of Jesus, Nephi was shown in vision the baptism of the Messiah, so that the people on the Western hemisphere would know the path which leads to salvation. "The gate by which ye should enter," the ancient seer then explained, "is repentance and baptism by water; and then cometh a remission of your sins by fire and by the Holy Ghost; and then are ye in this straight and narrow path which leads to eternal life." [^111] A revelation to Joseph Smith also designates baptism as the "gate" to the path that leads to salvation. [^112] The Prophet spoke of the ultimate blessing to be achieved by baptism when he said: "A man may be saved, after the judgment, in the terrestrial kingdom, or in the telestial kingdom, but he can never see the celestial kingdom of God, without being born of water and of the Spirit." [^113]

Man Receives Remission of Sins

By baptism, man is given access to the mercy of Christ unto the remission of his sins. Baptism therefore is a cleansing ordinance designed to wash away man's transgressions. When Nephi, the grandson of Helaman, baptized his people, the record states that "there was a great remission of sins." [^114] Nephi also ordained assistants in the ministry, so that those who came to them might be baptized "as a witness and a testimony before God, and unto the people, that they had repented and received a remission of their sins." [^115]

Mormon bore strong testimony to the efficacy of baptism as a means of washing away man's sins. [^116] "Baptism is unto repentance," he wrote, "to the fulfilling the commandments unto the remission of sins." [^117] This is also the testimony of many revelations given through Joseph Smith. [^118] The Elders were commanded to teach the people: "Repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, according to the holy commandment, for the remission of sins." [^119]

Man Enters Christ's Church

Having taken upon himself the name of Christ in baptism, the penitent believer may then be confirmed a member of Christ's church "by the laying on of the hands of the elders." [^120] For this reason, Moroni reported that after those who accepted Christ among the Nephites "had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ." [^121]

Man Receives Gift of the Holy Ghost

Finally, a major reason for baptism is that the Holy Ghost will not dwell in an unjustified person—in one to whom the atonement has not been extended to pay the debt of his personal sins. Only by being legally acquitted of his sins through baptism can man be given the Holy Ghost as a permanent gift. Joseph Smith observed: "Baptism is a holy ordinance preparatory to the reception of the Holy Ghost; it is the channel and key by which the Holy Ghost will be administered." [^122] By being baptized in water, man has "the promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost," he declared, ". . . and in no other way is the gift of the Holy Ghost obtained." [^123] Again, he explained:

On the day of the Pentecost, when there was a marvelous display of the gifts [of the Holy Spirit], according to the promise [which Christ gave, as recorded] in Mark, many were pricked in the heart, and said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren what shall we do? Peter said unto them: Repent, and be baptised every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, etc.—Here one of the witnesses [of Christ] says in so many words, repent and be baptised. And we are of the opinion that Peter having been taught by the Lord, and commissioned by the Lord, and endowed by the Lord, would be about as correct a counselor, or ambassador as we or they could inquire of to know the right way to enter into the kingdom.

Again, Luke in his record of the Acts of the Apostles, says: And it came to pass, that while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul having passed through the upper coasts, came to Ephesus; and finding certain disciples, he said unto them, Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? And they said unto him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost. And he said unto them, Unto what then were ye baptised? And they said: unto John's baptism. Then said Paul, John verily baptised with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is on Christ Jesus. When they heard this, they were baptised in the name of the Lord Jesus.—And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied.

From the above witnesses we are informed that baptism was the essential point on which they could receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. It seems from the reasoning above that some sectarian Jew had been baptising like John, but had forgotten to inform them that there was one to follow by the name of Jesus Christ, to baptise with fire and the Holy Ghost:—which showed these converts that their first baptism was illegal, and when they heard this they were gladly baptised, and after hands were laid on them, they received the gifts [of the Spirit], according to promise, and spake with tongues and prophesied. [^124]

Infant Baptism

Since little children are alive in Christ through the power of the atonement, they need not be baptized until they arrive at the age of accountability. The Prophet explained:

The doctrine of baptizing children, or sprinkling them, or they must welter in hell, is a doctrine not true, not supported in Holy Writ, and is not consistent with the character of God. All children are redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and the moment that children leave this world, they are taken to the bosom of Abraham. [^125]

Again he said:

"Do you believe in the baptism of infants?" asks the Presbyterian. No. "Why?" Because it is nowhere written in the Bible. Circumcision is not baptism, neither was baptism instituted in the place of circumcision. Baptism is for remission of sins. Children have no sins. Jesus blessed them and said, "Do what you have seen me do." Children are all made alive in Christ, and those of riper years through faith and repentance. [^126]

In a revelation to Mormon, the Lord was more emphatic. "Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God," He declared. "Behold, I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done away in me." [^127]

On the strength of this revelation, the Nephite prophet declared that "it is solemn mockery before God" to baptize little children. [^128] He declared:

Behold, baptism is unto repentance to the fulfilling the commandments unto the remission of sins.

But little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world; if not so, God is a partial God, and also a changeable God, and a respecter of persons; for how many little children have died without baptism!

Wherefore, if little children could not be saved without baptism, these must have gone to an endless hell.

Behold I say unto you, that he that supposeth that little children need baptism is in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity, for he hath neither faith, hope, nor charity; wherefore, should he be cut off while in the thought, he must go down to hell.

For awful is the wickedness to suppose that God saveth one child because of baptism, and the other must perish because he hath no baptism. . . .

Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful wickedness to deny the pure mercies of God unto them, for they are all alive in him because of his mercy.

And he that saith that little children need baptism denieth the mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption. [^129]

Summary

The preparatory gospel through which man can come unto Jesus Christ and receive a remission of his personal sins is designed to bring each true believer to receive a greater revelation of God. In this divine program, repentance follows faith in the Son of God as the second principle and ordinance of the gospel. When correctly applied, repentance enables man to achieve a meaningful spiritual union with Christ, and for this reason it is a principle of life and power. Fallen man must repent toward God, not merely in order to conform his life to the standard of conduct which the law of God requires, but as a means of obtaining divine mercy, truth, and power by which he can become a new creature in Christ. Repentance, therefore, is a gift of God, both in the program of repentance which God has given to man and in the results which follow the application of that program. True repentance is a divine, rather than a mere human, process. To comply with this divine program, man must (1) recognize Christ, (2) express remorse for sin, (3) rely upon the Son of God, (4) resolve to come unto Jesus, (5) be reconciled to the Redeemer, and (6) be renewed by the truth and power of God. Only in this way can repentance be a meaningful and lasting experience which leads man into the presence of God.

In the plan of life and salvation, baptism is the first fruits of repentance. Thereby men enter into a sacred covenant with Christ that they will bear one another's burdens, comfort those who stand in need of comfort, and stand as witnesses of God before the world. Being administered by immersion by one who has authority from God, baptism is symbolic of physical birth and of the death, burial, and resurrection of the Son of God. Without baptism there can be no salvation, for only in this way can man take upon himself the name of Christ and enter the path which leads to eternal life. By complying with this requirement, man receives a remission of sins and prepares himself to enter the Church of Jesus Christ and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. In this way, man is prepared for the greater revelation of God by which he can be sanctified and enter, eventually, into the presence of God.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Improvement Era, XII (March, 1909), p. 389.
[^2] D&C 121:26.
[^3] MA, II (October, 1835), p. 199.
[^4] TS III (June 15, 1842), p. 823; HC, V, p. 27. See also MA, I (December, 1834), p. 37. Again the Prophet said: "No man can preach the gospel without the Holy Ghost."—HC, II, p. 477.
[^5] See chapter one, the section entitled "The Hope of Glory." See also D&C 93:19-20; 3 Nephi 19:29.
[^6] Since only resurrected beings can be endowed with a fulness of the Father's glory, it may be concluded that the Holy Ghost does not possess the glory of the Father in its eternal fulness. For this reason the Holy Ghost cannot fully glorify resurrected man. Nor is it intended that he should. The scriptures state that man is to be glorified in Christ. But by means of the Holy Ghost man can be brought to the point of receiving the second Comforter and communing directly with Christ, and he can then be glorified directly by and in the Master.
[^7] For a treatment of the mission of the Holy Ghost, see Volume I of this study, the section in chapter nine entitled "The Holy Ghost Speaks for Christ—the Father and the Son"; and the section in chapter ten entitled "The Power of the Holy Ghost."
[^8] HC, V, p. 27. D&C 46:11.
[^9] 3 Nephi 11:32; Ether 5:4; Moses 5:9.
[^10] HC, II, p. 19.
[^11] Ibid., IV, pp. 602-603. (Italics in the original.)
[^12] Ibid.,V, p. 27.
[^13] Ibid., VI, pp. 302-303; 2 Nephi 33:1. Charles W. Penrose spoke of the Holy Ghost as a "power given unto us as an abiding witness, to be a light to our feet and a lamp to our path; as a restraint against sin, to guide us into all truth, to open the vision of the mind, to bring things past to our remembrance, and to make manifest things to come."—JD, XXIII, p. 350.
[^14] Jarom 4.
[^15] D&C 18:18. See also Moses 6:52; Moses 8:24.
[^16] Pratt, Key to Theology, pp. 101-103. Some redundant terms have been deleted from this statement in the later editions of this work. The writer has to a degree followed the later editions.
[^17] 3 Nephi 18:36-37; Moroni 2.
[^18] HC, I, p. 39. See also ibid., VI, p. 250.
[^19] D&C 107:18.
[^20] D&C 84:20-21.
[^21] HC, IV, p. 579. Again the Prophet said: We believe that the Holy Ghost is imparted by the laying on of hands of those in authority."—Ibid., V, p. 27.
[^22] Ibid., IV, p. 555.
[^23] Moroni 2:2.
[^24] Acts 6:1-6.
[^25] Acts 8:5-20.
[^26] Acts 19:1-6.
[^27] Timothy 1:6.
[^28] Hebrews 6:1-2. See HC, IV, p. 359, where Joseph Smith uses this quotation to identify the first principles and ordinances of the gospel.
[^29] D&C 20:41, 43, 68; 39:23. See also D&C 24:9; 33:15; 35:6; 49:14; 52:10. The Prophet pointed out that "the doctrine of laying on of hands for the gift of Holy Ghost was discarded" by the churches of his day.—HC, IV, p. 359.
[^30] TS, I (February, 1840), p. 55.
[^31] D&C 18:11. See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter sixteen entitled "Conditional Benefits Of The Atonement."
[^32] See Mosiah 2:36; 2 Nephi 26:11; Ether 2:15; Genesis 6:3; Moses 8:17; D&C 1:33.
[^33] Lectures on Faith, No. 1.
[^34] Ether 12:27. Nephi wrote: "If it so be that the children of men keep the commandments of God he doth nourish them, and strengthen them, and provide means whereby they can accomplish the thing which he has commanded them."—1 Nephi 17:3.
[^35] Alma 33:22.
[^36] 2 Nephi 25:20. See also Acts 4:12; 2 Nephi 11:6-7.
[^37] D&C 18:23.
[^38] 2 Nephi 11:6.
[^39] 3 Nephi 27:7-9.
[^40] 3 Nephi 27:10.
[^41] Matthew 3:16.
[^42] Mark 1:10; John 1:32.
[^43] Luke 3:22.
[^44] HC, V, pp. 260-261. (Italics in the original.)
[^45] John 16:14-15. See also Volume I of this study, the section in chapter nine entitled "The Holy Ghost Speaks for Christ—the Father and the Son"; and also the section in chapter ten entitled "The Power of the Holy Ghost."
[^46] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter five entitled "God Dwells in Everlasting Burnings."
[^47] D&C 88:29.
[^48] D&C 76:118.
[^49] Moses 6:66.
[^50] 2 Nephi 31:13.
[^51] See Mormon 7:10.
[^52] 3 Nephi 11:35.
[^53] 3 Nephi 12:1.
[^54] D&C 39:6.
[^55] D&C 33:11.
[^56] Helaman 5:13.
[^57] Helaman 5:43-45. It is apparent from the record that these Lamanites had not been baptized before they received this divine endowment. For an explanation of this point, see the section in this chapter entitled "The Holy Ghost And Gift Of The Holy Ghost."
[^58] 3 Nephi 9:20.
[^59] 3 Nephi 19:13-14. On the day of Christ's initial visit to the Nephites, the Book of Mormon states:
[^60] 3 Nephi 19:25.
[^61] 3 Nephi 19:35.
[^62] Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, Utah, 1945), pp. 22-23.
[^63] Juvenile Instructor, XXII, pp. 22-23. (Italics in the original.)
[^64] D&C 130:23.
[^65] HC, IV, p. 555.
[^66] Ibid. For a discussion of this point in relation to man's birth into the kingdom of God, see the section in chapter seven entitled "Birth to Enter the Kingdom of God."
[^67] Ibid. For Peter's statement, see Acts 2:38-39.
[^68] Moroni 10:3-4.
[^69] See 3 Nephi 20:27. The fact that the Holy Ghost would impart power to the gentiles does not necessarily imply that the Spirit would cause them to scatter the people of Israel.
[^70] 1 Nephi 13:12-19.
[^71] 3 Nephi 21:4.
[^72] 3 Nephi 20:27. The influence of this divine spiritual power in the rise of Western civilization to a position of power in the earth will be treated in some detail in volume III of this series.
[^73] For a discussion of the role of the Light of Christ in the program of life and salvation, see chapter ten in volume I of this study.
[^74] Volume III of this study will give documentary evidence to support this statement.
[^75] See Acts 10.
[^76] Helaman 5:43-45. See also the discussion of this incident in the preceding section of this chapter.
[^77] See D&C 18:33-36; 84:45; 88:66. Jesus said ". . . the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life."—John 6:63.
[^78] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter ten entitled "The Light, Life, and Power of the Gospel."
[^79] HC, VI, p. 58.
[^80] Moses 6:52.
[^81] Moses 8:24.
[^82] 1 Nephi 10:17-19.
[^83] Mosiah 3:19. For a discussion of the natural man, see Volume I of this study, the section in chapter seventeen entitled "The Natural Man."
[^84] See D&C 84:33.
[^85] HC, III, p. 380. Brigham Young stated:
[^86] See Moses 6:59. See also Alma 13:12; Moroni 6:4.
[^87] 3 Nephi 27:20. [^81]
[^88] D&C 68:25-27.
[^89] D&C 20:27.
[^90] Moroni 10:25.
[^91] TS, loc. cit., p. 905. (Italics in the original.)
[^92] D&C 18:22. See also D&C 112:29.
[^93] 2 Nephi 9:23.
[^94] Moroni 7:34. See also Ether 4:18.
[^95] 3 Nephi 11:33-35.
[^96] Matthew 3:13-15.
[^97] 2 Nephi 31:6-11.
[^98] TS, op. cit., p. 905. (Italics in the original.)
[^99] Discourse by Joseph Smith, July 23, 1843, manuscript report in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^100] Mosiah 18:13.
[^101] 3 Nephi 11:21-22.
[^102] 3 Nephi 11:25. See D&C 20:73 for a statement of the baptismal prayer in this dispensation.
[^103] JD, VIII, p. 194.
[^104] HC, I, p. 39. For the account of the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood, see Volume I, the section in chapter four entitled "The Aaronic Priesthood Restored."
[^105] Galatians 3:27.
[^106] 2 Nephi 31:13.
[^107] D&C 20:37.
[^108] 3 Nephi 27:5-6.
[^109] D&C 18:23-25.
[^110] Mosiah 5:7-10.
[^111] 2 Nephi 31:17-18.
[^112] D&C 22.
[^113] HC, I, p. 283.
[^114] 3 Nephi 1:23.
[^115] 3 Nephi 7:24-26.
[^116] 3 Nephi 30:2.
[^117] 117. Moroni 8:11.
[^118] 118. See D&C 19:31; 55:2; 68:27; 76:51, 52; 84:27, 74.
[^119] 119. D&C 49:13. See also D&C 33:11.
[^120] 120. D&C 20:41, 43, 68.
[^121] 121. Moroni 6:4.
[^122] 122. HC, III, p. 379.
[^123] 123. Ibid., IV, p. 555. See also D&C 84:74.
[^124] 124. TS, III (September 1, 1842), p. 904. (Italics in the original.) For the account of the day of Pentecost and Paul's ministry at Ephesus, see Acts 2 and 19, respectively.
[^125] 125. HC, IV, p. 554.
[^126] 126. Ibid., V, p. 499.
[^127] 127. Moroni 8:8.
[^128] 128. Moroni 8:9.
[^129] 129. Moroni 8:11-15, 19-20.
