Hyrum L. Andrus, Principles of Perfection ( 1970)

8

The Doctrines of Justification and Sanctification

We know that justification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true;

And we know also, that sanctification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true, to all those who love and serve God with all their mights, minds, and strength.—JOSEPH SMITH.

Joseph Smith taught that in the program of the gospel man is justified and sanctified through the grace and power of Jesus Christ. Justification is concerned, essentially, with acquitting man legally from the demands of broken law; it is accomplished primarily through the program of the preparatory gospel. The teachings which show man how to obtain and retain a remission of personal sins through Christ constitute the doctrine of justification. Sanctification is concerned with cleansing man from the effects of sin and making him pure and holy before God; it is accomplished through the atonement and by the aid of the Holy Spirit which Christ gives to man in the gift of the Holy Ghost. The teachings which show man how to be sanctified from the effects of sin constitute the doctrine of sanctification.

Doctrine of Justification

Justification Defined

The word "justification" comes from the word "justify," which means to show to be just or to vindicate one in his actions—to exonerate him or to declare him guiltless or blameless. It also means to make a person just or right in the eyes of the law. In the plan of the gospel, the word "justify" means to regard and treat man as a just person on the basis that the benefits of Christ's atonement have been extended to him. Justification, therefore, is a state of being justified—either of being vindicated or acquitted in regard to one's actions, or of being forgiven of one's sins. One who is justified either has never transgressed the law of God, or he is in a condition in which the penalties which divine justice prescribes for his transgressions have been paid. If he has not sinned, he is vindicated by his righteousness. If he has transgressed, he can be justified either by paying the debt of sin himself [^1] or by being reconciled to Christ through the atonement, which will absolve him from the demands of eternal law. In the latter event, justification is made possible by the gracious act of Jesus Christ.

Justification by Law

Theoretically, it is possible for man to be justified by law—to meet the challenge of earth's trials and temptations without transgressing any of the laws of God. This no man has done. Lehi could therefore declare: "By the law no flesh is justified; or, by the law men are cut off." [^2]

There was one exception. Jesus lived on earth and "did no sin." [^3] For this reason He could say of His freedom from the claims of the Adversary: "The prince of darkness, who is of this world, cometh, but hath no power over me." [^4]

Justification by Grace

There are many expressions of the doctrine of justification by grace in the plan of life and salvation. Grace is unearned (not necessarily unmerited) divine assistance—a gift for which man does not pay an equivalent price or value. As indicated earlier in this study, some expressions of God's grace are given to man unconditionally or without regard to his personal conduct or actions. [^5] To begin, Christ cushions the power of the first spiritual death so that life on earth is not subject completely to its power. By paying the debt of divine justice for Adam's transgression, Jesus is able to extend the Light of Christ to quicken life on earth [^6] without disregarding the demands of justice. Otherwise no life could have existed on this temporal sphere after the fall of Adam. Mortal life, therefore, is a gift of God. It is made possible by the extension of Christ's grace to man and to other forms of life, and for this reason it is an expression of the doctrine of justification by grace.

By the power of the atonement, all children are "alive in Christ." [^7] They are innocent in that the transgression of Adam cannot legally condemn them; [^8] Satan is checked in his power to tempt them until they begin to be accountable before God; [^9] and they are not held accountable to the law of God until they are eight years of age. [^10] These benefits are given to children by the grace of Jesus Christ, and they are expressions of the doctrine of justification by grace. People who live on earth without the law of God are also justified unconditionally by the grace of Jesus Christ. [^11]

Man's spiritual and moral agency on earth—his opportunity to choose either liberty and eternal life or captivity and spiritual death—is also given as an expression of the grace of Christ, and for this reason it has its basis in the doctrine of justification by grace. Except for the fact that Jesus freely paid the debt of sin and extends His mercy and power to hold in abeyance the demands of divine justice, man would have no alternative to spiritual death and darkness. And without spiritual truth and light, moral excellence would be but an illusive ideal which would fade as a hope within man as the forces of mortal corruption gained ascendancy over his desire to do good. Lehi therefore declared that because men are redeemed from the fall by the power of Christ's atonement, "they have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon, save it be by the punishment of the law at the great and last day, according to the commandments which God hath given." [^12]

The resurrection of all men and the redemption of all men from the power of the first spiritual death, wherein they are brought back into the presence of God to be judged for their deeds in the flesh, are also made possible by the grace and power of Jesus Christ; and they are expressions of the doctrine of justification by grace. [^13] Here also the demands of justice are paid unconditionally, and these actions are performed in behalf of man without regard for his personal merits or goodness.

Though some expressions of Christ's grace are given unconditionally to all men, others are extended only on a conditional basis, as man complies with the requirements of the gospel. One expression of grace which man must merit is that which is given to justify him before the bar of God for his personal sins, when he is offered the plan of life and salvation and is made responsible to its requirements. In the plan of the gospel, the justification of a believing individual results from the action of both Christ and man. In effecting the atonement, Jesus satisfied the demands of divine law; He paid the debt of sin for all men. But before man can obtain the benefits of the atonement and receive forgiveness for his sins, he must reconcile himself to the Redeemer by exercising living faith in Jesus Christ, repenting of his sins, and being baptized according to the Lord's commandment. The Son of God then extends the benefits of His atonement to man to justify him before the eternal bar of the Father. For this reason the Prophet wrote by revelation: "We know that justification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true." [^14]

This is a fundamental doctrine of the Book of Mormon. Lehi exclaimed: "How great the importance to make these things known unto the inhabitants of the earth, that they may know that there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah. [^15] His son Nephi therefore explained:

. . . we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God, for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do. . . .

We talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins. [^16]

Joseph Smith taught that when man accepts the gospel he enters into a state of grace in which he has access to the mercy and power of Christ unto salvation. [^17] Because the atonement frees him from the demands which divine justice would otherwise impose upon him for his sins, the man of faith may then receive the blessings, gifts, and powers of Christ's Holy Spirit to enable him to mature in the path of truth and light which leads to eternal life. So long as he does not transgress the law of God to the extent that he falls from grace, [^18] he may continue to receive these benefits until he is finally perfected in Christ.

A person who is baptized and thereafter transgresses the law may receive some divine reprimand but still not fall completely from grace. Christ controls the extension of His mercy to man, and He is free to handle each person as his case requires. Nevertheless, Jesus is merciful and sympathetic to the weaknesses of man; and so long as man expresses a genuine desire to attain the righteousness of God and is striving conscientiously toward that goal, the Lord extends the blessings of the atonement to free man from the obligations of divine justice and to aid him to grow in the knowledge and power of the Spirit until he overcomes the world.

Justification by Faith

Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is the primary principle and power by which man in his lost and fallen mortal state can reconcile himself to God. When viewed in this light, the doctrine of justification by faith is seen to have an important place in the divine plan of life and salvation. Modern revelation is in accord with the Apostle Paul, who wrote:

Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ:

By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. [^19]

Justification by Righteous Works

Man can only obtain and thereafter retain a condition of justification through Christ by doing the righteous works which the gospel requires. The initial works by which man achieves justification consist of obedience to the program of the preparatory gospel. Thereafter man must dedicate his life to the service of God and man in order to continue in a state of justification through the grace of the Master. [^20]

It should be stressed that without the grace of Christ, man's works would avail him nothing in his quest for salvation. The righteous works of man are not unto justification, but unto reconciliation through the grace of Jesus Christ; and then, man's righteous works must flow as an outward expression of the hope and faith of an enlightened and grateful heart. Works of themselves do not save man. But by hope and faith, coupled with obedience to the ordinances of the gospel and the righteous works of service, man is reconciled to God. Man's righteous works merely register the presence and strength of reconciling qualities within him. [^21]

Justification by the Holy Spirit

Joseph Smith implied that there is a difference between the condition of justification and the process by which justification is achieved in the gospel. The condition of justification is the state of being justified through the atonement of Jesus Christ, while the process of justification is that program by which fallen man may attain the state of justification. The Holy Spirit plays an important role in leading man to obtain the benefits of the atonement so that he can be brought to a condition of justification. In the sense that this is true, the Lord declared to Adam: "By the Spirit ye are justified." [^22]

The doctrine of justification by the Spirit may be divided into four major areas of discussion: First, as an active agent in the process by which man may attain a condition of justification, the Holy Spirit reaches down and invites man to raise his soul to God. [^23] The Lord loves man before man in his fallen state learns to reciprocate God's pure love, or is capable of doing so in obedience to the requirements of heaven. If man expresses a true desire for righteousness and an initial hope in Christ as a result of the uplifting influence of the Spirit of God, he is given strength and encouragement by the Spirit to comply with the principles, ordinances, and laws of the gospel. In this way, the Spirit justifies man, or leads him to be a justified man.

Second, when man yields to the uplifting power of the Holy Spirit so that this divine agent has a meaningful influence in his life, he is free conditionally from the demands of divine justice. Joseph Smith wrote by revelation that when men of faith manifest "by their works that they have received the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins [i.e., unto justification]," they may be baptized. [^24] Technically, this statement indicates that the remission of sins is given to man before baptism, and man's sins are remitted when the Spirit begins to have a significant influence in his life. The Holy Ghost cannot dwell in man before he receives a remission of sins, [^25] because it will not abide in an unjustified person—one to whom the benefits of the atonement have not been extended to remit his sins. [^26] The mercy of Christ must reach down and absolve man from his sins when he begins to express a desire for the righteousness of God and a living hope in Christ. Otherwise the demands of divine justice will prevent him from receiving the gifts and graces of the Spirit which are necessary to bring him to Christ. It follows that man must be justified on a conditional basis by the action of the Spirit before baptism. He must then be baptized to make official and binding by covenant that which God has previously granted to him on a temporary or contingent basis by the action of the Spirit. It is in this sense that baptism is for the remission of sins; and in this way, man is justified by the Spirit.

Receiving a remission of sins before baptism is in accord with the doctrine that the Holy Ghost may be given to a man before he receives the laying on of hands. [^27] At times the Spirit may even manifest its supernatural gifts and powers to the unbaptized. [^28] But should man fail to heed the injunction to be baptized after being enlightened by the Spirit to see the kingdom of God, the preliminary blessings of the Spirit which he has enjoyed will be withdrawn. Apparently the same principle applies when man's sins are remitted on a conditional basis before baptism. Should the Spirit withdraw after absolving man from the demands of divine justice, he would be left in his sins.

These provisions reflect the mercy and justice of God. They are of particular importance when the outward ordinances of the gospel are not immediately available to those who express living faith in Christ, or when there is no authority on earth to perform those saving ordinances. In such cases, God is not bound to execute the demands of justice against those who have not been baptized, and He may even extend the power and gifts of the Holy Ghost in some degree to such individuals as a result of their faith. It was apparently by such provisions that earlier generations of gentiles in America were blessed "unto the pouring out of the Holy Ghost" upon them. [^29] There were also many converts of the restored gospel who received the enlightening manifestations of the Holy Ghost before they were baptized, and they felt an inner peace which evidenced the extension of Christ's mercy unto them. [^30]

The third aspect of the doctrine of justification by the Spirit derives from the fact that the Holy Ghost must ratify all ordinances of the gospel before they are accepted officially in heaven. In this action, the Holy Ghost acts as a Spirit of promise, and for this reason He is called at times the Holy Spirit of promise. [^31] Each ordinance of the gospel carries with it stipulated blessings and promises; and in ratifying an ordinance, the Holy Ghost confirms its associated blessings to the individual. The Father sheds forth the Holy Spirit of promise upon all those who embrace the gospel and are just and true. [^32] Since the Holy Ghost ratifies all ordinances of the gospel, including that of baptism for the remission of sins, it may be said that man is justified by the Spirit at the time the Spirit acts to ratify the ordinance of baptism.

Finally, in the program of the gospel the full and complete acquittal of man from sin is made possible only by the action of the Holy Spirit upon him. Only as man is renewed and changed from his fallen state to a state of righteousness can be fully receive a forgiveness of sins, for until he is thus transformed he must continue to some extent in the ways of the world, which are the ways of spiritual darkness and sin. Although man is justified when he achieves that kind of a spiritual union with Christ which leads him to obey the gospel, he is then in a conditional state of justification where the atonement must act continually to shield him from the demands of eternal law. This is also true in some degree after he has been baptized and until he is fully sanctified and perfected in Christ. Man cannot be completely acquitted until he has overcome all things and can live in perfect accord with the laws of God. This he cannot do until he has been thoroughly cleansed, or sanctified, by the power of the Holy Spirit, and until he has matured sufficiently in the divine attributes and powers of the Spirit to overcome the world. Justification in the final or ultimate sense therefore depends upon the work of the Holy Spirit. For this reason, Nephi declared that man is given a remission of sins "by fire and by the Holy Ghost," [^33] or, as a revelation to the Prophet said, "by baptism and by fire, yea, even the Holy Ghost." [^34]

Retaining a Remission of Sins

The divine doctrine of justification may be divided into two programs: (1) the program by which man may initially obtain a remission of sins, and (2) the program by which he may thereafter retain a remission of sins. It is one thing to obtain a remission of sins as man obeys the ordinances of the gospel. But to receive an official acquittal of sins by baptism does not mean that he is then perfect, or that he will thereafter obey the law of God to perfection. It is therefore necessary for one who is baptized to be able to retain a remission of sins from day to day as he grows in grace and in the knowledge of the truth.

Man's need to retain a remission of sins after accepting the gospel comes from the weakness of his mortal nature in this fallen state. The plan of life and salvation is designed so that man must rely continually in faith upon Jesus Christ until he is perfected in Christ, [^35] and glorified in Christ. [^36] "I give unto men weakness that they may be humble," the Lord explained, "and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me." [^37] Having lamented the weakness of his flesh, Nephi thus qualified: "Nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted. My God hath been my support." [^38]

In order for one who has embraced the gospel to retain a remission of his sins as he struggles upward against the power of the fall and the influence of the world, he must exemplify Christ in his dedication to divine truth. As he applies the blessings of the gospel in his life, he must live outside of himself in love and service to others. The Prophet stated: "To be justified before God we must love one another: we must overcome evil; we must visit the fatherless and the widow in their affliction, and we must keep ourselves unspotted from the world." [^39] In a more elaborate statement, King Benjamin explained to his people the requirements associated with this phase of the gospel, after they had taken upon themselves the name of Christ. He said:

. . . as ye have come to the knowledge of the glory of God, or if ye have known of his goodness and have tasted of his love, and have received a remission of your sins, which causeth such exceeding great joy in your souls, even so I would that ye should remember, and always retain in remembrance, the greatness of God, and your own nothingness, and his goodness and long-suffering towards you, unworthy creatures, and humble yourselves even in the depths of humility, calling on the name of the Lord daily, and standing steadfastly in the faith. . . .

And behold, I say unto you that if ye do this ye shall always rejoice, and be filled with the love of God, and always retain a remission of your sins; and ye shall grow in the knowledge of the glory of him that created you, or in the knowledge of that which is just and true.

And ye will not have a mind to injure one another, but to live peaceably, and to render to every man according to that which is his due.

And ye will not suffer your children that they go hungry, or naked; neither will ye suffer that they transgress the laws of God, and fight and quarrel one with another, and serve the devil, who is the master of sin. . . .

But ye will teach them to walk in the ways of truth and soberness; ye will teach them to love one another, and to serve one another.

And also, ye yourselves will succor those that stand in need of your succor; ye will administer of your substance unto him that standeth in need; and ye will not suffer that the beggar putteth up his petition to you in vain, and turn him out to perish. . . .

And now, for the sake of these things which I have spoken unto you—that is, for the sake of retaining a remission of your sins from day to day, that ye may walk guiltless before God—I would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor, every man according to that which he hath, such as feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick and administering to their relief, both spiritually and temporally, according to their wants. [^40]

The Wayward Believer

Revelations to Joseph Smith indicate that special action should be taken to justify before the bar of God those who accept the gospel and later commit grievous sin. The Saints are to confess their sins to those whom they offend and to the Lord. [^41] But when a person commits a sin that jeopardizes his standing in the Church, that sin should also be confessed before the proper official, or officials, of the Church. As a common "judge in Israel," the bishop is appointed to "sit in judgment upon transgressors." [^42] Other presiding officials are also charged with this responsibility. [^43] Having explored the details of a given transgression, the appropriate officials may determine if the offending person should retain his standing in the Church, or if his repentance justifies the law being waived in his case. In making the necessary adjustment, a bishop cannot tell him his sins are forgiven, unless he is specifically directed to do so by the Spirit of revelation. Instead, the justification of the offending person through the extension of Christ's mercy unto him should be evidenced by the return of the fruits and blessings of the Holy Spirit in his life. Because the Holy Ghost does not dwell in an unjustified person, the presence of the holy Comforter will indicate when the person is again in a state of justification before the Lord.

Doctrine Of Sanctification

Sanctification Defined

Joseph Smith taught that in being sanctified, man is not only forgiven of sin but cleansed from the effects of it so that he is made a pure and holy being. The English word "sanctify" comes from the French word sanctifier, which means to make holy, which in turn derives from the Latin root sanctus, which means holy. It is one thing to forgive man of his sins and thereby acquit him of personal responsibility to divine law, but it is quite another thing to purge and renovate his soul from the effects of those sins and from the influences of this fallen mortal state. The latter tasks are those which are involved in the work of sanctification. Orson Pratt explained:

After you have been immersed . . . in the water [of baptism], and been cleansed and received a remission of your sins, you also have the promise of baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost, by which you are . . . sanctified from all your evil affections, and you feel to love God and that which is just and true, and to hate that which is sinful and evil. Why? Because of this sanctifying, purifying principle that comes upon you, by the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost. [^44]

Orson Hyde defined the state of sanctification as follows:

. . . it means a purification of, or a putting away from, us, as individuals and as a community, everything that is evil, or that is not in accordance with the mind and will of our heavenly Father.

Sanctification has also an eye to our own preservation for usefulness—for executing, carrying forward, and perpetuating the work of the Most High God. [^45]

Of the state of sanctification, Brigham Young said:

. . . it consists in overcoming every sin and bringing all into subjection to the law of Christ. God has placed in us a pure spirit; when this reigns predominant, without let or hindrance, and triumphs over the flesh and rules and governs and controls as the Lord controls the heavens and the earth, this I call the blessing of sanctification. [^46]

In the sense that sanctification means a cleansing of man from sin, all who repent, either in this world or in the spirit world hereafter, will be sanctified and endowed with a degree of glory in the resurrection. A revelation explained that Christ made His atonement "to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness, . . . except those sons of perdition who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him." [^47] But in a more positive sense, sanctification means more than to be cleansed from the effects of sin. It denotes possession of the powers and attributes of God—a condition of being matured in the divine nature of God. Only those who qualify for celestial redemption will be sanctified in this sense. Brigham Young explained that "when we sanctify ourselves to enter into the presence of the Father and of the Son, we will be filled with the same patience that he is filled with." [^48]

Man's Challenge to Be Sanctified

Brigham Young explained that man has been placed on earth "to be sanctified, that every thought, and desire and feeling may be brought into subjection to the will of God." [^49] This is true particularly of those who have embraced the gospel. "We are gathered together to sanctify these bodies," he explained, "to deal, act, transact and do everything we do in the love of God." [^50]

By sanctification, man may be cleansed and purified from (1) the effects of the fallen and corrupt nature that exists upon the earth as a result of Adam's transgression and the subsequent sins of man, and (2) the effects of his personal sins. Regarding the first issue, it is by being sanctified that man is changed from his "carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness." By the action of the Spirit he puts off the natural man, or the man that is natural to the order of life that prevails on this fallen sphere, and becomes a new creature in Christ. [^51] This transformation is necessary regardless of man's personal righteousness or purity. It is a factor separate and apart from the second issue mentioned above. Because Jesus was born of a mortal woman in this temporal state, He had to be sanctified from the effects of this fallen state, even though He had no personal sins. Speaking of His disciples, He said: "For their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth." [^52] Many elements that made up Christ's physical body were mortal elements; and the nature He received from His mother was a mortal nature. He, too, found it necessary to put off the natural man by the action of divine power.

To the degree that man transgresses the laws of God, the task of becoming sanctified is made more difficult, for by sin he loses virtue and becomes contaminated by the baneful influences which are in the world. In addition to being transformed from the fallen mortal state, which is a corrupt state, [^53] he must be cleansed from the effects of his personal sins and have built back into him the substance of virtue and power which he lost by transgression. This can only be done by the action of the Holy Spirit, which is a substance of virtue and truth. By its influence, man can partake of the virtue of Christ and be endowed with the attributes and powers of God. In this way, sinful man can be cleansed and renewed by the gospel, to become a new creature in Christ.

But when man is contaminated by sin and enveloped in the spiritual darkness which follows transgression, it is often hard for him to see how to extricate himself. And even when he is brought to see the way of life and truth, he may find it difficult to follow. The fact that he has lost virtue in some form may evidence a weakness of character that makes it hard for him to apply the principles by which he can regain innocence and acquire spiritual strength. Nevertheless, the pangs of guilt and remorse of conscience which the sinner feels may awaken in him a desire for righteousness which he had not previously possessed. With a new determination to do right, coupled with the mercy and power which God extends to aid those who truly desire to come unto Him, a wayward person can be renewed to a state of purity and power in Christ.

In facing the challenge of sanctification, man should, according to Brigham Young, keep in mind that "the power of God is greater than the power of the wicked one; and unless the Saints sin against light and knowledge, and wilfully neglect their plain and well understood duties, and the Spirit of God is grieved and it ceases to strive with them, the Spirit is sure to prevail over the flesh, and ultimately succeed in sanctifying the tabernacle for a residence in the presence of God." [^54] This fact should give the Saints great consolation and a hope of ultimate victory by complying with the program of the gospel.

Nevertheless, man in mortality cannot be sanctified completely from the effects of sin and of this fallen state. "Some suppose that they can in the flesh be sanctified body and spirit and become so pure that they will never again feel the effects of the power of the adversary of truth," Brigham Young observed. He explained: "Were it possible for a person to attain to this degree of perfection in the flesh, he could not die neither remain in a world where sin predominates." [^55] So long as man has a mortal body, there are corrupt elements within his system which, like centrifugal forces pulling a revolving object away from its center, tend to alienate man from God, so that the struggle of man's mortal probation continues until death. For this reason the Lord said, as He warned the Saints of the possibility of falling from grace: "Yea, and even let those who are sanctified take heed also." [^56] But as man becomes sanctified, he gains the mastery over the flesh and the world; and he may retain that mastery by the continual exercise of his will and of his reliance on Christ, except possibly in instances of slight or inadvertent departures from the path of strict rectitude which arise out of the weaknesses of human nature on earth. [^57] Brigham Young continued: "If we live our religion it will enable us to so overcome sin that it will not reign in our mortal bodies but will become subject to us, and the world and its fulness will become our servant instead of our master." [^58]

Sanctification by the Blood of Christ

The atonement is the foundation of the divine plan by which man may be sanctified, [^59] and Jesus "wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood." [^60] It may be said, therefore, that man is sanctified by the blood of Jesus Christ.

Several scriptures refer to the doctrine of sanctification in this light. God explained to Adam that to enter the kingdom of heaven, his children had to be "cleansed by . . . the blood" of His Only Begotten Son, and in this way they could be "sanctified from all sin." God stressed: "By the blood ye are sanctified." [^61] Jesus taught the Nephites that only those who "washed their garments" in His blood could be saved. [^62] Nephi and Moroni made similar statements. [^63] Of the faithful in ancient days, Alma said: "They . . . were sanctified, and their garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb." [^64] And the Lord warned the wicked in these last days: "My blood shall not cleanse them if they hear me not." [^65]

Sanctification by the Spirit

Though the shedding of Christ's blood in the atonement is the foundation of the divine program by which man may be sanctified, the active agent in the process of sanctification is the power of the Holy Ghost. Having referred to some in ancient times whose "garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb," Alma explained: "Now they, after being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, having their garments made white, being pure and spotless before God, could not look upon sin save it were with abhorrence." [^66]

Alma again expressed this view when he spoke of those who embraced the gospel in his day as "having been sanctified by the Holy Spirit." [^67] Jesus taught the Nephites to receive the gospel that they might "be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost" and thereby "stand spotless" before Him at the last day. [^68] Moroni wrote of those who received the message of redemption in his day: "After they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ." [^69] And in modern times a revelation to Joseph Smith spoke of the faithful as being "sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies." [^70]

To the Father, Jesus prayed in behalf of His disciples: "Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth." [^71] This is the living word, which is truth, or light, or Spirit—the Spirit of Jesus Christ. [^72] Divine truth given to man through the Holy Spirit has an enlightening and sanctifying influence in his life. Of this divine substance, which is called the glory of God—intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth—and which is the Spirit of truth, a revelation said: "Light and truth forsake that evil one [the Adversary]." [^73] "That which is of God is light," another revelation said, as it explained the manifestations of the Spirit of truth to the Saints; "and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." [^74] A sanctified person is filled with the light of the Spirit which abounds within him. [^75] These explanations were made so that the Saints might "know the truth," that they might "chase darkness" from among them, and, by becoming sanctified, that they might return, eventually, to the presence of God. [^76]

Justification Compared with Sanctification

The doctrine of justification is identified with the preparatory gospel, [^77] by which man is made ready to receive "a greater revelation of God." [^78] Since justification is essentially a preparatory action and state, it alone cannot bring man to the ultimate goal of salvation. Unless the work of justification is associated with the cleansing, renewing, and maturing powers of the Holy Spirit—powers that go beyond the enlightening influences by which a man of faith may be born to see the kingdom of God—it is useless in the final analysis. Man cannot be redeemed from his fallen state to celestial glory by the program of justification alone.

Orson Pratt, in explaining the relationship between the divine program by which man may receive a remission of personal sins and the means by which he can be sanctified from the effects of sin, stated:

The Holy Spirit dwells not in unholy temples; that is, it dwells not there, to sanctify, teach, and comfort the mind, but merely has an existence in such temples, to carry on the common operations of nature. To receive the Holy Spirit, so as to have the mind benefited, requires a preparation both of the body and mind. The body and mind of a natural man [i.e., a man who is conditioned to the world and its fallen state], have both been defiled by sin; consequently, both are unholy, impure, and altogether unprepared for the indwelling of the holy Comforter. Now there is but one way for them to be properly prepared for the residence of this pure Spirit. This one way is of divine origin, and consists of three important steps; . . . namely, Faith, Repentance, and Water Baptism. By these three steps, taken sincerely and properly, the sinner is forgiven of all past sins, and both mind and body are prepared for the Baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost.

Water Baptism is only a preparatory cleansing of the believing penitent; it is only a condition of a cleansing from sin [i.e., a condition of justification]; whereas, the Baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost cleanses more thoroughly, by renewing the inner man, and by purifying the affections, desires, and thoughts which have long been habituated in the impure ways of sin. Without the aid of the Holy Ghost, a person who has long been accustomed to love sin, and whose affections and desires have long run with delight in the degraded channel of vice, would have but very little power to change his mind, at once, from its habituated course, and to walk in newness of life. Though his sins may have been cleansed away, yet so great is the force of habit, that he would, without being renewed by the Holy Ghost, be easily overcome, and contaminated again with sin. Hence, it is infinitely important that the affections and desires should be, in a measure, changed and renewed, so as to cause him to hate that which he before loved, and to love that which he before hated. To thus renew the mind of man is the work of the Holy Ghost. [^79]

Sanctification by Grace

Sanctification, like justification, comes by the grace of God. Having written by revelation sanctioning the doctrine of justification by grace, Joseph Smith declared: "We know also, that sanctification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true, to all those who love and serve God with all their mights, minds, and strength." [^80] Man cannot sanctify himself. He is powerless by his own means to transform himself from his fallen and carnal state on earth to that state of righteousness which leads to eternal life. He cannot endow himself with the divine intelligence and power which are required to achieve full spiritual union with God. Nor does he earn that which he receives from Christ. A fallen being has little with which to purchase the divine endowments by which his renewal to a state of glory is made possible.

The basic means of receiving sanctifying truth and power is through the gift of the Holy Ghost. As indicated, this is a gift. But sanctification is a process, not a state to be achieved immediately upon reception of this gift. Having entered by faith and obedience into a state of grace, man must mature in the blessings and gifts of the Holy Spirit until he is glorified in Christ at the time of his resurrection. "Ye are little children and ye cannot bear all things now," a revelation explained to the Saints; "ye must grow in grace and in the knowledge of the truth." [^81] King Benjamin expressed the same point as he spoke to his people of their need to continue in the path of eternal life. "If ye do this," he declared, "ye shall always rejoice, and be filled with the love of God, and always retain a remission of your sins; and ye shall grow in the knowledge of the glory of him that created you, or in the knowledge of that which is just and true." [^82]

Because man must grow in the gifts and blessings of God after he receives the gospel, a revelation promised an early convert "grace and assurance" within the divine plan of life and salvation if he would continue faithful. [^83] Joseph Smith referred with approval to the declaration of the Apostle Peter that "grace and peace" are multiplied—given more abundantly or in manifold proportions—to the saints "through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord." [^84] Concerning the means by which the Saints could acquire such knowledge, a revelation said: "Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the laws of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand." [^85] Because he understood the relationship between man's efforts and the grace of God in the salvation of those who accept the gospel, Jacob explained, when some Nephites acquired power by faith to do great miracles: "Nevertheless, the Lord God showeth us our weaknesses that we may know that it is by his grace, and his great condescension unto the children of men, that we have power to do these things." [^86] By continuing "from grace to grace," Jesus acquired a fulness of the Father's glory, [^87] and man must do the same. [^88] In the words of the Prophet, man must go "from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation," until he has attained to the resurrection of the dead and is "able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory, as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power." [^89]

Moroni completed the account of the Nephites and their religious teachings with the admonition that man must recognize and acquire the grace of God if he is to obtain salvation. Before sealing up the ancient record, he declared:

. . . I would exhort you that ye would come unto Christ, and lay hold upon every good gift, and touch not the evil gift, nor the unclean thing. . . .

Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ; and if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise deny the power of God.

And again, if ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that ye become holy, without spot. [^90]

Sanctification by Works of Righteousness

Though man is sanctified by the grace of God, the Prophet wrote by revelation that grace to this end is given only to those who "love and serve God with all their mights, minds, and strength." [^91] This means that if man is to be sanctified he must commit his life and interests completely to Christ. He may be sanctified only by service in doing the will of God. A revelation declared that those who magnify their "calling" are "sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies." [^92]

In the sense that man must serve God in righteousness in order to receive the sanctifying powers of the Spirit, it may be said that he is sanctified by his works. Having declared that if man's eye is "single" to the glory of God his whole body will be filled with the light of the Spirit, a revelation admonished the Saints: "Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God." [^93] Another revelation explained that for man to obtain the powers and attributes of God's glory he must receive "grace for grace." [^94] This means that he can receive grace (i.e., the divine truth, powers, and attributes of the Spirit) from God only as he gives grace to others.

Sanctification comes to those who reconcile themselves to Christ. It is the Lord's purpose to sanctify man through the gospel, [^95] and in Him is centered the power to do so. But to be sanctified, man must perform, in faith and love, the works of reconciliation and service which the law of God requires. To the degree that man does these things, he may be sanctified. Mormon wrote of a group of Nephite saints: "They did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God." [^96] Having obeyed the gospel, man is sanctified in degree commensurate with his yielding his heart to God.

God's Methods of Sanctifying Man

A revelation to Joseph Smith indicates that God uses various methods in His effort to sanctify man so that man can be endowed with celestial glory in the resurrection. But man must respond to the uplifting hand of God and yield obedience to the law of God. "They who are not sanctified through the law which I have given unto you, even the law of Christ," the revelation declares, "must inherit another kingdom, even that of a terrestrial kingdom, or that of a telestial kingdom." [^97] The revelation then explains:

. . . that which is governed by law is also preserved by law and perfected and sanctified by the same.

That which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment. Therefore, they must remain filthy still. [^98]

God first extends His law to man, and by obeying that law man may receive a remission of his sins and the power of the Holy Spirit by which he may be sanctified. Obedience to law thus leads man to a state of sanctification; and without obedience man cannot be sanctified. Basing his statement on the testimony of scripture, Brigham Young declared: "The people must be sanctified by law, they must live according to that law; and they must be justified, purified, and sanctified in order to get into the kingdom of heaven, that is, the highest glory." [^99]

Since fallen man does not obey the law of God to perfection, the Lord next extends mercy to those who seek for His righteousness, so that by mercy they may receive the blessings of the Holy Spirit and be sanctified. By being sanctified by the Spirit, man may then more fully keep the law of God. In referring to the way the gifts of the Holy Spirit are received, a revelation said: "Verily I say unto you, they are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do." [^100] Not totally by law, but by mercy also, the blessings of the Spirit are given to man.

Third, if man rejects mercy, God has no alternative but to exercise justice upon him to bring him to an awareness of his responsibility to divine law. But in executing divine justice, God stands ready to extend mercy and power to repentant man, to sanctify him from sin and redeem him to a state of righteousness.

God's dealings with the people who perished in the flood in the days of Noah is an example of this policy. The Lord explained to the patriarch Enoch that Christ would pay the debt of their sins if they would repent when the message of redemption was given to them in the spirit world, after the crucifixion, but until that time they would be in torment. Enoch was then shown that after the resurrection of Christ "as many of the spirits as were in prison came forth, and stood on the right hand of God." [^101] But when God is required to exercise justice in order to bring man to repentance, man's waywardness may evidence a lack of dedication to truth and righteousness on his part. When this is the case, man cannot be sanctified to the point that he can receive the full glory and power of celestial existence. Those who perished in the flood are, in general, redeemed only to a terrestrial state of glory in the resurrection. [^102]

Finally, the word "judgment" is used in the above statement to portray a method by which God seeks to sanctify man. Judgment denotes a more harsh and exacting action against a wayward person than does justice. Justice may be tempered with mercy, but judgment is more demanding and enduring in its prescribed penalties. In referring to the doctrine of eternal judgment, Joseph Smith explained that it is possible for man to sin against truth and light to the extent that he cannot receive mercy even though he should repent. In such cases, man himself must pay the debt of justice for his sins, unmitigated by mercy, before he can be forgiven and sanctified to the degree that he can attain a kingdom of glory in the resurrection.

Murderers in an enlightened Christian society are in this class. "If the ministers of religion had a proper understanding of the doctrine of eternal judgment, they would not be found attending the man who forfeited his life to the injured laws of his country, by shedding innocent blood," the Prophet explained; "for such characters cannot be forgiven, until they have paid the last farthing." Murderers are outside of the pale of mercy. "The prayers of all the ministers in the world can never close the gates of hell against a murderer," [^103] the latter-day Seer concluded.

Neither is mercy extended to the man who falls from the sanctified state in which he has made sure his calling and election to celestial glory. He must suffer the judgments of God unmitigated by mercy before he can inherit the blessings that have been sealed upon his head. He cannot receive final sanctification and glorification except by judgment. [^104]

At times the sanctifying process requires that the Saints "be chastened and tried, even as Abraham, who was commanded to offer up his only son." The Lord explained: "For all those who will not endure chastening, but deny me, cannot be sanctified." [^105] Another revelation declared of the latter-day program:

Zion shall be redeemed, although she is chastened for a little season. . . .

Therefore, let your hearts be comforted; for all things shall work together for good to them that walk uprightly, and to the sanctification of the church.

For I will raise up unto myself a pure people, that will serve me in righteousness. [^106]

To become fully sanctified, the Saints are required to apply every aspect of the law of God in their lives so that they can be reconciled in every way to Christ and receive the full powers of the Holy Spirit. Not only must their hearts be dedicated to God, but the institutions of society among them must be patterned after the law of heaven. Only then can the Spirit and power of the gospel be revealed in their fulness among the people of God. Having given the Saints some instructions concerning the divine order which they are to establish and uphold, a revelation said:

And thus ye shall become instructed in the law of my church, and be sanctified by that which ye have received. . . .

That inasmuch as ye do this, glory shall be added to the kingdom which ye have received. Inasmuch as ye do it not, it shall be taken, even that which ye have received. [^107]

Thus God and man work together in the divine process of sanctifying man, and for this reason the Saints were admonished:

Prepare ye, prepare ye, O my people; sanctify yourselves; gather ye together, O ye people of my church. . . .

Go ye out from Babylon. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord.

Call your solemn assemblies, and speak often one to another. And let every man call upon the name of the Lord. [^108]

Sacrament of the Lord's Supper

The sacrament of the Lord's supper is an essential part of the divine program by which man can be justified and sanctified before God. As He introduced this sacred rite among the Nephites, Jesus instructed: "Behold there shall one be ordained among you, and to him will I give power that he shall break bread and bless it and give it unto the people of my church, unto all those who shall believe and be baptized in my name." "This shall ye do in remembrance of my body, which I have shown unto you," He continued. "And it shall be a testimony unto the Father that ye do always remember me." Finally, He promised: "And if ye do always remember me ye shall have my Spirit to be with you." [^109] This Spirit is the power of the Holy Ghost which Christ gives to man in the gospel in order to sanctify him before God. [^110]

The sacramental prayer which Jesus gave the Nephites to bless the bread incorporates the above ideas into this sacred ritual. It states:

O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it; that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him, and keep his commandments which he hath given them, that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. [^111]

Having administered this part of the sacrament to the Nephites, Jesus commanded His disciples to take wine and drink, and to give it to the multitude. He then said: "This is fulfilling my commandments, and this doth witness unto the Father that ye are willing to do that which I have commanded you." Continuing, He instructed: "This shall ye always do to those who repent and are baptized in my name; and ye shall do it in remembrance of my blood, which I have shed for you, that ye may witness unto the Father that ye do always remember me." He then promised again: "And if ye do always remember me ye shall have my Spirit to be with you." [^112]

The sacramental prayer which Jesus gave the Nephites to bless the wine, like that which He gave to bless the bread, incorporates the above ideas into this sacred ritual. It states:

O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee, in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this wine to the souls of all those who drink of it, that they may do it in remembrance of the blood of thy Son, which was shed for them; that they may witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they do always remember him, that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. [^113]

The mere act of partaking of the sacrament does not bring the results which Jesus promised, for He stated specifically that if those who were baptized would always "remember" Him [^114] and partake of the sacred emblems worthily they would have His Spirit—the power of the Holy Ghost—to be with them. Though the outward ritual was to be observed, the blessings of the Holy Spirit were to be given only to those who lived in true remembrance of Christ. By being continually in a state of justification through the power of His atonement, they could partake day by day of the blessings of His Holy Spirit.

Later when Jesus again administered the sacrament to the Nephites, He expressed in Hebraic symbolism the spiritual blessings which were to be given to those who partook of the sacrament worthily. "He that eateth this bread eateth of my body to his soul," He explained; "and he that drinketh of this wine drinketh of my blood to his soul; and his soul shall never hunger nor thirst, but shall be filled." [^115]

The sacrament of the Lord's supper and the first principles and ordinances of the gospel constitute the basic program of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Having administered the sacrament to the Nephites, Jesus explained: "And if ye do always do these things blessed are ye, for ye are built upon my rock." [^116] The record then states that "when the multitude had all eaten and drunk, behold, they were filled with the Spirit." [^117]

Final Purpose of Sanctification

The final purpose of the gospel is to sanctify man so that he can be crowned with celestial glory in the resurrection. Having endowed His disciples on the Western hemisphere with some of His glory, which was to them a sanctifying agent, Jesus prayed: "Father, I thank thee that thou hast purified those whom I have chosen, because of their faith, and I pray for them, and also for them who shall believe on their words, that they may be purified in me, through faith on their words, even as they are purified in me." [^118] The end-purpose of their sanctification, Jesus then observed, was that He might "be glorified in them." [^119]

The same objective was set for the Saints in the latter days. A revelation declared: "Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power." [^120] Of the final goal to be achieved, another revelation said: "Unto him that repenteth and sanctifieth himself before the Lord shall be given eternal life." [^121] Only by being sanctified can man abide in the presence of God. Having admonished the Saints to sanctify themselves so that their minds were "single to God," the Prophet wrote by revelation: "The days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you." [^122]

Evidences Of A Sanctified Life

Several characteristics distinguish a sanctified man: First, he has spiritually been born of God. There has been a mighty change wrought in his heart, for he is quickened by the Spirit in the inner man, and he is continuing to travel the path which leads to eternal life or glory. [^123] Second, his eye is single to the glory of God; he yields his heart to the Lord. [^124] Third, he feels continually a nearness of the Holy Spirit and enjoys its sacred fruits, gifts, and blessings in his life. [^125] Fourth, by means of the Spirit, he loves and serves God with all his heart, might, mind, and strength, living outside himself in genuine interest for the welfare of his fellow men. [^126] Finally, he has lost the desire for sin, and he cannot look upon that which is perverse except with abhorrence. [^127] He has achieved such union spiritually with God that he views things as God sees them, and the light and truth of the Spirit dictate his every action. Brigham Young explained: "When through the Gospel, the spirit in man has so subdued the flesh that he can live without willful transgression, the Spirit of God unites with his spirit, they become congenial companions, and the mind and will of the Creator is thus transmitted to the creature." [^128]

Since the elements of mortal corruption still exist in some measure in a sanctified person's mortal body and exert a baneful influence upon him, his whole being which is made sensitive to impure influences by the refining power of the Spirit may feel keenly the corruption of the flesh. With Nephi he may mourn: "O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh." [^129] Nevertheless, Brigham Young explained, he takes "a firmer hold on the enduring substance behind the veil, drawing from the depths of that eternal Fountain of Light sparkling gems of intelligence which surround [him] . . . with a halo of immortal wisdom." [^130] In patience, he possesses his soul, and he waits earnestly for his corrupt mortal body to be raised to an incorrupt state endowed with a fulness of the Spirit which he has come to know and to esteem above all else on earth.

Summary

The programs of justification and sanctification are prominent features in the plan of the gospel. Justification is concerned, primarily, with the legal acquittal of man from the demands of broken law, and sanctification has to do with the purification of man from the effects of sin and the fallen mortal state. There are several aspects of the doctrine of justification: justification by law, justification by grace, justification by faith, justification by man's righteous works, and justification by the Holy Spirit. By abiding continually in Christ, man can retain a remission of his sins from day to day—live day by day in a state of justification. But one who commits serious transgressions of the law of God after receiving the gospel must have his acts judged by a bishop or another appropriate official of the Church to see if he is worthy by repentance to retain his standing among the Saints. Having repented of his sins and made the required adjustment with the Church, the offending person may know that the Lord has forgiven him by the return of the blessings and manifestations of the Spirit.

Man is sanctified by the power of the Holy Ghost, by being transformed from his fallen state to a state of righteousness and being cleansed from the effects of sin. As with justification, there are several aspects of the doctrine of sanctification: sanctification by the blood of Christ, sanctification by the Spirit, sanctification by grace, and sanctification by man's righteous works. Having given man the law by which he can be sanctified, God extends mercy to man to enable him to become sanctified. The Lord may also administer justice and judgment upon man, if they are necessary, to bring man to realize his responsibility to divine law that he may be sanctified. When man responds to the law of God and begins to become sanctified, he is given the manifestations of the Holy Spirit in greater abundance, making the sanctifying process in some respects a cyclical one. The sacrament of the Lord's supper plays a significant role in the programs of justification and sanctification. When man is sanctified, he is a new creature in Christ, having been purified by the power of the Holy Ghost and endowed with its enlightening and enlivening powers.

Footnotes

Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ, your Lord, your God, and your Redeemer, whose word is quick and powerful.

For, behold, I say unto you, that it mattereth not what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that ye do it with an eye single to my glory—remembering unto the Father my body which was laid down for you, and my blood which was shed for the remission of your sins.

Wherefore, a commandment I give unto you, that ye shall not purchase wine neither strong drink of your enemies;

Wherefore, you shall partake of none except it is made new among you; yea, in this my Father's kingdom which shall be built up on the earth.—D&C 27:1-4.

On the basis of this revelation, the Church later changed the practice of using wine in the sacrament to using water.

---
Notas:
[^1] See, for example, D&C 10:70; 11:28; 12:9; 34:2; 39:2; 45:7.
[^2] See the section in chapter seven entitled "Purpose of Rebirth." Of the gospel, John Taylor said: "It is the principle that brings life and immortality to light."—JD, XXI, p. 94.
[^3] See Volume I of this study, the sections in chapter eight entitled "Eternal Life" and "Christ As Our God."
[^4] I. R., John 1:4, 17-18.
[^5] 2 Nephi 25:27.
[^6] MA, I (December, 1834), p. 38. The writer stated: "Let the reader compare Matthew 28:19, 20, with Mark 16:15, 16, 17, 18—Luke 24:45, 46, 47, 48, with the second chapter of the acts of the apostles and he will be enabled to see and understand the apostolic commission without either priest or commentator."—Ibid.
[^7] See John 15.
[^8] HC, IV, p. 478.
[^9] John 15:1-2.
[^10] D&C 46:28.
[^11] JD, VII, p. 138.
[^12] D&C 46:11, 16. See, for example, 1 Corinthians 12:4-6.
[^13] JD, XXI, pp. 75-76.
[^14] HC, III, p. 380. See also JD, XI, p. 10; XII, p. 270.
[^15] D&C 109:15. The Prophet prayed on behalf of a man and his wife who desired to do right: "'May they have the light of eternal truth continually springing up in them like a well of living water; may . . . their faith increase from day to day until they shall have power to lay hold on the blessings of God and the gifts of the Spirit until they are satisfied."—HC, VI, p. 265.
[^16] JD, III, p. 192.
[^17] HC, III, p. 389.
[^18] D&C 8:2-3.
[^19] HC, III, p. 381.
[^20] D&C 85:6.
[^21] Enos 1:10.
[^22] D&C 9:8-9.
[^23] HC, II, p. 392.
[^24] D&C 50:23-24.
[^25] D&C 11:12. For a further treatment of this subject, see Volume I of this study, the section in chapter ten entitled "Christ's Holy Spirit Leads Man Upward to God."
[^26] D&C 11:13-14.
[^27] Mosiah 4:3.
[^28] Wilford Woodruff, Leaves From My Journal (Salt Lake City, 1881), pp. 86-87.
[^29] HC, III, p. 381.
[^30] Ibid., VI, pp. 50-51.
[^31] See D&C 93:19-20 in conjunction with verses 11 through 17.
[^32] D&C 93:26-28.
[^33] Lectures on Faith, No. 5. Though in this lecture the Prophet does not speak specifically of that divine personage who is called the Holy Spirit, it is excellent on the purpose of the gospel.
[^34] Ibid.
[^35] D&C 11:12-13; 98:12.
[^36] D&C 63:23.
[^37] D&C 121:26.
[^38] D&C 76:7-10.
[^39] JD, XXIII, p. 351.
[^40] 3 Nephi 18:19-20.
[^41] Mormon 9:21. Continuing, Moroni admonished: "Be wise in the days of your probation; strip yourselves of all uncleanness; ask not, that ye may consume it on your lusts, but ask with a firmness unshaken, that ye will yield to no temptation, but that ye will serve the true and living God."—Mormon 9:28.
[^42] D&C 88:63-65.
[^43] See Galatians 5:22.
[^44] 2 Nephi 26:30; Alma 7:24; Ether 12:28-37; Moroni 7:44-47; 10:20-21.
[^45] D&C 88:3-4.
[^46] Moses 6:61.
[^47] Exodus 33:18-23.
[^48] See Ether 12:34; Moroni 7:47.
[^49] Moroni 7:46-47.
[^50] Ether 12:34.
[^51] Moroni 8:44-45.
[^52] 1 Nephi 11:22-23.
[^53] 2 Nephi 1:15.
[^54] Moroni 8:25.
[^55] Mosiah 3:19.
[^56] Moroni 7:48.
[^57] Moroni 8:25.
[^58] See 1 Nephi 8; 11:22-25.
[^59] Alma 13:28.
[^60] HC, III, p. 304. He observed: "It is one evidence that men are unacquainted with the principles of godliness to behold the contraction of affectionate feelings and lack of charity in the world."—Ibid., V, p. 24.
[^61] Ibid., IV, p. 227.
[^62] Ibid., V, p. 498.
[^63] Ibid., p. 517.
[^64] Ibid., IV, p. 606.
[^65] Ibid., V, p. 517.
[^66] Alma 7:14. See also Mosiah 5:15; Ether 12:4.
[^67] James 2:18.
[^68] D&C 93:12-13, 19-20. See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter eight entitled "Service the Pathway to Eternal Life."
[^69] HC, V, pp. 27-28.
[^70] Ibid., III, p. 30.
[^71] Masterful Discourses of Orson Pratt, ed. N. B. Lundwall (Salt Lake City, nd), pp. 539-540.
[^72] D&C 46:13-27; Moroni 10:9-17. The writer has combined the statements in these two sources in making the above list.
[^73] 2 Nephi 2:4.
[^74] D&C 76:22-23.
[^75] D&C 46:14.
[^76] HC, III, p. 392.
[^77] Ibid., V, p. 31.
[^78] Ibid., III, p. 379. See also ibid., IV, pp. 485-486.
[^79] Ibid., IV, p. 607.
[^80] Ibid., V, pp. 30-31. Writing to the brethren in Missouri, the Prophet said:
[^81] Ibid., III, p. 392.
[^82] Ibid., V, pp. 31-32.
[^83] D&C 46:11.
[^84] HC, V, p. 28.
[^85] Moroni 10:8.
[^86] D&C 46:8-9. "To some is given one [gift], and to some another," the revelation declared, "that all may be profited thereby."—D&C 46:12.
[^87] See 1 Corinthians 12:4-11.
[^88] HC, V, pp. 29-30.
[^89] Ibid., p. 28.
[^90] D&C 46:28, 30, 33.
[^91] HC, V, p. 218.
[^92] Masterful Discourses of Orson Pratt, pp. 539-540.
[^93] Mormon 9:7-8, 20.
[^94] Moroni 10:24-26.
[^95] Moroni 7:38.
[^96] Moroni 10:7.
[^97] HC, V, pp. 218-219.
[^98] See again D&C 46:14.
[^99] D&C 42:48-52.
[^100] D&C 42:43.
[^101] Journal History, August 21, 1834.
[^102] D&C 63:64.
[^103] HC, V, pp. 30-31.
[^104] Ibid., p. 258.
[^105] D&C 101:4-5. In the divine patriarchal order, Abraham had but one son as heir in the flesh.
[^106] D&C 100:13, 15-16.
[^107] D&C 43:9-10. The nature of the social, economic, and political institutions of the kingdom of God will be discussed in volume III of this study.
[^108] D&C 133:4-6.
[^109] 3 Nephi 18:5-7.
[^110] For a discussion on this subject, see Volume I of this study, the section in chapter ten entitled "The Power of the Holy Ghost."
[^111] Moroni 4:3; D&C 20:77.
[^112] 3 Nephi 18:8-11.
[^113] Moroni 5:2; D&C 20:79. When Joseph Smith went to procure wine for a sacrament meeting in which he planned to confirm his wife and the wife of Newel Knight members of the Church, he was met by a heavenly messenger, who said:
[^114] 3 Nephi 18:7, 11; Moroni 4:3; 5:2.
[^115] 3 Nephi 20:8.
[^116] 3 Nephi 18:12.
[^117] 3 Nephi 20:9.
[^118] 3 Nephi 19:28.
[^119] 3 Nephi 19:29.
[^120] D&C 43:16.
[^121] D&C 133:62.
[^122] D&C 88:68.
[^123] Mosiah 27:24-28; Alma 5:6-14; D&C 5:16; Moses 6:59-62.
[^124] D&C 88:66-68; Helaman 3:35.
[^125] Mosiah 18:10, 13; Alma 34:17-27; D&C 20:77-79.
[^126] Mosiah 18:8-10.
[^127] Alma 13:11-12; HC, II, p. 8.
[^128] JD, IX, pp. 287-288.
[^129] 2 Nephi 4:17.
[^130] 130. JD, IX, p. 288.
