Hyrum L. Andrus, Principles of Perfection ( 1970)

10

The Law of the Gospel

My beloved brethren, after ye have gotten into this straight and narrow path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for ye have not come thus far save it were by the word of Christ with unshaken faith in him, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save.

Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men.—NEPHI.

Joseph Smith taught the Saints that the gospel is not only a means of receiving divine truth and power, but a program of right action and conduct. As he spoke of this phase of the plan of life and salvation, the Prophet cited the admonition of Peter to add to one's faith "virtue, knowledge, temperence, patience, godliness, [and] brotherly kindness." "If these things be in you, and abound," he quoted the ancient apostle, "they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ." [^1] Only by growing in the knowledge of Christ, as that knowledge is given to man through the Spirit and as he applies the above admonition, can man be saved.

Sermon On The Mount

Gospel Context of the Sermon

Latter-day revelation makes it plain that Christ's teachings in the Sermon on the Mount are set in the context of the gospel; and they reveal the standard of conduct which is required of those who embrace the plan of life and salvation. When Jesus delivered the Sermon on the Mount to the Nephites, He gave important clarifications to this effect. By revelation, Joseph Smith also made revisions in Matthew's account of that classic statement which give significant insight into the meaning of this greatest of all gospel sermons.

Before Jesus delivered the Sermon on the Mount to the Nephites, He taught them that the basic program of the gospel is the "rock" upon which all things must be built in His church. [^2] According to Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible, Christ also prefaced His sermon to the Jews with a statement of the basic program of the gospel. [^3] When the Lord's discourse is seen in this context, two things are apparent: first, the teachings in the sermon are designed to aid those who receive the gospel to develop the attributes and powers of the Holy Spirit in their lives; [^4] second, the full standard and ideal of Christian conduct which is set forth in that sermon can be achieved successfully only when man is strengthened and uplifted in his righteous desires by the enlightening and sanctifying power of the Spirit as it is given to him through the gospel. Not only did Jesus teach that man should be perfect as the Father is perfect, [^5] but He opened up the channels of divine truth and power by which that standard of perfection can be made possible. [^6] Though the Sermon on the Mount contains many universal truths which may serve as ideals for all men, it is clear from its gospel context that it pertains primarily to those who accept Christ in baptism. More than mere ideals, the teachings in this sermon must become a practical standard of conduct for those who embrace the gospel, if they are to attain salvation. "Verily I say unto you," Jesus said to the Nephites, "that except ye shall keep my commandments, which I have commanded you at this time, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven." [^7]

Place of Beatitudes in the Gospel

Both the Nephite version of the beatitudes and Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of Matthew's account contain preliminary statements, or beatitudes, which the account in the New Testament does not give. These preliminary beatitudes are the foundation of all the other beatitudes, and they make clear the gospel context in which the remaining beatitudes were meant to be understood. Having taught the Nephites the gospel, [^8] Jesus said concerning His ordained disciples, or Apostles:

Blessed are ye if ye shall give heed unto the words of these twelve whom I have chosen from among you to minister unto you, and to be your servants; and unto them I have given power that they may baptize you with water; and after that ye are baptized with water, behold, I will baptize you with fire and with the Holy Ghost; therefore blessed are ye if ye shall believe in me and be baptized, after that ye have seen me and know that I am.

And again, more blessed are they who shall believe in your words because that ye shall testify that ye have seen me, and that ye know that I am. Yea, blessed are they who shall believe in your words, and come down into the depths of humility and be baptized, for they shall be visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and shall receive a remission of their sins. [^9]

After these introductory beatitudes, Christ's sermon to the Nephites seems to be worded in such a way that each subsequent beatitude becomes an extension of these initial beatitudes, thereby showing the several qualities which man may acquire by applying the gospel in his life.

In the first subordinate beatitude which Jesus gave, He said: "Yea, blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." [^10] The introductory term "yea" is a transitional word which ties this beatitude to Christ's previous statement regarding the blessedness of those who are baptized and receive the Holy Ghost, thus expanding the meaning of that prior statement to mean that they who receive the gospel and utilize its divine truth and power to become poor in spirit (poor in the spirit of the world or of the unregenerated man) shall inherit the kingdom of heaven by coming unto Him. The stipulation that man must come unto Jesus confirms the assertion that he must embrace the gospel as the Master explained it to the Nephites if he is to attain the kingdom of heaven. Being poor in the spirit of the world then leads to being rich in the spirit and power of the gospel. Brigham Young explained that the poor in spirit are those who divest themselves of the characteristics of the world—pride, arrogance, vanity, etc.—so that they feel their dependence upon Christ and realize that only in and through Him can they acquire that which leads to strength and salvation. He said:

Jesus had no other meaning than simply, blessed are they who have the light of revelation to understand the providences of God, and to know Him and themselves.

The rich that He and other writers have referred to . . . are those who trust in the riches of this world, and forget their God. . . .

The Lord loves those who trust in Him, who feel their dependence upon Him, and feel and understand their own weakness and inability, who are thankful for their organization, and have full confidence in the providences of the Lord, trusting in His mercy and goodness to bring them off conquerors. [^11]

In the second subordinate beatitude, Jesus said: "And again, blessed are all they that mourn, for they shall be comforted." [^12] The introductory expression "and again" ties this beatitude to the previous statements of the Master and thereby establishes its proper gospel framework. Given this context, the beatitude assumes that little comfort can be extended to the natural man who mourns without an enlightened hope in Christ. But in referring to those who have received the gospel and are brought to mourn, Jesus declared that they shall be comforted. This is one of the functions of the Holy Ghost which man receives in the gospel; and for this reason the Holy Ghost is called the Comforter. At the funeral services of Lorenzo D. Barnes, the Prophet exclaimed: "Hosanna, hosanna, hosanna to Almighty God, that rays of light begin to burst forth upon us." [^13] Though the Saints are not immune from sorrow in this world, they may be sustained above its baneful influences by the enlightening powers of the Spirit in their lives. Sorrow may then be swallowed up in a hope that is made real by the comforting assurances of the Spirit. Meanwhile, sorrow, mourning, and disappointment teach the faithful who live in spiritual union with Christ the need for continual reliance upon Him; experiences which bring sorrow can be the means of perfecting the bond of spiritual union between the faithful and God, and can develop in them the attributes of patience and trust.

In the third subordinate beatitude, Jesus declared: "And blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth." [^14] The coordinate conjunction "and" again seems to tie this beatitude to the previous declarations of the Savior so that it establishes the framework in which the beatitude is to be understood. It then becomes apparent that a meek person is one who has tamed his unruly impulses, conquered his worldly aspirations and pride, and subdued the corruption in his flesh by utilizing the transforming power of the gospel in his life. When Joseph Smith was in Springfield, Illinois, on one occasion, some people expressed the opinion that he was not a very meek prophet. The latter-day Seer reported:

I told them: "I am meek and lowly in heart," and will personify Jesus for a moment, to illustrate the principle, and cried out with a loud voice, "Woe unto you, ye doctors; woe unto you, ye lawyers; woe unto you, ye scribes, Pharisees, and hypocrites!" But you cannot find the place where I ever went that I found fault with their food, their drink, their house, their lodgings; no, never; and this is what is meant by the meekness and lowliness of Jesus. [^15]

A meek person is free from the haughtiness, pride, and arrogance of the world; he possesses a gentle and long-suffering disposition, and is submissive and compliant to the will of God. Many revelations admonished the Saints to develop this quality in their lives. [^16] True meekness brings a spiritual quality to man which is a principle of peace and power within him. "Walk in the meekness of my Spirit," a revelation admonished, "and you shall have peace in me." [^17] The meek have power to possess the earth. Nephi observed that God continually raises up righteous nations and destroys the nations of the wicked. [^18] But more than this, those who receive and apply the gospel in their lives have the promise that they will inherit the earth when it is made into a glorified celestial sphere in the resurrection. "After it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father," a revelation said of the earth; "that bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for this intent are they sanctified." [^19] Only the meek will have power to inherit the earth in that future day. [^20]

On the Western hemisphere and in Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of Matthew's account, Jesus expressed the fourth subordinate beatitude as follows: "And blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost." [^21] Again the coordinate conjunction "and" seems to bind this beatitude to all that goes before it; and the promise that those Saints who hunger and thirst after righteousness shall be filled with the Holy Ghost assumes that their desire to attain the righteousness of God is accompanied by obedience to the ordinances of the gospel. Only by combining righteous desires with acceptance of God's holy ordinances can man be filled with the Holy Ghost. In expressing a similar point, a revelation said: "He that prayeth, whose spirit is contrite, the same is accepted of me, if he obey mine ordinances." [^22] To be filled in this manner with the Holy Ghost is the only way the desires of the righteous can be satisfied, for it is through the manifestations of the Spirit that all things pertaining to life and godliness are to be given unto them.

In expressing the fifth subordinate beatitude, Jesus said: "And blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy." [^23] By binding this beatitude to His previous statements, Jesus implied that mercy is also a quality that can be developed within man through the influence of the gospel. Mercy is akin to love and springs as a by-product of that parent attribute which is matured in man through the Holy Spirit. [^24] In declaring that the merciful shall find mercy, Jesus expressed the great principle of retribution that man will be judged by the same standard by which he judges others. Joseph Smith said of the subject of mercy:

Suppose that Jesus Christ and holy angels should object to us on frivolous things, what would become of us? We must be merciful to one another, and overlook small things. . . .

Christ was condemned by the self-righteous Jews because He took sinners into His society; He took them upon the principle that they repented of their sins. . . . Nothing is so much calculated to lead people to forsake sin as to take them by the hand, and watch over them with tenderness. When persons manifest the least kindness and love to me, O what power it has over my mind, while the opposite course has a tendency to harrow up all the harsh feelings and depress the human mind.

It is one evidence that men are unacquainted with the principles of godliness to behold the contraction of affectionate feelings and lack of charity in the world. The power and glory of godliness is spread out on a broad principle to throw out the mantle of charity. God does not look on sin with allowance, but when men have sinned, there must be allowance made for them.

All the religious world is boasting of righteousness: it is the doctrine of the devil to retard the human mind, and hinder our progress, by filling us with self-righteousness. The nearer we get to our heavenly Father, the more we are disposed to look with compassion on perishing souls; we feel that we want to take them upon our shoulders, and cast their sins behind our backs. My talk is intended for all. . . . If you would have God have mercy on you, have mercy on one another. [^25]

The sixth subordinate beatitude Jesus gave as follows: "And blessed are all the pure in heart, for they shall see God." [^26] The word in italics implies that Christ again placed this beatitude in its gospel context, and He indicates that only by utilizing the sanctifying power of the Holy Ghost can man become pure in heart. One may be honest in heart before he embraces the gospel, but it requires the manifestations of the Spirit to make him pure in heart to the degree which is required by the law of God in the plan of salvation. Since the great purpose of the gospel is to sanctify man so that he can return to the presence of God and behold His face, [^27] those who utilize the Holy Spirit to purify themselves from all sin may expect to realize the promise associated with this beatitude.

In stating the next beatitude, Jesus said: "And blessed are all the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God." [^28] This beatitude, like the former ones, was to be understood in the context of the gospel. Christ is the Prince of Peace. [^29] But the peace which He gives to the Saints is not given in the way the world seeks to establish peace. The peace to which Christ referred comes only through the Holy Ghost. Men in the world may endeavor to alleviate stress and strain between individuals and nations in worthwhile ways, but there are no true peacemakers in the sense that Jesus designated them except those who teach the true gospel of Christ and administer its saving ordinances to men. Thereby the power of the Holy Ghost, with its divine fruits and blessings, is given to man, and by partaking of "the peaceable things of immortal glory" [^30] through the Spirit, man can achieve that kind of peace which is found only in Christ. True peacemakers are those who become the children of God—those who have been born into the kingdom of God and who publish the gospel to others. Having referred to those who are the children of Christ in the gospel, Abinadi said: ". . . these are they who have published peace, who have brought good tidings of good, who have published salvation; and said unto Zion: Thy God reigneth!" [^31]

The Lord's declaration that all peacemakers shall be called the children of God may also imply that those who truly seek for peace will necessarily develop the peaceable fruits and attributes of the Spirit in their lives. As man responds to the Spirit, he is led unto Christ; and if those who truly seek for peace continue to cultivate the blessings of the Spirit in their lives, they will be brought unto God, even the Father, and learn of the covenant by which they can become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ. [^32] Either on earth or in the world to come, true peacemakers will become the children of God.

Though Matthew's report of the Sermon on the Mount merely states in the final beatitude that they are blessed who are persecuted for righteousness sake, the Nephite version of this beatitude and Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of Matthew's account indicate that Christ is the center of all righteousness. To His disciples on the Western hemisphere, Jesus said: "And blessed are all they who are persecuted for my name's sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." [^33] Taken in its designated context, this statement assumes that the attributes of righteousness which are enumerated in all the preceding beatitudes come to man from Christ by man's obedience to His gospel. By taking upon themselves the name of Jesus Christ and by receiving the enlightening and regenerating powers of His Holy Spirit, those who accept the gospel are made partakers of His righteousness. For this reason they are persecuted. The abuse and ridicule which they receive from the world bear witness that they are not of the world. And as the reward of their continued faithfulness, they shall be given the kingdom of heaven. This is a fitting benediction to the list of beatitudes. In reiterating this beatitude, Jesus added: "For ye shall have great joy and be exceeding glad, for great shall be your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets who were before you." [^34]

On the assumption that His disciples would receive the gospel and develop the fruits, gifts, and blessings of the Holy Spirit in their lives, Jesus said:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you to be the salt of the earth; but if the salt shall lose its savor wherewith shall the earth be salted? The salt shall be thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out and to be trodden under foot of men.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you to be the light of this people. A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid.

Behold, do men light a candle and put it under a bushel? Nay, but on a candlestick, and it giveth light to all that are in the house;

Therefore let your light so shine before this people, that they may see your good works and glorify your Father who is in heaven. [^35]

Law of the Gospel Contrasted to Law of Moses

Jesus next turned His attention to the law of Moses and contrasted the requirements of that law to the standard of conduct which is set forth in the law of the gospel. The preparatory gospel which Moses gave Israel did not include the gift of the Holy Ghost. [^36] But in giving His disciples the Holy Ghost, Jesus revealed a higher standard of personal conduct to them. He first spoke of the law of the gospel concerning anger:

Ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, and it is also written before you, that thou shalt not kill, and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment of God;

But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of his judgment. And whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council; and whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

Therefore, if ye shall come unto me, or shall desire to come unto me, and rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee—

Go thy way unto thy brother, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I will receive you. [^37]

The law of Moses with its injunction against killing sought merely to control man's outward acts. But, by following the law of the gospel, man could sanctify his feelings and emotions by the power of the Spirit and thus avoid anger and reproachful speech.

Jesus next spoke of the gospel law governing the reconciliation of man to his fellow man. In the event a disciple was at fault so that his adversary had claim upon him, Jesus admonished him to admit it quickly and turn from the course of error lest judgment come upon him. The Master said:

Agree with thine adversary quickly while thou art in the way with him, lest at any time he shall get thee, and thou shalt be cast into prison.

Verily, verily, I say unto thee, thou shalt by no means come out hence until thou hast paid the uttermost senine. And while ye are in prison can ye pay even one senine? Verily, verily, I say unto you, Nay. [^38]

Continuing, Jesus referred to the law of the gospel as it applies to virtuous thought. Having stated that the old law forbade adultery, He said: "But I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery already in his heart." The law of Christ requires man to become pure in heart through the sanctifying influence of the Holy Spirit. The Lord therefore instructed: "Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of these things to enter into your heart; for it is better that ye should deny yourselves of these things, wherein ye will take up your cross, than that ye should be cast into hell." [^39] According to the Prophet's Inspired Revision of Matthew, Jesus explained: "For a man to take up his cross, is to deny himself all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and keep my commandments." [^40]

The Nephite account of this statement, unlike that of Matthew, does not imply that a person should actually pluck out an offending eye or cut off an unruly hand rather than use the member of his body to commit transgression. [^41] The reason for this omission may be that the Nephites did not need the added emphasis that Christ's Jewish disciples did. In the Western hemisphere, the kingdom of God was established and its righteous influence extended throughout the land. But in Palestine, Christ's disciples were confronted with the apostate standards and practices of the Jewish system and the carnality of the Roman world. However, Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible, after repeating the above injunction concerning adultery which Jesus gave to the Nephites, clarifies Matthew's report by stating:

Wherefore, if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.

Or if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.

And now this I speak, a parable concerning your sins; wherefore, cast them from you, that ye may not be hewn down and cast into the fire. [^42]

By giving the above injunction as a parable, Jesus stressed the seriousness of transgressions of a sexual nature without really stating that man should dismember his body. Sexual sin constitutes a perversion of the most sacred and far-reaching physical endowment which God has given to man. By the prostitution of this endowment, a saint may forfeit his claim to eternal life. A revelation to Joseph Smith declared: "He that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith, and shall not have the Spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out." [^43] Because of the seriousness of this kind of transgression, Jesus commanded the Nephites to cast such things away from them, that they might not be brought down to hell.

Jesus next spoke of divorce. Moses permitted a man to put away his wife if he gave her "a writing of divorcement." [^44] But the Lord declared: "I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery; and whoso shall marry her who is divorced committeth adultery." [^45] Christ's law governing divorce has its basis in the sanctity of the sexual relationship and in the provision that marriage should continue for time and all eternity. [^46] When Jesus expressed this statement on divorce, His disciples said: "If the case of the man be so with a wife, it is not good to marry." But Christ replied: "All cannot receive this saying; it is not for them save to whom it is given." [^47] It seemed to apply, therefore, only to those who received the Lord's law of marriage.

If those who were united in the new and everlasting covenant of marriage truly lived the gospel so that they were guided by the light and inspiration of the Holy Spirit as they entered into that sacred relationship, and if they applied the gospel in their lives thereafter, the union would endure forever. When marriage was viewed in this light, man had no right to put away his wife by the provision of God's law, unless she committed fornication. [^48] Otherwise the union was indissoluble with respect to man's right to put away his wife by divorce. [^49] If he disregarded the binding power of God's law and put away his wife unjustifiably, he would cause her to commit adultery if she married again. The man who married her without a proper cancellation of the former contract would also commit adultery.

Jesus then directed His attention to the gospel law of personal integrity in keeping one's word. In showing the distinction between the law given by Moses and the law of the gospel, He said:

And again it is written, thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths;

But verily, verily, I say unto you, swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it is God's throne;

Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool;

Neither shalt thou swear by the head, because thou canst not make one hair black or white;

But let your communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay; for whatsoever cometh of more than these is evil. [^50]

In the Mosaic dispensation, the taking of oaths was approved as a means of attesting to the truth of a statement or to one's determination to keep a pledge. [^51] Oaths were often made in the name of the Lord; and when expressed by the righteous, they could be relied upon with absolute assurance. For example, Nephi, his life in grave danger, sought to persuade Laban's servant, Zoram, to go with him into the desert. "I spake unto him, even with an oath," he reported, "that he need not fear." When Zoram "made an oath" in turn, promising his support, Nephi's fears ceased concerning him. [^52]

But Jesus revealed a higher standard of truthfulness and personal integrity. In this standard, simplicity and straight-forwardness in speech were to characterize those who received the gospel. Yea was to mean Yea, and Nay was to mean Nay. No oath was to be required; and man's word was to be as true and accurate as though he had spoken it with a sacred oath.

Jesus next set forth the law of the gospel on patience and forebearance. In the system of justice which Moses established, an offended person could require by the process of law an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth, or its equivalent in value, of one who injured him. This was a law of just and equitable retribution. But of the law of the gospel, Jesus said to the Nephites:

. . . I say unto you, that ye shall not resist evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also;

And if any man will sue thee at the law and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also;

And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.

Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn thou not away. [^53]

The true intent of Christ's statement is expressed in Joseph Smith's revision of Luke's report of this saying:

. . . unto him who smiteth thee on the cheek, offer also the other; or, in other words, it is better to offer the other, than to revile again. And him who taketh away thy cloak, forbid not to take thy coat also.

For it is better that thou suffer thine enemy to take these things, than to contend with him. Verily I say unto you, Your heavenly Father who seeth in secret, shall bring that wicked one into judgment. [^54]

The law of the gospel requires that man suffer personal abuse rather than retaliate. To the Nephites, Jesus declared: "He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another." [^55] Christ's doctrine is that "such things should be done away." [^56] Nevertheless, one who embraces the gospel should view himself as a person of dignity and value, too mature in character to engage in petty strife, but not a walking mat for corrupt and thoughtless individuals to trample upon with impunity. The Lord explained in modern times how a true Christian should conduct himself when he suffers abuse:

Now, I speak unto you concerning your families—if men will smite you, or your families, once, and ye bear it patiently and revile not against them, neither seek revenge, ye shall be rewarded;

But if ye bear it not patiently, it shall be accounted unto you as being meted out as a just measure unto you.

And again, if your enemy shall smite you the second time, and you revile not against your enemy, and bear it patiently, your reward shall be an hundred-fold.

And again, if he shall smite you the third time, and ye bear it patiently, your reward shall be doubled unto you four-fold;

And these three testimonies shall stand against your enemy if he repent not, and shall not be blotted out.

And now, verily I say unto you, if that enemy shall escape my vengeance, that he be not brought into judgment before me, then ye shall see to it that ye warn him in my name, that he come no more upon you, neither upon your family, even your children's children unto the third and fourth generation.

And then, if he shall come upon you or your children, or your children's children unto the third and fourth generation, I have delivered thine enemy into thine hands;

And then if thou wilt spare him, thou shalt be rewarded for thy righteousness; and also thy children and thy children's children unto the third and fourth generation.

Nevertheless, thine enemy is in thine hands; and if thou rewardest him according to his works thou art justified; if he has sought thy life, and thy life is endangered by him, thine enemy is in thine hands and thou art justified.

Behold, this is the law I gave unto my servant Nephi, and thy fathers, Joseph, and Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham, and all mine ancient prophets and apostles. [^57]

This revelation also makes it clear that the requirement to forgive seventy times seven applies only when an offender asks forgiveness and makes proper restitution for his injurious deeds. The revelation states:

. . . verily I say unto you, if after thine enemy has come upon thee the first time, he repent and come unto thee praying thy forgiveness, thou shalt forgive him, and shalt hold it no more as a testimony against thine enemy—

And so on unto the second and third time; and as oft as thine enemy repenteth of the trespass wherewith he has trespassed against thee, thou shalt forgive him, until seventy times seven.

And if he trespass against thee and repent not the first time, nevertheless thou shalt forgive him.

And if he trespass against thee the second time, and repent not, nevertheless thou shalt forgive him.

And if he trespass against thee the third time, and repent not, thou shalt also forgive him.

But if he trespass against thee the fourth time thou shalt not forgive him, but shalt bring these testimonies before the Lord; and they shall not be blotted out until he repent and reward thee four-fold in all things wherewith he has trespassed against thee.

And if he do this, thou shalt forgive him with all thine heart; and if he do not this, I the Lord, will avenge thee of thine enemy an hundred-fold;

And upon his children, and upon his children's children of all them that hate me, unto the third and fourth generation.

But if the children shall repent, or the children's children, and turn to the Lord their God, with all their hearts and with all their might, mind, and strength, and restore four-fold for all their trespasses wherewith they have trespassed, or wherewith their fathers have trespassed, or their father's fathers, then thine indignation shall be turned away;

And vengeance shall no more come upon them, saith the Lord thy God, and their trespasses shall never be brought any more as a testimony before the Lord against them. [^58]

Finally, Jesus stated the law of love which the gospel requires and which the power of the Holy Ghost makes possible as it fills a man with the sacred fruits of the Spirit. The Master declared:

. . . it is written also, that thou shalt love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy;

But behold I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them who despitefully use you and persecute you;

That ye may be the children of your Father who is in heaven; for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good. [^59]

Only when man is filled with the love of God through the Holy Spirit can he act toward those who do him evil with the patience and compassion with which God acts. [^60] Such action is evidence that man is indeed reconciled to God through the gospel.

"Those things which were of old time, which were under the law in me are all fulfilled," Jesus stressed as He concluded this phase of His great sermon on the law of the gospel. "Old things are done away, and all things have become new." [^61] Not only was there a new law, but under the new program man could become a new creature in Christ. Concerning the goal of perfection which man can achieve in eternity by acquiring the divine attributes and powers of the Spirit in this new stage of life, Jesus said: "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect." [^62]

It is noteworthy that Jesus included Himself with His Father as a standard of the perfection to which the gospel leads, while in His sermon to the Jews He cited only His Father as an example of that standard. [^63] Perfection is not merely to obey perfectly the law of God, for in the divine plan of life obedience is but a means to an end. The end is to be endowed with the full attributes and powers of the Father's glory. [^64] Though Jesus kept the law of His Father to perfection during His earthly mission and in this respect was a true example which man can follow, [^65] it was not until He was resurrected that He acquired a fulness of His Father's glory and became perfect like the Father. He was not perfect in that sense when He gave the Sermon on the Mount to His Jewish disciples. This is the goal which Christ gave to those who obey the gospel.

Outward and Inward Man of Righteousness

Obedience to the law of the gospel brings spiritual growth and development, and for this reason obedience produces its own reward. One who receives the divine attributes and powers of life which come from obeying the law of the gospel needs no outward recognition, but may be content to enjoy the peace and truth and power which he feels within. Nevertheless, he has the promise that God will reward him openly.

Jesus, as He spoke of various requirements of the law of the gospel, stressed these points and warned His disciples against the outward show of righteousness. Of the giving of alms, He said:

Verily, verily, I say that I would that ye should do alms unto the poor; but take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen of them; otherwise ye have no reward of your Father who is in heaven.

Therefore, when ye shall do your alms do not sound a trumpet before you, as will hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.

But when thou doest alms let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth;

That thine alms may be in secret; and thy Father who seeth in secret, himself shall reward thee openly. [^66]

Joseph Smith gave a similar admonition when he said: "Let not any man publish his own righteousness, for others can see that for him; sooner let him confess his sins, and then he will be forgiven, and he will bring forth more fruit." [^67]

Prayer is another important feature of the gospel program that can become ritualistic, spiritually drab, or vain. Jesus instructed:

. . . when thou prayest thou shalt not do as the hypocrites, for they love to pray, standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.

But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. [^68]

Prayer should be simple and direct communion with God, not artificial or unnatural. "When ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen," Jesus stated, "for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking." Having affirmed that the Father knows what man has need of before he prays, so that there is no need to repeat the petition at length or with unnatural expression, Christ gave an illustration of the true simplicity of prayer in what has since become known as the Lord's prayer. The Nephite version of this prayer states:

Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.

Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.

And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever. Amen. [^69]

The fact that this prayer omits two phrases which are found in the prayer which Jesus gave to His disciples in Palestine perhaps illustrates the point that in prayer man should not use vain and meaningless phrases. The two omitted phrases are: "Thy kingdom come" and "Give us this day our daily bread." With Christ's ministry among the Nephites, His kingdom was fully established on the Western hemisphere—spiritually, socially, economically, and politically. There followed an era of prosperity unequalled in Nephite history. [^70] It may be suggested that it was not necessary for the Nephites to pray for the coming of God's kingdom, for it was in their midst. Nor presumably did they need to ask the Lord to bless them with nourishment for their bodies when He had given them an economic system through which there would be great prosperity in material things and an equal opportunity for every man to acquire the things of the earth.

Joseph Smith taught and illustrated this concept of prayer. When a man who had been an exhorter in another faith before embracing the restored gospel was asked to bless the food, he did so with great glowing terms and high-sounding phrases. "Brother Joshua," the Prophet admonished at the close of the blessing, "don't let me ever hear you ask another such blessing." [^71] When Joseph sat down to eat a scanty meal of corn bread at another time, he prayed: "Lord, we thank Thee for this johnny cake, and ask Thee to send us something better. Amen." Before the bread was eaten, a man brought him some flour and a ham. After thanking the man for his gift, the Prophet said to his wife: "I knew the Lord would answer my prayer." [^72] In recording his impression of a prayer which the latter-day Seer uttered publicly, Daniel Tyler said: "There was no ostentation, no raising of the voice as by enthusiasm, but a plain conversational tone, as a man would address a present friend." Yet Elder Tyler observed: "That prayer, I say, to my humble mind, partook of the learning and eloquence of heaven. . . . It was the crowning . . . of all the prayers I ever heard." [^73]

The Prophet taught that in true prayer man must commune spiritually with God; otherwise he merely expresses words but does not pray. "He that asketh in the Spirit asketh according to the will of God," a revelation explained; "wherefore it is done even as he asketh." The revelation instructed: "Ye must give thanks unto God in the Spirit for whatsoever blessing ye are blessed with." [^74] To obtain the Spirit in prayer, man must express faith and be contrite in heart. "The Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith," a revelation observed. [^75] Again: "Pray always, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and great shall be your blessings." [^76] "Ye receive the Spirit through prayer," still another revelation stated; "wherefore, without this there remaineth condemnation." [^77]

True prayer is whole-soul communion with God. The Saints were instructed to pray always [^78] and to do all things with much prayer, faith, and thanksgiving. [^79] Amulek set a high, but appropriate, standard of prayer when he admonished:

God grant unto you, my brethren, that ye may begin to exercise your faith . . . to call upon his holy name, that he would have mercy upon you;

Yea, cry unto him for mercy; for he is mighty to save.

Yea, humble yourselves, and continue in prayer unto him.

Cry unto him when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your flocks.

Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning, mid-day, and evening.

Yea, cry unto him against the devil, who is an enemy to all righteousness.

Cry unto him over the crops of your fields, that ye may prosper in them.

Cry over the flocks of your fields, that they may increase.

But this is not all; ye must pour out your souls in your closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness.

Yea, and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually for your welfare, and also for the welfare of those who are around you. [^80]

This kind of prayer is more than mere supplication for needed blessings and the expression of thanks for divine favor. It is a means of strengthening man and maturing him spiritually. For these reasons the Saints are instructed: "Pray always, that you may come off conqueror." [^81] Again: "Pray always, that ye may not faint." [^82] Prayer keeps man from falling "into temptation," [^83] where the wicked one has power in him. [^84]

To pray with humility and contrition of heart, man must possess the spirit of forgiveness for those who have transgressed against him. True humility is always accompanied by the spirit of forgiveness in man. This is an important feature of the concept of prayer which Jesus taught. "If ye forgive men their trespasses your heavenly Father will also forgive you," He stressed after giving them the Lord's prayer; "but if ye forgive not men their trespasses neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." [^85]

The Prophet expressed this principle by charging the Saints not to follow the example of the adversary in accusing the brethren, and said:

If you do not accuse each other, God will not accuse you. If you have no accuser you will enter heaven, and if you will follow the revelations and instructions which God gives you through me, I will take you into heaven as my back load. If you will not accuse me, I will not accuse you. If you will throw a cloak of charity over my sins, I will over yours—for charity covereth a multitude of sins. [^86]

In His sermon to the Nephites, Jesus next turned His attention to the true practice of fasting, which is part of the law of the gospel, and said:

Moreover, when ye fast be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance, for they disfigure their faces that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.

But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face;

That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father, who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. [^87]

Fasting is closely associated with prayer. When the sons of Mosiah went to proclaim the gospel to the Lamanites, "they fasted much and prayed much that the Lord would grant unto them a portion of his Spirit to go with them, and abide with them." [^88] Alma later met them, after they had performed a notable work among the Lamanites, and wrote that "they had waxed strong in the knowledge of the truth; for they were men of a sound understanding and they had searched the scriptures diligently, that they might know the word of God." "But this is not all," he stressed; "they had given themselves to much prayer, and fasting; therefore they had the spirit of prophecy, and the spirit of revelation, and when they taught, they taught with power and authority of God." [^89]

Fasting was an important practice among the Nephite saints. The people of Nephi "did fast much, and they did worship God with exceeding great joy." [^90] Mormon gave a similar report at a later period. [^91] And of their practice after the time of Christ, Moroni said: "The church did meet together oft, to fast and to pray, and to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls." [^92]

A similar practice was established among the Latter-day Saints. They were advised to "continue in prayer and fasting from this time forth." [^93] Having indicated that in true fasting man's joy is made full, a revelation said: "Verily, this is fasting and prayer, or in other words, rejoicing and prayer." [^94] By fasting and prayer, man may acquire a true spiritual union with Christ, and such union brings joy and rejoicing to the human heart. That they might realize these blessings more fully in their lives the Saints were instructed to build "a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God." [^95]

The law of the gospel requires that man's eye be single to the glory of God. Man's central hope in Christ—that which should be his ultimate desire and to which all else is subordinate in the plan of life and salvation—should be to acquire a fulness of the Father's glory. [^96] "The light of the body is the eye," Jesus declared as He spoke of this central hope in the gospel; "if therefore thine eye be single to the glory of God, thy whole body shall be full of light." [^97] In the full statement of this requirement which He made to the Nephites, the Lord said:

Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and thieves break through and steal;

But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal.

For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

The light of the body is the eye; if, therefore, thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.

But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If, therefore, the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!

No man can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. [^98]

Admonitions and Instructions on Law of the Gospel

Having set forth the law and standard of the gospel to the Nephites, Jesus concluded His sermon by giving them appropriate admonitions and instructions on the law of the gospel. He first spoke of their agency in judging the issues of life and admonished:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, Judge not, that ye be not judged.

For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?

Or how wilt thou say to thy brother: Let me pull the mote out of thine eye—and behold, a beam is in thine own eye?

Thou hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brother's eye. [^99]

Inherent in the injunction that man should not trust in the arm of flesh [^100] is the fact that he should not rely upon mere finite powers of reason and analysis to determine the truth of a principle or the propriety of a given action. Things are not always what they appear to be to the physical senses. "The devil has great power to deceive," Joseph Smith cautioned; "he will so transform things as to make one gape at those who are doing the will of God." [^101] The life of a saint should be centered in the enlightening power of the Holy Spirit which, as a Spirit of discernment, enables him "to judge righteously." [^102] Mormon admonished: "And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which ye may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge wrongfully; for with that same judgment which ye judge ye shall also be judged." [^103] Modern scriptures imply that in expressing views and opinions, and in rendering judgments, man should first be sure that his eye is single to the glory of God, for only when his body is filled with the light of the Spirit can he judge righteously. For this reason, the Lord admonished the Nephites to reserve judgment and first cast out the beam from their own eyes. Man's final reward in eternity will depend largely upon the judgments he has rendered in this life, not only because of the law of retribution but because his judgments will evidence the degree to which his life has been in tune with the Holy Spirit.

Jesus next instructed His disciples: "Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you." [^104] Man is on earth to be proved in all things and to develop in the attributes and powers of the Holy Spirit by obeying the plan of life and salvation, not merely to satisfy his curiosity to know the mysteries of God. An understanding of the mysteries is given as a result of man's faith, not as a means of building faith; nor is it given to the unworthy. Alma explained: "It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him." [^105]

This does not mean that man should not seek to know the mysteries of God, but that he should come unto God in the right way in order to receive them. Having given the above admonition, Jesus then declared:

Ask, and it shall be given unto you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

For every one that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened.

Or what man is there of you, who, if his son ask bread, will give him a stone?

Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?

If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him? [^106]

To gain a knowledge of divine truth, man must obey the law by which he can receive personal revelation from God. In addition to receiving the ordinances of the gospel, that law requires that man ask of God and that he love and respect his fellow men. As an extension of His promise that the Father would give good things to those who would seek them in the right way, Jesus said: "Therefore, all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the law and the prophets." [^107] Upon this great principle of individual dignity, justice, and brotherhood the gospel rests in all ages of time. "Enter ye in at the strait gate," the Master stressed; "for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, which leadeth to destruction, and many there be who go in thereat; because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." [^108] The gospel is not merely a code of conduct, but a way of receiving divine attributes and powers of life.

Following these admonitions, Jesus expressed two major warnings. The first concerned those who would come representing themselves as ministers of God without legal claim to that office. Of such, He said:

Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.

Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?

Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.

A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.

Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.

Wherefore, by their fruits ye shall know them. [^109]

A true minister of Christ must be called of God in the proper way, and he must "work by the power and gifts of God." [^110] These are the criteria by which a true minister may be identified. Is he called of God in the right way? Does he do the works of Christ? And are the powers, gifts, and fruits which Jesus possessed manifested in his labors?

A true minister of God must have the basic qualifications of a prophet; and in his sphere of action, he must be a prophet to his people. Joseph Smith often cited the statement of the angel to John on the Isle of Patmos that the testimony of Jesus constitutes the spirit of prophecy, [^111] which indicates that if a man has a testimony from the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Son of God, he has the basic qualifications of a true prophet of God. The latter-day Seer explained:

According to John, the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy; therefore, if I profess to be a witness or teacher, and have not the spirit of prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, I must be a false witness; but if I be a true teacher and witness, I must possess the spirit of prophecy, and that constitutes a prophet; and any man who says he is a teacher or preacher of righteousness, and denies the spirit of prophecy, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; and by this key false teachers and imposters may be detected. [^112]

In His second warning, Jesus stressed man's need of accepting the message of life and salvation and of acting upon it in the right way. The Master explained:

Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father who is in heaven.

Many will say to me in that day: Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out devils, and in thy name done many wonderful works?

And then will I profess unto them: I never knew you; depart from me, ye that work iniquity.

Therefore, whoso heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, who built his house upon a rock—

And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded upon a rock.

And every one that heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them not shall be likened unto a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand—

And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell, and great was the fall of it. [^113]

The Lord's Day

The Saints were instructed to commemorate the Lord's Day as a means of assisting them to keep more fully the law of the gospel. A revelation given to the Church through the Prophet on that day, Sunday, August 7, 1831, set forth the law of God on this subject. [^114] The revelation said:

. . . that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day;

For verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High;

Nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times;

But remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord.

And on this day thou shalt do none other thing, only let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting may be perfect, or, in other words, that thy joy may be full.

Verily, this is fasting and prayer, or in other words, rejoicing and prayer.

And . . . ye [shall] do these things with thanksgiving, with cheerful hearts and countenances, not with much laughter, for this is sin, but with a glad heart and a cheerful countenance. [^115]

The Lord's Day is a day for the Saints to cease their labors of the week and pay their devotions to the Most High. It is the Christian Sabbath, [^116] and as such it is "given unto man for a day of rest; and also that man should glorify God." [^117] Sunday is a day of rest with respect to both aspects of the term, for the word "rest" means not only to cease from one's daily labors but to achieve a state of spiritual union with God. Spiritually the term "rest" means to enter into the presence of God and partake of His glory. [^118] As a day of rest, the Sabbath is symbolic of the state when the faithful enter into the full glory, or rest, of the Lord. [^119] By achieving true spiritual union with God through the gospel and by maturing in that divine relationship through the proper observance of the Lord's Day, the Saints can anticipate and approximate the great objective of the gospel, which is to bring man to enter into the Lord's rest, or into the fulness of His glory. [^120]

The law of the Lord's Day is positive rather than negative in its requirements. The emphasis is upon those things which the Saints are to do to make the Lord's Day truly a day of spiritual rest. Thereby they can be filled with joy and gladness, and have cheerful countenances. [^121] Because the gospel is a divine program of life and salvation, the Saints can experience in the observance of the Sabbath the joy of redemption [^122] and of spiritual light. [^123] To realize these blessings, they must avoid such things as loud and boisterous laughter, light-mindedness, light and vain speech, and evil speaking of others and of the Lord's servants. [^124] These requirements are part of the law of the gospel.

Word Of Wisdom

Latter-day revelations indicate that man must give proper care to his physical body if he is to develop spiritually to a significant degree. Physical well-being is essential to mental vigor; [^125] and both physical health and mental vigor have an influence upon the spiritual life of man. Joseph Smith received a revelation, popularly designated as the Word of Wisdom, which expressed important principles and teachings concerning man's temporal well-being that play a vital role in the plan of life and salvation. The Word of Wisdom, therefore, is part of the law of the gospel.

Joseph Smith reaffirmed the biblical doctrine that "man is the tabernacle of God, even temples," [^126] and that the Spirit of God dwells in man. [^127] Both temporal and spiritual blessings thus follow obedience to the Word of Wisdom. This revelation set "forth the order and will of God in the temporal salvation of all saints in the last days," and the law therein contained was given "for a principle with promise, adapted to the weakest of all saints, who are or can be called saints." [^128]

The Word of Wisdom first warned the Saints of temptations which they would meet in the last days, then advised against harmful substances commonly taken into the body:

Behold, verily, thus saith the Lord unto you: In consequence of evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days, I have warned you, and forewarn you, by giving unto you this word of wisdom by revelation—

That inasmuch as any man drinketh wine or strong drink among you, behold it is not good, neither meet in the sight of your Father, only in assembling yourselves together to offer up your sacraments before him.

And behold, this should be wine, yea, pure wine of the grape of the vine, of your own make.

And, again, strong drinks [i.e., alcoholic drinks] are not for the belly, but for the washing of your bodies.

And again, tobacco is not for the body, neither for the belly, and is not good for man, but is an herb for bruises and all sick cattle, to be used with judgment and skill.

And again, hot drinks [i.e., tea, coffee, etc.] are not for the body or belly. [^129]

After stating some of the things which the Saints were not to partake of, the revelation mentioned many things which could appropriately be used:

. . . all wholesome herbs God hath ordained for the constitution, nature, and use of man—

Every herb in the season thereof, and every fruit in the season thereof; all these to be used with prudence and thanksgiving.

Yea, flesh also of beasts and of the fowls of the air, I, the Lord, have ordained for the use of man with thanksgiving; nevertheless they are to be used sparingly;

And it is pleasing unto me that they should not be used, only in times of winter, or of cold, or famine.

All grain is ordained for the use of man and of beasts, to be the staff of life, not only for man but for the beasts of the field, and the fowls of heaven, and all wild animals that run or creep on the earth;

And these hath God made for the use of man only in times of famine and excess of hunger.

All grain is good for the food of man; as also the fruit of the vine; that which yieldeth fruit, whether in the ground or above the ground—

Nevertheless, wheat for man, and corn for the ox, and oats for the horse, and rye for the fowls and for swine, and for all beasts of the field, and barley for all useful animals, and for mild drinks, as also other grain. [^130]

By obedience to the Word of Wisdom, the Saints are promised both physical and spiritual blessings. Of the first, the revelation said: "All saints who remember to keep and do these sayings, walking in obedience to the commandments, shall receive health in their navel and marrow to their bones; . . . and shall run and not be weary, and shall walk and not faint." [^131] Spiritually, the Saints are promised "wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures." [^132] These blessings are those which the faithful receive when their bodies are fit dwelling places for the Holy Ghost.

Summary

The Prophet made it clear that for man to develop in the divine truth, power, gifts, and blessings of the Holy Spirit after entering the path which leads to life and salvation,he must obey the law of the gospel. The classic statement of this law is in Christ's Sermon on the Mount. The Nephite record, in particular, places this great statement in its proper gospel context. Having taught His disciples on the Western hemisphere the basic program of the gospel upon which man must establish his life in order to receive celestial salvation, Jesus gave them the beatitudes as eight subordinate statements which specify the ways by which those who accept the gospel and apply its divine truth and power in their lives may expect to be blessed, or may become blessed. Christ then contrasted the law of the gospel with the law of Moses and indicated that by receiving the manifestations of the Holy Ghost and continuing in this path, man can eventually become perfect in all the divine attributes and powers of the Father and the Son. Since these divine attributes and powers have the effect of transforming man and renewing him to a state of righteousness, Jesus next spoke of the outward as contrasted to the inward man of righteousness, while stating the law and the standard of the regenerated man. Finally, the Master issued appropriate admonitions and instructions to those who heard His message. Only by hearing those sayings and actually doing them can man build his life upon the rock of Christ and acquire salvation. The Lord's Day and the Word of Wisdom also play significant roles in this divine program of human development.

Footnotes

. . . Lord God how wilt thou give me this land for an everlasting inheritance?

And the Lord said, Though thou wast dead, yet am I not able to give it thee?

And if thou shalt die, yet thou shalt possess it, for the day cometh, that the Son of Man shall live; but how can he live if he be not dead? he must first be quickened.

And it came to pass, that Abram looked forth and saw the days of the Son of Man, and was glad, and his soul found rest, and he believed in the Lord.—I. R., Genesis 15:9-12.

And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have it; and if he sue thee again, let him have thy cloak also.

And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him a mile; and whosoever shall compel thee to go with him twain, thou shalt go with him twain.—I. R., Matthew 5:42-43.

And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us.

And suffer us not to be led into temptation, but deliver us from evil.—I. R., Matthew 6:13-14.

In the Lord's sermon to the Nephites, the remaining instructions which are recorded in 3 Nephi 13 were given specifically to the Twelve and pertain to their service in the ministry. For this reason they are not discussed here.

Now these are the words which Jesus taught his disciples that they should say unto the people.

Judge not unrighteously, that ye be not judged; but judge righteous judgment.

For with what judgment ye shall judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

And again, ye shall say unto them, Why is it that thou beholdest the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?

Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and canst not behold a beam in thine own eye?

And Jesus said unto his disciples, Beholdest thou the Scribes, and the Pharisees, and the Priests, and the Levites? They teach in their synagogues, but do not observe the law, nor the commandments; and all have gone out of the way, and are under sin.

Go thou and say unto them, Why teach ye men the law and the commandments, when ye yourselves are the children of corruption?

Say unto them, Ye hypocrites, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye.

Go ye into the world, saying unto all, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come nigh unto you.—I. R., Matthew 7:1-9.

. . . the mysteries of the kingdom ye shall keep within yourselves; for it is not meet to give that which is holy unto the dogs; neither cast ye your pearls unto swine, lest they trample them under their feet.

For the world cannot receive that which ye, yourselves, are not able to bear; wherefore ye shall not give your pearls unto them, lest they turn again and rend you.—I. R., Matthew 7:10-11.

Say unto them, Ask of God; ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

For every one that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and unto him that knocketh, it shall be opened.

And then said his disciples unto him, they will say unto us, We ourselves are righteous, and need not that any man should teach us. God, we know, heard Moses and some of the prophets; but us he will not hear.

And they will say, We have the law for our salvation, and that is sufficient for us.

Then Jesus answered, and said unto his disciples, thus shall ye say unto them.

What man among you, having a son, and he shall be standing out, and shall say, Father, open thy house that I may come in and sup with thee, will not say, Come in, my son; for mine is thine, and thine is mine?

Or what man is there among you, who, if his son ask bread, will give him a stone?

Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?

If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?—I. R., Matthew 7:12-20.

---
Notas:
[^1] HC, IV, p. 608.
[^2] D&C 124:28, 39, 40. Joseph Smith stated that the Nauvoo Temple would be a place "where instructions from the Most High will be received, and from this place go forth to distant lands."—HC, IV, p. 269.
[^3] D&C 124:38-39.
[^4] 2 Nephi 5:16.
[^5] See, for example, Jacob 1:17; 2:2; Mosiah 1:18; 2:1-7; 7:17; 11:10, 12; 19:5; Alma 10:2; 3 Nephi 11:1.
[^6] D&C 57:2-3.
[^7] D&C 36:8; 42:36. See also D&C 97:15-17.
[^8] D&C 88:119-120.
[^9] HC, V, p. 423.
[^10] Ibid., pp. 423-424. Still again: "Why gather the people together in this place? For the same purpose that Jesus wanted to gather the Jews—to receive the ordinances, the blessings, and glories that God has in store for His Saints."—Ibid., p. 427.
[^11] Ibid., III, p. 380.
[^12] D&C 88:107.
[^13] D&C 76:95.
[^14] See chapter twelve in this volume.
[^15] HC, V, p. 424.
[^16] Ibid., VI, p. 184, citing John 14:2. (The word "house" is italicized in the original.)
[^17] D&C 124:39.
[^18] D&C 124:28.
[^19] HC, IV, p. 449.
[^20] Ibid., p. 269.
[^21] Ibid., p. 603.
[^22] JD, XII, p. 49.
[^23] HC, IV, p. 604.
[^24] Ibid., pp. 492-493.
[^25] D&C 124:39.
[^26] D&C 124:55.
[^27] HC, V, p. 423; IV, p. 208. The Prophet spoke of the temple as the place where the Saints could "receive the ordinances, the blessings, and glories that God" has in store for them.—Ibid., V, p. 427.
[^28] D&C 109:10-13, 16, 22.
[^29] Isaiah 4:5.
[^30] MA, II (October, 1835), p. 199.
[^31] 3 Nephi 20:22; 21:25.
[^32] D&C 45:67.
[^33] D&C 97:15-16.
[^34] HC, IV, p. 449.
[^35] Letter of Brigham Young to C. Brown of pensacola, Florida, written at Nauvoo, Illinois, August 27, 1845; in "Brigham Young Papers, 1843-1853," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^36] This point will be discussed in greater detail in volume IV of this series.
[^37] HC, IV, pp. 492-493. The plan and program of Zion as a temple-oriented society will be discussed in volume III of this study.
[^38] D&C 110:10.
[^39] HC, V, p. 362.
[^40] Ibid., III, p. 296.
[^41] Ibid.
[^42] Ibid., V, p. 259.
[^43] D&C 38:32; 39:15.
[^44] HC, II, p. 309.
[^45] D&C 95:8-9.
[^46] Letter of Oliver Cowdery to John F. Boynton at Saco, Maine, written May 6, 1834; Cowdery Collection, Huntington Library, San Marino, California; used by permission.
[^47] D&C 43:16.
[^48] HC, II, p. 218.
[^49] Ibid., p. 301.
[^50] Ibid., pp. 287, 300. See also p. 53.
[^51] Ibid., p. 309. See also pp. 334, 339, 345, 364, 368, and 373.
[^52] During the Kirtland period, these blessings were given only to men. Since they were priesthood ordinances, they were confined to men who had been ordained to the priesthood. For example Benjamin F. Johnson wrote:
[^53] This conclusion is supported by the fact that before the second solemn assembly was held in the Kirtland Temple, in April, 1837, many of those who had been ordained to the priesthood, but who had not received these blessings, were given them "that all might be prepared" for the assembly.—HC, II, p. 475.
[^54] JD, II, p. 31.
[^55] The journal of Erastus Snow, pp. 5-6.
[^56] Psalm 96:2-3; 24:7, 10.
[^57] HC, II, pp. 412-413. The first hymn was written by Parley P. Pratt and the second by William W. Phelps.
[^58] Ibid., pp. 414-415. See Matthew 8:18-20.
[^59] D&C 109:35-37. For evidence that the dedicatory prayer had been prepared in printed form, see JD, XI, p. 9.
[^60] MA, II (March, 1836), p. 280; HC, II, p. 426.
[^61] HC, II, p. 427; MA, II (March, 1836), p. 281.
[^62] Helen Mar Whitney, "Early Reminiscences," Women's Exponent, IX (February 1, 1881), p. 130. See also Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Salt Lake City, 1945), p. 91.
[^63] HC, II, p. 427.
[^64] Ibid., p. 428.
[^65] Ibid.
[^66] JD, II, p. 215; XI, p. 10.
[^67] "A Short Sketch of the Life of Levi Jackman—1797-1876," Mormon Diaries, XIV, No. 5, p. 17.
[^68] See JD, II, p. 215, where George A. Smith expressed this point.
[^69] Testimonies For The Truth: A Record of Manifestations of the Power of God, Miraculous and Providential, Witnessed in The Travels and Experiences of Benjamin Brown (Liverpool, England, 1853), pp. 10-11.
[^70] Journal History, March 27, 1836; The Contributor, IV, p. 242; Lola Belnap Coolbear, "Sketch of the Life of Vinson Knight," p. 4; John Tanner, "Sketch of an Elder's Life," Scraps of Biography, Tenth Book (Salt Lake City, 1883), p. 14; "Diary of Joel Hills Johnson, 1802-1882," I, p. 17. See also Wilford Woodruff, Leaves From My Journal (Salt Lake City, 1882), p. 21.
[^71] The journal of Erastus Snow, pp. 9-13. Of the ministry of angels at the Solemn Assembly, Heber C. Kimball said: "While these things [i.e., the ordinances then being administered] were being attended to, the beloved disciple John was seen in our midst by Joseph Smith, Jun., Oliver Cowdery and others."—Helen Mar Whitney, "Early Reminiscences," Women's Exponent, IX (February 1, 1881), p. 130.
[^72] JD, XVIII, pp. 131-132.
[^73] As related by the recipient and recorded in "Diaries of Charles L. Walker, 1833-1904," II, pp. 650-651. In his autobiography, Elder Andrus wrote "I was in Kirtland at the dedication of the Temple and the endowment of the Elders. . . I saw fire descend and rest on the heads of the Elders, and they spoke with tongues, and prophesied."—Milo Andrus, Autobiographical Sketch, pub. by his son, Milo Andrus, Jr., p. 4.
[^74] Tullidge, op. cit., p. 110.
[^75] Ibid., p. 65.
[^76] Whitney, op. cit., p. 93.
[^77] Tullidge, op. cit., p. 99.
[^78] Ibid., p. 207.
[^79] Johnson, My Life's Review, p. 23.
[^80] Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, p. 11.
[^81] See D&C 124:39.
[^82] HC, II, p. 334. For the report of the second solemn assembly held in the Kirtland Temple, see ibid., pp. 475-480.
[^83] Ibid., pp 308-309.
[^84] Ibid., pp. 364, 367.
[^85] Ibid., p. 385.
[^86] Ibid., p. 388.
[^87] Ibid., p. 428.
[^88] Ibid., p. 430.
[^89] Ibid., pp. 430, 431.
[^90] Ibid., p. 431.
[^91] Ibid., pp. 432-433.
[^92] Ibid., p. 432.
[^93] As the Prophet's work related to the organization of the Church, see ibid., pp. 124, 308.
[^94] This subject will be discussed in chapter twelve.
[^95] D&C 110:10.
[^96] D&C 93:19-20. See again the section in chapter one entitled "The Hope of Glory."
[^97] I. R., Matthew 6:22. See also D&C 88:67.
[^98] 3 Nephi 13:19-24. Two references from Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the gospel by Luke should be noted in conjunction with the above statement: "If thy whole body therefore is full of light, having no part dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of a candle lighteneth a room and doth give the light in all the room."—I. R., Luke 11:37. "This he spake unto his disciples, saying, Sell that ye have and give alms; provide not for yourselves bags which wax old, but rather provide a treasure in the heavens, that faileth not; where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth."—I. R., Luke 12:36.
[^99] 3 Nephi 14:1-5. In Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of Matthew, Jesus indicates that this phase of the law of the gospel was to be used in preaching repentance to the world. It states:
[^100] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter seventeen entitled "Man Should Not Trust in the Arm of Flesh."
[^101] HC, IV, p. 605.
[^102] D&C 11:12.
[^103] Moroni 7:14-18. See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter ten entitled "Christ's Holy Spirit Leads Man Upward to God."
[^104] 3 Nephi 14:6. Continuing the view that this phase of the law of the gospel was to be used in preaching repentance to the world, Jesus said to His disciples in Palestine, as recorded in Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible:
[^105] Alma 12:9. See also D&C 63:64.
[^106] 3 Nephi 14:7-11. Though Jesus warned His Jewish disciples not to reveal the mysteries of the kingdom unto the world, He instructed them concerning those who had not embraced the gospel:
[^107] 3 Nephi 14:12.
[^108] 3 Nephi 14:13-14. Consistent with the approach taken in Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible, Jesus instructed His disciples to say to those to whom they preached the gospel: "Repent, therefore, and enter ye in at the strait gate. . . ."—I. R., Matthew 7:22.
[^109] 3 Nephi 14:15-20.
[^110] Moroni 10:24-25.
[^111] Revelation 19:10.
[^112] HC, V, pp. 215-216. See also ibid., III, p. 28; V, pp. 231-232, 427.
[^113] 3 Nephi 14:21-27. In the Prophet's Inspired Revision of the Bible, this statement is set more fully in context with the doctrine of eternal judgment, which is a fundamental principle of the gospel. "Verily I say unto you, it is not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father who is in heaven," Jesus explained. "For the day cometh, that all men shall come before me to judgment, to be judged according to their works."—I. R., Matthew 7:30-31. In that day, the Master declared that He would say to those who keep not his sayings: "Ye never knew me; depart from me ye that work iniquity."—I. R., Matthew 7:33. On the other hand, Jesus promised the Nephites, as He concluded His sermon: "Therefore, whoso remembereth these sayings of mine and doeth them, him will I raise up at the last day."—3 Nephi 15:1.
[^114] In New Testament times following the crucifixion of Christ, the Lord's Day was the day especially associated with the Lord Jesus Christ—Sunday, or resurrection day. It is mentioned by this name in Revelation 1:10. Sunday, the first day of the week, was devoted by the apostles as a time for meeting and performing spiritual activities—administering the sacrament, communing with God, receiving instructions and admonitions in spiritual things, giving religious offerings, and occupying time in holy thought and prayer. On this day, Christ arose from the grave, and during that day He appeared to His disciples and apostles on five different occasions. Also after eight days, on the first day of the next week, He appeared to the eleven apostles. At Pentecost, which some scholars contend fell that year on the first day of the week, the apostles and disciples "were all united with one accord in one place" when they had spiritual gifts conferred upon them and began to give these blessings to others by preaching the gospel and administering its ordinances to those who believed. See Acts 2. Later, when the practice of the early Church had assumed a settled form, Paul preached to the saints at Troas "upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to break bread."—Acts 20:7. To the Corinthians, Paul instructed: ". . . upon the first day of the week . . . lay up . . . in store."—1 Corinthians 16:2. The collection of religious offerings on that day seems to have been a standard practice, for Paul wrote: "Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I have given order to the churches of Galatia, even so do ye."—1 Corinthians 16:1. After citing these references and others, the New Smith's Bible Dictionary, p. 216, adds: "And all these passages have remarkable confirmation in the fact that this day is noted in similar manner, being associated with the Lord's resurrection, by extrabiblical usage; also it is never questioned, but is accepted as equally apostolic with baptism, ordination, etc.; and according to principal writers in the centuries after John's death, it existed as part and parcel of apostolic, and so of scriptural, Christianity."
[^115] D&C 59:9-15.
[^116] See D&C 68:29, where it is referred to as the Sabbath.
[^117] I. R., Mark 2:26.
[^118] See D&C 84:24.
[^119] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter thirteen entitled "The Seventh Day One of Rest."
[^120] D&C 19:9; 121:32.
[^121] See D&C 59:15; 61:36; 68:6; 78:18; 112:4; 123:17; 128:19-20.
[^122] Moses 5:11; 2 Nephi 2:25.
[^123] D&C 11:12-13.
[^124] D&C 20:54; 42:27; 43:34; 84:61; 88:121; 98:11; 100:7; 121:16; 124:116; 136:21, 23.
[^125] Here a revelation declared: "Cease to be idle; cease to be unclean; . . . cease to sleep longer than is needful; retire to thy bed early, that ye may not be weary; arise early, that your bodies and your minds may be invigorated."—D&C 88:124.
[^126] D&C 93:35. See 1 Corinthians 6:19.
[^127] D&C 88:50. See 1 Corinthians 6:19.
[^128] D&C 89:2-3.
[^129] D&C 89:4-9. For evidence that strong drinks are alcoholic drinks, see D&C 27:3. For evidence that hot drinks were defined in Joseph Smith's day as tea, coffee, etc., see TS, III (June 1, 1842), pp. 799-800.
[^130] D&C 89:10-17.
[^131] 131. D&C 89:18, 20.
[^132] 132. D&C 89:19.
