Hyrum L. Andrus, Principles of Perfection ( 1970)

12

The Divine Patriarchal Order

Let all my saints . . . build a house to my name, for the Most High to dwell therein.

For there is not a place found on earth that he may come to and restore again that which was lost unto you, or which he hath taken away, even the fulness of the priesthood.—REVELATION TO JOSEPH SMITH.

The Lord through Joseph Smith made it clear that it is not enough for man to be born of water and of the Spirit and thereby become a son of Jesus Christ in eternal life. To realize the full purpose of his being, man must also become a father spiritually, under Christ, in the sense that he is an agent through whom the living attributes and powers of the Holy Spirit are developed in his children in the flesh. The gospel program requires those who become sons of Christ to be organized into a divine patriarchal order where each man is made a father spiritually over his children on earth. This is an important feature of the gospel plan. It is by the sacred rites, ordinances, and covenants which are administered in the temple that the Saints are organized into this divine family order and become fathers and mothers under Christ in developing the divine attributes and powers of eternal life in their children.

Restoration Of Keys Of Divine Patriarchal Order

Early Beginnings of Divine Patriarchal Order

Since the divine patriarchal order has its basis in the covenant of baptism by which those who are born into the kingdom of God become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ, it had its beginning in this dispensation in the ministry of John the Baptist to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, in May, 1829. [^1] John's mission anciently was to go forth "in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord." [^2] The Aaronic Priesthood was restored in modern times to fulfill the same purposes. Those who received it were to begin the work of building up the divine patriarchal order in preparation for the coming of Christ—the Father of all who acquire membership in the celestial family order. [^3]

After having begun to teach the plan of birth into the kingdom of God in the new dispensation, Joseph Smith started, on January 21, 1836, to organize the divine patriarchal order as a sanctified system on earth. He began to administer the ordinance which was made the foundation of the temple rites through which the divine family order is organized, by giving the ordinance to his father, Joseph Smith, Sr., who had previously been ordained to be the Patriarch to the Church. In conjunction with the ordinance, Joseph Smith, Sr. was blessed by the First Presidency of the Church to be the Patriarch to the Church and to attend to all the duties that pertained to that office. The members of the First Presidency, beginning with the eldest, then received the ordinance under the hands of Patriarch Smith. When the Prophet received the sacred rite, the Patriarch sealed upon him "the blessings of Moses, to lead Israel in the latter days, even as Moses led him in days of old; also the blessings of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob." [^4]

It is apparent that the above ordinance was patriarchal in nature, and that Joseph Smith received special rights and blessings which pertained to him alone as the presiding officer of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. Patriarch Smith, who had been ordained to the office of Patriarch to the Church on December 18, 1833, was empowered by the First Presidency to officiate in the patriarchal office in giving this ordinance to members of that presiding body. As an additional blessing, the Patriarch sealed upon the Prophet the blessings of Moses and of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. [^5] Though the full keys and powers of the divine patriarchal order were not given to the latter-day Seer until April 3, 1836, it appears that in the above ordinance he had sealed upon his head the basic powers of presidency over the family of Christ in this dispensation. [^6]

The Prophet's position as the presiding figure in the divine patriarchal order in this dispensation is like that of Abraham in his. "As I said unto Abraham concerning the kindreds of the earth," a revelation declared, "even so I say unto my servant Joseph." [^7] Abraham is a father in eternal life under Christ of all who are born into the kingdom of God during and after his day. [^8] The latter-day Seer's appointment to a like position in his day and for suceeding generations was foreshadowed when Christ appeared to him in February, 1831, and instructed him to seal several individuals to eternal life. To them the Prophet said: "He [Christ] has given you all to me." [^9] By the ordinance referred to above and by the appointments which he later received from Moses, Elias, and Elijah, [^10] Joseph Smith was given the full right through the priesthood to be the father in eternal life under Christ of all who are born into the kingdom of God in this dispensation.

Coming of Moses, Elias, and Elijah

Only the initial ordinances of the divine patriarchal order were given to the Saints in the Kirtland Temple. Brigham Young explained that even though those "preparatory ordinances" were "accompanied by the ministration of angels, and the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, [they] were but a faint similitude of the ordinances of the House of the Lord in their fulness." [^11] A few days after the solemn assembly was held in the Kirtland Temple, in March, 1836, the keys and powers by which the more complete program of the divine patriarchal order could be built up and perfected were given to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. With the restoration of these keys and powers, new ordinances which pertain to the divine family order were to be performed and new arrangements in church organization made. A higher echelon of divine organization, doctrine, and power was to be established.

The keys and powers of the higher program were restored on Sunday, April 3, 1836. After the administration of the Lord's Supper, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery retired to the pulpit of the temple, the veils separating that place from the congregation having been lowered, and bowed themselves in solemn and silent prayer. They wrote that upon rising from prayer:

The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father. . . .

After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north.

After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed.

After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said:

Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—

To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—

Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors. [^12]

Visitation of Moses

The keys and conferrals which were given to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple enabled them to accomplish several things in establishing the divine patriarchal order on the earth. The scattered remnants of ancient Israel were to be gathered in the latter days. As early as 1823, the angel Moroni informed Joseph Smith of the nature of this great work. [^13] Among the gathered remnants, with others who would identify themselves in the same covenant, the divine patriarchal order was to be established. To this end Moses, who held the keys of the gathering and leading of Israel anciently, restored those keys to the earth in 1836.

Coming of Elias

Elias conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the same divine rights, privileges, and promises which God gave anciently to Abraham and his elect posterity in the flesh—his descendants through Isaac and Jacob. [^14] These rights, privileges, and promises are those which pertain to the divine patriarchal order as it centered in Abraham and the patriarchs before him. In this conferral it was as though Elias said to the Prophet, "By this appointment you are a modern Abraham possessing that which God gave to the ancient patriarchs. In your day and for the generations of the earth to come, the rights, privileges, and promises which God gave to Abraham will center in you."

The divine patriarchal order, which has its basis in the covenant of baptism, is brought to fruition in the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, in which the sons and daughters of Christ are made fathers and mothers spiritually over their children in the flesh and are given the promises which were conferred upon the Prophet and his associate by Elias. A revelation declared that by means of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage "Abraham received promises concerning his seed, and of the fruit of his loins." [^15] It then said to Joseph Smith: "This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham." [^16] The same general blessings are given to all who embrace the sacred covenant of eternal marriage.

Like all other promises which have their origin in the appointments which were made in the Grand Organizational Council before man was placed upon the earth, the promises which were given to Abraham's descendants through Isaac and Jacob were contingent upon their faith and their responsiveness to the Holy Spirit in mortality. These sacred rights and promises consisted of: (1) the promise that Abraham's descendants would be numerous and that they would continue in the world and out of the world (in the resurrection) without end; [^17] (2) the right of his elect posterity to receive the articles and covenants of adoption by which they could become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ in the living attributes and powers of eternal life; [^18] (3) the right of his elect descendants in the flesh to bear the priesthood of God; [^19] (4) the right of his elect children to receive those sacred covenants and sealing powers of the priesthood which are administered in the house of the Lord by which they could be organized according to the divine patriarchal order and become fathers and mothers spiritually under Christ in the divine family order; [^20] and (5) the right of his elect posterity, by complying with the above requisites, to be endowed with the glory and power of God. [^21]

Two major responsibilities accompanied these blessings and promises: (1) the responsibility of building up the divine patriarchal order to be an ensign and a standard to the world, and thus preparing the Saints to be endowed with glory; and (2) the charge to preach the gospel to all other families of the earth, that by obedience to the plan of life and salvation responsive souls throughout the world might become sons and daughters of Christ and become part of the divine patriarchal order through adoption.

Appearance of Elijah

After Elias had committed a dispensation of appointment and promise to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, Elijah then revealed the priesthood and the sacred covenants by which the appointments and promises which were given by Elias could be administered to men in the latter days. In 1823, the angel Moroni quoted Malachi's prophecy to Joseph Smith concerning the coming of Elijah, and gave significant clarifications concerning the nature of the ancient prophet's latter-day ministration. Moroni's version states:

Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers.

If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming. [^22]

Elijah came to reveal the priesthood. [^23] To reveal is to make known or disclose, as something before unknown or unseen—to give knowledge or to divulge. Elijah thus revealed the use or function of the priesthood in a sphere of action theretofore unknown, and he committed the keys by which the priesthood could be used in this new sphere and by which it could perform the new ordinances. [^24] In referring to this new usage, Brigham Young said: "There are keys to open up other ordinances which I will mention." [^25] Elijah committed these keys to men on earth. Joseph Smith explained that God would "send Elijah to seal the children to the fathers, and the fathers to the children." [^26] This was a new way in which the sealing power of the priesthood was to function. Of the key to that power, Parley P. Pratt said: "This last key of the Priesthood is the most sacred of all, and pertains exclusively to the First Presidency of the Church, without whose sanction, and approval or authority, no sealing blessing shall be administered pertaining to things of the resurrection and the life to come." [^27] By the keys of the priesthood which Elijah restored, the divine patriarchal order can be established on earth and extended to the faithful in past generations until all the righteous children of Adam are sealed together in one great patriarchal unit. [^28]

Moroni also declared to Joseph Smith that Elijah would "plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers." [^29] The fathers are the ancient patriarchs. And the promises which were made to the fathers are those promises which God gave to Abraham and other great patriarchs concerning their descendants in the flesh, which promises Elias conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple. By the keys and functions of the priesthood which Elijah revealed, these promises may be planted in the hearts of the children—that is, actually given to the children—of the ancient patriarchs in the latter days. The difference between the conferrals which were made by Elias and Elijah, therefore, is that Elias committed a dispensation of appointment and promise, while Elijah revealed the glorious fact that the priesthood could be used to confer these appointments and promises upon the Saints, and he gave the keys and covenants of the priesthood by which this could be done.

Joseph Smith spoke on two occasions of the nature of the keys and powers of the priesthood which Elijah restored in the last days. He said:

Elijah was the last Prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood, and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. It is true that the Savior had authority and power to bestow this blessing; but the sons of Levi were too prejudiced. "And I will send Elijah the Prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lord," etc., etc. Why send Elijah? Because he holds the key of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness. [^30]

Again the Prophet said: "The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that ye have power to hold the key of the revelations, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth; and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God, even unto the turning of the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the hearts of the children unto the fathers, even those who are in heaven." [^31]

This statement makes it plain that Elijah revealed the priesthood and committed the keys to build up the kingdom of God as a patriarchal structure, not merely as a church or as a social order. Thus, while Elias appointed Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to the same rights, privileges, and promises which God gave to the ancient patriarchs, Elijah revealed the priesthood and committed the keys and covenants which were necessary in order to organize the kingdom of God as a divine family order and to seal upon the faithful the rights, privileges, and promises which Elias gave. The Prophet observed: "He [God] shall send Elijah the prophet, and he shall reveal the covenants of the fathers in relation to the children, and the covenants of the children in relation to the fathers." [^32] Again: "Elijah shall reveal the covenants to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers." [^33]

Nature Of Divine Patriarchal Order

Antiquity of Divine Patriarchal Order

The Book of Abraham indicates that though the divine patriarchal order began on this sphere with Adam, it had its origin in heaven before the creation of the earth. "It came down from the fathers, from the beginning of time," Abraham wrote, "yea, even from the beginning, or before the foundations of the earth." [^34] This divine family order thus came down in eternity by generation to Adam, and from Adam it extended to the patriarchs of later times on this earth.

For men on this earth, the divine patriarchal order begins with the Father, Elohim—the Man of Holiness. Joseph Smith taught that this exalted being is not merely a creator in the sense that He is an organizer, but that He is our Father. He is the great head of human procreation—the Father of our organized spirits, directly, and of our physical bodies, indirectly, through Adam. [^35] He is also the center of the living attributes and powers of eternal life, or glory. From Him, these divine attributes and powers are dispensed to man through Christ, with the keys, rights, and powers by which the divine patriarchal order can be established and perpetuated. The Prophet interpreted a certain figure in facsimile number two in the Book of Abraham as representing "God sitting upon his throne, revealing through the heavens the grand Key-words of the Priesthood." [^36] Through these the divine patriarchal order is established among the righteous in the several worlds which God creates. Through Christ, this divine family order is designed to unite the saints of all ages on the earth into one great family under the Man of Holiness, each father receiving proper respect and recognition in each aspect of life within the over-all program.

Eternal Marriage the Basis of Divine Patriarchal Order

One of the glorious truths which was revealed to Joseph Smith was that the sacred relationships of marriage and of the home should continue both in time and in eternity, if the covenant of marriage is made and kept according to the law of God and sealed by the Holy Priesthood. [^37] The new and everlasting covenant of marriage is the crowning covenant of the divine patriarchal order and the source from which all the rights, privileges, and blessings that are associated with that system flow. Within the divine patriarchal order, wives are united with their husbands in the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, and children are secured to their parents in a sacred family order that is designed to continue forever. By organizing each family of the faithful into an eternal unit and by uniting each generation of the righteous to the succeeding generation, the divine patriarchal order can be built up and perpetuated in the earth. [^38]

Organization of Divine Patriarchal Order in Temple

Joseph Smith taught that the ordinances of the house of the Lord are those by which the divine patriarchal order can be established on earth and perpetuated from generation to generation. [^39] "Go to and finish the temple," he said as he spoke to the Saints of the Patriarchal Priesthood, "and God will fill it with power, and you will then receive more knowledge concerning this priesthood." [^40]

When the Prophet began to administer the program of the temple, he explained that he then "set forth the order pertaining to the Ancient of Days." [^41] The Ancient of Days is the oldest man, Adam, [^42] and the order which pertains to the Ancient of Days is the divine patriarchal order over which Adam, or Michael, [^43] presides, "under the counsel and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life." [^44] By means of the temple, that eternal family order was again to be established on earth among those who accepted the gospel in the last days.

Righteous Men Priests and Kings unto God

Within the divine patriarchal order, righteous men were to be made kings and priests (and their wives queens and priestesses) over their faithful descendants. Joseph Smith repeatedly made reference to these major objectives of the gospel program. Referring to biblical testimony of the millennial kingdom, he said: "John represents the sound which he heard from heaven, as giving thanks and glory to God, saying that the Lamb . . . had made them kings and priests unto God: and they should reign on the earth." "If the Saints are not to reign," the Prophet queried, "for what purpose are they crowned?" [^45] As he spoke of the millennial kingdom to be established through the work of the latter-day dispensation, Joseph Smith referred to it as "a kingdom of Priests and kings to God and the Lamb, forever." [^46] Of the purpose of the temple in organizing this patriarchal kingdom, he said:

As soon as the Temple and baptismal font are prepared, we calculate to give the Elders of Israel . . . those last and most impressive ordinances, without which we cannot obtain celestial thrones. But there must be a holy place prepared for this purpose, . . . that men may receive their endowments and be made kings and priests unto the most High God. [^47]

Righteous Men Fathers in Eternal Life

As a priest in the divine patriarchal order, each righteous man is a father over his children in the divine attributes and powers of eternal life. Having become a son of Jesus Christ by being born into the kingdom of God, each faithful man may grow up spiritually to become, in turn, a father under Christ within the divine patriarchal system. To this end, he must receive the sacred rites, ordinances, and covenants of the house of the Lord.

Ordinances are channels of divine mercy and power. Through the higher ordinances of the priesthood which are administered in the temple, a righteous man can acquire greater manifestations of divine truth and power than he can normally receive through the gift of the Holy Ghost alone. Joseph Smith spoke of the faithful receiving the "power of the Priesthood" through the ordinances of the temple. [^48] "You need an endowment, brethren," he said, "in order that you may be prepared and able to overcome all things." Of the expressions of the spiritual power which they could acquire in the temple, he said: "The sick will be healed, the lame made to walk, the deaf to hear, and the blind to see, through your instrumentality." [^49] For this reason, apparently, these rites and ordinances are referred to as the endowment ceremony, for thereby the Saints can be endowed with power from God. With these greater channels of divine power open to him, a faithful man can become a father spiritually in the full sense that is possible within the divine patriarchal order.

One who is a father spiritually under Christ possesses the right and responsibility to confer the blessings and powers of the priesthood and of the gospel upon his children in the flesh. A man who receives all the blessings of the temple is not a father merely because he gives physical endowments to those who are tabernacled in the flesh as his children, but because he can also lawfully develop in them the divine attributes and powers of the Spirit which lead eventually to eternal life. This is a paternal requirement of the highest order. The Prophet may have had this general concept in mind when he suggested: "There are many teachers, but, perhaps, not many fathers." [^50]

According to latter-day revelation, Adam was the first man on earth to be born into the kingdom of God and thus to become a son of Jesus Christ in eternal life. [^51] He was also the first to receive the sacred covenants upon which the divine patriarchal order is built, [^52] and in this way he was made a father spiritually over his righteous descendants in the flesh. Under Christ, he presides over the divine patriarchal order for this earth, as the great spiritual head in the eternal family of the righteous. But even though Adam is the great progenitor in physical life of all men on earth, only those who embrace the gospel and thereby acquire membership in the divine patriarchal order become his children in the living attributes and powers of eternal life.

Joseph Smith taught that Adam was called Michael because of his place in the divine patriarchal order. Having been born into the kingdom of God and having acquired the keys of the priesthood over his posterity in the flesh, with the right to dispense to them the spiritual blessings and powers that lead to eternal life, he was to stand as the father of both physical and divine endowments of life for his children to the latest generation. "He is Michael," the Prophet explained, "because he was the first and father of all, not only by [physical] progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth." [^53] This statement is in harmony with a revelation which declared: "[God] . . . hath appointed Michael your prince, and established his feet, and set him upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life." [^54]

The name Michael means "Who is like God?" The Man of Holiness is the source of all the attributes and powers of life in the total plan of life and salvation—in spirit life, in physical life, and in eternal life. If the interrogation above is applied to Michael, or Adam, it may be said that he is like God in that through him the attributes and powers of both physical and eternal life are given to man.

Other patriarchs after Adam were given the same rights, powers, and privileges concerning their descendants. In addition, they were made fathers by adoption of those from all other families of the earth, during and after their day, who embraced the gospel and became sons and daughters in the celestial family of Jesus Christ. For this reason the Lord promised Abraham: ". . . as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father." [^55] This means that when the divine patriarchal order is perfected for this earth, those who embrace the gospel from all families of the earth will become the children of the patriarchs, in one great celestial family, through the sealing power of the priesthood.

That which was true of Adam and of other ancient patriarchs is also true in a general way of every man who embraces the gospel and receives all the sacred ordinances and covenants of the temple.

Divine Patriarchal Order Sealed

Joseph Smith taught that when the divine patriarchal order has been organized by means of the sacred covenants of the temple, the sealing power of the Melchizedek Priesthood can be used in behalf of those who are tried and proved, to make their calling and election sure to the sacred family relationships which exist in eternity within the divine patriarchal order. Through the sealing power of the priesthood, the faithful are made in actual fact priests and kings (and priestesses and queens) to God within the divine family order, with the promise guaranteed to them by the sealing power of the Holy Priesthood that they will reign with Christ in the millennial society and in eternity. [^56] Those who are finally crowned receive a fulness of the priesthood. "For any person to have the fullness . . . he must be a king and a priest," Brigham Young explained. "A man may be anointed king and priest long before he receives his kingdom." [^57] By the action of the sealing power, the divine plan of life and salvation is consummated so far as man's earth life is concerned, and the faithful are prepared to receive exaltation in the celestial kingdom of God.

Sealing of Children to Parents

The same basic principles which apply to marriage for time and eternity also hold true in the binding of children to their parents in a family unit for eternity. Concerning children, the Prophet said to the Saints: "In order for you to receive your children to yourselves you must have a promise—some ordinance; some blessing, in order to ascend above principalities." [^58]

Children who are born within the covenant of eternal marriage are bound automatically to their parents according to the provisions of that covenant. But if children are not born within the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, they must be sealed to their parents by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood if the family unit is to continue in eternity.

Interrelationship of Temple Ordinances

The Prophet implied that there is an interrelationship between the rites and ordinances of the temple similar to that of the first principles and ordinances of the gospel, [^59] so that a person may have to receive all the rites and ordinances of the house of the Lord in order to have any of them prove efficacious in the final analysis. The latter-day Seer declared: "Those who will not receive all the ordinances [of the temple] will come short of the fullness of that [celestial] glory, if they do not lose the whole of it." [^60] In receiving the initial ordinance of the house of the Lord, a man is given the promise (based upon his faithfulness) of becoming a king and a priest in the kingdom of God. Thereafter the program of the temple is designed to bring man to realize that exalted station in eternity. There may be no halfway place at which he can stop. Should he fail to achieve the full objectives of that program, he may lose all of that which the temple has prepared him to receive. [^61]

Divine Patriarchal Order Instituted

Basic Ordinance Given in Kirtland Temple

The basic ordinance of the program by which the divine patriarchal order was to be established was administered in the Kirtland Temple to many who had previously received the priesthood. [^62] Orson Pratt explained, however, that this was not the full development of the endowment. [^63] This was the same basic ordinance which the Prophet received as referred to in the beginning of this chapter, [^64] except that he was given additional blessings by virtue of his position as head of the divine patriarchal order in this dispensation.

Introduction of Ordinances of Holy Endowment

In the months following the divine manifestations and conferrals which occurred in Kirtland, the Saints had little time to enjoy the temple they had built. With Americans in general they were caught in the financial collapse of 1837. The majority of the Saints left Kirtland under trying circumstances and spent a hectic period with other members of the Church who had settled in Missouri. Soon after this the Saints were driven from Missouri and were faced with the task of building another city and temple at Nauvoo, Illinois, beginning in 1839. Their second temple was designed as a holy sanctuary in which they could perform the higher rites, ordinances, and covenants by which they could be organized as families within the divine patriarchal order. However, Joseph Smith was prompted to have these blessings administered to some of the brethren and their wives before the Nauvoo Temple was finished. His decision to do so proved to be inspired, for he was killed several months before that structure was completed.

The Prophet began on May 4, 1842, to introduce among the Saints the more complete program of the house of the Lord. Reporting the activities of that day, he said:

I spent the day in the upper part of the store, that is my private office . . . in council with General James Adams, of Springfield, Patriarch Hyrum Smith, Bishops Newel K. Whitney and George Miller, and President Brigham Young and Elders Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards, instructing them in the principles and order of the Priesthood . . . setting forth the order pertaining to the Ancient of Days, and all those plans and principles by which any one is enabled to secure the fullness of those blessings which have been prepared for the Church of the First Born, and come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim in the eternal worlds. In this council was instituted the ancient order of things for the first time in these last days. And the communications I made to this council were of things spiritual, and to be received only by the spiritual minded: and there was nothing made known to these men but what will be made known to all the Saints of the last days, so soon as they are prepared to receive, and a proper place is prepared to communicate them, even to the weakest of the Saints; therefore let the Saints be diligent in building the Temple, and all houses which they have been, or shall hereafter be, commanded of God to build; and wait their time with patience in all meekness, faith, perseverance unto the end, knowing assuredly that all these things referred to in this council are always governed by the principle of revelation. [^65]

This statement can be understood fully only by those who have received the ordinances of the house of the Lord and are thoroughly acquainted with the plan of life and salvation. The essential point is that in the temple the faithful are given sacred rites and covenants by which they are organized into a divine patriarchal order which on this earth centers in the Ancient of Days—the oldest man, Adam. This is the "ancient order of things," the rights, privileges, and promises of which were centered in later generations in Abraham, and in modern times in Joseph Smith. [^66]

In the above statement, the Prophet also taught that by organizing themselves according to the divine patriarchal order, Latter-day Saints could secure the fulness of those blessings which pertain to the church of the Firstborn. Admission into that church requires that man make his calling and election sure to celestial glory, through righteousness and by the sealing power of the Holy Priesthood. And before he can secure a fulness of the blessings which pertain to the church of the Firstborn, he must receive all the ordinances of the house of the Lord and be sealed unto exaltation in the celestial kingdom of God. [^67] In this way, man can come up in the resurrection to abide in "the presence of the Eloheim [i.e., the Gods] in the eternal worlds" [^68] and be made one with them in the ever-increasing family order of eternity.

There were those other than the seven men listed above who received the higher ordinances of the priesthood in the upper floor of the Prophet's store before the temple was finished. On December 2, 1843, Joseph Smith reported that several brethren "received their endowments and further instructions in the Priesthood." [^69]

Some women also received these sacred rites and ordinances together with their husbands. There is no ordinance or blessing of the priesthood given to the Saints in the temple which is not designed to be conferred upon women in association with their husbands. While addressing the Female Relief Society in April, 1842, Joseph Smith "spoke of delivering the keys of the Priesthood to the Church, and said that the faithful members of the Relief Society should receive them in connection with their husbands, that the Saints whose integrity had been tried and proved might know how to ask the Lord and receive an answer." [^70]

Ebenezer Robinson, who served as an editor of the Times and Seasons, reported that women as well as men were given the endowment ordinances at Nauvoo. [^71] Emma Smith apparently received them in 1843 [^72] and was instrumental in administering them to other women. In his journal, Heber C. Kimball wrote: "My wife Vilate and many females were received into the holy order." [^73] Having reported a mission which George A. Smith performed in the East, Bathsheba W. Smith wrote: "Soon after my husband's return we were blessed by receiving our endowments and were sealed under the holy law of Celestial Marriage which was revealed July 12, 1843." [^74] Many years later, in 1894, Wilford Woodruff commented that he and Bathsheba W. Smith were the only persons then living who received their blessings of the temple from the Prophet Joseph Smith. [^75]

Joseph Smith apparently obtained many elements of the temple ceremony from the writings of Abraham which came into his possession in 1835. In his interpretation of facsimile number 2 in the Book of Abraham, the latter-day Seer wrote: "Is made to represent . . . the grand Key-words of the Holy Priesthood, as revealed to Adam in the Garden of Eden, as also to Seth, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and all to whom the Priesthood was revealed." [^76] Another part of the facsimile, he said: "Represents God sitting upon his throne, revealing through the heavens the grand Key-words of the Priesthood." [^77] Again, another part of the facsimile, "Contains writings that cannot be revealed unto the world; but it is to be had in the Holy Temple of God." [^78]

The Prophet also obtained much information about the temple and its sacred rites and ordinances by direct revelation. Concerning the Nauvoo Temple, the Lord said:

. . . verily I say unto you, let this house be built unto my name, that I may reveal mine ordinances therein unto my people;

For I deign to reveal unto my church things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the dispensation of the fulness of times.

And I will show unto my servant Joseph all things pertaining to this house, and the priesthood thereof, and the place whereon it shall be built. [^79]

Having obtained a knowledge of the principles and ordinances of the temple program, the latter-day Seer proceeded to arrange them in their proper order. Brigham Young, who was intimately associated with the Prophet in this work, later said of the institution of the endowment ceremony at Nauvoo:

We went into the large room over the store in Nauvoo, Joseph Smith divided up the room the best that he could, . . . gave us our instructions as we passed along from one department to another, . . . And after we had got through, Brother Joseph turned to me and said, "Brother Brigham, this is not arranged right, but we have done the best we could under the circumstances in which we are placed, and I want you to take this matter in hand and organize and systematize all these ceremonies. . . ." I did so and each time I got something more so that when we went through the Temple at Nauvoo I understood and knew how to place them there. [^80]

The Prophet felt a sense of urgency in administering these sacred ordinances and instructions to others, and in conferring upon the Twelve a similar right to do so. "I know not why," he commented, "but for some reason I am constrained to hasten my preparations, and to confer upon the Twelve all the ordinances, keys, covenants, endowments, and sealing ordinances of the Priesthood, and so set before them a pattern in all things pertaining to the sanctuary and the endowment therein." Having done so he rejoiced exceedingly. "The Lord is about to lay the burden on your shoulders and let me rest awhile," he declared to the Twelve; "and if they kill me, the Kingdom of God will roll on, as I have now finished the work which was laid upon me, by committing to you all things for the building up of the kingdom according to the heavenly vision, and the pattern shown me from heaven." [^81] John Taylor observed:

Joseph Smith, before his death, was much exercised about the completion of the Temple in Nauvoo, and the administering of the ordinances therein. In his anxiety and for fear he should not live to see the Temple completed, he prepared a place over what was known as the brick store . . . where to a chosen few he administered those ordinances that we now have today associated with endowments, and that if anything should happen to him—which he evidently contemplated—he would feel that he had then fulfilled his mission, that he had conferred upon others all the keys given to him by the manifestations of the power of God. [^82]

When the Nauvoo Temple was sufficiently completed and prepared, the sacred rites and ordinances which Joseph Smith administered to a limited number of people before his death were then given more generally to the Saints. In January, 1845, Brigham Young wrote to Wilford Woodruff of his intentions: "In all probability by next December we shall be giving the Saints their endowments." [^83] In April, 1845, the Twelve wrote to Lyman Wight: "There is every prospect of getting on the roof [of the temple] and finishing some rooms by next autumn when we shall commence administering the ordinances of endowment according to the commandment." [^84]

The ordinances of the endowment were administered for the first time in the Nauvoo Temple during the afternoon and evening of December 10, 1845. [^85] In noting the activities of that day, Heber C. Kimball wrote in his journal that, while President Brigham Young made the final preparations of the celestial room for the endowment, Mary Ann Young, Vilate Kimball, and Elizabeth Ann Whitney received the initial ordinance of the sacred ceremony in another part of the temple. [^86]

Thereafter the endowment ceremony was administered to many of the Saints. To Wilford Woodruff, Brigham Young reported on December 17, 1845:

We have now commenced the endowment in the attic story of the Lord's house. We are engaged night and day and have given the endowment to about 400 persons among whom is Sister Smoot who is much pleased at the fulfillment of your prophecy, "That she should go into the Lord's house." [^87]

New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage Instituted

As early as 1831, the Prophet spoke of some points of doctrine relating to the patriarchal order of marriage. [^88] But how early he understood the full concept of marriage within that divine family order is not known. He included some features of the divine patriarchal order in marriage ceremonies which he performed before the coming of Elias and Elijah. While solemnizing the marriage of Newel Knight and Lydia Goldthwaite in November, 1835, he "remarked that marriage was an institution of heaven, instituted in the garden of Eden; that it was necessary it should be solemnized by the authority of the everlasting Priesthood." In the ceremony, he "pronounced upon them the blessings that the Lord conferred upon Adam and Eve in the garden of Eden, that is, to multiply and replenish the earth, with the addition of long life and prosperity." [^89] In reporting the solemnizing of a marriage in January, 1836, which ceremony "was conducted after the order of heaven," Joseph Smith said: "I pronounced upon them the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and such other blessings as the Lord put into my heart." [^90]

Though these ceremonies included features of the concept of marriage within the divine patriarchal order, they lacked some of the most important elements of the more complete program which the Prophet later instituted, including the fact that when the marriage union is properly solemnized it will continue in the resurrection forever. [^91] In referring to a period in the winter of 1840 when he was closely associated with the Prophet, Parley P. Pratt wrote:

During these interviews he taught me many great and glorious principles concerning God and the heavenly order of eternity. It was at this time that I received from him the first idea of eternal family organization, and the eternal union of the sexes in those inexpressibly endearing relationships which none but the highly intellectual, the refined and pure in heart, know how to prize, and which are at the very foundation of everything worthy to be called happiness.

Till then I had learned to esteem kindred affections and sympathies as appertaining solely to this transitory state, as something from which the heart must be entirely weaned, in order to be fitted for its heavenly state.

It was Joseph Smith who taught me how to prize the endearing relationships of father and mother, husband and wife, of brother and sister, son and daughter.

It was from him that I learned that the wife of my bosom might be secured to me for time and all eternity; and that the refined sympathies and affections which endeared us to each other emanated from the foundation of divine eternal love. It was from him that I learned that we might cultivate these affections, and grow and increase in the same to all eternity; while the result of our endless union would be an offspring as numerous as the stars of heaven, or the sands of the sea shore.

It was from him that I learned the true dignity and destiny of a son of God, clothed with an eternal priesthood, as the patriarch and sovereign of his countless offspring. It was from him that I learned that the highest dignity of womanhood was, to stand as a queen and priestess to her husband, and to reign for ever and ever as the queen mother of her numerous and still increasing offspring.

I had loved before, but I knew not why. But now I loved—with a pureness—an intensity of elevated, exalted feeling, which would lift my soul from the transitory things of this grovelling sphere and expand it as the ocean. I felt that God was my heavenly Father indeed; that Jesus was my brother, and that the wife of my bosom was an immortal, eternal companion; a kind ministering angel, given to me as a comfort, and a crown of glory for ever and ever. In short, I could now love with the spirit and with the understanding also.

Yet, at that time, my dearly beloved brother, Joseph Smith, had barely touched a single key; had merely lifted a corner of the veil and given me a single glance into eternity. [^92]

Joseph Smith dictated the revelation setting forth the law governing the new and everlasting covenant of marriage on July 12, 1843. [^93] The Lord instructed the Prophet that for a man to have claim upon his wife in eternity he must be given a binding promise to that effect by the Holy Priesthood. To exist forever, a contract such as that of marriage must be made according to the law of God, so that it is centered in a system of law which exists throughout eternity. Of the conditions of the law of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, the revelation said: "All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations, that are not made and entered into and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, of him who is anointed, both as well for time and for all eternity, and that too most holy, by revelation and commandment through the medium of mine anointed, whom I have appointed on the earth to hold this power, . . . are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead; for all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead." [^94]

That which God establishes is done according to His law and by His authority. The revelation explained:

Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion.

Will I accept an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name?

Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?

And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?

I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord. [^95]

The revelation then states that "everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be," that are not made by the law and authority of God "shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection." Only those things will remain which are of God. That which is not ordained by Him and His law will be "shaken and destroyed." [^96] As these facts apply to the covenant of marriage, the revelation said: "Therefore, if a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not by me nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world and she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead, and when they are out of the world; therefore they are not bound by any law when they are out of the world." [^97]

The same principle holds true when, by mere human authority or by a usurpation of divine authority, a covenant is made for both time and eternity. Here the revelation states:

. . . if a man marry a wife, and make a covenant with her for time and for all eternity, if that covenant is not by me or by my word, which is my law, and is not sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, through him whom I have anointed and appointed unto this power, then it is not valid neither of force when they are out of the world, because they are not joined by me, saith the Lord, neither by my word; when they are out of the world it cannot be received there, because the angels and the gods are appointed there, by whom they cannot pass; they cannot, therefore, inherit my glory; for my house is a house of order, saith the Lord God. [^98]

Within the gospel and under the authority of the Holy Priesthood, marriage is performed for time and for all eternity. The Lord said of the law which governs the new and everlasting covenant of marriage:

. . . if a man marry a wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys of this priesthood; and [in addition] it shall be said unto them—Ye shall come forth in the first resurrection; and if it be after the first resurrection, in the next resurrection; and shall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths—then shall it be written in the Lamb's Book of Life, that he shall commit no murder whereby to shed innocent blood, . . . it shall be done unto them in all things whatsoever my servant hath put upon them, in time, and through all eternity; and shall be of full force when they are out of the world; and they shall pass by the angels, and the gods, which are set there, to their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads, which glory shall be a fullness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. [^99]

The word "fulness," italicized in the above quotation, means a fulness of the Father's glory. Concerning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, God declared: "No one can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter into my glory." [^100] He then stated: "And as pertaining to the new and everlasting covenant, it was instituted for the fulness of my glory; and he that receiveth a fulness thereof must and shall abide the law." [^101] To have "a continuation of the seeds forever and ever" is to have power to beget children after the resurrection forever. [^102] Brigham Young explained: "When our spirits receive their bodies [in the resurrection], and through our faithfulness we are worthy to be crowned, we will then receive authority to produce both spirit and body." [^103] To the power of procreation which man now possesses will be added the power to beget spirit children. Like the Man of Holiness, the righteous who are exalted in celestial society will have power to organize spirit with its primal intelligence and stand as fathers and gods over their children in eternity. Their respective patriarchal kingdoms will then extend into eternity and they will be exalted in the divine patriarchal order of celestial society over their continually extending family. They will be fathers in all three basic stages in the over-all plan of life and salvation—spirit life, physical life and eternal life. [^104]

These are the most distinctive features of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. From the above explanation it can be seen that, like the apex of a pyramid, that sacred covenant fulfills and crowns all other covenants within the divine plan of life and salvation. The program which begins on earth with baptism is brought to fruition in eternity through the covenant of eternal marriage. Through that covenant those who become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ are given a fulness of the glory of God and are made fathers and mothers in eternal life over their children on this sphere and in eternity, within the divine patriarchal order. For this reason Joseph Smith taught that the ordinances of the temple were those by which man may "come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim [i.e., the Gods] in the eternal worlds." [^105] To abide in the presence of the Man of Holiness and other supreme beings like Him, [^106] man must possess the same general powers and rights which they possess; he must be a father in the three basic stages of life which are mentioned in the paragraph above. A revelation declared: "Strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it, because ye receive me not in the world neither do ye know me." [^107] Christ then added:

But if ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and shall receive your exaltation; that where I am ye shall be also.

This is eternal lives—to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent. I am he. Receive ye, therefore, my law. [^108]

Exaltation and Eternal Lives

The statements in the revelation quoted above use two terms to designate the state and power of those who enjoy an eternal marital union within the divine patriarchal order of celestial society: first, "exaltation"; and second, "eternal lives," with its synonym "the continuation of lives." The term "exaltation" comes from the word "exalt," which means to raise or elevate in position or rank—to give glory, to pay high honor, or to magnify. In the above statement, the term "exaltation" therefore means for man to be exalted to a place of power and authority within the divine patriarchal order of the celestial kingdom. Since this is a divine family order, he must be made a patriarch, a priest, and a king over an ever-increasing progeny in eternity in order to be exalted in celestial society. To be exalted, man must be endowed with a fulness of the glory of the Father in the resurrection, which is to have "eternal life," [^109] and to possess the power to beget children forever in the resurrection, which is to have "eternal lives"—a "continuation of lives," or a "continuation of the seeds forever and ever." [^110] These three terms—"exaltation," "eternal life," and "eternal lives"—therefore are directly related in meaning, but they each denote a different aspect of the future state of the righteous within celestial society.

Summary

Joseph Smith taught that celestial society is patriarchal in its structure, and that all who are born into the kingdom of God must be organized by the covenants and powers of the priesthood into a divine patriarchal order under Christ, who is their Father in the living attributes and powers of eternal life. In the Kirtland Temple, important keys and promises were restored by which this divine patriarchal order could be established in the latter days. Moses committed the keys of the gathering of Israel and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. With the gathering of Israel, the true patriarchal order of Israel (the divine patriarchal order) is to be established and perfected on earth. To this end Elias restored the special promises, rights, blessings, and privileges which God gave anciently to Abraham. And Elijah revealed the covenants and keys by which the divine patriarchal order can be organized among the living and can be extended back through past generations to the patriarchs of old.

The divine patriarchal order has its origin in eternity and came down by generation to Adam, and from Adam to the patriarchs in later ages. The new and everlasting covenant of marriage is the crowning covenant of the divine family order and the source from which all the rights, privileges, and blessings that are associated with that eternal system flow. The sacred rites and covenants of the temple are those by which the divine patriarchal order can be established on earth and perpetuated from generation to generation. Therein righteous men are made kings and priests (and women queens and priestesses) unto God over their posterity in the flesh and in eternity; and as priests, men are fathers in the living attributes and powers of the Holy Spirit. Having received the covenants of this divine system, the Saints were then required to make their calling and election sure to the promised blessings by receiving the sealing power of the Holy Priesthood.

Joseph Smith administered the basic ordinance of the divine patriarchal order to several men at Kirtland, Ohio, and at Nauvoo he began to administer the more complete program by which the divine order could be established among the Saints. He also dictated a revelation which set forth the law governing the new and everlasting covenant of marriage which is the crowning covenant of the divine family order. Only by means of this sacred covenant can the Saints acquire exaltation and eternal lives, with a fulness of glory, in the celestial kingdom of God.

Footnotes

In the evening of July 26, 1872, Brigham Young stated in the Ward Meeting house of the 14th Ward in Salt Lake City, Utah, that he was the only one alive of seven men to whom "the Prophet revealed the Endowments and Sealing."—The Diary of Charles L. Walker, under date.

In the meeting of May 4th, Joseph Smith may not have administered to them the full ordinances of the endowment ceremony. On May 26, 1843, he wrote in his journal: "At five p.m. I met in council in the upper room, with my brother Hyrum, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Judge James Adams, Bishop Newel K. Whitney and William Law, and gave them their endowments."—HC, V, p. 409. On the 28th, the Prophet again reported: "At five p. m. I met with Brother Hyrum, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Newel K. Whitney, and James Adams, in the upper room to attend to ordinances and counseling."—Ibid., p. 412. Finally he wrote on May 29:

At nine a.m., I met in council with brother Hyrum, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Newel K. Whitney, and James Adams.

Singing, and prayer by Elder Brigham Young. Conversation, instruction and teaching concerning the things of God. Had a pleasant interview.—Ibid., pp. 412-413.

Heber C. Kimball may have erred on the date when these ordinances were given, for he later noted in his journal:

June, 1842 I was initiated into the ancient order . . . in company with nine others, viz: Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Wm Law, Wm Marks, Judge Adams, Brigham Young, Willard Richards, George Miller, N. K. Whitney.—The journal of Heber C. Kimball, under date; original journal in church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

I heard the Prophet Joseph charge the twelve with the duty and responsibility of administering the ordinances and endowments and of sealing for the living and [the] dead. I met many times with Brother Joseph, and others who had received their endowments, in company with my husband in an upper room dedicated for that purpose and prayed with them repeatedly in those meetings.—Ibid.

Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection. But those who are married by the power and authority of the priesthood in this life, and continue without committing the sin against the Holy Ghost, will continue to increase and have children in the celestial glory.—HC, V, p. 391.

---
Notas:
[^1] HC, IV, p. 258.
[^2] Luke 1:17.
[^3] See HC, VI, p. 254, where Joseph Smith stresses this point.
[^4] Ibid., II, pp. 379-380.
[^5] Ibid.
[^6] The place of Joseph Smith in the divine patriarchal order will be treated more fully in volume III of this study.
[^7] D&C 124:58. See also D&C 132:30-31.
[^8] See Abraham 2:10.
[^9] HC, VI, p. 51.
[^10] The full program of sealing the faithful to celestial relationships will be consummated at the beginning of the millennial era when the Lord "shall have sealed all things, unto the end of all things."—D&C 77:12.
[^11] Mosiah 26:20.
[^12] Enos 1:27.
[^13] 3 Nephi 28:3.
[^14] Ether 12:37.
[^15] D&C 1:8-9.
[^16] D&C 68:12.
[^17] It is sometimes supposed that there were no sealing powers associated with the priesthood in the present dispensation until Elijah ministered to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in 1836, but the writer feels that this conclusion cannot be supported in light of historical evidence or the actions and teachings of Joseph Smith. It is apparent that before the coming of Elijah, many of the Saints were sealed to eternal life and received the second Comforter.
[^18] HC, III, p. 380. The discourse from which this statement is taken was delivered first to the Twelve and later to the Saints in general. See ibid., IV, p. 10.
[^19] D&C 76:53.
[^20] HC, V, p. 403.
[^21] Ibid.
[^22] Ibid., III, p. 380.
[^23] That is, it is presently the more general way the Saints receive the promise of eternal life. But this may not always be the case once the kingdom of God is established on earth with its full program, blessings, and powers. See HC, III, p. 380 (in light of D&C 84:98 and Jeremiah 31:34), where Joseph Smith teaches that eventually every man remaining on earth will be raised to this spiritual standard.
[^24] D&C 14:7. See also D&C 6:13.
[^25] 2 Nephi 31:19-20. In conjunction with this challenge and promise, see the Prophet's discussion in HC, II, pp. 19-22.
[^26] HC, VI, p. 315.
[^27] D&C 76:79.
[^28] Omni 1:26.
[^29] D&C 20:29. See also D&C 20:25.
[^30] Moroni 3:3.
[^31] 2 Nephi 31:12-13, 15-16.
[^32] Alma 38:2.
[^33] Alma 32:13.
[^34] D&C 98:14-15.
[^35] D&C 101:35.
[^36] D&C 6:29-30.
[^37] HC, V, p. 391.
[^38] Ibid., VI, pp. 252-253.
[^39] Ibid., p. 314.
[^40] See Volume I of this work, the section in chapter seventeen entitled "The Perseverance of the Righteous in Mortality."
[^41] In the resurrection the body is raised to a state of incorruption, and in this sense the struggle with the flesh is not continued after the reunion of the spirit and the body.
[^42] HC, V, pp. 391-392.
[^43] Ibid., I, pp. 323-324. See also JD, IX, p. 288, for a statement by Brigham Young on "wilful transgression."
[^44] The law of consecration and stewardship, as well as the united order, will be treated in volume III of this study.
[^45] Speaking of those who were made members of the united order, the revelation directing the Prophet to organize it said:
[^46] D&C 78:11-12.
[^47] D&C 82:11-12, 20-21.
[^48] D&C 104:1-9.
[^49] HC, VII, pp. 268, 269.
[^50] See, for example, D&C 132:49, 57. This seems to be true also in respect to verse 19.
[^51] D&C 132:26.
[^52] Letter of Vilate Kimball to Heber C. Kimball, written at Nauvoo, June 8, 1843, and recorded in the journal of Heber C. Kimball, 1840-1845; original journal in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^53] D&C 132:26.
[^54] The Church has no power to deprive any person of life or property. Nor will it have such power when the millennial kingdom is fully established on earth. An official proclamation expressing the views of the Saints on such points states: "We do not believe that any religious society has authority to try men on the right of property or life, to take from them this world's goods, or to put them in jeopardy of either life or limb, or to inflict any physical punishment upon them."—D&C 134:10. When the full law and program of the kingdom of God are established, such matters will be handled by the government of God—the political organization within the kingdom which will maintain freedom and justice for all men.
[^55] Far West Record, under date, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 9.
[^56] D&C 88:1-4.
[^57] D&C 90:3. A revelation in February, 1831, seems to imply that he had not at that time been given the guarantee that he would hold these keys in eternity. See D&C 43:3-4. It should be kept in mind that this promise was in addition to the guarantee of eternal life.
[^58] The journal and memoirs of Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner, p. 7. Though it is not known specifically when this conversation took place, evidence points to the Nauvoo period of the Church.
[^59] HC, I, p. 85. The record does not state if there was any action by the priesthood on earth at that time to make the promise official and binding by its power.
[^60] The journal and memoirs of Mary Elizabeth Rollins Lightner, pp. 2-3; Young Woman's Journal, XVI, pp. 556-557. In the above quotation, the writer has combined the statements made by Mrs. Lightner into one statement containing all the details of her report.
[^61] From an account of early historical events, written by Joseph Knight, Sr., Church Historian's Library Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^62] D&C 88:1-4.
[^63] HC, I, p. 466.
[^64] Ibid.
[^65] Manuscript report, December 18, 1833, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 41.
[^66] HC, I, p. 467.
[^67] Ibid., p. 323.
[^68] The journal of Reuben McBride, Brigham Young University Library. The writer has corrected spelling and punctuation in this quote.
[^69] D&C 68:7, 12.
[^70] Journal History, September 27, 1831.
[^71] The journal of Orson Pratt, August 26, 1833.
[^72] Ibid., under date.
[^73] Whitney, op. cit., p. 253.
[^74] D&C 124:124. As a general rule, such promises are now given in patriarchal blessings on a contingent basis, subject to the person proving worthy to receive them.
[^75] Solomon P. Kimball, Life of David P. Kimball, pp. 125-127.
[^76] Ibid., pp. 127-128.
[^77] This means that though a man and his bride may be married for time and all eternity by the authority and power of the priesthood, they are not actually "sealed" to that relationship until they have made their calling and election sure to exaltation in the celestial kingdom. To seal is to secure or bind——to fasten up or enclose securely. Technically speaking, only those are sealed who make their calling and election sure and are given the more sure word of prophecy.
[^78] D&C 132:49, 57.
[^79] D&C 132:19.
[^80] HC, V, p. 391.
[^81] Ibid., VI, pp. 252, 253; MS, XXIII, pp. 102-103.
[^82] HC, VI, p. 254.
[^83] Ibid., p. 184.
[^84] Ibid., III. p. 379.
[^85] Ephesians 1:13-14, as cited in HC, III, pp. 379-380.
[^86] 2 Peter 1:8, 10-12, 16-19.
[^87] HC, V, pp. 401-402.
[^88] Ibid., p. 392.
[^89] Ibid., pp. 402-403.
[^90] Ibid., pp. 387-388.
[^91] Ibid., p. 389.
[^92] Ibid., pp. 402-403.
[^93] Ibid., p. 389.
[^94] 2 Peter 1:10-11.
[^95] HC, V. pp. 402-403.
[^96] Ibid., p. 403.
[^97] Ibid., p. 388.
[^98] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter eleven entitled "The Grand Organizational Council."
[^99] HC, VI, p. 252.
[^100] Ibid., IV, p. 360. As the Prophet indicates, some aspects of the doctrine of predestination are true. God predestines that man will be saved in and through Christ. There is no other name given whereby salvation can come to man. God also predestines that in salvation man must be conformed to the divine image of Christ. There is no other person in whom and through whom man can be glorified.
[^101] Parley P. Pratt said of Abraham: "When he had been sufficiently proved according to the flesh, the Lord manifested to him the election before exercised towards him in the eternal world. He then renewed that election and covenant, and blessed him, and his seed after him."—JD, I, pp. 258-259.
[^102] HC, V, pp. 530-531.
[^103] Articles of Faith No. 5. See Alma 13:3ff for an explanation of this doctrine. For a treatment of this subject in relation to the Grand Organizational Council, see Volume I of this study, the section in chapter eleven entitled "Men are Called of God by Prophecy."
[^104] See D&C 131:5.
[^105] As indicated in the preceding section of this chapter, this is not the only way the guarantee of eternal life is a more sure word, or something that is more sure in its nature than something else. Having cited Peter's admonition to the ancient saints to make their calling and election sure and thereby receive the more sure word of prophecy, Joseph Smith said: "Now, wherein could they have a more sure word of prophecy than to hear the voice of God saying, This is my beloved Son."—HC, V, p. 388. The Prophet then explained that it is one thing for a person to know that Jesus is the Son of God and another thing for him to know that in the resurrection he is guaranteed a place with Christ in the kingdom of heaven, and that the guarantee of eternal life is a more sure indication of what his state will be in the resurrection than for him to hear a voice from heaven bear testimony that Jesus is the Son of God. But the fact that the more sure word of prophecy is more sure than one thing does not prevent it from being more sure than another. As a prophetic word, it is more sure than the prophetic word which was given to those who were called and elected in the pre-earth to receive specified blessings in the flesh. Apparently it was in this sense that the Apostle Peter used the term, for in his epistle he was writing to many who had not been on the mount and received the testimony of Christ which he then received. Yet he said, "We have also a more sure word of prophecy."—2 Peter 1:19.
[^106] See, for example, an article written by Brigham Young and Willard Richards entitled "Election and Reprobation," in HC, IV, pp. 256-266.
[^107] D&C 1:8.
[^108] HC, VI, p. 252.
[^109] Exodus 9:16.
[^110] HC, IV, pp. 263-264. Where the King James translation of the Bible says "the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh," Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision states that "Pharaoh hardened his heart." See Exodus 9:12; 10:1, 20, 27; 11:9-10; 14:4, 8, 17 in comparison with the equivalent verses in the Prophet's work.
