Hyrum L. Andrus, Principles of Perfection ( 1970)

14

The Second Comforter

I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever.—JESUS.

Joseph Smith taught that within the program of the gospel there are two Comforters. "One is the Holy Ghost, the same as given on the day of Pentecost, and that all Saints receive after faith, repentance, and baptism," he explained. "The other Comforter spoken of is a subject of great interest," the Prophet continued, "and perhaps understood by few of this generation." [^1] Concerning it, a revelation declared: "This Comforter is the promise which I give unto you of eternal life, even the glory of the celestial kingdom." [^2]

Second Comforter Defined

Essentially the second Comforter is the promise, or guarantee, of eternal life which man receives when he makes his calling and election sure to celestial glory. This promise carries with it certain privileges, including the right (subject to the will of God) to enjoy in some degree the manifestations of celestial glory on earth and to commune personally with those who reside in the presence of God. Similar to the fact that the laying on of hands following baptism entitles man to the blessings of the Holy Ghost through the continued exercise of his faith, so does the guarantee of eternal life entitle the recipient to the personal ministry of Christ and other holy beings who reside in the presence of God. [^3]

The doctrine of the second Comforter must be seen in the context of man making his calling and election sure. Hyrum Smith declared that the promise of eternal life which he sealed upon Vilate Kimball in a patriarchal blessing was "called the Second Comforter, not his presence, but his promise." [^4] He implied that there was a difference between the two aspects of the second Comforter, but that in a general way the promise of eternal life and the presence of Christ were both referred to as the second Comforter.

This view is reflected in a statement by the Prophet. In discussing the second Comforter, he first spoke of man making his calling and election sure. "After a person . . . receives the Holy Ghost, (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter," he explained, "then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him, Son thou shalt be exalted." This is the guarantee of eternal life. The Prophet continued: "When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and his election made sure, then it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter, which the Lord hath promised the Saints." [^5]

From this statement it is apparent that the promise of eternal life normally precedes the manifestations which relate to the second Comforter. But having set the doctrine in its proper context, Joseph Smith seems to have referred to the second Comforter as being both the promise of eternal life and the personal manifestation of Christ and other divine beings to the worthy recipient. "Now what is this other Comforter?" he inquired. "It is no more nor less than the Lord Jesus Christ Himself; and this is the sum and substance of the whole matter; that when any man obtain this last Comforter [i.e., the promise of eternal life?], he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him, and the visions of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face." [^6]

According to the Prophet, Jesus promised the second Comforter to His disciples before He was crucified. Having referred to a person making his calling and election sure, the Prophet explained: "Then it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter, which the Lord promised the Saints, as is recorded in the testimony of St. John, in the 14th chapter, from the 12th to the 27th verses." [^7] In this statement, Jesus said:

. . . I will pray the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever;

Even the Spirit of Truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.

I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you. . . .

He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him. . . .

If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. [^8]

Two points in this statement are of special importance: First, Jesus associated the other Comforter directly with the Spirit of truth, which is the Holy Ghost. Joseph Smith made it clear that the Holy Ghost Himself is not the second Comforter, but that He ratifies and thereby binds the promise of eternal life upon faithful saints. The Prophet and others were given this same promise in a revelation: "Wherefore, I now send upon you another Comforter, even upon you my friends, that it [i.e., the other Comforter] may abide in your hearts, even the Holy Spirit of promise; which other Comforter is the same that I promised unto my disciples, as is recorded in the testimony of John." [^9] Having identified this Comforter as that which Jesus promised to His disciples, the revelation then declared that that Comforter (i.e., the Holy Spirit of promise), which was to abide in their hearts, was "the promise . . . of eternal life, even the glory of the celestial kingdom." [^10] The other Comforter of which Christ spoke, therefore, was the divine promise or guarantee sealed in the hearts of the faithful by the revelation and power of the Holy Spirit that they would receive eternal life in the world to come, which is the glory of the celestial kingdom. This is the more sure word of prophecy, which is for a man to know "that he is sealed up unto eternal life, by revelation and the spirit of prophecy, through the power of the Holy Priesthood." [^11]

Second, Jesus stated that He would manifest Himself to those disciples who received the other Comforter, and that even the Father would reveal Himself unto them. Of Christ's promise as recorded in John 14:23, Joseph Smith wrote by revelation: "The appearing of the Father and the Son, in that verse, is a personal appearance; and the idea that the Father and the Son dwell in a man's heart is an old sectarian notion, and is false." [^12] The promise of eternal life, which is sealed in the heart of man by the power of the Holy Ghost, therefore carries with it the privilege of receiving the personal manifestations of the Father and the Son.

The Prophet indicated that the blessings of the second Comforter are also given in the spirit world to those who make their calling and election sure to eternal life by enduring faithful in the gospel to the end of their mortal probation. In referring to faithful saints who passed away in his day, he said: "Those who have died in the faith are now in the celestial kingdom of God." [^13] By this statement he did not mean that they were then resurrected, but that they dwelt in a state of celestial glory. He wrote in a revelation that "there are two kinds of beings in heaven," namely (1) resurrected beings having bodies of flesh and bones and (2) spirits "who are not resurrected but inherit the same glory." [^14] The latter group includes those who endure faithful in the gospel until mortal death. The corruption in the body which in mortality acts as a deterring force pushing man away from God is left behind as the spirit departs the physical tabernacle, and if the person has been faithful in his day of probation he then enters into a state of glory and is given the privilege of the second Comforter in the spirit world. Joseph Smith therefore taught that "the spirits of the just are exalted to a greater and more glorious work . . . in their departure to the world of spirits," and that there they are "enveloped in flaming fire" or glory. [^15]

Blessings Of The Second Comforter

Right to Commune with the Father and the Son

Those who make their calling and election sure to celestial glory and in this way receive the second Comforter, or the promise of eternal life, may have the privilege of communing personally and openly with the Man of Holiness and His Son Jesus Christ. Revelations given through Joseph Smith refer to this promise in the gospel program. "The power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church," one revelation explained—"to . . . have the heavens opened unto them, . . . and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant." [^16] In referring to the blessings of the second Comforter, Joseph Smith also spoke repeatedly of the Saints communing personally with God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ. [^17]

Right to Commune with Angels

Joseph Smith taught that those who make their calling and election sure have the privilege of communing with "an innumerable company of angels." [^18] He observed that "Paul [the Apostle] speaks of the Church coming to an innumerable company of angels." [^19] The Prophet also explained:

The Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of mustard seed. The mustard seed is small, but brings forth a large tree, and the fowls lodge in the branches. The fowls are the angels. . . . We may come to an innumerable company of angels, have communion with and receive instruction from them. . . . Paul had these things, and we may have the fowls of heaven lodge in the branches, etc. [^20]

The Aaronic Priesthood holds the keys of the ministry of angels. [^21] But the right to commune with such beings is also extended to those who are sealed to eternal life. [^22] It is possible that man does not need to achieve as great a degree of spiritual maturity to receive this privilege as he does to stand in the presence of God. A revelation to the Saints concerning their challenge to acquire the blessings of the second Comforter thus stated: "Ye are not able to abide the presence of God now, neither the ministry of angels; wherefore, continue in patience until ye are perfected." [^23]

Angels are not a special creation of God separate from man, and they do not have wings. [^24] They are holy men who held the priesthood during earth life and who thereafter continue to act in special callings to fulfil the will of God. Joseph Smith "explained the difference between an angel and a ministering spirit; the one a resurrected or translated body, with its spirit ministering to embodied spirits—the other a disembodied spirit, visiting and ministering [primarily] to disembodied spirits." [^25] He spoke, for example, of the angel Moroni as being a resurrected personage. [^26] Of the being who appeared to the Apostle John, he said: "The angel that appeared to John on the Isle of Patmos was a translated or resurrected body." [^27] To illustrate the distinction between ministering spirits and angels, the Prophet explained:

Jesus Christ became a ministering spirit (while His body was lying in the sepulchre) to the spirits in prison, to fulfill an important part of His mission, without which He could not have perfected His work, or entered into His rest. After His resurrection He appeared as an angel to His disciples. [^28]

"Angels have advanced higher in knowledge and power than spirits," the latter-day Seer declared. [^29] One reason for their ascendancy is that those who are resurrected are tabernacled in bodies of flesh and bones. [^30] But even though "these men are in heaven," the Prophet explained that "their children are on the earth," and "their bowels yearn over us." [^31] For this reason God sends resurrected beings down to earth as angels. This will be true particularly in the latter days. Joseph Smith said of the building up of Zion: "All these authoritative characters will come down and join hand in hand in bringing about this work." When the Saints are finally sanctified and all things are ready, the Prophet concluded: ". . . the Son of Man will descend, the Ancient of Days sit; we may [then] come to an innumerable company of angels, have communion with and receive instruction from them." [^32] When a people have been prepared for the millennium, they will realize in great measure the blessings which are reserved for those who are sealed to eternal life.

Right to Commune with Spirits of Just Men Made Perfect

It is also the privilege of those who make their calling and election sure and thereby receive the second Comforter to commune with the spirits of just men made perfect. These are the disembodied spirits of those who have obtained and retained a state of justification on earth through the program of the gospel. They are the spirits of the justified who are made perfect by being endowed with glory as they enter the spirit world at mortal death. Hence they are designated as "the spirits of just men made perfect." Having acquired the promise of eternal life either by receiving the more sure word of prophecy on earth or by enduring in the gospel to the end of their mortal probation, they are privileged to dwell in the presence of God in the spirit world. [^33] Of their ministry to those who make their calling and election sure, Joseph Smith said: "The spirits of just men are made ministering servants to those who are sealed unto life eternal, and it is through them that the sealing power comes down." [^34]

On more than one occasion the Prophet referred to the spirits of just men made perfect as being included among those celestial beings with whom the faithful may commune when they receive the second Comforter. Speaking of New Testament times, he said: "The Hebrew Church 'came unto the spirits of just men made perfect, and unto an innumerable company of angels, unto God the Father of all, and to Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the new covenant.'" [^35] Again, in referring to the ultimate objectives of the gospel, he made reference to the Saints coming up to commune with "an innumerable company of angels, . . . the spirits of just men made perfect, and . . . Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant." [^36]

Right to Commune with Church of the Firstborn

In a broader and more inclusive sense, the ministry of celestial beings to which man is entitled when he receives the promise of eternal life includes those who are members of the church of the Firstborn beyond the veil. A revelation explained that it is the purpose and design of the Melchizedek Priesthood to bring the Saints to the point of spiritual maturity and power which will enable them to "commune with . . . the church of the Firstborn." [^37] "This is the state and place the ancient Saints arrived at when they had such glorious visions," Joseph Smith said—"Isaiah, Ezekiel, John upon the Isle of Patmos, St. Paul in the three heavens [manifestation], and all the Saints who held communion with the . . . Church of the First Born." [^38]

The revelations and teachings of Joseph Smith indicate that the church of the Firstborn is the heavenly church of Christ and consists, essentially, of the sanctified saints in eternity who are endowed with the glory of the celestial kingdom. By being sealed to eternal life, the faithful on earth are also made members of the church of the Firstborn. A revelation therefore said of some brethren whose calling and election were made sure: "Ye are the church of the Firstborn, and he [Christ] will take you up in a cloud, and appoint every man his portion." [^39] In the most inclusive sense, the membership of the church of the Firstborn is comprised of those who have made their calling and election sure to eternal life, whether they live on earth, in the spirit world, or in a resurrected state. Because the Saints on earth who are sealed to eternal life become members of that church, they have a right by faith (subject to the will of God) to commune with the church of the Firstborn beyond the veil.

Latter-day Saint literature makes several references and allusions to the church of the Firstborn: First, a revelation equates this select body or inner church with the church of Enoch. [^40] Enoch and his people matured in the program of the gospel until they made their calling and election sure and entered into the rest of the Lord, [^41] endowed with His glory. Of them it was said: "The Lord came and dwelt with his people, and . . . the glory of the Lord . . . was upon his people." [^42]

Second, as indicated above, the church of the Firstborn consists of those who overcome spiritual death and have a right to the glory and power of God. Referring to celestial glory, a revelation explained: ". . . which glory is that of the church of the Firstborn, even of God, the holiest of all, through Jesus Christ his Son." [^43] Another revelation referred to the church of the Firstborn as those "who have received the fulness of the Father." [^44] Again, Christ explained: "All those who are begotten through me are partakers of the glory of the same [i.e., of the Son of God], and are the church of the Firstborn." [^45] Birth into the kingdom of God opens the way to membership in the church of the Firstborn; but having been born again, man must be given the right to partake of the glory of Christ, by making his calling and election sure, in order to become a member of the inner church. The right to partake of the glory of the church of the Firstborn is given to those who receive the second Comforter. [^46]

Third, to obtain a fulness of the blessings which pertain to the church of the Firstborn, man must acquire exaltation in celestial society—come forth to inherit the highest degree of celestial glory in the resurrection. [^47] As Joseph Smith instituted the sacred ordinances of the temple by which man may attain these blessing in eternity, he explained that those ordinances contained "all those plans and principles by which any one is enabled to secure the fullness of those blessings which have been prepared for the Church of the First Born, and come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim [i.e., the Gods] in the eternal world." [^48] In referring to those "who are the church of the Firstborn" and who acquire exaltation in that glorified body, a revelation said:

They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things—

They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory;

And are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son.

Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God—

Wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's. . . .

And they see as they are seen, and know as they are known, having received of his fulness and of his grace;

And he makes them equal in power, and in might, and in dominion. [^49]

Right to Commune with General Assembly

Joseph Smith associated the term "general assembly" directly with the church of the Firstborn and indicated that that divine assembly consists of a body of celestial beings with whom those who are sealed to eternal life may commune. He taught that the purpose of the Melchizedek Priesthood is to mature the Saints spiritually so that they can "commune with the general assembly and church of the Firstborn." [^50] The Prophet therefore declared that those in ancient times who made their calling and election sure to celestial glory "held communion with the general assembly and Church of the First Born." [^51]

To be more specific, early Latter-day Saint literature uses the term "general assembly" in two separate but related ways: first, as indicated above, it is used in conjunction with the term "the church of the Firstborn"; second, it refers to the official assembly of the church of the Firstborn, or that church in official assembly. The Prophet's Inspired Revision of the Bible makes the latter implication when it promises: "And the general assembly of the church of the first-born shall come down out of heaven, and possess the earth, and shall have place until the end come." [^52]

The general assembly of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints consists of the several quorums of the priesthood and official members organized into a general priesthood assembly. When properly organized and conducted, the general assembly constitutes the highest body in authority in the Church. Therein is centered "the spiritual authority of the church." [^53] If the general assembly of the church of the Firstborn were an equivalent body of the inner church of Christ, it would consist of the several quorums or units of the priesthood and the official members beyond the veil of that glorified body, organized into a great priesthood unit or assembly. It therefore would be the church of the Firstborn in official assembly; and it could also be referred to in conjunction with the church of the Firstborn, as is suggested in point one in the preceding paragraph. The second Comforter embraces the right to commune with that divine and authoritative body.

Right to Come to Mount Zion and Heavenly Jerusalem

Joseph Smith, like the Apostle Paul, used the terms "Mount Zion" and the "heavenly Jerusalem" to denote the abode of glorified beings with whom those saints who make their calling and election sure may commune. Speaking of the Hebrew Church in New Testament times, Paul said:

. . . ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels,

To the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect,

And to Jesus the meditator of the new covenant. . . . [^54]

While writing on the same theme, Joseph Smith said:

A man may be saved, after the judgment, in the terrestrial kingdom, or in the telestial kingdom, but he can never see the celestial kingdom of God without being born of water and the Spirit. He may receive a glory like unto the moon [i.e., of which the light of the moon is typical], or a star [i.e., of which the light of the stars is typical], but he can never come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels; to the general assembly and Church of the First-born, which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, unless he becomes as a little child, and is taught by the Spirit of God. [^55]

This statement, written in 1832, reveals the Prophet's view of the gospel at an early date: the ultimate objectives of the plan of life and salvation, and the way by which man must achieve them. The society of Zion which he sought to establish was to be built on a plane which would enable the Saints to make their calling and election sure to eternal life, for Mount Zion on earth was to be in direct communion with the eternal Mount Zion, and the New Jerusalem was to be in union spiritually with the heavenly Jerusalem.

Explanations Concerning The Second Comforter

Second Comforter Available to All Saints

The second Comforter with all its divine blessings is not limited to a given class or group of individuals. It is within the reach of all who will apply the program of life and salvation in their lives to the degree which is required to obtain it and its blessings. The Prophet is quoted in the preceding chapter as stating that every person who will pay the price of dedication can make his calling and election sure to eternal life. [^56] It follows, therefore, that every person who will do this can receive the blessings of the second Comforter. On this point, a revelation stated emphatically: "Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am." [^57] To a group of women at Nauvoo, Joseph Smith said:

If you live up to your privileges, the angels cannot be restrained from being your associates. Females, if they are pure and innocent, can come in the presence of God. [^58]

Second Comforter the Result of True Faith

The Prophet constantly stressed in his teachings and through the scriptures which he gave to the world that the blessings which relate to the second Comforter are the ultimate products of man's faith in Jesus Christ. The brother of Jared is an illustration of this point. His faith was such that "he could no longer be kept without the veil." [^59] To him, the pre-earth Christ said: "Because of thy faith thou hast seen that I shall take upon me flesh and blood; and never has man come before me with such exceeding faith as thou hast; for were it not so ye could not have seen my finger." The record then states: "The Lord showed himself unto him, and said: Because thou knowest these things ye are redeemed from the fall; therefore ye are brought back into my presence; therefore I show myself unto you." [^60]

Joseph Smith taught that those who acquire true faith—like Enoch, the brother of Jared, and Moses—obtain power with God "to behold him face to face." [^61] The latter-day Seer explained:

All things were in subjection to the Former-day Saints, according as their faith was. By their faith they could obtain heavenly visions, the ministering of angels, have knowledge of the spirits of just men made perfect, of the general assembly and church of the first born, whose names are written in heaven, of God the judge of all, of Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, and become familiar with the third heavens, see and hear things which were not only unutterable, but were unlawful to utter. [^62]

Obtaining Second Comforter a Major Objective of the Gospel

Joseph Smith repeatedly taught that as a product of true faith in Christ, the blessings of the second Comforter constitute a major objective of the gospel. [^63] A revelation he received states that since the Melchizedek Priesthood administers the gospel and holds "the key of the knowledge of God," its purpose is to bring the Saints to the point of spiritual union with Christ which will enable them to receive the second Comforter. [^64] Another revelation on this point explained: "The power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church—to have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the general assembly and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant." [^65]

To attain the celestial kingdom in the resurrection, man must receive the second Comforter, either in this life or in the spirit world after death. [^66] A revelation stated that those who are "sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise" become celestial beings in the resurrection, and that they constitute the church of the Firstborn. [^67] Speaking of this class of beings in the resurrection, the revelation stressed: "These are they who have come to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of Enoch, and of the Firstborn." [^68] It is noteworthy that the verb in this statement denotes completed action. These are they who "have come," etc. Before the resurrection, they have matured in the gospel to the point of communing with beings who reside above the veil. Having met the challenge of returning to the presence of God, they therefore will inherit celestial glory in the resurrection.

Challenge to Obtain Second Comforter

Joseph Smith's experiences were not unique to him. True, he was a spiritual giant whose soul was refined and honed to a fine edge. Consequently he had a great capacity to commune with God. He said of his experience in receiving the blessings of the second Comforter: "The sound saluted my ears—'Ye are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant.'" [^69] Again: "Paul saw the third heavens, and I more." [^70] To a prominent individual in the East, he wrote: "I . . . have witnessed the visions of eternity, and beheld the glorious mansions of bliss. . . . I . . . have heard the voice of God, and communed with angels." [^71] But having obtained the blessings of the second Comforter, the Prophet desired others to achieve them also. In a discourse in which he spoke repeatedly of these blessings, he concluded: "Let us seek for the glory of Abraham, Noah, Adam, the Apostles, who have communion with these things, and then we shall be among that number when Christ comes." [^72]

The promise of the personal manifestation of Christ was given repeatedly to the Saints in revelations through Joseph Smith. In November, 1831, the Lord gave them such a promise and explained the change in nature which man must experience in order to achieve it:

. . . inasmuch as you strip yourselves from jealousies and fears, and humble yourselves before me, for ye are not sufficiently humble, the veil shall be rent and you shall see me and know that I am—not with the carnal neither natural mind, but with the spiritual.

For no man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God.

Neither can any natural man abide the presence of God, neither after the carnal mind.

Ye are not able to abide the presence of God now, neither the ministering of angels; wherefore, continue in patience until ye are perfected.

Let not your minds turn back; and when ye are worthy, in mine own due time, ye shall see and know that which was conferred upon you by the hands of my servant Joseph Smith, Jun. [^73]

Along with the promise which this revelation held out to the Saints, two points were stressed: First, man cannot see God with the unregenerated natural mind, neither with the carnal mind, but only with the spiritual, for only when he is quickened by the Holy Spirit can he see God. To achieve a spiritual nature, one must put off the natural man by acquiring the transforming power of the Holy Spirit. [^74] Being quickened sufficiently by the Spirit in this new state, man can then see God. Here the requirement to be born again is correlated with the greater challenge of receiving the blessings of the second Comforter.

Second, it is only by receiving the blessings of the second Comforter that man can realize fully that which he is given in the gospel. The Saints were not then able to abide the presence of God, or even the ministering of angels, but they were admonished to continue in patience until they were perfected enough to receive these blessings. Then they would know what had been conferred upon them through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith. When they finally stood in the presence of God and were made partakers of His glory, they would see the gospel in its true light—as a practical program leading man to the presence of God. They would then realize that which they had received through the Prophet.

In another statement in which the promise of the personal manifestation of Christ was given to the Saints early in this dispensation, the Lord said:

Behold, that which you hear is as the voice of one crying in the wilderness—in the wilderness, because you cannot see him—my voice, because my voice is Spirit; my Spirit is truth; truth abideth and hath no end; and if it be in you it shall abound.

And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light [through the Holy Spirit], and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things.

Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will. [^75]

This revelation too stresses that man must become a recipient of the Holy Spirit and mature in its divine endowments until he can enter into the presence of God. To do this, man must bring his life into such union with the will of God—through faith and by personal discipline—that his eye will be single to the glory of God. Then his whole body will be filled with the light of the Spirit. Through this divine and intelligent agent, man may eventually comprehend all things, and by following this path he can enter into the presence of the Lord.

Early Successes in Obtaining Second Comforter

During the years before the Saints were endowed with power from on high at Kirtland, in 1836, the Prophet made a special effort to sanctify them and to develop in them the kind of faith and spiritual maturity which would enable them to behold Christ in His glory. [^76] He expected the Savior to make a major appearance in the temple, and the Saints to behold Him in the solemn assembly which was held upon its completion. As early as January, 1833, Joseph Smith wrote to the presiding brethren among the Saints in Missouri of the first of these appearances: "The Lord commanded us, in Kirtland, to build a house of God, and . . . on conditions of our obedience He has promised us great things; yea, even a visit from the heavens to honor us with His own presence." [^77] Several months before the solemn assembly was held at Kirtland, the Prophet promised the Saints: "All who are prepared, and are sufficiently pure to abide the presence of the Savior, will see Him in the solemn assembly." [^78]

This promise was based upon the fact that before that assembly would be held many of the brethren would be sealed to eternal life and thereby would have received the right to the blessings of the second Comforter. [^79] These blessings were not given to all the Saints, but only to those God should "name out of all the official members." [^80] In speaking of those to be chosen, a revelation said:

There has been a day of calling, but the time has come for a day of choosing; and let those be chosen that are worthy.

And it shall be manifest unto my servant, by the voice of the Spirit, those that are chosen; and they shall be sanctified. [^81]

The next day Joseph Smith met in a council of High Priests, and some "individuals were called and chosen, as they were made manifest" to him by the "voice of the Spirit." [^82] In following this procedure, the Prophet complied with the revelation which stated that only those of whom God bore record should be sealed to eternal life. [^83]

When the Presidency of the Church and other officials received these sacred rites in January, 1836, the Prophet revealed the object he hoped to achieve: "As Paul said, so say I, let us come to visions and revelations." [^84] In reporting the blessings of the second Comforter which these brethren then received, the latter-day Seer wrote:

The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. I saw the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold. . . . [^85]

After relating other things which he saw, the Prophet explained:

Many of my brethren who received the ordinance with me saw glorious visions also. Angels ministered unto them as well as to myself, and the power of the Highest rested upon us, the house was filled with the glory of God, and we shouted Hosanna to God and the Lamb. My scribe also . . . saw, in a vision, the armies of heaven protecting the Saints in their return to Zion, and many things which I saw. [^86]

After these manifestations were over, the Bishop of Kirtland with his counselors and the Bishop of Zion and his counselors received the sacred rite under the hands of Joseph Smith, Sr. It was then "confirmed by the Presidency, and the glories of heaven were unfolded to them also." [^87] The High Councilors of Kirtland and Zion were then invited into the room and given the same blessings, whereupon the Prophet related:

The visions of heaven were opened to them also. Some of them saw the face of the Savior, and others were ministered unto by holy angels, and the spirit of prophecy and revelation was poured out in mighty power; and loud hosannas, and glory to God in the highest, saluted the heavens, for we all communed with the heavenly host. [^88]

The next day Joseph Smith and others attended a regular session of a Hebrew school at Kirtland. But instead of pursuing their studies, the brethren "spent the time in rehearsing to each other the glorious scenes that occurred on the preceding evening." [^89] That evening the First Presidency met with the Council of the Twelve Apostles, the Presidency of the Seventy, and others to give them these sacred blessings. The latter-day Seer reported: "The heavens were opened and angels ministered unto us." [^90]

These blessings were then given to the Presidency of the Seventy, and the Prophet stated: "The heavens were opened unto Elder Sylvester Smith, and he, leaping up, exclaimed: 'The horsemen of Israel and the chariots thereof.'" [^91]

The latter-day Seer reported on the concluding portion of the meeting as follows:

President Rigdon arose to conclude the services of the evening by invoking the blessing of heaven upon the Lord's anointed, which he did in an eloquent manner; the congregation shouted a long hosanna: the gift of tongues fell upon us in mighty power, angels mingled their voices with ours, while their presence was in our midst, and unceasing praises swelled our bosoms for the space of half-an-hour. [^92]

Later, other quorums of the priesthood received these blessings. Having instructed the quorum of High Priests and the quorum of Elders in the procedures they should follow, the Prophet went to organize and instruct the quorum of the Seventy. He reported:

I found the Twelve Apostles assembled with this quorum, and I proceeded, with the quorum of the Presidency, to instruct them, and also the seven presidents of the Seventy Elders, to call upon God with up-lifted hands, to seal the blessings which had been promised to them. . . . As I organized this quorum, with the presidency in this room, President Sylvester Smith saw a pillar of fire rest down and abide upon the heads of the quorum, as we stood in the midst of the Twelve.

When the Twelve and the seven presidents were through with their sealing prayer, I called upon President Sidney Rigdon to seal them with uplifted hands; and when he had done this, and cried hosanna, that all the congregation should join him, and shout hosanna to God and the Lamb, and glory to God in the highest. It was done so, and Elder Roger Orton saw a mighty angel riding upon a horse of fire, with a flaming sword in his hand, followed by five others, encircle the house, and protect the Saints, even the Lord's anointed, from the power of Satan and a host of evil spirits, which were striving to disturb the Saints.

President William Smith, one of the Twelve, saw the heavens opened, and the Lord's host protecting the Lord's anointed.

President Zebedee Coltrin, one of the seven presidents of the Seventy, saw the Savior extended before him, as upon the cross, and a little later, crowned with glory upon his head above the brightness of the sun.

After these things were over, and a glorious vision, which I saw, had passed, I . . . returned to the room of the High Priests and Elders, and attended to the sealing of what they had done, with up-lifted hands. [^93]

When the solemn assembly was held in the Kirtland Temple, in March, 1836, [^94] similar blessings were given to many who were present. Throughout the day and until five o'clock the next morning the brethren "continued prophesying, and blessing, and sealing them with hosanna and amen." [^95] Heber C. Kimball reported: "While these things were being attended to the beloved disciple John was seen in our midst by the Prophet Joseph, Oliver Cowdery and others." [^96] The Prophet said: "The Savior made His appearance to some, while angels ministered to others, and it was a Pentecost and an endowment indeed long to be remembered." Because this was the beginning of the manifestation of God's glory among the Lord's people in the latter days, the Prophet stated that the report of these manifestations would be "handed down upon the pages of sacred history, to all generations" of the future. [^97]

Purposes Of The Second Comforter

Basis for Giving World a Sure Testimony

God's testimony in the world is established on a sure foundation through the manifestations of the second Comforter. To establish faith in the world, God sends angels to commune with those who possess "strong faith and a firm mind in every form of godliness." [^98] He also manifests Himself personally to such individuals. These men are then required to bear testimony through the power of the Holy Ghost concerning the work of God. Joseph Smith therefore taught that in past ages God has centered the keys of His work on earth in those who have been seers—men who have penetrated the veil and have been taught through the visions and revelations of God. Having spoken of the blessings of the second Comforter, he admonished:

Wherefore, we again say, search the revelations of God; study the prophecies, and rejoice that God grants unto the world Seers and Prophets. They are they who saw the mysteries of godliness. [^99]

The Prophet then referred to many things which the ancient oracles saw by which the testimony and knowledge of God were established in the world.

As a case in point, the latter-day Seer taught that this was the basis upon which the Apostles of Jesus were sent to testify to the world in their day. Christ concluded His last great commission to them with the promise: "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." [^100] This promise, Joseph Smith made clear, was a reassurance that they would have the blessings of the second Comforter to attend them in their ministry. He said:

He, the Lord, . . . [was] a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek, and the anointed Son of God, from before the foundation of the world, and they [were] the begotten sons of Jesus through the gospel, to teach all nations—and lo I am with you always to the end of the world—that is—by the other comforter which the world cannot receive—for ye are witnesses—having the testimony of Jesus which is the spirit of prophecy. [^101]

Means of Revealing Higher Knowledge

The Prophet taught that there is an important reason why all faithful saints should receive the blessings of the second Comforter. This reason is that man cannot be saved in ignorance of the divine truth which is communicated to him through the gospel. In referring to the purpose of Christ's ministry to those who make their calling and election sure, the latter-day Seer said: "The Lord will teach him face to face, and he may have a perfect knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God." [^102] Of communion with angels, he declared: "We may come to an innumerable company of angels, have communion with and receive instructions from them." [^103] For the same purpose the faithful may commune with the spirits of just men made perfect. "What would it profit us to come unto the spirits of the just men," Joseph Smith inquired, "but to learn and come up to the standard of their knowledge?" [^104] Book learning and knowledge acquired by mere human experience alone will not suffice. [^105] "The best way to obtain truth and wisdom is not to ask it from books, but to go to God in prayer, and obtain divine teaching," he explained. [^106] "Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject." [^107] Continuing, he stressed: "I assure the Saints that truth, in reference to these matters, can and may be known through the revelations of God in the way of His ordinances, and in answer to prayer." [^108]

Joseph Smith held that the gospel is a system by which divine truth can be given to man, beginning with the principle of faith and the gift of the Holy Ghost and culminating with the sealing power by which faithful individuals can make their calling and election sure to celestial glory and acquire the blessings of the second Comforter. Speaking of divine truth, he said: "Knowledge of these things can only be obtained by experience through the ordinances of God set forth for that purpose." [^109] According to Joseph Smith, the Apostle Peter understood the purpose of the gospel to be one of revealing divine truth to man. Having quoted from 1 Peter 1:3-5 and 2 Peter 1:1-3, the latter-day Seer said:

These sayings put together show the apostle's views most clearly, so as to admit of no mistake in the mind of any individual. He says that all things that pertain to life and godliness were given unto them through the knowledge of God and our Saviour Jesus Christ. And if the question is asked, how were they to obtain the knowledge of God? (for there is a great difference between believing in God and knowing him—knowledge implies more than faith. And notice, that all things that pertain to life and godliness were given through the knowledge of God) the answer is given—through faith they were to obtain this knowledge; and, having power by faith to obtain the knowledge of God, they could with it obtain all other things which pertain to life and godliness.

By these sayings of the apostle, we learn that it was by obtaining a knowledge of God that men got the knowledge of all things which pertain to life and godliness, and this knowledge was the effect of faith; so that all things which pertain to life and godliness are the effects of faith. [^110]

In these statements, the Prophet taught that the truth which is given to man through the second Comforter is that which he must eventually receive in order to be saved.

Those things which man may learn through the second Comforter, which are difficult to convey by intellectual processes alone, include many precious truths concerning the divine nature of God. A revelation in May, 1833, assured the Saints that by achieving the blessings of the second Comforter they could understand their relationship in the Spirit to Jesus and His relationship in glory to the Father. The revelation said:

Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am;

And that I am the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world;

And that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one—

The Father because he [i.e., Elohim] gave me of his fulness, and the Son because I was in the world and made flesh my tabernacle, and dwelt among the sons of men. [^111]

In a statement in which he enumerated many things which holy men in past ages have been taught through the second Comforter, Joseph Smith said:

They . . . saw the mysteries of godliness; they saw the flood before it came; they saw angels ascending and descending upon a ladder that reached from earth to heaven; they saw the stone cut out of the mountain, which filled the whole earth; they saw the Son of Man come from the regions of bliss and dwell with men on earth; they saw the deliverer come out of Zion, and turn away ungodliness from Jacob; they saw the glory of the Lord when he showed the transfiguration of the earth on the mount; they saw every mountain laid low and every valley exalted when the Lord was taking vengeance upon the wicked; they saw truth spring out of the earth, and righteousness look down from heaven in the last days, before the Lord came the second time to gather his elect; they saw the end of wickedness on earth, and the Sabbath of creation crowned with peace; they saw the end of the glorious thousand years, when Satan was loosed for a little season; they saw the day of judgment when all men received according to their works, and they saw the heaven and the earth flee away to make room for the city of God, when the righteous receive an inheritance in eternity. [^112]

The Prophet held that if holy men in past ages were taught and shown such things by obtaining the second Comforter, the Saints could receive similar blessings on the same principle. Having cited the examples above, he stressed:

Fellow sojourners upon earth, it is your privilege to purify yourselves and come up to the same glory, and see for yourselves, and know for yourselves. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. [^113]

Many things which are taught to those who receive the second Comforter go beyond the knowledge which is contained in the written word of God, or that which God permits His prophets to write. Having recorded but a small fraction of the information which he and Sidney Rigdon were given in a heavenly vision concerning the destiny of the human family in eternity, [^114] Joseph Smith said at the conclusion of the written report:

But great and marvelous are the works of the Lord, and the mysteries of his kingdom which he showed unto us, which surpass all understanding in glory, and in might, and in dominion;

Which he commanded us we should not write while we were yet in the Spirit, and are not lawful for man to utter;

Neither is man capable to make them known, for they are only to be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those who love him, and purify themselves before him;

To whom he grants this privilege of seeing and knowing for themselves. [^115]

As this statement indicates, some knowledge given to those who receive the second Comforter is so sacred that the recipients are forbidden to communicate it to others. For example, the Prophet said:

The Hebrew Church [in New Testament times] "came unto the spirits of just men made perfect, and unto an innumerable company of angels, unto God the Father of all, and to Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the new covenant." What did they learn by coming to the spirits of just men made perfect? Is it written? No. What they learned has not been and could not have been written. [^116]

According to Joseph Smith, the Apostle Paul received such knowledge. "Paul ascended into the third heavens," he explained, "and he could understand the three principal rounds of Jacob's ladder—the telestial, the terrestrial, and the celestial glories or kingdoms, where Paul saw and heard things which were not lawful for him to utter." [^117] Of his own experience, the latter-day Seer said: "I know a man that has been caught up to the third heavens, and can say, with Paul, that we have seen and heard things that are not lawful to utter." [^118]

Because many of the ancient saints obtained the blessings of the second Comforter through the application of true faith and obedience to the gospel, they were in a position to teach the world the things of God, though they were in humble circumstances and in many instances lacked worldly knowledge. Joseph Smith explained:

This is the reason that the fisherman of Galilee could teach the world—because they sought by faith, and by faith obtained. And this is the reason that Paul counted all things but filth and dross—what he formerly called his gain he called his loss; yea, and he counted all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus the Lord. Philippians iii. 7, 8, 9, and 10. Because he obtained the faith by which he could enjoy the knowledge of Christ Jesus the Lord, he had to suffer the loss of all things. This is the reason that the Former-day Saints knew more, and understood more, of heaven and of heavenly things than all others besides, because this information is the effect of faith—to be obtained by no other means. [^119]

The knowledge which the ancient saints obtained of divine things was real and soul-stirring, so much so that the things of this world were swallowed up in a hope of immortal glory. The Prophet taught that the Latter-day Saints should acquire the same knowledge and reflect the same disposition.

Way to All Truth

By obtaining the blessings of the second Comforter, man can eventually acquire a fulness of the truth and light of the Father's glory. Having declared that if man's eye is single to the glory of God his body will be filled with light, or with the Spirit, a revelation to Joseph Smith promised: "That body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things." [^120] It then declared: "Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you." [^121]

Jesus exemplified the way to all truth. Having defined truth as "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come," Christ said in a revelation to the Prophet:

The Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth.

And no man receiveth a fulness unless he keepeth his commandments.

He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things. [^122]

Three major points either mentioned or implied in this statement must be understood if one is to catch the meaning of the Lord's explanation: First, Christ as a glorified being is inseparably associated with that divine substance or essence which is called the Spirit of truth. The Spirit of truth, known also as the Holy Spirit, centers in God and is given to man through Christ. Hence Jesus is said to be the Spirit of truth. [^123] The Spirit of truth, which is the glory of God, emanates from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space; and as God's divine agent, it communicates to Him a knowledge of all things throughout His vast domain. When Jesus obtained a fulness of the glory of the Father, He received the full truth and power of that primary being. This is the central theme expressed in this revelation. [^124]

Second, man must acquire a fulness of truth the same way Jesus did. Man thinks and acts only by the influence of a quickening and enlightening spiritual power which is given to him from God. [^125] But the physical senses of man alone are limited in their ability to perceive and acquire truth. If man is to receive a fulness of truth he must receive in its fulness the living and enlightening power of that Spirit which constitutes the glory of God. Being filled with a fulness of that Spirit which is in and through all things, man may then know all things. [^126]

Third, to obtain a fulness of glory, man must acquire truth and light through the principle of revelation, by expressing living faith in Christ and by obeying the law of God. The intellectual process alone can never bring man to achieve a fulness of truth. True faith includes but requires more than the expression of mental powers. In the expression of faith, the whole soul of man—both the powers of mind and body—reaches up to God in the quest for truth, and man is brought into a living spiritual union with Christ. Only when man has developed in this divine relationship until he is glorified in truth will he know all things. Being endowed with the full glory of God,—which is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth [^127]—he will then have a fulness of truth.

Because this is the goal of the plan of life and salvation, John Taylor explained: "The Gospel embraces principles that dive deeper, spread wider, and extend further than anything else that we can conceive." [^128] According to Brigham Young, it also "incorporates every true principle there is in heaven and on earth" into its body of knowledge. [^129] George Q. Cannon therefore said: "The Gospel embraces all truth, and there is no truth of any nature or name, whether it be scientific, or moral, or religious, that is not comprehended within the scope of the Gospel of Jesus Christ." [^130]

Entering Into The Rest Of The Lord

Joseph Smith explained that those who make their calling and election sure to celestial glory thereby enter into the rest of the Lord. A revelation defined the term "rest" as "the fulness of his [God's] glory." [^131] This is a state in which man is brought by the action of his faith into the presence of God and is given access to the glory and power of the Lord. [^132] He also partakes significantly of the divine fruits, or attributes, of the Holy Spirit and is filled with that joy and peace which Christ alone can give to the human soul.

To enter into the Lord's rest, man must traverse the path of the gospel upward out of the world's state of spiritual darkness and death into the presence of God; he must acquire the blessings of the second Comforter. Concerning this divine state of rest and of man's need to prepare for it, the Prophet said:

God has in reserve a time, or period appointed in His own bosom, when He will bring all His subjects, who have obeyed His voice and kept His commandments, into His celestial rest. This rest is of such perfection and glory that man has need of a preparation before he can, according to the laws of that kingdom, enter it and enjoy its blessings. This being the fact, God has given certain laws to the human family, which, if observed, are sufficient to prepare them to inherit this rest. [^133]

The Prophet declared that it was "the order of the kingdom" which had been restored to earth through his instrumentality "to prepare men for the rest of the Lord." [^134] According to the Book of Mormon, this is the objective of the Melchizedek Priesthood and its divine law. Alma taught that God had prepared this holy calling "from the foundation of the world for such as would not harden their hearts, . . . that they . . . might enter into his rest." [^135] Having stated that in earlier times those who received this priesthood and established its divine law in their midst thereby became "pure and spotless before God," Alma stressed: ". . . and there were many, exceeding great many, who were made pure and entered into the rest of the Lord their God." To men in his day, he therefore said: "And now, my brethren, I would that ye should humble yourselves before God, and bring forth fruit meet for repentance, that ye may also enter into that rest." [^136]

Since man can make his calling and election sure to celestial glory either by acquiring the more sure word of prophecy or by enduring with living faith to the end of his mortal probation, it follows that he can enter into the rest of the Lord in either of these two ways. There have been those who entered into rest while still on earth. [^137] But faithful saints who endure to the end of their mortal lives also have the promise of entering into the Lord's rest after they pass from this sphere. [^138]

This challenge has confronted the people of God in every age. According to Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible, the Lord declared to Moses that, having been given the opportunity, the ancient Israelites failed to "enter into my presence, into my rest." [^139] That volume also reports that the Apostle Paul explained Israel's failure and said to the Hebrew saints:

. . . to whom sware he [God] that they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not?

So we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief.

Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.

For unto us was the rest preached, as well as unto them; but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it.

For we who have believed do enter into rest, as he said, As I have sworn in my wrath, If they harden their hearts they shall not enter into my rest; also, I have sworn, If they will not harden their hearts, they shall enter into my rest. [^140]

The Nephite prophets also took the failure of their Israelite fathers to heart and sought to prevent their people from coming under the same condemnation. "We labor diligently among our people, that we might persuade them to come unto Christ, and partake of the goodness of God," Jacob reported, "that they might enter into his rest, lest by any means he should swear in his wrath they should not enter in, as in the provocation in the days of temptation while the children of Israel were in the wilderness." [^141] Alma also admonished his people to become righteous so that they could enter into a state of rest; and he warned them that by taking a contrary course, they could "not enter into the rest of the Lord." [^142] When Jesus ministered to the Nephites after His resurrection, He reaffirmed these teachings. Speaking of the kingdom of the Father, He said: "No unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end." [^143] Because the gospel gives to man both the immediate and the post-mortal objective of entering into the presence of God, Mormon characterized those who achieve the first of these goals as "peaceful followers of Christ" who obtain sufficient hope to "enter into the rest of the Lord" on earth and continue therein until they can "rest with him in heaven." [^144] Having received the blessings of the second Comforter on earth, they finally realize the full object of their faith in the resurrection.

In like manner, latter-day revelations mention the need for the Saints to meet the challenge of entering into the Lord's rest. To those who were called to initiate the last dispensation, the Lord said: "I speak unto you that are chosen in this thing, even as one, that you may enter into my rest." [^145] A revelation on priesthood explained that this can only be achieved by man partaking of the "power of godliness" as it is manifested through the Melchizedek Priesthood and its ordinances. [^146] And in speaking of the great culminating purposes of this dispensation, the Prophet referred to the time "when every man shall enter into his [God's] eternal presence and into his immortal rest." [^147] When these purposes are accomplished, the work of perfecting the Saints will be complete, and all the righteous in eternity will be given the blessings of the second Comforter.

This was the reason the Saints sought to establish the society of Zion in Missouri. When they neglected to apply the principles that would enable them to enter into the Lord's rest, Joseph Smith warned: "I say to you (and what I say to you I say to all), hear the warning voice of God, lest Zion fall, and the Lord swear in His wrath the inhabitants of Zion shall not enter into His rest." [^148] Unfortunately the Prophet's admonition was not sufficiently heeded, and the Saints have since been denied many of the blessings which the latter-day Seer had hoped they would realize.

Summary

Joseph Smith explained that within the program of the gospel there are two Comforters: the Holy Ghost and the divine promise, or guarantee, sealed in the hearts of the faithful by the Holy Spirit that they will receive eternal life in the world to come. The latter Comforter carries with it the right (subject to the will of God) to commune with Christ and the Father, an innumerable company of angels, the spirits of just men made perfect, the church of the Firstborn, and the general assembly of the church of the Firstborn. One who receives the second Comforter has the right to come to Mount Zion and the heavenly Jerusalem—the abode of glorified beings in eternity.

Man may obtain the guarantee of eternal life either by receiving the more sure word of prophecy in this life or by enduring faithful in the gospel to the end of his mortal probation. The first way entitles him to enjoy the blessings of the second Comforter in mortality. But in either case the faithful receive those blessings in the spirit world after mortality, for the spirits of the just dwell in the midst of celestial glory.

The second Comforter is available to all who embrace the gospel. The blessings associated with this Comforter are the final products of true faith in Jesus Christ, and receiving these blessings is a major object of the gospel plan. For these reasons, the Prophet challenged the Saints repeatedly to seek the blessings of the second Comforter. Several saints received the manifestations of the second Comforter early in this dispensation, particularly at Kirtland and in association with the Kirtland Temple.

By means of the second Comforter, a sure testimony of Christ is established in the world. The purpose of the second Comforter is also to reveal to the Saints the mysteries of God and to give them a greater knowledge of His eternal ways. In this way, the faithful can eventually acquire a knowledge of all truth. Since the design of the gospel is to bring fallen man into the presence of God, those who receive the second Comforter also enter into the rest of the Lord where they partake of that peace and joy which Christ alone can give to man.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Alma 9:17-19.
[^2] D&C 124:33; 128:5, 8, 22; 130:20; 132:5, 11, 28, 63. See also Alma 22:13.
[^3] Joseph Smith Papers, 1839-1841, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 190.
[^4] HC, II, p. 15.
[^5] Ibid., VI, pp. 50-51.
[^6] Joseph Smith Papers, op. cit.; found also in TPJS, p. 181.
[^7] HC, V, p. 529.
[^8] Ibid., p. 423.
[^9] TS, III (September 1, 1842), p. 904.
[^10] D&C 20:25-26.
[^11] TS, I (November, 1839), p. 1. Brigham Young declared: "There is no evidence to be found in the Bible that the Gospel should be one thing in the days of the Israelites, another in the days of Christ and his apostles, and another in the 19th century, but, on the contrary, we are instructed that God is the same in every age, and that his plan of saving his children is the same."—JD, X, p. 324.
[^12] D&C 22:1.
[^13] TS, III (September 1, 1842), pp. 904-905.
[^14] D&C 132:5. See also verse 11.
[^15] D&C 132:28. See also verse 63. This law will be discussed in Volume III of this work.
[^16] D&C 130:20-21.
[^17] HC, II, p. 309.
[^18] EMS, I (May, 1833), pp. 93-94. See also JD, I, p. 235.
[^19] HC, IV, p. 208. See TS, III (September 1, 1842), pp. 904-905.
[^20] See Hebrews 11:4.
[^21] HC, II, pp. 15-16.
[^22] Ibid., pp. 16-17.
[^23] Ibid. For the last reference by the Apostle Paul, see Galatians 3:19. As further evidence to support the Prophet's argument, the words of Paul to the Corinthians may be cited:
[^24] See Moses 5:2-3. William W. Phelps wrote: "It ought to be known, for it is published, that after Adam and Eve were driven out of the garden of Eden, they had many children, and the children went forth two and two and began to multiply and replenish the earth; yea, and all this too, before Adam had the gospel preached unto him or was baptized."—EMS, I (April, 1833), pp. 84-85.
[^25] Moses 5:5.
[^26] Moses 5:6-9.
[^27] Moses 5:12-15.
[^28] Moses 6:52.
[^29] See, for example, D&C 88:63-65; Mormon 9:21, 28.
[^30] Moses 6:53-68. See the section in chapter seven entitled "Enoch's Explanation of Rebirth."
[^31] See Moses 7:1.
[^32] Abraham, Facsimile No. 2.
[^33] HC, IV, p. 207.
[^34] D&C 78:16; HC, IV, p. 207.
[^35] HC, III, p. 387; D&C 76:22-24; 88:36-39, 51-61.
[^36] HC, III, pp. 387-388; IV, pp. 208-209.
[^37] Ibid., III, p. 385.
[^38] Ibid., IV, p. 207.
[^39] Ibid., III, p. 386.
[^40] Ibid., IV, pp. 207-208.
[^41] Ibid., p. 208.
[^42] Ibid., II, p. 17.
[^43] Ibid., IV, p. 208.
[^44] See the section in chapter three entitled "Role of Testimony."
[^45] Lectures on Faith, No. 2.
[^46] Moses 5:9.
[^47] See the section in chapter one entitled "Objectives And Purposes Of The Gospel."
[^48] Moses 5:10.
[^49] Moses 5:11.
[^50] HC, III, p. 388.
[^51] D&C 107:54.
[^52] HC, III, p. 388. For a scriptural reference to the effort of Moses, see D&C 84:19-24.
[^53] Moses 6:21, 41.
[^54] Lectures on Faith, No. 2.
[^55] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter nine entitled "Christ Speaks as the Father."
[^56] See Moses 6 and 7. For Joseph Smith's commentary on God's revelation to Enoch, see HC, II, pp. 260-261.
[^57] Moses 6:26-27.
[^58] Moses 6:34.
[^59] See the section in chapter seven entitled "Enoch's Explanation Of Rebirth."
[^60] Moses 6:59.
[^61] Moses 6:62.
[^62] Moses 7:1.
[^63] The elements of union and individualism among the Saints will be treated in volume III of this study.
[^64] Having spoken of ancient Eliases who tried unsuccessfully to restore the earth to a state of paradisiacal glory, Joseph Smith indicated that this objective would be achieved in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, when God would gather together all things in one. Only when this is done, he explained, will the Saints enjoy direct communion with celestial beings and the earth be renewed to a state of glory. See HC, III, pp. 388-389. This point will be discussed more fully in volumes III and IV of this study.
[^65] Moses 7:16-18.
[^66] Reported by Joseph Young, Sr. in his History of the Organization of the Seventies, Also, A Brief Glance at Enoch and His City (Salt Lake City, 1878), p. 11.
[^67] See HC, IV, pp 209-210.
[^68] JD, III p. 320. Of Enoch's relationship with Adam, William W. Phelps said:
[^69] JD, III, p. 320. See D&C 84:24, where a revelation states that the term "rest" means to enter into the glory of the Lord. Joseph Smith also stated that Enoch and his people became "righteous enough to come into the presence of God, and walk with him."—TS, III (September 1, 1842), p. 905.
[^70] See chapter thirteen for a discussion of the subject of making man's calling and election sure.
[^71] JD, III, p. 320.
[^72] Concerning this last point, see Moses 7:21; D&C 45:11-12.
[^73] HC, IV, pp. 556-557.
[^74] Ibid., pp. 209-210.
[^75] I. R., Genesis 14:30-32.
[^76] For a discussion of these points as they relate to the gospel, see chapter thirteen.
[^77] HC, IV, pp. 209-210. Evidence indicates that Joseph Smith received special revelation on the subject of translated beings, which evidently included a personal visitation from Enoch. For statements concerning the latter point, see D&C 128:21; JD, XX, pp. 174-175; XXI, pp. 65, 94. Of the Prophet's revelation on translated beings, Orson Pratt said:
[^78] Moses 8:2.
[^79] Moses 7:27.
[^80] HC, III, p. 386.
[^81] D&C 84:15.
[^82] D&C 107:52; Abraham 1:2-3, 18-19.
[^83] HC, IV, p. 210.
[^84] TS, III (September 1, 1842), p. 904.
[^85] Moses 8:13.
[^86] See chapter seven for a discussion of the way by which man can become a son of God.
[^87] Moses 8:19.
[^88] Moses 8:16.
[^89] Moses 8:23-24.
[^90] Moses 8:20-21.
[^91] JD, XXVI, p. 90.
[^92] Moses 8:14-15.
[^93] For evidence of Noah's presiding position in the Melchizedek Priesthood by which he was the Lord's prophet on earth, see D&C 84:14-15. For evidence that he held the keys of the Patriarchal Priesthood in a family-oriented society, see D&C 107:40-52. For the fact that he reigned as a king in that system, see Abraham 1:25-26. The situation may have been such that all men may not have recognized his authority in these positions.
[^94] Moses 8:18.
[^95] Sayings of Joseph Smith, from those who heard him and later reported that which he said, in "Joseph Smith, Jr. Papers," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. Once when the Prophet was in the shop of Dimick Huntington he talked of the history of the earth. According to Huntington, he said that while Noah was building the ark and preaching "the wicked people mobbed and drove him four times."—Young Woman's Journal, II, p. 467; The diary of Charles L. Walker, December 5, 1891.
[^96] See Amos 3:7.
[^97] This revelation was given to him while he dwelt in a shepherd's tent in Arizona Territory. A copy is in the Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^98] Moses 8:25-26.
[^99] Genesis 6:6.
[^100] Moses 8:25-26.
[^101] The book of Hebrews implies that Melchizedek was "without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life."—Hebrews 7:3. But Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible renders this passage as follows: "For this Melchizedek was ordained a priest after the order of the Son of God, which order was without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life."—I. R., Hebrews 7:3.
[^102] Alma 13:19. John Taylor stated that Shem, the son of Noah, was Melchizedek. See TS, V (December 15, 1844), p. 746. There is also a Jewish tradition which affirms this identity of Melchizedek. See, for example, The Book of Jasher 16:11-12. In discussing this issue, students of Joseph Smith's thought refer to a revelation which states: "Abraham received the priesthood from Melchizedek, who received it through the lineage of his fathers, even till Noah."—D&C 84:14. Depending upon the meaning of the word "till," this statement may suggest that there were "fathers" between Melchizedek and Noah. If so, Shem could not have been Melchizedek. However, Webster's New International Unabridged Dictionary gives the following as one of the definitions of "till": ". . . during the whole time from the starting point up to; up or down to [a specified time]." Taking this definition of the word "till" into consideration, it may be that the above statement should be understood to mean, "Abraham received the priesthood from Melchizedek, who received it through the lineage of his fathers, even [from Adam] till Noah." This view is supported by the next statement in the revelation which reads: "And from Noah till Enoch, through the lineage of their fathers [i.e., the fathers of both Enoch and Noah]."—D&C 84:15. If this interpretation is correct, it is possible that Shem could have been Melchizedek. The writer is indebted to Dr. Ellis T. Rasmussen of the Brigham Young University and Thomas G. Truitt of the Church Historian's Library for supplying arguments which support the latter interpretation.
[^103] Alma 13:14-15, 17-18.
[^104] Joseph Smith taught that the order, or system, of priesthood which Melchizedek received contains the office of king as well as priest. See TPJS, p. 318; HC, V, pp. 517-518. The political rights of the Melchizedek Priesthood will be discussed in volume III of this study.
[^105] D&C 107:3-4. (Italics in the original.)
[^106] I. R., Genesis 14:17-18.
[^107] Taylor, op. cit., p. 83.
[^108] D&C 45:12-13.
[^109] I R., Genesis 14:33-34.
[^110] See, for example, D&C 129:1, 3, where the word "heaven" is used to denote a state of glory.
[^111] Alma 13:14.
[^112] Alma 13:16. See also Alma 13:6, 11-13.
[^113] Abraham 1:5-6.
[^114] I. R., Genesis 17:4-7.
[^115] Abraham 1:15; 2:13.
[^116] Abraham 1:16. For a discussion of the fact that angels speak by and in the name of Christ, see Volume 1 of this study, the section in chapter nine entitled "Christ Speaks as the Father."
[^117] Abraham 2:6-13
[^118] Abraham 3, 4, 5.
[^119] See the section in chapter twelve entitled "Coming of Elias."
[^120] Moses 6:23.
[^121] See D&C 107:39; HC, III, p. 381.
[^122] Abraham 1:19.
[^123] Abraham 2:9. The divine patriarchial order under Abraham will be discussed in volume III of this study.
[^124] Abraham 2:6
[^125] Abraham 2:15.
[^126] 1 Nephi 17:33-35.
[^127] Abraham 3:15.
[^128] Jesus challenged the Jews of His day: "If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham."—John 8:39.
[^129] Ibid., VII, p. 239. See also ibid., III, p. 80; XIII, pp. 146, 255; XVI, p. 160, for other statements by Brigham Young.
[^130] Ibid., XX, p. 287. See also ibid., XIV, p. 57, for another statement by George Q. Cannon.
[^131] D&C 84:24.
[^132] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter thirteen entitled "The Seventh Day One of Rest."
[^133] 133. HC, II, p. 12.
[^134] 134. Ibid., p. 228.
[^135] 135. Alma 13:5-6.
[^136] 136. Alma 13:11-13.
[^137] 137. Enoch and his people entered into the Lord's rest. See, for example, Moses 7:16-17; JD, III, p. 320. It is apparent that Melchizedek and his people also achieved this objective. See I. R., Genesis 14:34; Alma 13:6-16.
[^138] 138. See, for example, Enos 1:27; Alma 13:29; 40:12; Moroni 10:34; D&C 59:2; 101:31; 121:32.
[^139] 139. I. R., Exodus 34:2. See also D&C 84:24.
[^140] 140. I. R., Hebrews 3:18-19; 4:1-3.
[^141] 141. Jacob 1:7.
[^142] 142. Alma 12:34-37; 13:12-16; 16:17.
[^143] 143. 3 Nephi 27:19.
[^144] 144. Moroni 7:3.
[^145] 145. D&C 19:9. The Prophet wrote: "Our trust is in God, and we are determined, His grace assisting us, to maintain the cause and hold out faithful unto the end, that we may be crowned with crowns of celestial glory, and enter into the rest that is prepared for the children of God."—HC, I, p. 450.
[^146] 146. D&C 84:19-24.
[^147] 147. D&C 121:32.
[^148] 148. HC, I, p. 316.
