Hyrum L. Andrus, Principles of Perfection ( 1970)

16

The Gospel from Israel to Modern Times

Some, when they had heard, did provoke: howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses.

But . . . to whom sware he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not? . . .

Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.

For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it.

For we which have believed do enter into rest.—PAUL.

Revelations to Joseph Smith teach that many people from the time of Moses to the present day had the gospel, and that some applied its divine program until they obtained the blessings of the second Comforter. The Prophet also made clear the nature of the revelation which was given to Israel through Moses and its relationship to the earthly ministry of Christ and His apostles. The objectives of the gospel in those dispensations are plainly revealed, and the apostasy which took place from the Church of Jesus Christ in New Testament times is made apparent. Modern revelations also set forth the ultimate purpose of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, which is to renew the earth through the power of the gospel and establish it again in a state of paradisiacal glory.

Israel The Chosen People

Spiritual Foundations of Israel

Though there were others who endeavored to develop the principles and powers of the gospel on earth after the flood, the Lord eventually centered the rights of the priesthood by promise in the descendants of Abraham, through Isaac and Jacob, who is Israel. In this way, God sought to develop a righteous people through whom He could establish and sustain His law in the earth. To Abraham, the Lord said of the priesthood: "I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal." [^1] Like Abraham and the great patriarchs before him, members of the chosen family were expected to be "preachers of righteousness." [^2]

Jacob, the father of Israel, persisted in the plan of the gospel until he received the blessings of the second Comforter. Joseph Smith referred to him as one who "saw the mysteries of godliness" when he beheld "angels ascending and descending upon a ladder that reached from earth to heaven." [^3] According to the Prophet, "the three principal rounds of Jacob's ladder" represented the kingdoms of glory which man will inherit in the resurrection. [^4] To Jacob was also revealed the future of his descendants to the latter days. [^5] With Abraham and Isaac his fathers, Jacob stands as a foremost figure in the patriarchal kingdom of Jehovah after the flood and in all generations to follow.

Desire of God for Israel

As God's chosen people, Israel was expected to seek for and achieve the same spiritual blessings and powers which the righteous in former ages had enjoyed. When Moses led the Israelites out of Egypt, he sought to develop them in spiritual excellence and power to be like the people of Enoch, so that they could be endowed with glory and enter into the presence of God. Having explained that it is only through the Melchizedek Priesthood and its sacred ordinances that "the power of godliness is manifest" and that without receiving "the power of godliness . . . no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live," a revelation to Joseph Smith stated: "Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God." He wanted them to enter into the Lord's rest, "which rest is the fulness of his glory." [^6]

In commenting upon this statement, George Q. Cannon explained that without the enlightening and regenerating power which may be obtained through the Melchizedek Priesthood and its sacred ordinances, there are limits to which a people can go in their effort to attain the presence of God:

They cannot attain to the fullness of the glory of God the Eternal Father, without the presence of the Melchisedek Priesthood. . . .

Without this Priesthood, without its ordinances, without its powers, [or] without its gifts, "no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live." Therefore it is essential that, if a people should be exalted unto the presence of God, they should have this Melchisedek or greater Priesthood, and the ordinances thereof, by the means of which they are to be prepared, or they shall be prepared to enter into the presence of God the Father, and endure His presence. [^7]

Ministry of Moses

Israel had been in Egypt many years before the time of Moses. Joseph, the favored son of the patriarch Jacob, was sold by his brothers into Egyptian slavery. But he rose to great spiritual and political heights as the Pharaoh's prime minister, and through his influence the Israelites settled in Egypt. Later, however, there arose another Pharaoh who "knew not Joseph," [^8] and the chosen people of the Lord were placed in a state of servitude and bondage.

By obtaining the blessings of the second Comforter, the Patriarch Joseph was shown many important things concerning the future of Israel. "Joseph truly saw our day," Lehi declared as he spoke of the revelations of God to the earlier patriarch. [^9] Among other things, the Patriarch Joseph learned that Moses would be raised up to lead the children of Jacob out of Egypt. To the ancient Joseph, God said: "Moses . . . I have said I would raise up unto you, to deliver my people, O house of Israel, . . . out of the land of Egypt." [^10] The patriarch later said:

. . . I am sure of the promise of Moses; for the Lord hath said unto me, I will preserve thy seed forever.

And the Lord hath said: I will raise up a Moses; and I will give power unto him in a rod; and I will give judgment unto him in writing. Yet I will not loose his tongue, that he shall speak much, for I will not make him mighty in speaking. But I will write unto him my law, by the finger of mine own hand; and I will make a spokesman for him. [^11]

Revelations to Joseph Smith indicate that before Moses went to deliver Israel from Egypt he had attained the blessings of the second Comforter by complying with the program of the gospel; he had traversed the path of faith upward into the presence of God. [^12] He was "caught up into an exceedingly high mountain," and there he "saw God" and talked with Him. [^13] This great theophany occurred some time after the episode of the burning bush [^14] and before Moses went to deliver Israel from Egypt. [^15] On that occasion, the Lord showed Moses the earth, even all of it, so that "there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the Spirit of God." Moses also saw all the inhabitants of the earth. In addition, God explained to him that He had created "worlds without number," that the "first man of all men" thereon He had called Adam, and that as one earth had passed away with its atmospheric heavens, another had been formed, so that there is no end to His works nor to His words. Finally, the Lord stated that the great purpose of His work in creating these many spheres, and the way by which He continually acquires glory, is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^16]

With this great revelation of God's works and purposes to sustain him, Moses went to Egypt, where the Lord had prepared the way beforehand to magnify His name in the earth, to develop faith in the Israelites, and to bring judgments upon the Egyptians for their wickedness. In referring to His divine purposes, God said to Pharaoh through Moses: "For this cause have I raised thee up, for to shew in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth." [^17] It was necessary, therefore, that God "meet with opposition to give Him an opportunity to manifest His power," Brigham Young and Willard Richards wrote; "therefore He raised up a man, even Pharaoh, who, He foreknew, would harden his heart against God of his own free will and choice, and would withstand the Almighty in His attempt to deliver His chosen people." [^18]

To such a degree was the power of God revealed through Moses in the plagues which were brought upon Egypt that the proud and defiant Pharaoh was finally willing to release 600,000 men, with their women, children, cattle, etc., from serving him and his people as slaves. [^19] "Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of the people." [^20] But more important than this, the Israelites came to esteem Moses to the extent that they were willing to follow him into the desert. After they had crossed the Red Sea through another remarkable display of God's power, and the Egyptian army, which pursued them when Pharaoh again hardened his heart, had perished in the water, the record states: "And Israel saw that great work which the Lord did upon the Egyptians; and the people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, and his servant." [^21]

The Lord also manifested His glory visibly to Israel so that the Israelites had ample opportunity to acquire a hope for that glory. As they left Egypt, "the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night." [^22] When Pharaoh pursued Israel with his army, "the angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them; and it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness to the Egyptians, but it gave light by night to the Israelites, so that the one came not near the other all the night." [^23]

Joseph Smith made it clear that the initial principles and ordinances of the gospel were given to Israel as they tarried on the shore of the Red Sea. The Apostle Paul stated that they "were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud [i.e., the glory, or Spirit, of God] and in the sea." Thus they were born of water and of the Spirit. Continuing, Paul explained: ". . . and [they] did all eat the same spiritual meat; and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ." [^24] In commenting upon this statement, the Prophet said: "Aaron was baptized in the cloud and in the sea, together with all Israel, as is related by the Apostle in Corinthians." [^25] Again the latter-day Seer said:

Paul told about Moses' proceedings; spoke of the children of Israel being baptized.—(I Cor. x:1-4). He knew this, and that all the ordinances and blessings were in the [Israelite] Church. [^26]

Three months after the Israelites left Egypt they arrived at Mount Sinai. Moses then began the task of sanctifying the people and establishing them upon the law of God on a grand scale, with the Lord personally directing the program. "If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people," God explained, ". . . and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation." [^27] They were to become like the people of Enoch. "He designed to lead them forward under the guidance of the everlasting Priesthood," George Q. Cannon stressed, ". . . until they should behold the face of their God and see Him for themselves." [^28]

In preparing Israel for these great blessings, the Lord instructed Moses: "Go unto the people, and sanctify them to day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes, and be ready against the third day: for the third day the Lord will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai." [^29] On this great occasion, the Israelites were also to be given the sacred laws and ordinances which would take them into the presence of God, endowed with His glory.

When the time came for God to reveal Himself and His law to Israel, the record states:

. . . there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that was in the camp trembled.

And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.

And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.

And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice.

And the Lord came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount: and the Lord called Moses up to the top of the mount; and Moses went up. [^30]

When Israel beheld God's glory on Mount Sinai, they also heard the voice of the Lord speak to them. [^31] But the living word, conveyed by the penetrating and regenerating power of the Spirit or glory of God, [^32] was more than they could bear. They said to Moses: "Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die." [^33] Moses later recounted Israel's response to the voice of God:

. . . when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the darkness, (for the mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came near unto me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your elders;

And ye said, Behold, the Lord our God hath shewed us his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire: we have seen this day that God doth talk with man, and he liveth.

Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume us: if we hear the voice of the Lord our God any more, then we shall die. . . .

Go thou near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say: and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee; and we will hear it, and do it. [^34]

The Israelites were not prepared at this time to enter into the presence of the Lord, for they had not yet received the laws and ordinances by which they could be sanctified to that extent. [^35] Their response to the voice of the Lord, therefore, was consistent with their state. Yet their expressions to Moses were lacking in faith and in a hope for the glory of God. George Q. Cannon explained:

They hardened their hearts and could not endure the presence of the Lord. "Go thou, Moses, and speak to God," said the children of Israel, "and then tell us what God has to say: be thou mouthpiece, be thou God to us; we will be content with this, the face of God is too terrible for us. We desire not to enter into His presence. We shall be content to have thee give to us the word of God." These were, in effect, their words, and their actions corresponded to these words. As Paul says, "Which voice (the voice of God) they had heard entreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more, for they could not endure that which was commanded." Moses stood between them and God. They could not endure the presence of God. They hardened their hearts against it. [^36]

Joseph Smith expressed an eternal principle when he said: "The moment we revolt at anything which comes from God, the devil takes power." [^37] This was true of Israel. Amid the display of glory on Mount Sinai, God revealed the law of Zion to Moses. "The sight of the glory of the Lord was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel," the record states. "And Moses went into the midst of the cloud . . . and . . . was in the mount forty days and forty nights." [^38] But when the people saw that Moses delayed to return from the mount, they persuaded Aaron to make a golden calf, which they began to worship in idolatrous fashion. [^39] Their lack of faith and their failure to respond with a hope for the glory of God turned into spiritual rebellion. They turned from sacred spiritual insight to carnal and sensual practices.

When the Lord saw Israel engaged in idolatry, He was about to destroy the people; but Moses pleaded in their behalf. With mercy, the Lord responded, as recorded in Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible: "If they will repent of the evil which they have done, I will spare them, and turn away my fierce wrath; but, behold, thou shalt execute judgment upon all that will not repent of this evil this day." [^40]

After Moses had carried out these instructions, God again spoke to him. "If I have found grace in thy sight," Israel's leader then pleaded, "shew me now thy way, that I may know thee." Moses also desired the Lord to still accept Israel as His people and to let His presence—His glory and power—go with them. "For wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight?" he reasoned. "Is it not in that thou goest with us?" [^41]

Since the object of the gospel is to bring man into the presence of God, Moses desired to learn more about God's glory. "I beseech thee," he exclaimed to the Lord, "show me thy glory." God then said: "I will make all my goodness [i.e., glory] pass before thee." But, He qualified:

Thou canst not see my face at this time, lest mine anger be kindled against thee also, and I destroy thee, and thy people; for there shall no man among them see me at this time, and live, for they are exceeding sinful. And no sinful man hath at any time, neither shall there be any sinful man at any time, that shall see my face and live.

And the Lord said, Behold, thou shalt stand upon a rock, and I will prepare a place by me for thee.

And it shall come to pass, while my glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a cleft of a rock, and cover thee with my hand while I pass by.

And I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts, but my face shall not be seen, as at other times; for I am angry with my people Israel. [^42]

This incident illustrates the degree of purity of the holy powers of life which are centered in God and revealed as His glory. It also makes known the state of perfection to which man must attain, eventually, in order to dwell with God. Neither the natural man nor the carnal man can abide the glory of God. [^43] When God manifested all His glory, or goodness, even Moses could not endure it, but was permitted to see only the back parts of God and the glory which shone therefrom. Previously God had explained to him: "No man can behold all my glory, and afterwards remain in the flesh on the earth." [^44] The Lord therefore took the precautions which are mentioned above. In this way, Moses could get a better idea of the greatness of God's glory without being exposed directly to the full power and purity of God's divine nature.

Moses was privileged to continue with the Lord and learn of His glory, but Israel's rebellion at Sinai cost her much. Even though the Lord had promised Moses that His presence would continue to go before the camp of Israel, the people were deprived of the means of entering into the presence of God and of partaking of His glory. They could still be spectators, but they could not partake of the glory which they saw. When Moses came down from the mount and saw the people engaged in idolatry and all its attendant evils, he broke the tablets of stone on which God had written the law by which the people could be sanctified and enter into the presence of the Lord. Thus Israel never actually heard that higher law. Joseph Smith observed: "The law revealed to Moses in Horeb never was revealed to the children of Israel as a nation." [^45] When Moses later received a second set of tablets from God, the law which they contained varied significantly from that which he had initially received. In reporting the giving of the second set of tablets, Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible states:

And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two other tables of stone, like unto the first, and I will write upon them also, the words of the law, according as they were written at the first on the tables which thou brakest; but it shall not be according to the first, for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst, lest I destroy them.

But I will give unto them the law as at the first, but it shall be after the law of a carnal commandment; for I have sworn in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my presence, into my rest, in the days of their pilgrimage. [^46]

This statement indicates that only through the Holy Priesthood, its sacred ordinances, and the order or system of society that can be built thereon, could Israel have been endowed with the glory of God. [^47] Had they possessed the Holy Priesthood and built up the sacred order of society that can be established upon the covenants of that priesthood, they could have had the presence of God in their midst, not merely out front leading the camp of Israel. But since they were unworthy of entering into God's presence, or into His rest, the Lord took away the means by which they could achieve this glorious privilege. "They hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence," a revelation to Joseph Smith explained; "therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory." [^48] Later, when the divine decree was fully carried out, the Lord "took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also; and the lesser [i.e., Aaronic] priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel." [^49] "All priesthood is Melchizedek, but there are different portions or degrees of it," Joseph Smith stated. "That portion which brought Moses to speak with God face to face was taken away; but that which brought the ministering angels remained." [^50]

Lesser Law of Moses

In speaking of the desire of ancient prophets and patriarchs to build up a system by which their people could attain the glory and power of God, Joseph Smith said: "Moses sought to bring the children of Israel into the presence of God, through the power of the Priesthood, but he could not." [^51] Israel's rebellion was again expressed in the events associated with the giving of the second set of tablets upon which God wrote the lesser law, by which the children of Jacob were finally governed. Having been with God again for forty days and nights, Moses assimilated so much glory that when he came down from the mount "the skin of his face shone" so that the Israelites feared to come near him until he veiled his face. [^52] Here again they expressed their desire to get away from the presence of the Lord. Because of the hardness of their hearts, they rejected the higher spiritual truths and powers of the everlasting gospel; and in later generations when the law of Moses was read, the veil was still upon their hearts. [^53]

Joseph Smith explained the nature of Israel's rebellion and the consequences which followed it. "When God offers a blessing or knowledge to a man, and he refuses to receive it, he will be damned," he said. "The Israelites prayed that God would speak to Moses and not to them; in consequence of which he cursed them with a carnal law." [^54] That law proved to be more compatible with their nature and lack of faith. It issued strict injunctions governing personal conduct and elaborated the law of sacrifice into a variety of rituals which centered attention upon the atoning sacrifice which Christ would make. For this reason, the law of carnal commandments was considered a schoolmaster to bring the people to Christ. [^55]

The Israelites were also taught of Christ in other ways. When fiery serpents were sent among them for their rebellion, Moses was instructed to make a brazen serpent and place it upon a pole with the promise that all who looked upon it would be healed. [^56] According to Alma, this was a "type" or symbol of Christ. But though "many did look and live," he added: "Few understood the meaning of those things, and this because of the hardness of their hearts." There were also "many who were so hardened that they would not look, therefore they perished." [^57]

The program which Israel was finally given through Moses was two-fold in nature. First, it gave the people the preparatory gospel, which consisted of the first three principles and ordinances of the gospel; [^58] the decalogue, or ten commandments, as the divine law of conduct governing those who received these principles and ordinances; and the law of carnal commandments. In stressing that this law was part of the greater program of the preparatory gospel, Joseph Smith cited the statement of the Apostle Paul that the law "was added because of transgression"; [^59] he then queried: "What, we ask, was this law added to, if it was not added to the [Preparatory] Gospel?" [^60] Since the Israelites were finally given only the preparatory gospel, it seems apparent that the right to receive the Holy Ghost, as it was given to them on the shore of the Red Sea, was rescinded.

The power of the Holy Ghost was manifested in some measure in the ministry of the Aaronic Priesthood and in that of its appendage the Levitical Priesthood. Joseph Smith taught that "the Holy Ghost is God's messenger" to minister in all channels of the priesthood. [^61] The power of the priesthood is the authoritative expression of the power of the Holy Ghost. [^62] But though the priests and Levites in ancient Israel could enjoy the power of the Holy Ghost and utilize its influence in their official priesthood acts, they did not necessarily possess the gift of the Holy Ghost, nor did they have authority by the Aaronic Priesthood to bestow that precious gift upon others.

The lesser law contained a negative element, also. "The law was given under Aaron for the purpose of pouring out judgments and destructions," Joseph Smith explained. [^63] The Israelites were heirs in the flesh to the full program of the gospel by which they could have established Zion on earth as a sanctified society, which would have enabled them to partake of the glory of God. But they refused to do this. Consequently, the judgments of God were associated with the lesser law which they received. The Prophet declared: "God cursed the children of Israel because they would not receive the . . . law [of the Melchizedek Priesthood] from Moses." [^64]

Second, the divine program gave Israel the benefit of the ministry of special prophets who held the Melchizedek Priesthood and thereby directed the religious, social, economic, and political functions of Israel. Joseph Smith explained that "all the prophets [of ancient Israel] had the Melchizedek Priesthood, and were ordained by God himself." [^65] Elijah was the last of Israel's prophets to hold "authority to administer in all the ordinances of the [Melchizedek] Priesthood." [^66] Many of these prophets, if not all, received the blessings of the second Comforter. In this respect, Joseph Smith made special mention of Isaiah, Ezekiel, [^67] and Daniel. [^68] Since a person must make his calling and election sure before he can be translated, [^69] it is apparent that Elijah also obtained such blessings. But it is not known to what extent the prophets of Israel were permitted to administer the higher ordinances of the gospel to the children of Israel. Though David was a king and received some priesthood rights and powers, the Prophet remarked that he did not obtain the fulness of the Holy Priesthood. [^70]

But Israel did not sustain the spiritual requirements of the lesser law. Nor did the people see clearly the intent of that law to bring them to Christ. Instead, the Jews permitted the law of Moses to become an end within itself, with emphasis upon the letter rather than upon the Spirit. Priestcraft and hypocrisy eventually prevailed in Jerusalem. Yet there were some who looked in faith for the coming of the Messiah to fulfil the inspired teachings and prophecies relating to His mission on earth.

Law Of God Among Nephites

Higher Gospel Law Among Nephites

The Lord's dealings with the Nephites indicate that when the people of God were worthy to receive the higher blessings of the gospel, they were not denied them. Being a more righteous branch of Israel, the Nephites were given the gift of the Holy Ghost [^71] and the higher order of gospel law and ordinances which pertains to the Melchizedek Priesthood. In speaking of the blessings of the second Comforter which he received, Lehi said: "The Lord hath redeemed my soul from hell; I have beheld his glory, and I am encircled about eternally in the arms of his love." [^72] Nephi testified of seeing Christ [^73] and said: "Wherefore, my soul delighteth to prophesy concerning him, for I have seen his day, and my heart doth magnify his holy name." [^74] Of some of the blessings which he received by obtaining the second Comforter, Nephi said:

My voice have I sent up on high; and angels came down and ministered unto me.

And upon the wings of his Spirit hath my body been carried away upon exceeding high mountains. And mine eyes have beheld great things; yea, even too great for man; therefore I was bidden that I should not write them. [^75]

Jacob also obtained the second Comforter. In speaking of Jesus, Nephi said: "My brother, Jacob, also has seen him as I have seen him." [^76] To Jacob, Lehi therefore said: "I know that thou art redeemed, because of the righteousness of thy Redeemer; for thou hast beheld that in the fulness of time he cometh to bring salvation unto men. And thou hast beheld in thy youth his glory." [^77]

Because the program of the gospel which the Nephites had was designed to bring them to realize the blessings of the second Comforter, Jacob wrote: "We labor diligently among our people, that we might persuade them to come unto Christ, and partake of the goodness of God, that they might enter into his rest, lest by any means he should swear in his wrath they should not enter in, as in the provocation in the days of temptation while the children of Israel were in the wilderness." [^78] King Benjamin admonished his people to be steadfast and immovable in righteousness, that they might be sealed unto eternal life. [^79] And having shown that in earlier ages "there were many, exceeding great many, who were made pure and entered into the rest of the Lord their God" by establishing the divine order which has its basis in the law and covenants of the Melchizedek Priesthood, Alma said to members of the church in his day: "And now, my brethren, I would that ye should humble yourselves before God, and bring forth fruit meet for repentance, that ye may also enter into that rest." [^80]

Law of Moses Among Nephites

The Book of Mormon has much to say about the purpose and intent of the law which Moses gave to Israel. Being Israelites, the Nephites observed "to keep the judgments, and the statutes, and the commandments of the Lord in all things according to the law of Moses." [^81] Yet they understood that the law of carnal commandments was given because "the Lord God saw that his people were a stiffnecked people," [^82] and that its intent was to lead men to Christ. Centuries before Christ, Nephi wrote: "Behold, my soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ; for, for this end hath the law of Moses been given, and all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him." [^83] Alma also held that "the law of Moses was a type" of Christ's sacrifice. [^84] To Abinadi it was "a shadow of those things which are to come." For this reason, he taught that salvation came not by the law of Moses, but "through Christ the Lord, who is the very Eternal Father." [^85] "Were it not for the atonement, which God himself shall make for the sins and iniquities of his people," he concluded, ". . . they must unavoidably perish, notwithstanding the law of Moses." [^86] Nevertheless, Alma explained, "the law of Moses did serve to strengthen their faith in Christ; and thus they did retain a hope through faith, unto eternal salvation, relying upon the spirit of prophecy, which spake of those things to come." [^87] A classic statement concerning the relationship of the law of Moses to Christ was made by Jacob, who, having referred to the hope of the prophets in the glory of Christ, said:

Behold, they believed in Christ and worshiped the Father in his name, and also we worship the Father in his name. And for this intent we keep the law of Moses, it pointing our souls to him; and for this cause it is sanctified unto us for righteousness, even as it was accounted unto Abraham in the wilderness to be obedient unto the commands of God in offering up his son Isaac, which is a similitude of God and his Only Begotten Son.

Wherefore, we search the prophets, and we have many revelations and the spirit of prophecy; and having all these witnesses we obtain a hope, and our faith becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can command in the name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea. [^88]

Like other Israelite prophets, the Nephite oracles were ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood. But because the Nephites were a more righteous branch of Israel than the Jews, the prophets on the Western hemisphere taught their people a fuller program of the gospel, and they testified of the enlivening and regenerating spiritual powers which could be acquired through Christ. The following statement from Nephi illustrates their position on the law of Moses and the gospel:

. . . notwithstanding we believe in Christ, we keep the law of Moses, and look forward with steadfastness unto Christ, until the law shall be fulfilled.

For, for this end was the law given; wherefore the law hath become dead unto us, and we are made alive in Christ because of our faith; yet we keep the law because of the commandments.

And we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins.

Wherefore, we speak concerning the law that our children may know the deadness of the law; and they, by knowing the deadness of the law, may look forward unto that life which is in Christ, and know for what end the law was given. And after the law is fulfilled in Christ, that they need not harden their hearts against him when the law ought to be done away. [^89]

When Jesus appeared among the Nephites after His resurrection, He confirmed the teachings of their prophets concerning the law of Moses. Having given them the law of the gospel to supersede that law which Moses gave, and having charged them to be the salt of the earth and a light to the world, He said:

Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets. I am not come to destroy but to fulfil;

For verily I say unto you, one jot nor one tittle hath not passed away from the law, but in me it hath all been fulfilled. . . .

Therefore those things which were of old time, which were under the law, in me are all fulfilled.

Old things are done away, and all things have become new. [^90]

But even after Jesus had made these statements, there were some "who marveled, and wondered what he would [do] concerning the law of Moses; for they understood not the saying that old things had passed away and that all things had become new." The Lord therefore explained in greater detail:

Marvel not that I said unto you that old things had passed away, and that all things had become new.

Behold, I say unto you that the law is fulfilled that was given unto Moses.

Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for I have come to fulfil the law; therefore it hath an end.

Behold, I do not destroy the prophets, for as many as have not been fulfilled in me, verily I say unto you, shall all be fulfilled.

And because I said unto you that old things have passed away, I do not destroy that which hath been spoken concerning things which are to come.

For behold, the covenant which I have made with my people is not all fulfilled; but the law which was given unto Moses hath an end in me.

Behold, I am the law, and the light. Look unto me, and endure to the end, and ye shall live; for unto him that endureth to the end will I give eternal life.

Behold, I have given unto you the commandments; therefore keep my commandments. And this is the law and the prophets, for they truly testified of me. [^91]

Ministry Of John The Baptist

Joseph Smith threw light upon many important aspects of the ministry of John the Baptist. John's birth preceded that of Christ's by but a few months. The Prophet explained:

When Herod's edict went forth to destroy the young children [in his effort to kill Jesus], John was about six months older than Jesus, and came under this hellish edict, and Zacharias caused his mother to take him into the mountains, where he was raised on locusts and wild honey. When his father refused to disclose his hiding place, and being the officiating high priest at the Temple that year, was slain by Herod's order, between the porch and the altar, as Jesus said. [^92]

According to Joseph Smith, the kingdom of God had its beginning in New Testament times with John. "Where there is a prophet, a priest, or a righteous man unto whom God gives His oracles, there is the kingdom of God," the latter-day Seer stated. He said of John: "There was a legal administrator, and those that were baptized were subjects for a king; and also the laws and oracles of God were there; therefore the kingdom of God was there; for no man could have better authority to administer than John; and our Savior submitted to that authority Himself, by being baptized by John; therefore the kingdom of God was set up on the earth, even in those days of John." [^93]

A revelation stated that John was filled "with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb." It also explained: "He was baptized while he was yet in his childhood, and was ordained by the angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power, to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord, in whose hand is given all power." [^94]

Joseph Smith taught that John was given "the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood," [^95] which constitute the right to direct the functions of that priesthood on earth. The Prophet said: "He had his authority from God, and the oracles of God were with him, and the kingdom of God for a season seemed to rest with John alone." [^96] This meant that he was placed in a presiding position over those who held the Aaronic Priesthood in Palestine, and in this way he had power to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews. The latter-day Seer explained:

John, at that time [at the baptism of Jesus], was the only legal administrator in the affairs of the kingdom there was then on the earth, and holding the keys of power. The Jews had to obey his instructions or be damned, by their own law; and Christ Himself fulfilled all righteousness in becoming obedient to the law which he had given to Moses on the mount, and thereby magnified it and made it honorable, instead of destroying it. The son of Zacharias wrested the keys, the kingdom, the power, the glory from the Jews, by the holy anointing and decree of heaven. [^97]

Jesus stated that "among those that are born of women" there was not a greater prophet than John the Baptist. [^98] Joseph Smith gave three reasons why this was true. Of the first reason, the Prophet said:

He [John] was entrusted with a divine mission of preparing the way before the face of the Lord. Whoever had such a trust committed to him before or since? No man. [^99]

The latter-day Seer declared of the second reason:

He was entrusted with the important mission, and it was required at his hands, to baptize the Son of Man. Whoever had the honor of doing that? Whoever had so great a privilege and glory? Whoever led the Son of God into the waters of baptism, and had the privilege of beholding the Holy Ghost descend in the form of a dove, or rather in the sign of the dove, in witness of that administration? [^100]

The third reason was that John was given power to terminate, or bring to an end, the kingdom of the Jews as has been explained earlier in this section. "These three reasons," Joseph Smith concluded, "constitute him the greatest prophet born of a woman." [^101]

Though the identity of the recipient in the following statement is not fully clear, it appears that John the Baptist was given one of the most important revelations known to man concerning the divine nature of God, [^102] as a manifestation of the blessings of the second Comforter. [^103] "John saw and bore record of the fulness of my glory," Jesus stated in a revelation to Joseph Smith. "And he bore record, saying: I saw his glory, that he was in the beginning, before the world was; therefore, in the beginning the Word was, for he was the Word, even the messenger of salvation—the light and the Redeemer of the world; the Spirit of truth, who came into the world, because the world was made by him, and in him was the life of men and the light of men." [^104] Having testified further that the worlds were made by Christ, as well as all men and all things, John continued:

I, John, bear record that I beheld his glory, as the glory of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, even the Spirit of truth, which came and dwelt in the flesh, and dwelt among us.

And I, John, saw that he received not of the fulness at the first, but received grace for grace;

And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness;

And thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not of the fulness at the first.

And I, John, bear record, and lo, the heavens were opened, and the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the form of a dove, and sat upon him, and there came a voice out of heaven saying: This is my beloved Son.

And I, John, bear record that he received a fulness of the glory of the Father;

And he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him. [^105]

This divine manifestation and testimony is sufficient to establish John the Baptist as one of the greatest prophets. Apparently his testimony was the basis of the testimonies of other gospel writers in New Testament times. [^106] In his brief but effectual ministry, John made straight the path before the Lord of life by declaring the preparatory gospel and by directing the attention of the people to the great Redeemer whose purpose was to reveal the higher ordinances and sanctifying power which Israel, under Moses, had rejected. John declared: "I indeed baptize you before he cometh, that when he cometh he may baptize you with the Holy Ghost and fire." [^107]

Ministry Of Christ And His Apostles

Establishment of Melchizedek Priesthood

As the great High Priest of the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood, [^108] Jesus established the authority, power, and keys of that divine order again upon the earth. "He built up the Kingdom," Joseph Smith explained, "chose apostles, and ordained them to the Melchizedek Priesthood, giving them power to administer in the ordinances of the Gospel." [^109] Thereby, according to George Q. Cannon, there was a "restoration of the Priesthood in its fullness, that Melchizedek Priesthood which Moses held, and through which he exercised such mighty power among the children of Israel." [^110] The writer of the epistle to the Hebrews noted the change which was then made in the priesthood, from the lower order which was given to the sons of Aaron and the tribe of Levi to the higher system after the order of Melchizedek, and the goal that was made possible by that change:

If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood, (for under it the people received the law,) what further need was there that another priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of Aaron?

For the priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the law. [^111]

This statement makes it clear that man can achieve perfection only by the aid of the blessings and power of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and that when Christ established that order of the priesthood on earth there was of necessity a change in the law which the people of God were required to obey. Jesus gave the higher law in the Sermon on the Mount. [^112] Having done so and having declared that old things were done away so that all things had become new, the Master admonished His disciples to become perfect. [^113] By the new program which He gave, that goal was made possible.

With the ancient authority and power again made available to man, Jesus and His Apostles tried to achieve the same goals which Moses sought to realize. George Q. Cannon explained: "It was God's design—if the people would have submitted to it, if they would have received the message that He sent unto them through John [the Baptist] and afterwards through His beloved Son—to have restored the Kingdom even to Israel, and to have built up the Kingdom in great power and glory upon the earth." [^114]

Christian System

Joseph Smith taught: "Although there are two priesthoods, yet the Melchizedek Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood, and is the grand head, and holds the . . . keys of the Kingdom of God in all ages of the world, . . . and is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation, and every important matter is revealed from heaven." [^115] Though the law of carnal commandments which the Aaronic Priesthood had administered from the time of Moses was done away after the crucifixion of Christ, the latter-day Seer made it clear that the lesser priesthood was retained in the New Testament Church and placed under the direction of the Apostleship, thus continuing the program of the preparatory gospel after the coming of Christ. [^116] In this way, all the avenues of mercy and sanctifying power of the preparatory gospel and the everlasting gospel were opened to man.

Latter-day Saint spokesmen stressed that, according to plain declarations which are found in the New Testament, the Christian system which Jesus established was designed to be perpetuated without change in its major offices and functions to succeeding generations. They cited the statements of the Apostle Paul that when Christ ascended up on high He "gave gifts unto men." Paul said of these divine gifts and of their intended purposes and continuance in the Church of Jesus Christ:

. . . he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;

For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ:

Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ:

That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive;

But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ:

From whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love. [^117]

Joseph Smith and his associates also cited the Apostle Paul to show that the Church of Jesus Christ in New Testament times was analogous to a living body, and that one organ (i.e., office, calling, or divine gift) could not say to another, "I have no need of thee." Paul declared that even the less honorable and uncomely parts of the body of Christ were important. Those who believed in Christ were "baptized into one body" and were "all made to drink into one spirit." Consequently there was to be "no schism in the body." [^118] Concluding his analysis of the body of Christ, Paul wrote of some of its leading offices and gifts:

. . . God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.

Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of miracles?

Have all the gift of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?

But covet earnestly the best gifts. . . . [^119]

This was the Church of Jesus Christ with its divine gifts and offices. In baptism (which was performed by immersion for the remission of sins), [^120] repentant believers "put on Christ," [^121] being "planted together in the likeness of his death" with the hope that they would "be also in the likeness of his resurrection." [^122] Those who were baptized were given the gift of the Holy Ghost. [^123] Of this divine gift, Peter declared: "The promise [of the gift of the Holy Ghost] is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." [^124] There would be no exceptions. That precious gift would be given to them by the laying on of hands. [^125]

Joseph Smith wrote to a newspaper editor that Christ sought to establish the new covenant which God, through Jeremiah, had declared He would make with His people. [^126] By means of this new covenant, the Lord promised to put His "law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts." [^127] Because the enlightening and regenerating power of the Holy Spirit was to be manifested through the new covenant, the Apostle Paul wrote that each recipient of it would become an epistle of Christ, "written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the heart." This was the "new testament" which Christ established; it was an abiding principle of revelation and power to every worthy saint, rather than a written letter only. [^128]

By the regenerating power of the everlasting gospel, many in New Testament times developed spiritually until they made their calling and election sure and received the blessings of the second Comforter. Jesus promised this Comforter to the eleven apostles. [^129] Paul reminded the Ephesian saints that they "were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise." [^130] And Peter declared: "We have also a more sure word of prophecy." [^131] Joseph Smith wrote that by the blessings of the second Comforter Peter, James, and John "saw the glory of the Lord when he showed the transfiguration of the earth on the mount." [^132] The Prophet also indicated that John was given other manifestations in the realm of the second Comforter in the great apocalypse which he received on the Isle of Patmos. [^133] The latter-day Seer explained that, by acquiring similar privileges, the Hebrew church came "to an innumerable company of angels—to God the Judge of all—the spirits of just men made perfect; to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant." [^134] In this way they were taught things which were so sacred that they could not be written. [^135]

Paul contrasted the glory that could be revealed through the gospel with that which had been manifested to Israel when the lesser law was given to them by Moses. The manifestation of glory and power on that occasion was such "that the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance." But this glory could be eclipsed by the greater glory which was made available through Christ, the Apostle declared. "For if the ministration of condemnation be glory," he explained, "much more doth the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory." [^136] The people of Enoch's city, for example, received more glory than that which shone from Moses when he came from the mount. Because it was the central purpose of the gospel to develop in man the divine nature of God, Paul wrote: "We all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same [divine or glorified] image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord." [^137]

The Gospel Among The Gentiles

When Israel rejected her God and crucified Him, she was broken off; no longer was she accorded the privileges which she had enjoyed as God's chosen people. Though the Israelites were heirs in the flesh to the priesthood and the blessings of the gospel, Joseph Smith said of God's dealings with His elect people: "He passes over no man's sins, but visits them with correction, and if His children will not repent of their sins He will discard them." [^138] For the time, at least, Israel was discarded as a people. [^139] Orson Pratt explained:

After Israel lost the kingdom, they had no more power nor auhority which God recognized: their priesthood which could once bless and curse with authority, became powerless. Their ministrations were as unless as those of heathen priests; their forms and ceremonies were as lifeless and ineffectual as those of Paganism. God had forsaken the nation, by withdrawing the kindom with all is supernatural fruits; [and in this state] eighteen long centuries of terrible midnight darkness have rolled over the heads of that devoted apostate race. [^140]

After Israel was broken off, the gospel was given to the gentiles. Joseph Smith explained: "The Jews, as a nation, having departed from the law of God and the Gospel of the Lord, prepared the way for transferring it to the Gentiles." [^141] Again he said: "After this chosen family had rejected Christ and His proposals, the heralds of salvation said to them, 'Lo we turn unto the Gentiles'; and the Gentiles received the covenant, and were grafted in from whence the chosen family were broken off." [^142] Orson Pratt explained: "The Gentiles, as soon as they received it [the gospel], began to have visions, dreams, prophecies, revelations, angels, tongues, interpretation of tongues, healings, miracles, and, in short, all the fruits of the kingdom that Israel enjoyed in the days of their righteousness." [^143]

Universal Apostasy

"But the Gentiles have not continued in the goodness of God," Joseph Smith declared, "but have departed from the faith that was once delivered to the Saints, and have broken the covenant in which their fathers were established (see Isaiah xxiv:5); and have become high-minded, and have not feared." [^144] To illustrate this important point, the Prophet said:

Christ said to His disciples (Mark xvi:17 and 18), that these signs should follow them that believed:-"In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover"; and also, in connection with this, read 1st Corinthians, 12th chapter. by the foregoing testimonies we may look at the Christian world and see the apostasy there has been from the apostolic platform; and who can look at this and not exclaim, in the language of Isaiah, "the earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinances, and broken the everlasting covenant?" [^145]

Following the example of the Prophet, leading authorities among the Latter-day Saints repeatedly cited biblical prophecies and evidence which confirm that the gentiles had departed from the Christian system, with its divine gifts and powers, which was given to them. [^146] The Apostle Paul wrote prophetically of a great "falling away" which would occur from the divine system which Christ and the Apostles endeavored to establish. The "man of sin" would then be "revealed," he declared, "the son of perdition; who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God." [^147] Men would "heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears," he declared. "And they shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be turned into fables." [^148] The Apostle Peter also warned that there would come "false teachers." "And," he said, "many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of." [^149] In summarizing biblical declarations of the universal apostasy from the true Christian system, Orson Pratt wrote:

The great apostasy of the Christian Church commenced in the first century, while there were yet inspired apostles and prophets in their midst; hence Paul, just previous to his martyrdom, enumerates a great number who had "made shipwreck of their faith," and "turned aside unto vain jangling;" teaching "that the resurrection was already past," giving "heed to fables and endless genealogies," "doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof came envyings, railings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness." This apostasy had become so general that Paul declares to Timothy, "that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me;" and again, he says, "At my first answer, no man stood with me, but all men forsook me;" he further states, that "there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake." These apostates, no doubt, pretended to be very righteous; for, says the Apostle, "they profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate." Near the close of the first century, the apostasy had become so universal, that only seven churches throughout all Asia, Africa, and Europe, were considered worthy of being either reproved or blessed by the voice of revelation [which was given to John on the Isle of Patmos]; and even these seven were so corrupted by the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes, and of Balaam, by the fornications and adulteries of Jezebel, and by losing their "first love," and becoming "neither cold nor hot," that the Almighty considered them, with a very few exceptions, as "dead," and threatened to "spew them out of his mouth"—to cast them "into great tribulation," and "kill their children with death"—to "fight against them with the sword of His mouth"—and to "remove the candlestick" or Church, "out of its place." [^150]

Modern scriptures make repeated reference to the universal apostasy which took place from the system which Jesus and the apostles established. A revelation which explained Christ's parable of the wheat and the tares said: "Behold, verily I say, the field was the world, and the [ancient] apostles were the sowers of the seed; and after they have fallen asleep the great persecutor of the church, the apostate, the whore, even Babylon, that maketh all nations drink of her cup, in whose hearts the enemy, even Satan, sitteth to reign—behold he soweth the tares; wherefore, the tares choke the wheat and drive the church into the wilderness." [^151] Thus the true church of Christ, with its divine gifts, ordinances, and powers, was taken from among men.

In vision, Nephi was shown this period of apostasy. He saw "the foundation of a great and abominable church" which displaced the true Christian Church. Of the foreign system which perverted "the right ways of the Lord," the ancient seer said:

. . . I saw among the nations of the Gentiles the foundation of a great church.

And the angel said unto me: Behold the foundation of a church which is most abominable above all other churches, which slayeth the saints of God, yea, and tortureth them and bindeth them down, and yoketh them with a yoke of iron, and bringeth them down into captivity.

And it came to pass that I beheld this great and abominable church; and I saw the devil that he was the foundation of it.

And I also saw gold, and silver, and silks, and scarlets, and fine-twined linen, and all manner of precious clothing; and I saw many harlots.

And the angel spake unto me, saying: Behold the gold, and the silver, and the silks, and the scarlets, and the fine-twined linen, and the precious clothing, and the harlots, are the desires of this great and abominable church.

And also for the praise of the world do they destroy the saints of God, and bring them down into captivity. [^152]

Owing to the perversion of the true Christian system and because of deficiencies in the scriptural writings which the gentiles in later ages would possess, Nephi beheld that "an exceeding great many" would stumble, and Satan would have "great power over them." [^153] While the gentiles were in this condition, many churches would be built up among them. Nephi wrote of the religious scene which would ensue:

. . . the Gentiles are lifted up in the pride of their eyes, and have stumbled, because of the greatness of their stumbling block, that they have built up many churches; nevertheless, they put down the power and miracles of God, and preach up unto themselves their own wisdom and their own learning, that they may get gain and grind upon the face of the poor.

And there are many churches built up which cause envyings, and strifes, and malice. [^154]

Again the ancient seer said, as he wrote of the churches which would be built up in the latter days:

. . . it shall come to pass in that day that the churches which are built up, and not unto the Lord, when the one shall say unto the other: Behold, I, I am the Lord's; and the others shall say: I, I am the Lord's; and thus shall every one say that hath built up churches, and not unto the Lord—

And they shall contend one with another; and their priests shall contend one with another, and they shall teach with their learning, and deny the Holy Ghost, which giveth utterance.

And they deny the power of God, the Holy One of Israel; and they say unto the people: Hearken unto us, and hear ye our precept; for behold there is no God today, for the Lord and the Redeemer hath done his work, and he hath given his power unto men;

Behold, hearken ye unto my precept; if they shall say there is a miracle wrought by the hand of the Lord, believe it not; for this day he is not a God of miracles; he hath done his work.

Yea, and there shall be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die; and it shall be well with us.

And there shall also be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry; nevertheless, fear God—he will justify in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God.

Yea, and there shall be many which shall teach after this manner, false and vain and foolish doctrines, and shall be puffed up in their hearts, and shall seek deep to hide their counsels from the Lord; and their works shall be in the dark.

And the blood of the saints shall cry from the ground against them.

Yea, they have all gone out of the way; they have become corrupted.

Because of pride, and because of false teachers, and false doctrine, their churches have become corrupted, and their churches are lifted up; because of pride they are puffed up.

They rob the poor because of their fine sanctuaries; they rob the poor because of their fine clothing; and they persecute the meek and the poor in heart, because in their pride they are puffed up.

They wear stiff necks and high heads; yea, and because of pride, and wickedness, and abominations, and whoredoms, they have all gone astray save it be a few, who are the humble followers of Christ; nevertheless, they are led, that in many instances they do err because they are taught by the precepts of men. [^155]

Dispensation Of The Fulness Of Times

State of Modern Christianity

The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times was introduced with an official statement by the glorified Christ to Joseph Smith in the spring of 1820 concerning the state of modern Christianity. Having asked the Lord which of all the churches of his day was right and which one he should join, the Prophet was told: "I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: 'they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof!" [^156]

Though the Book of Mormon recognizes and denounces the state of modern Christianity, it centers attention upon the work of the Lord in the last days and upon God's desire to bring man to embrace the fulness of the gospel. Having shown Nephi the apostate condition of Christianity in the latter days, an angel explained:

. . . the Lord God [will not] suffer that the Gentiles shall forever remain in that awful state of blindness, which thou beholdest they are in, because of the plain and most precious parts of the gospel of the Lamb which have been kept back by that abominable church, whose formation thou hast seen.

Wherefore saith the Lamb of God: I will be merciful unto the Gentiles . . . in that day, insomuch that I will bring forth unto them, in mine own power, much of my gospel, which shall be plain and precious, saith the Lamb. [^157]

Nephi beheld that, to fulfil this promise, "other books" containing scriptural writings would come forth "by the power of the Lamb" in the last days. The angel explained: "These last records, which thou hast seen among the Gentiles, shall establish the truth of the first, which are of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, and shall make known the plain and precious things which have been taken away from them; and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be saved." [^158] In this way, a great program would be launched in the last day. Speaking of it, the Lord said: "Forasmuch as this people draw near unto me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their hearts far from me, and their fear towards me is taught by the precepts of men—therefore, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, yea, a marvelous work and a wonder, for the wisdom of their wise and learned shall perish and the understanding of their prudent shall be hid." [^159]

Ministry of Joseph Smith

The restoration of the pure Christian system upon the earth in its fulness required that many heavenly messengers minister to Joseph Smith. After the Prophet's glorious vision of the Father and the Son in the spring of 1820, the angel Moroni became his director in the revelation and translation of the Book of Mormon, and Joseph Smith received many visitations from him during the course of that work. [^160] Before the time the Prophet received the gold plates from which the Nephite scripture was translated, other former prophets of the Nephite civilization also ministered to him, including such individuals as Nephi, Alma, and Mormon. [^161] After he received the Nephite record, and until the time of his death in 1844, the latter-day Seer was a constant recipient of the blessings and ministrations which are related to the second Comforter. Few men have ever realized the higher blessings of the gospel to the degree that he received them.

In ushering in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, the Lord committed to Joseph Smith all the keys and powers of the Holy Priesthood which had been given to prophets of God since the days of Adam. Having referred to heavenly manifestations to himself by Moroni, Michael (i.e., Adam), and Peter, James, and John, the latter-day Seer summarized: "And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!" [^162] Of the ministrations which Joseph Smith received, John Taylor later said:

Although the Church was so few in number the principles and purposes of God were developed fully to the vision of his [Joseph Smith's] mind, and he gazed [by heavenly vision] upon the things that are to transpire in the latter-days associated with the dispensation that he was called upon by the Amighty to introduce. He learned by communication from the heavens, from time to time, of the great events that should transpire in the latter days. He understood things that were past, and comprehended the various dispensations and the designs of those dispensations. He not only had the principles developed, but he was conversant with the parties who officiated as the leading men of those dispensations, and from a number of them he received authority and keys and priesthood and power for the carrying out of the great purposes of the Lord in the last days, who were sent and commissioned specially by the Almighty to confer upon him those keys and this authority, and hence he introduced what was spoken of by all the prophets since the world was; the dispensation in which we live which differs from all other dispensations in that it is the dispensation of the fulness of times, embracing all other dispensations, all other powers, all other keys and all other privileges and immunities that ever existed upon the face of the earth. [^163]

Though Joseph Smith was "a feeble youth, inexperienced, [and] without a knowledge of the learning of the day," John Taylor explained that "God put him in possession of that kind of intelligence, and what may be termed a scientific knowledge of all things pertaining to this earth, and the heavens, . . . which was altogether ahead of all the intelligence that existed in the world." Thus equipped, the Prophet began to introduce the great latter-day dispensation "by following the education he had received from the Almighty, by teaching the principles of life and salvation, the principles of the everlasting Gospel, by conferring upon others that priesthood which had been conferred upon him, and by organizing a state of things that was after the pattern of the heavens, that was calculated to live and grow and increase, that had the principle of life and vitality within itself, and that was calculated to draw together the honest in heart and assimilate them in their ideas and views and feelings and faith, and empower them to operate with him and with the Lord and with the holy priesthood that had existed in former ages." [^164]

The Prophet was informed that as the work of the latter-day dispensation developed in its onward course, the great purposes of God concerning the earth and its inhabitants in the latter days would be fulfilled. Having spoken of the establishment of the new dispensation in 1823, the angel Moroni said: ". . . it will increase the more [it is] opposed, and spread farther and farther, increasing in knowledge till they [the Saints] shall be sanctified and receive an inheritance where the glory of God shall rest upon them." [^165] When this takes place, the angel continued, God's purposes in regard to the scattered remnants of His ancient covenant people, Israel, will be fulfilled. [^166] They will come to Zion and be "crowned with glory—that is, be given the higher sealing powers of the priesthood by which they can acquire glory—"by the hands of the servants of the Lord." [^167] "When this is fulfilled will be brought to pass the saying of the prophet," Moroni explained—"'And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord.'" [^168]

Joseph Smith taught that the Saints can establish Zion in her glory by building up that holy order of society which is founded upon the covenants of the Melchizedek Priesthood. [^169] When this is accomplished, he declared, "The Son of Man will descend, the Ancient of Days sit; we may [then] come to an innumerable company of angels, have communion with and receive instruction from them." [^170] The ancient objective of the gospel—that which Adam sought to achieve through the divine plan of life and salvation—will then be realized by Christ coming in glory to destroy the wicked and renew the earth to a paradisiacal state somewhat like that which it enjoyed before Adam fell.

Summary

Through Israel as a chosen people, God endeavored to establish His law in the earth, by giving them the gospel, sanctifying them through its divine truth and power, and bringing them into His presence as He did the people of Enoch in earlier times. Moses, having received the blessings of the second Comforter, sought diligently to raise Israel to the standard of spiritual maturity that would qualify them to enter into the presence of God and partake of His glory. To this end, the power and glory of God were manifested to the Israelites as they came out of Egypt. But when they beheld God's glory and heard His voice, they failed to express a true hope for that glory. Evidencing a lack of faith, they finally rejected the divine offer and turned to idolatry. Consequently they were given a lesser law than that which God originally delivered to Moses. The lesser law retained the preparatory gospel and the decalogue, but added the law of carnal commandments instead of the higher order of the everlasting gospel, which pertains to the Melchizedek Priesthood. Except for the fact that all the prophets of Israel were given the Melchizedek Priesthood, the Israelites as a people were left with only the Aaronic Priesthood which administered the lesser law. It was the purpose of the lesser law to bring Israel to Christ.

Jesus restored the higher order of the priesthood which had been taken from Israel with Moses, and He centered that system in the holy apostleship. In this way, Christ gave His disciples the higher law and the greater spiritual powers by which they could be sanctified and endowed with celestial glory. But because of apostasy, that divine system with its apostles, prophets, and spiritual gifts was not perpetuated. Instead, a religious system foreign to the New Testament Church developed under the name of Christianity, and in later ages a babel of churches arose, each claiming to teach and administer the gospel of Christ.

The personal appearance of the Father and the Son to Joseph Smith introduced the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. Thereafter other heavenly beings ministered to the Prophet until all the keys, powers, and authority which were committed to ancient prophets for the salvation of man had been restored to the earth in modern times. Through this heavenly system, Zion was to be established and the earth renewed eventually to a paradisiacal state of glory.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] HC, IV, p. 595.
[^2] Ibid., V, p. 136.
[^3] Ibid., IV, p. 595.
[^4] Ibid., pp. 595-596.
[^5] Ibid., p. 596.
[^6] Ibid., pp. 596-597. On the extent of Christ's forgiveness, Joseph Smith said on another occasion: "All sins shall be forgiven, except the sin against the Holy Ghost; for Jesus will save all except the sons of perdition."—Ibid., VI, p. 314.
[^7] Ibid., IV, pp. 597-598. This statement should not be construed to mean that the Prophet condoned death-bed repentance. He said: Brigham Young placed the date at "about the year 1840-41."—JD, XVI, p. 165.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 425-426.
[^9] Ibid., p. 426.
[^10] Ibid., pp. 597, 598.
[^11] Ibid., p. 598.
[^12] Ibid., p. 575.
[^13] Ibid., p. 425.
[^14] The Prophet's teachings on this subject will be treated in volume IV of this work.
[^15] HC, VI, pp. 313-314.
[^16] Ibid.
[^17] Ibid., IV, p. 597.
[^18] Ibid., VI, p. 313.
[^19] Ibid., p. 314.
[^20] Ibid., IV, p. 598.
[^21] Ibid., p. 231.
[^22] Ibid., p. 426.
[^23] Ibid., p. 599.
[^24] Ibid., p. 425.
[^25] D&C 128:19. The breadth of divine mercy which is expressed in the plan of salvation as it pertains to the dead was spoken of by other prominent Latter-day Saints. Orson Pratt declared: "It is the most charitable doctrine that was ever preached to the nations of the earth."—JD, VII, p. 88. George Q. Cannon said: "To my mind there is something godlike in the Gospel of salvation. I can see beauty, and the power of God in it. I understand from this that there is a plan of salvation capable of saving all men."—Ibid., XIV, p. 319.
[^26] HC, VI, p. 365. In support of this statement, it may be noted that the Apostle Paul lists "the doctrine of baptisms" as well as the "laying on of hands" for the gift of the Holy Ghost in his delineation of the first principles and ordinances of the gospel. See Hebrews 6:1-2.
[^27] Ibid., IV, p. 231.
[^28] Ibid., VI, pp. 365-366.
[^29] Ibid., IV, pp. 426, 569.
[^30] Ibid., p. 231.
[^31] JD, XIV, p. 318. For similar commentaries by Orson Pratt, see ibid., VII, p. 82; XVIII, p. 52.
[^32] HC, IV, p. 569.
[^33] Ibid., V, p. 425.
[^34] Ibid., IV, p. 569.
[^35] JD, VII, p. 83. See, for example, Matthew 16:19; 18:18.
[^36] D&C 128:8, 9.
[^37] JD, VII, pp. 83-84.
[^38] HC, IV, p. 425.
[^39] JD, V, p. 90.
[^40] Ibid., VII, p. 85.
[^41] Ibid., XIV, p. 318. For Malachi's prophecy, see Malachi 4:5-6.
[^42] JD, XVI, p. 165.
[^43] Ibid., XIV, p. 317.
[^44] Ibid., XVI, p. 165.
[^45] HC, II, p. 380.
[^46] Ibid., III, p. 29. [^75]
[^47] This sacred system, with its law and program, will be discussed in volume III of this work.
[^48] HC, IV, p. 231.
[^49] Journal History, August 15, 1840. The widow to whom the Prophet referred was Jane Harper Neymon. She later reported that after Joseph Smith introduced this subject, he said: "I have laid the subject of baptism for the dead before you. You may receive or reject it as you choose." Sister Neymon then went and was baptized by Harvey Olmstead for her son Cyrus Livingston Neymon. Vienna Jaques witnessed the ordinance by riding into the river on horseback to get close enough to hear the ceremony. When the form of the ceremony was related to the Prophet, he sanctioned it as being correct.—See ibid.
[^50] Discourse of Brigham Young at Nauvoo, April 6, 1845; handwritten copy of the address in "Brigham Young, Addresses, 1843-1845," Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^51] See D&C 127, 128.
[^52] HC, VI, p. 319.
[^53] Ibid., p. 365.
[^54] Ibid., V, p. 424.
[^55] D&C 124:36.
[^56] D&C 124:29-31, 33.
[^57] JD, VII, p. 86.
[^58] D&C 128:12-13.
[^59] D&C 127:6.
[^60] D&C 128:3. See also HC, V, p. 141.
[^61] D&C 128:5.
[^62] D&C 128:8.
[^63] D&C 127:7.
[^64] D&C 128:6.
[^65] D&C 128:7.
[^66] D&C 128:8.
[^67] D&C 128:7.
[^68] JD, VII, p. 84. For another statement by Elder Pratt, see ibid., XVI, pp. 259-260.
[^69] See Volume I of this study, the section in chapter eleven entitled "The Grand Organizational Council."
[^70] HC, V, p. 141.
[^71] Ibid., VI, p. 365.
[^72] Ibid., p. 184.
[^73] Ibid., p. 319. See also ibid., V, p. 425.
[^74] JD, XVIII, p. 53. See also ibid., XVI, p. 259, for another statement by Orson Pratt.
[^75] 2 Nephi 4:24-25.
[^76] 2 Nephi 11:3.
[^77] 2 Nephi 2:3-4.
[^78] Jacob 1:7.
[^79] Mosiah 5:15.
[^80] Alma 13:12-13. See also Alma 12:34-37; 13:6, 16; 57:36.
[^81] 2 Nephi 5:10.
[^82] Mosiah 3:14.
[^83] 2 Nephi 11:4.
[^84] Alma 25:15.
[^85] Mosiah 16:14-15.
[^86] Mosiah 13:28.
[^87] Alma 25:16. An antagonist to the Nephite faith accused them of converting "the law of Moses into the worship of a being which ye say shall come many hundred years hence."—Jacob 7:7.
[^88] Jacob 4:5-6.
[^89] 2 Nephi 25:24-27. See also Jarom 1:11.
[^90] 3 Nephi 12:17-18, 46-47.
[^91] 3 Nephi 15:2-10.
[^92] TS, III (September 1, 1842), p. 902. For a report on the edict of Herod, see Matthew 2:16. For the statement of Jesus concerning Zacharias, see Matthew 23:25.
[^93] HC, V, p. 258.
[^94] D&C 84:27-28.
[^95] Manuscript report of Joseph Smith's teachings, July 23, 1843, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 319; HC, V, pp. 257, 258.
[^96] HC, V, p. 257.
[^97] Ibid., p. 261. Again the Prophet commented: "John having the power took the Kingdom by authority."—Manuscript report of Joseph Smith's teachings, July 23, 1843, op. cit.
[^98] Matthew 11:11; Luke 7:28.
[^99] HC, V, p. 260.
[^100] Ibid., pp. 260-261. (Italics in the original.)
[^101] Ibid., p. 261.
[^102] See D&C 93:6-18. There is reason to question which John received this revelation—John the Baptist or John the Apostle. In the introductory note of the present edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, James E. Talmage identifies the person mentioned as John the Apostle. But the revelation implies that it may have been John the Baptist. He testified of Jesus: "I, John, bear record, and lo, the heavens were opened, and the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the form of a dove, and sat upon him, and there came a voice out of heaven saying: This is my beloved Son."—D&C 93:15. Joseph Smith's Inspired Revision of the Bible confirms the fact that John the Baptist "saw . . . the heavens opened" when the Holy Ghost descended on this occasion. See I. R., Matthew 3:45 in conjunction with Matthew 3:16. Since this event took place before John the Apostle became a disciple of Jesus (see Matthew 4:21-22), the person who gave the above testimony was undoubtedly John the Baptist, unless John the Apostle, who was a disciple of John the Baptist, was present as an observer of the baptism of Jesus and received a like vision at that time. However, both Orson Pratt and John Taylor identify John the Baptist as the person giving the testimony which is recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 93. See Deseret Evening News, II (March 9, 1878), No. 90; Taylor, Mediation And Atonement (Salt Lake City, 1950), p. 55.
[^103] This is the context in which the report of John's testimony is set. See D&C 93:1 ff.
[^104] D&C 93:6-9.
[^105] D&C 93:11-17. For a treatment of the important ideas in this statement, see Volume I of this study, the section in chapter eight entitled "Christ As The Son Of God."
[^106] This seems to be true particularly of John the Apostle, who may have utilized the testimony of John the Baptist in beginning his account of Jesus. See John 1.
[^107] I. R., Matthew 3:38.
[^108] See Hebrews 5:6; 6:20.
[^109] Manuscript report of a discourse by Joseph Smith, July 23, 1843, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; found also in TPJS, p. 318.
[^110] JD, XXV, p. 291-292.
[^111] Hebrews 7:11-12. See the verses which follow this statement in Hebrews for evidence that the gospel writer was applying these words specifically to Christ and the change which He instituted.
[^112] For a discussion of this subject, see chapter ten.
[^113] Matthew 5:48; 3 Nephi 12:48.
[^114] JD, XXV, p. 292.
[^115] HC, IV, p. 207.
[^116] Joseph Smith used the example of Philip's ministry in Samaria to illustrate the continuation of the functions of the Aaronic Priesthood in the New Testament Church.—Ibid., VI, pp. 249-250. See Acts 8, where it is apparent that Philip had authority to baptize but not to confer the gift of the Holy Ghost. The writer of the epistle to the Hebrews also distinguished between the lesser and the higher priesthood and implied that they were both in the New Testament Church. See Hebrews 5:4-5.
[^117] Ephesians 4:8, 11-16. For statements by the Prophet and others citing this declaration by Paul, see HC, V, pp. 28-29; JD, XIV, p. 53; XVI, p. 373.
[^118] Corinthians 12:1-26.
[^119] 1 Corinthians 12:28-31. For statements by the Prophet and others, see HC, I, p. 454; IV, p. 609; V. pp. 27-29; JD, XIV, p. 53; XVII, p. 310.
[^120] For the purpose and mode of baptism, see Mark 1:4; Luke 3:3; Acts 2:38; 22:16; Romans 6:3-5; Colossians 2:12. The English verb "to baptize" derives from the Greek baptizo and means to dip or immerse.
[^121] Galatians 3:27.
[^122] Romans 6:3-5. See also Matthew 3:16; Mark 1:5, 9, 10; John 3:23; Acts 8:38-39.
[^123] Acts 2:37-38; 8:14-20; 9:31; 10:44-48; 11:15; 19:1-6. See also Matthew 3:11; Mark 3:11; Luke 12:11; 24:49; John 14:16-17, 26; 15:26; 16:7-14; 20:21; Acts 1:5.
[^124] Acts 2:37-39.
[^125] Acts 8:12-18; 19:1-6.
[^126] HC, I, p. 313.
[^127] Jeremiah 31:31. This promise was given specifically to the house of Israel (the northern kingdom) and the house of Judah (the southern kingdom), and after Israel's latter-day restoration it will have its full consummation in relation to the gathered remnants. See HC, I, pp. 312-316.
[^128] 2 Corinthians 3:1-6.
[^129] John 14:16-23; HC, III, pp. 379-381; D&C 88:3-4.
[^130] Ephesians 1:13-14; HC, III, pp. 379-380.
[^131] 2 Peter 1:19; HC, V, pp. 387-389, 401-403.
[^132] HC, I, p. 283. See also Matthew 17:1-8; Mark 9:2-8; Luke 9:28-36; 2 Peter 1:16-18; D&C 63:20-21.
[^133] HC, III, p. 381. See also ibid., I, pp. 283-284.
[^134] Ibid., III, p. 388. See Hebrews 12:23.
[^135] See HC, VI, p. 51.
[^136] 2 Corinthians 3:7-9.
[^137] 2 Corinthians 3:18
[^138] HC, IV, p. 360.
[^139] God's covenant with the ancient partiarchs is that He will remember their posterity in the latter days and bring them again to be His elect people. THis part of the divine program will be discussed in volume IV of this study.
[^140] From a treatise on "The Universal Apostasy," written by Orson Pratt, Liverpool, England, January 1, 1851.
[^141] HC, V, p. 257.
[^142] Ibid., I, p. 313. See Acts 13:46.
[^143] Pratt, op. cit.
[^144] HC, I, pp. 313-314. See also ibid., V, p. 424.
[^145] Ibid., I, p. 314. The last biblical reference cited by the Prophet is found in Isaiah 24:5.
[^146] See, for example, JD, VII, pp. 212-213; VIII, p. 262; XII, pp. 64-71, 246-247; XIV, pp. 52, 293-294; XVI, pp. 74, 344-350; XVIII, pp. 44, 170-179; XIX, pp. 352-353; XXI, p. 251; XXIV, pp. 83-93, 285, 204-212, 340, 370-371; XXV, pp. 206-270, 332.
[^147] 2 Thessalonians 2:1-5.
[^148] 2 Timothy 4:3.
[^149] 149. 2 Peter 2:1-2.
[^150] 150. Pratt, op. cit.
[^151] 151. D&C 86:2-3.
[^152] 152. 1 Nephi 13:4-9.
[^153] 153. 2 Nephi 13:29.
[^154] 154. 2 Nephi 26:20-21.
[^155] 155. 2 Nephi 28:3-14.
[^156] 156. HC, I, p. 6; Smith 2:19.
[^157] 157. 1 Nephi 13:32-33, 34.
[^158] 158. 1 Nephi 13:39-40.
[^159] 159. 2 Nephi 27:25-26.
[^160] 160. For a discussion of this subject, see Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith the Man and the Seer (Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City, Utah), pp. 69-77.
[^161] 161. See ibid., pp. 80-81.
[^162] 162. D&C 128:21.
[^163] 163. JD, XX, pp. 174-175. Both John Taylor and his brother William Taylor asserted that Joseph Smith was as well acquainted with such personalities as the Father, Jesus, Adam, Seth, Enoch, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the apostles in Palestine, and the apostles who ministered to the Nephites, as they and their associates were with each other. See JD, XXI, pp. 65, 94; Young Woman's Journal, XVII, p. 548. For a discussion of this subject, see Andrus, op. cit., chapter four.
[^164] 164. JD, XX, p. 175.
[^165] 165. MA, II (October, 1835), p. 199.
[^166] 166. Ibid.
[^167] 167. D&C 133:32.
[^168] 168. MA, II (October, 1835), p. 199.
[^169] 169. This holy order of society will be discussed in volume III of this study.
[^170] 170. HC, III, p. 389.
