Prayerfully select and read from this message the scriptures and teachings that meet the needs of the sisters you visit. Share your experiences and testimony. Invite those you teach to do the same.

Blessings of Belonging to Relief Society: Relief Society should strengthen sisters’ testimonies of Jesus Christ and His Atonement. It also should increase their resolve to come unto Christ.

2 Nephi 25:26: “We talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, … that [we and] our children may know to what source [we] may look for a remission of [our] sins.”

President Gordon B. Hinckley: “Who can gauge the miraculous effects upon the lives of millions of women whose knowledge has been increased, whose vision has been extended, whose lives have been broadened, and whose understanding of the things of God has been enriched by reason of countless lessons effectively taught and learned in meetings of the Relief Society?” (“Ambitious to Do Good,” Ensign, Mar. 1992, 4).

President James E. Faust, Second Counselor in the First Presidency: “The Relief Society curriculum is focused on basic doctrine and will give you the opportunity to study the gospel and increase your spirituality. … All sisters … need to be ‘remembered and nourished by the good word of God’ [Moro. 6:4]. Doctrine will strengthen you and help you to develop the spirituality necessary to overcome the challenges of life” (“You Are All Heaven Sent,” Liahona, Nov. 2002, 111).

Anne C. Pingree, second counselor in the Relief Society general presidency: “Each of us … can move forward without fear, finding our way to Him as we personally feel the blessings of His infinite Atonement. I know that one of the supernal blessings of Relief Society is our connection to women who also bear testimony of our Lord. My prayer is that we will ever walk side by side towards the light of His redeeming love” (“Walking towards the Light of His Love,” Liahona and Ensign, Nov. 2004, 113).

Elder Dallin H. Oaks of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: “The scriptures teach us that faith comes by hearing the word of God, [which] teaches us that we are children of God, the Eternal Father. It teaches us about the identity and mission of Jesus Christ, his Only Begotten Son. … Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is a conviction and trust that God knows us and loves us and will hear our prayers and answer them. … Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ opens the door of salvation and exaltation” (“Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ,” Ensign, May 1994, 99–100).

Elder Robert D. Hales of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: “Remember the pattern: (1) hear the word of God, spoken and written by His servants; (2) let that word sink deep into your heart; (3) hunger in your soul for righteousness; (4) obediently follow gospel laws, ordinances, and covenants; and (5) raise your voice in mighty prayer and supplication, asking in faith to know that Jesus Christ is our Savior. … When the challenges of mortality come, and they come for all of us, it may seem hard to have faith and hard to believe. At these times only faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and His Atonement can bring us peace, hope, and understanding. Only faith that He suffered for our sakes will give us the strength to endure to the end” (“Finding Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ,” Liahona and Ensign, Nov. 2004, 72–73).
