William O. Nelson, Charter of Liberty: The Inspired Origin and Prophetic Destiny of the Constitution ( 1987)

Prologue

"We Will Stand by Its Principles"

No greater immediate responsibility rests upon members of the Church, upon all citizens of this Republic and of neighboring Republics, than to protect the freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution of the United States.

President David O. McKay

Latter-day Saint doctrine clearly supports the view of an inspired constitution. By inspired, we mean that God miraculously impressed on the minds of the Founding Fathers the "just and holy principles" contained in the Constitution that would preserve the basic rights of the people. Also inspired were their efforts in producing a final document that represented the will of the majority of the Convention of 1787. [^1] A compelling motivation of Latter-day Saints to support the Constitution is the Lord's admonition by revelation to befriend "that law which is the constitutional law of the land." (D&C 98:6.) Moreover, the Prophet Joseph Smith is reported to have said that the Constitution would one day hang by a thread and that if it were to be saved, it would be saved by members of the Church. [^2]

The statement by Joseph Smith is regarded as prophetic and implies an apostasy from the original principles that were laid down to preserve basic freedoms. That apostasy from the principles is well documented. President John Taylor said in 1884, "By and by, you will find they will tear the Constitution to shreds, as they have begun now; they won't have to begin; they have started long ago to rend the Constitution of our country in pieces; and in doing so they are letting loose and encouraging a principle which will react upon themselves with terrible consequences." [^3] President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., gave a number of discourses on the subject that are preserved in his writings. [^4] He deplored administrative agencies being empowered to make laws; the office of the president of the United States assuming war powers during so-called emergencies; the breaking down of the independence of the three branches of government—executive, judicial, and legislative; the diminishing of local self-government and the increasing centralization of the federal government; the powers used by the federal government to redistribute the wealth of its citizens from one sector of the economy to another; of immigrants who brought with them an alien philosophy into the country, some of whom served in bureaucratic agencies of government; and the diminishing of the protections to the people's Bill of Rights—all these, he noted, were departures and usurpations of the provisions to the Constitution that should not be warranted by the people. Other respected legal scholars have also noted the departure from the original principles of the Constitution. [^5]

How Will the Constitution Be Saved?

How members of the Church should step forward to save the Constitution from the verge of destruction is subject to interpretation. A popular view is that they should seek political office, and, by virtue of their political influence, defend constitutional principles. Another view is that members of the Church must learn constitutional principles and then insist that their elected representatives adhere to those principles. While there is some merit to both these perspectives, still another interpretation was given by President John Taylor. Said he:

We have got to establish a government upon the principle of righteousness, justice, truth and equality and not according to the many false notions that exist among men. And then the day is not far distant when this nation will be shaken from the centre to circumference. . . . When the people shall have torn to shreds the Constitution of the United States the Elders of Israel will be found holding it up to the nations of the earth and proclaiming liberty and equal rights to all men, and extending the hand of fellowship to the oppressed of all nations. This is part of the programme, and as long as we do what is right and fear God, he will help us and stand by us under all circumstances. [^6]

The implication of this interpretation is that the Saints, because of their faith and testimony of the Constitution, will never abandon its fundamental principles even though the nation as a whole may apostatize from them. In light of prophecies from the Book of Mormon and the Prophet Joseph Smith, such a departure from true principles is not unlikely. [^7]

Another implication of John Taylor's prophecy is that members of the Church will defend and uphold the underlying principles of the Constitution regardless of where they live. This does not mean that Church members will be insubordinate to the laws or the political structure of the governments of their respective countries, but it implies that they, in conscience, will give allegiance to those principles that accord to man his fundamental rights.

The Constitution for "All Flesh"

John Taylor's declaration that the elders of the Church will uphold its principles to the nations of the earth is consistent with the Lord's revelation that the Constitution of the United States was to be maintained for the rights and protection of "all flesh." (See D&C 101:77.) What is meant by "all flesh?" Does the prophecy mean that the Constitution's provisions are intended for all people?

That the principles of the Constitution are intended for all people, regardless of nationality, is evident from the aforementioned revelation. Unless the agency of all people is respected and freedom is accorded to all, they cannot be fully accountable for their own sins. Moreover, since it is "not right that any man should be in bondage one to another" (D&C 101:79), the principles of the Constitution have validity for all people in all nations. [^8]

Does the Constitution for "all flesh" mean that other governments should or will adopt principles from the U. S. Constitution? President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., expressed in a general priesthood conference that some nations had already adopted the "great essentials" from the Constitution:

I will recall . . . to your attention, that the Constitution of the United States is the basic law for all of the Americas, or Zion, as it has been defined by the Lord.

You brethren from Canada know that your great British North America Act, in its fundamental principles, is based upon our Constitution, and you know that in the courts of Canada, the reports of our Supreme Court, and our Federal courts generally, are just as persuasive as the decisions of the courts of England, and even more so, where questions of constitutional law and constitutional interpretation are involved.

You brethren also know that from the Rio Grande down to the Horn there is no constitutional government except those that are founded primarily upon our own Constitution. In Mexico the revolutionary party which more than a century and a quarter ago rebelled against the king of Spain and established a republic, copied almost verbatim, and practically overnight, our Constitution, and made it their own. Neither Mexico nor the others to the South interpret their Constitutions as we interpret ours. They have different standards and different canons of interpretation, for their fundamental system is the civil law, while ours is the common law. But the great essentials of that document, the Constitution of the United States, which God Himself inspired, is the law of Zion, the Americas. [^9]

But there is another significant meaning to the prophecy that the elders of Israel will uphold the principles of the Constitution to the nations of the earth. In recent years, Latter-day Saints have been urged to reflect on the meaning of the Constitution and to live by its principles. [^10] A burden is therefore placed on the Saints to learn the fundamental principles of the Constitution and then to uphold them. An example would be that Church members believe that all people have the right to worship God according to their own conscience. (Article of Faith 11.) Should Church members do other than support the principles of the Constitution that assure the expression of this right?

Indeed, those who become members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints give tacit approval to the underlying principles of the Constitution by virtue of sustaining latter-day revelation. [^11]

The Constitution is a prosaic document, and its words, phrases, and clauses have been subject to many decisions of the courts. The tendency of many people, therefore, is to neglect the meaning of the document. President John Taylor's prophecy further implies that Church members need not necessarily be experts in the technicalities of constitutional law, but they must be familiar with its fundamental principles so they can uphold them. Such a view is consistent with the testimony of Elder Harold B. Lee: "Would it be sacrilegious to paraphrase the words of the Apostle Peter, and say that the Constitution of the United States could be saved by the elders of this Church because this Church and this Church alone has the words of eternal life? We alone know by revelation as to how the Constitution came into being, and we, alone, know by revelation the destiny of this nation. The preservation of `life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness' can be guaranteed upon no other basis than upon a sincere faith and testimony of the divinity of these teachings." [^12]

When members of the Church uphold the principles that underlie the Constitution and proclaim liberty and equal rights, the Constitution will indeed be for "all flesh" in all nations.

The Story of Our Constitution

The succeeding chapters of this book tell the story of the remarkable spiritual achievement of the framers of the Constitution in securing an unparalleled freedom for the citizens of the United States. Their accomplishment is placed within a religious, not just a political context. In this sense, it is an untold saga. Told from a Latter-day Saint theological perspective, the story relates how a distinguished assembly of statesmen, by virtue of premortal assignment, came together at one place at a singular time in history to accomplish a monumental feat. They devised a government in which freedom of religion was secured. From such a climate of liberty, the gospel was restored and then extended from the shores of America to other nations. Thus we see the beginning of the fulfillment of the ancient prophecy that "out of Zion shall go forth the law." (Isa. 2:3.)

The Constitution was constructed by tough, arduous labor—by imperfect men who were instruments in God's hands in achieving His divine purpose. Their willingness to compromise for the good of a union made possible a "land of liberty" as prophesied in the Book of Mormon.

Paradoxically, for the Saints, the land of liberty that guaranteed religious freedom became a land of religious persecution for over seven decades into the twentieth century. In the context of that persecution, the Lord gave His approbation to the Constitution and its principles and counseled the Saints to exercise restraint and seek legal redress, not retaliation. Their forbearance made it possible that those who interfered with their rights and deprived them of their liberties would be held accountable before God in the day of His judgment.

As the Book of Mormon shows, virtue is absolutely necessary for this nation to survive. Freedom today, fragile as it is, depends on total virtue. The electorate must be virtuous. If the citizens of this nation do not practice virtue and live by the restraints placed on them by their Creator; if they become intemperate in their wants and yield to politicians who pander to their pleadings, they will lose their freedom. But there must also be virtue among those elected to public trust by the people. If the elected become morally derelict, it is incumbent on the electorate to remove them. Only virtue in both the elected and the electorate will preserve our freedoms. When virtue is ignored or neglected, the Constitution indeed "hangs by a thread," and the nation becomes subject to the same divine decree that brought other nations that have occupied this land to destruction. (See Ether 2:9-12.)

Are We an Idolatrous People?

Are we at that point today? We are perilously close. During the nation's Bicentennial, a prophet of the Lord—President Spencer W. Kimball—equated our sins with the idolatry practiced by the Israelites in ancient times:

The Brethren constantly cry out against that which is intolerable in the sight of the Lord: against pollution of mind, body, and our surroundings; against vulgarity, stealing, lying, pride, and blasphemy; against fornication, adultery, homosexuality, and all other abuses of the sacred power to create; against murder and all that is like unto it; against all manner of desecration.

That such a cry should be necessary among a people so blessed is amazing to me. And that such things should be found even among the Saints to some degree is scarcely believable, for these are a people who are in possession of many gifts of the Spirit, who have knowledge that puts the eternities into perspective, who have been shown the way to eternal life.

Sadly, however, we find that to be shown the way is not necessarily to walk in it, and many have not been able to continue in faith. These have submitted themselves in one degree or another to the enticings of Satan and his servants and joined with those of "the world" in lies of ever deepening idolatry.

I use the word idolatry intentionally. As I study ancient scripture, I am more and more convinced that there is significance in the fact that the commandment "Thou shalt have no other gods before me" is the first of the Ten Commandments.

Few men have ever knowingly and deliberately chosen to reject God and his blessings. Rather, we learn from the scriptures that because the exercise of faith has always appeared to be more difficult than relying on things more immediately at hand, carnal man has tended to transfer his trust in God to material things. Therefore, in all ages when men have fallen under the power of Satan and lost the faith, they have put in its place a hope in the "arm of flesh" and in "gods of silver, and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know" (Dan. 5:23)—that is, in idols. This I find to be a dominant theme in the Old Testament. Whatever thing a man sets his heart and his trust in most is his god; and if his god doesn't also happen to be the true and living God of Israel, that man is laboring in idolatry.

It is my firm belief that when we read these scriptures and try to "liken them unto [our]selves," as Nephi suggested (1 Ne. 19:24), we will see many parallels between the ancient worship of graven images and behavioral patterns in our very experience.

The Lord has blessed us as a people with a prosperity unequaled in times past. The resources that have been placed in our power are good, and necessary to our work here on the earth. But I am afraid that many of us have been surfeited with flocks and herds and acres and barns and wealth and have begun to worship them as false gods, and they have power over us. Do we have more of these good things than our faith can stand? Many people spend most of their time working in the service of a self-image that includes sufficient money, stocks, bonds, investment portfolios, property, credit cards, furnishings, automobiles, and the like to guarantee carnal security throughout, it is hoped, a long and happy life. Forgotten is the fact that our assignment is to use these many resources in our families and quorums to build up the kingdom of God—to further the missionary effort and the genealogical and temple work; to raise our children up as fruitful servants unto the Lord; to bless others in every way, that they may also be fruitful. Instead, we expend these blessings on our own desires, and as Moroni said, "Ye adorn yourselves with that which hath no life, and yet suffer the hungry, and the needy, and the naked, and the sick and the afflicted to pass by you, and notice them not." (Morm. 8:39.)

As the Lord himself said in our day, "They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own God, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall." (D&C 1:16; italics added.) [^13]

Such an indictment—especially as it was directed to members of the Church—should give us pause and the desire to repent and turn our hearts to a gracious Heavenly Father who has bestowed on us such bounteous gifts—one of the most precious of which is our freedom.

We Will Stand by Its Principles

Our freedom depends not so much on what we know about the Constitution, but on whether we understand its fundamental principles and then live righteous, virtuous lives. When we do that, we will influence others by "proclaiming liberty and equal rights to all men, and extending the hand of fellowship to the oppressed of all nations." We shall then be prepared to fulfill another of President John Taylor's prophecies even though others may apostatize from the principles that have secured our rights: "If lawmakers and administrators can afford to trample upon justice, equity, and the Constitution of this country, they will find thousands and tens of thousands who are willing to follow in their wake in the demolition of the rights of man, and the destruction of all principles of justice, and the safeguards of the nation but we will stand by and maintain its principles and the rights of all men of every color, and every clime; we will cleave to the truth, live our religion and keep the commandments of God, and God will bless us in time and throughout the eternities that are to come." [^14]

And again he prophesied, "It may not be among the improbabilities, that the prophecies of Joseph Smith may be fulfilled and that the calumniated and despised Mormons may yet become the protectors of the Constitution and the guardians of religious liberty and human freedom in these United States." [^15]

Many latter-day prophets have equated the Constitution to scripture. For example, President George Albert Smith said, "The Constitution of the United States of America is just as much from my Heavenly Father as the Ten Commandments." (Conference Report, April 1948, p. 182.) President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., declared, "It is my conviction that God inspired the inditing of that document. Thus the Constitution becomes sacred scripture to me." ("Gratitude For Our Heritage," Harold B. Lee Library, Special Collections, Brigham Young University, no date, pp. 10-11.) And again President Clark said, "The Constitution of the United States is to me and to my people as much a part of our religion as the Decalogue . . . or the Beatitudes." (Vital Speeches of the Day, January 1, 1939, vol. 5, no. 6, p. 177.) President Ezra Taft Benson has written, "I reverence the Constitution of the United States as a sacred document. To me its words are akin to the revelations of God, for God has placed His stamp of approval on the Constitution of this land." (Ezra Taft Benson, The Constitution—A Heavenly Banner [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1986], p. 31.)

Do these statements mean that every provision in the Constitution is the inerrant word of the Lord? Obviously not, for the original document sanctioned slavery, whereas a revelation of the Lord said that "it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another." (D&C 101:79.) The sacredness and inspiration of the document is in the God-inspired principles that secure the liberty of all mankind.

Professor Corwin's analysis, while valid, extended only to the 1950s. Since that time, another distinguishable period has developed, which is popularly called judicial activism or judicial legislation. This recent development is the belief that judges do not restrain themselves from imposing their personal biases and private legislation through their decisions.

The courts do make law whenever they interpret legislation. Most interpretations, as Dallin H. Oaks has pointed out, are legitimate judicial lawmaking, but some are not. The only practical remedy to the problem is judicial restraint. For an excellent discussion on the problem of judicial legislation and its remedies, see Rex E. Lee, A Lawyer Looks at the Constitution (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1981), pp. 36-38; chapters 17 and 18. Dallin H. Oaks and J. Clifford Wallace provide two brief essays on the problem in Views from the Bench, edited by Mark W. Cannon and David M. O'Brien (Chatham, New Jersey: Chatham House Publishers, 1985), pp. 147-54; 155-65. A scholarly approach to the problem is Dallin H. Oaks, "Judicial Activism," Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy, vol. 7, no. 1 (Winter), 1984.

"I saw men hunting the lives of their own sons, and brother murdering brother, women killing their own daughters, and daughters seeking the lives of their mothers. I saw armies arrayed against armies. I saw blood, desolation, fires. The Son of Man has said that the mother shall be against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother. These things are at our doors. They will follow the Saints of God from city to city. Satan will rage, and the spirit of the devil is now enraged. I know not how soon these things will take place; but with a view of them, shall I cry peace? No; I will lift up my voice and testify of them.

"How long you will have good crops, and the famine be kept off, I do not know; when the fig tree leaves, know then that the summer is nigh at hand." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1938], p. 161.)

"`We pray that kings and rulers and the peoples of all nations under heaven may be persuaded of the blessings enjoyed by the people of this land by reason of their freedom and under their guidance and be constrained to adopt similar governmental systems, thus to fulfill the ancient prophecy of Isaiah and Micah that ". . . out of Zion shall go forth the law and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem."'" (Improvement Era, October 1945, p. 564.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 19:229.
[^2] Thirty-two of the thirty-nine signers of the Constitution were baptized by proxy in the Endowment House before the St. George Temple was completed. The others had their proxy ordinance work completed in later years.
[^3] Conference Report, April 1898, pp. 89-90.
[^4] Journal of Discourses 19:229.
[^5] "August 21, 1877 I Wilford Woodruff went to the Temple of the Lord this morning and was Baptized for 100 persons who were dead including the signers of the Declaration of Independence all except John Hancock and [William Floyd]. I was Baptized for the following names: [names follow]." (Wilford Woodruff Journal, August 19, 21-24, 1877, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.) Proxy baptisms had been performed for John Hancock and William Floyd in the Endowment House. The proxy work for Martin Van Buren, James Buchanan, and the president who was then living, Ulysses Simpson Grant, was subsequently done.
[^6] Matthias Cowley, Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964), p. 500.
[^7] Conference Report, April 1898, p. 90.
[^8] Conference Report, April 1957, p. 47.
[^9] Henry Steele Commager asked: "Who can doubt, for example, that in the crisis of 1774-1783, the American colonies and states enjoyed far more competent leadership than the British Empire?
[^10] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1985), p. 34; see also p. 512.) Elder McConkie wrote: "No two persons are born with the same talents and capacities; no two are rooted in the same soil of circumstances; each is unique. The cares of this world, gold and honor and power and renown, the lusts of the flesh, the chains of past sins, and a thousand other things—all exert their influence upon us. But in the final sense the answer stems back to premortality. We all lived as spirit beings, as children of the Eternal Father, for an infinitely long period of time in the premortal existence. There we developed talents, gifts, and aptitudes; there our capacities and abilities took form; there, by obedience to law, we were endowed with power, in one degree or another, to believe the truth and follow the promptings of the Spirit. And the talent of greatest worth was that of spirituality, for it enables us to hearken to the Holy Spirit and accept that gospel which prepares us for eternal life.
[^11] President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., called this principle "spiritual relativity." He explained: "We were not all equal at the beginning; we were not all equal at the Grand Council; we have never been all equal at any time since, and apparently we never shall be. (Conference Report, October 1956, p. 84.)
[^12] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1938), p. 365.
[^13] Conference Report, April 1898, p. 89.
[^14] See, for example, Acts 17:22-26 and Deut. 32:7-9. For commentary on these passages that reflects Church theology, see Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1956), pp. 46-48.
[^15] J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Stand Fast by Our Constitution (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1973), p. 136.
