William O. Nelson, Charter of Liberty: The Inspired Origin and Prophetic Destiny of the Constitution ( 1987)

1

"The Best Spirits God Could Find"

The Framers of our Constitution knew . . . history. . . . They were trained and experienced in the Common Law. They remembered the Barons and King John at Runnymede. They were thoroughly indoctrinated in the principle that the true sovereignty rested in the people.

J. Reuben Clark, Jr.

An extraordinary occurrence took place in St. George, Utah, just over one hundred years after the Declaration of Independence was signed. The St. George Temple had been dedicated in April 1877 amid great rejoicing and prayers of thanksgiving. It was now August, and Wilford Woodruff, the new president of the St. George Temple, was at the temple during the late night hours. Several weeks later, he disclosed what had transpired on that night, the next two days, and the following night. "The spirits of the dead gathered around me," he said, "wanting to know why we did not redeem them." [^1] He identified them as the signers of the Declaration of Independence and other eminent leaders who came to him "for two days and two nights." The majority of the thirty-nine signers of the Constitution had received proxy baptism and confirmations in the Endowment House almost one year before. [^2] But the proxy ordinance work for the signers of the Declaration of Independence had not been done. They were dismayed that their ordinances had not been done, because they had laid the foundation for a new government. Recalling their appearance in later years, Wilford Woodruff said that these spirits demanded at his hands that he "should go forth and attend to the ordinances of the House of God for them." [^3] They said to President Woodruff: "You have had use of the Endowment House for a number of years, and yet nothing has been done for us. We laid the foundation of the government you now enjoy, and we never apostatized from it, but we remained true to it and were faithful to God." [^4]

Accordingly, on August 21, 1877, Elder Wilford Woodruff and Brother R. D. McAllister performed the proxy ordinances for these and other eminent persons in the St. George Temple. Elder Woodruff recorded in his journal:

When Br McAllister had Baptized me for the 100 Names I Baptized him for 21, including Gen Washington & his forefathers and all the Presidents of the United States that were not in my list Except Buchannan Van Buren & Grant.

It was a vary interesting day. I felt thankful that we had the privilege and the power to administer for the worthy dead especially for the signers of the declaration of Independence, that inasmuch as they had laid the foundation of our Government that we could do as much for them as they had done for us.

Sister Lucy Bigelow Young went forth into the font and was Baptized for Martha Washington and her famaly and seventy (70) of the Eminent women of the world. I Called upon all the Brethren & Sisters who were present to assist in getting Endowments for those that we had been Baptized for to day. [^5]

Church historians have been noticeably quiescent about this remarkable episode. Earlier that year, however, Wilford Woodruff recorded pointedly in his journal: "I warn the future historians to give credence to my history; for my testimony is true, and the truth of its record will be manifest in the world to come." [^6]

The testimony of Wilford Woodruff is extraordinary for several reasons. First, it implies that there was a collective virtue among the men responsible for the founding principles of the American nation. They collaborated in mortality to lay down the principles that established the government of the United States and then mutually appeared to Wilford Woodruff with the appeal to perform ordinance work for them. "Would those spirits have called upon me to perform that work," said Wilford Woodruff, "if they had not been noble spirits before God?" [^7]

Second, the fact that these men who came to Wilford Woodruff "demanded" ordinances of salvation signifies their acknowledgement and acceptance of gospel principles that were restored some forty years after they had established a free government. This demonstrates a connection between the work they performed and the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ to this dispensation.

Third, Wilford Woodruff's testimony that the founders said to him that they "laid the foundation of the government [we] now enjoy" further implies that what they accomplished was the will of God. This testimony corroborates a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1833 in which the Lord said that the Constitution of the United States had been established "by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose." (D&C 101:80; italics added.)

An Aggregation of Exceptional Talent

Historians are generally agreed that never before had there been such an assembly of men gathered to determine the kind of government to which they would give their allegiance. Thomas Jefferson exclaimed that the framers of the Constitution were "demigods," and other eminent writers have concurred with J. Reuben Clark's assessment that there has never been a "group that . . . challenged the supremacy of this group." [^8]

How does one account for such an assembly of talent at one time and one place in history? Generally it is treated as a fortuitous, chance circumstance when an opportune moment in history brought forth such talent. [^9]

A more perceptive, reasonable, and equitable explanation that accounts for such extraordinary talents and abilities among men was offered by the Prophet Joseph Smith. On the basis of revelation, he declared the unique truth that all men and women lived before their mortal birth and that exceptional abilities were the result of faithfulness and effort in one's premortal life. Such an explanation is reasonable and just because it postulates that all people had something to do with developing their talents and abilities before they were born, rather than that God discriminately favored a few of His children with talents while depriving others of the same.

The doctrine of man's premortality provides us with some expansive insights. Based on the Christian principle of the Fatherhood of God, fundamentally the doctrine is: all mortal beings are the spirit offspring of God and premortally dwelt in His presence as His spirit children. Because each received his or her spirit existence from Him, God is the literal Father of all mankind.

In premortal life, spirits had agency and progressed in knowledge and intelligence in proportion to the obedience that they gave to the eternal laws of God. Not all spirits made the same effort or gave the same degree of obedience to eternal law. Accordingly, spirits developed different talents and aptitudes—intellectual, musical, artistic, and spiritual. [^10] The Lord revealed to Abraham this principle: "These two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all." (Abr. 3:19.) Here we have at least three degrees of intelligences or spirits: one is more intelligent than another—a third is more intelligent than the other two. There were, in other words, gradations in intelligence. Differences among persons born into mortality are based on their premortal initiative and obedience, accounting for individuality and exceptional and extraordinary talents. In Latter-day Saint theology, there never was, there is not now, nor will there ever be equality of intelligence. [^11]

In the account revealed to Joseph Smith, Abraham was shown the premortal spirit children of God, whom he described as "the intelligences that were organized before the world was." He saw "many of the noble and great ones." Standing among these valiant spirits, God saw that "they were good." Abraham was "one of them" and was "chosen before [he] wast born." (Abr. 3:22-23.)

Prophets of God, considered as the "noble and great," came to earth to accomplish assignments given by God in premortal councils. "Every man," said Joseph Smith, "who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before the world was." [^12] Other male and female spirits, also noble, are given assignments to further the progress of mankind. Significantly, Wilford Woodruff declared the founders of the American Republic to be "the best spirits the God of heaven could find on the face of the earth. They were choice spirits." [^13]

The doctrine of our premortal life increases our reverence for God's omniscience. Only an omniscient God could direct the timing and placement of His children on this earth. Only God can providentially determine to what nation His children will be sent. Timing and placement are crucial to the accomplishment of His divine purposes. Thus, the assignment of select sons and daughters to come to earth at particular places and at a particular historical moment is neither haphazard nor accidental. Both Moses and the Apostle Paul implied this truth in their writings, [^14] but it took latter-day revelation to clarify our understanding of it.

With the perspective that we had a premortal life, we can see that it was not an accident of history that such an assembly of talent appeared on the scene at one time and in one nation. They came to earth by assignment from God; this assignment, according to their words to Wilford Woodruff, was to "lay a foundation" of a new government that would provide freedom to all. That freedom was a necessary precursor for a later restoration of the gospel. That is why the founders of the American republic are rightfully respected in Church theology as necessary forerunners to the great latter-day work of establishing the kingdom of God on earth before the Savior comes again.

Intellectual and Spiritual Influences on the Founders

Historians have not been oblivious to the intellectual and religious influences that gave rise to the unique American political system embodied in the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution. The fundamental doctrine of government through the rule of law rather than government through the rule of a sovereign was not a unique idea of the Founding Fathers. Previous political thinkers had enunciated this idea centuries before, but their ideas were not fully developed until the framers of the Constitution collaborated to debate the kind of government under which they would live. Happily, the framers were familiar with history, common law, and philosophy. They may have traveled in horse-drawn carriages, but they "carried under their hats . . . a political wisdom garnered from the ages." [^15]

That political wisdom included belief in four fundamental principles: First, a belief in the natural rights of man; second, that people cannot be taxed without their consent; third, that the best way to preserve liberty is to separate and limit the powers of government; and fourth, that the powers of self-government could be delegated to representatives of their own choosing.

As British subjects, the framers brought to the Constitutional Convention the British common law precedent of rights and liberties. These rights and liberties had been secured by centuries of struggle wherein the Britons won concessions from kings who held to the Justinian Code that "the prince stood above the law." [^16] That view represented the European continental conception of government, that he who rules holds all power, rights, and authority.

The first political concession that limited a monarch's power was made on June 12, 1215, when King John was compelled to sign the Magna Charta. The Great Charter established two principles that form the basis for English constitutional law. First, there are certain laws that even the king is compelled to obey; and second, if the monarch (government) refuses to obey these laws, the nation has the legitimate right to overthrow the government. This historic right was later invoked by the colonists in the Declaration of Independence when they stated that the king of England had so infringed upon the rights of his subjects that he was "no longer fitted to be the ruler of a free people."

In the seventeenth century, Parliament presented to Charles I a Petition of Rights. The petition was a reassertion of the provisions of the Magna Charta, demanding that the king agree to what was already the law of the land. The king was unwilling to acknowledge these provisions, so Parliament demanded his formal consent. Charles I resisted. But because he needed money to operate his government, and because Parliament refused to vote him money until he agreed to their petition, he reluctantly signed the petition on June 7, 1628. He thereafter dissolved Parliament and refused to grant the rights to which he had agreed. For that, he was subsequently carried to the scaffold and beheaded.

The monarchy was not restored until 1660, when Charles II agreed to the provisions of the Magna Charta and the Petition of Rights. However, his brother, James II, who succeeded him, reasserted the right of absolute monarchy. In the Revolution of 1688, James was forced to abdicate, and parliamentary rule was established once and for all among the British people.

In 1689, Parliament established a constitutional landmark—the Bill of Rights. The Bill of Rights provided in written form specific rights of the people that are fundamental to British constitutional law. Excessive bail, fines, and cruel and unusual punishment were declared illegal. Only Parliament could levy taxes. The bill also gave citizens the rights to bear arms. The king could not suspend laws or create courts outside of established law.

England's revolution was between the monarch and Parliament. Out of this struggle emerged the by-product—liberty for British citizens. So profound was the impact of the revolution upon the Puritan settlers in America that they instituted the same principles in their colonial government—principles that had been won by centuries of struggle. That struggle, however, established in the minds of the British subjects the idea of government by law rather than government by a sovereign. A century later this would find expression in the Constitution and the first eight amendments to the Constitution.

John Locke's ideas formed the basis for both the English and the American revolutions. His Two Treatises of Government was not published until two years after the English Revolution, but the manuscript had been in existence for twenty years, so his ideas were well known. According to Locke, all people have certain natural rights, which consist of life, liberty, and property. In order to protect these rights, people form a government by social contract. Government, he reasoned, has certain powers to govern so long as it rules fairly and equitably in preserving the rights of the people. Should government break the contract by arbitrarily removing these unalienable rights, those governed are relieved of their contract. They then had the absolute right to rebel and to establish a new government.

Other key ideas of Locke—sovereignty of the people, government resting on the consent of the governed; the legislature as the supreme power but its power delegated by the people, who may withdraw it; and the executive as the agent of the legislature—provided the fundamental philosophy for the colonists.

Another idea that found expression in the American system was the belief that liberty could be preserved by limiting government. Baron de Montesquieu conceived that the best way to achieve this was by separating the powers of government into three departments: executive, legislative, and judicial. The doctrine of separation of powers is a cardinal feature of the U. S. Constitution.

There were also undeniable Christian influences on the founders that sponsored their ideas about civil liberties as expressed in the Bill of Rights. Moreover, the entire American legal tradition (judicial review of government acts, presumption of innocence of the accused, compensation to those negligently injured, equal protection of the right of a person to have a court determine reason for his or her detention) is based on biblical justification. [^17]

But a written constitution was not conceived only from the ideas of these preceding philosophers and events. For 169 years, the colonists experimented with varying forms of government under British rule. In some instances, they had substantial autonomy of rule. Through experience with charters, colonial legislatures, and later state constitutions, they learned the value of self-government as a means to secure their liberty. [^18] But even though some local autonomy had been granted to the colonists, Parliament still insisted on regulating colonial commerce through navigation acts and through levying taxes.

Precipitating Causes of the American Revolution

Resistance to taxation by the colonists rested on the historical British constitution that it was unlawful to tax without the consent of citizens through lawfully appointed representatives. The colonists, of course, had no representation in Parliament, so they denied that Parliament had the right to tax them. When the British imposed the dreaded Stamp Act and enforced it by the innovation of admiralty courts, the colonists reacted violently. The most notable firebrand of the revolution, Patrick Henry, denounced the act as illegal. The act was subsequently repealed, but the British government insisted on the supremacy of Parliament to maintain its right to tax and to regulate commerce. This disagreement reached a crisis with the Boston Tea Party and resistance to other acts regarded by the colonists as unlawful. They took their first steps toward union by sending representatives to the First Continental Congress in 1774. The delegates made a list of grievances and asserted their right to live as British subjects. Britain refused to redress their grievances. Hostilities then broke out in Massachusetts when local farmers attacked British troops at Lexington and Concord. The British declared Massachusetts in a state of rebellion.

When the Second Continental Congress convened in May 1775, some members of Congress still hoped for reconciliation. Again Congress petitioned England. King George dismissed their petition with contempt and pronounced them rebels. Finding that they could not have the rights of English citizens, the colonists rebelled, and the revolution commenced.

Momentous events in history are the result of colliding influences: the personalities in a drama, an issue or a crisis, and a timing that synchronizes these influences into a historically significant event.

We can hardly imagine a greater confluence of forces—an issue that had crescendoed for centuries, a king who desired to preserve the view that he who has power has the right to dictate, and the colonists who were willing to sacrifice their lives to be independent from oppression. Had it not been for the collision of these opposing philosophies and personalities the American Revolution might never have occurred. Brigham Young intimated as much when he said: "The king of Great Britain . . . might . . . have been led to . . . aggressive acts, for aught we know, to bring to pass the purposes of God in thus establishing a new government upon a principle of greater freedom, a basis of self-government allowing the free exercise of religious worship." [^19]

The Revolution Was Foreordained

That the American Revolution was foreknown by God and foreordained to happen is evident from some remarkable prophecies from the Book of Mormon, which were recorded some twenty-three hundred years before the revolution transpired.

ProphecyCommentaryI looked and beheld a man among the Gentiles, who was separated from the seed of my brethren by the many waters; and I beheld the Spirit of God, that it came down and wrought upon the man; and he went forth upon the many waters, even unto the seed of my brethren, who were in the promised land. (1 Ne. 13:12.) The "man among the Gentiles" has been interpreted as being Christopher Columbus.

I beheld the Spirit of God, that it wrought upon other Gentiles; and they went forth out of captivity, upon the many waters.The "other Gentiles" that came out of captivity were the Puritans, Pilgrims, and others who sought freedom. The "seed of my brethren" were Nephi's brethren, namely Lamanites or their descendants, the Indian of the Western hemisphere. Their scattering and decimation by the explorers and later the colonists is an established fact.And it came to pass that I beheld many multitudes of the Gentiles upon the land of promise; and I beheld the wrath of God, that it was upon the seed of my brethren; and they were scattered before the Gentiles and were smitten. (1 Ne. 13:13-14.) And I beheld the Spirit of the Lord, that it was upon the Gentiles, and they did prosper and obtain the land for their inheritance. (1 Ne. 13:15.) The Gentiles are essentially our European ancestors who migrated to America.I, Nephi, beheld that the Gentiles who had gone forth out of captivity did humble themselves before the Lord; and the power of the Lord was with them. (1 Ne. 13:16.) And I beheld that their mother Gentiles were gathered together upon the waters, and upon the land also, to battle against them.The "mother Gentiles" is the mother country—Great Britain.And I beheld that the power of God was with them, and also that the wrath of God was upon all those that were gathered together against them to battle.

And I, Nephi, beheld that the Gentiles that had gone out of captivity were delivered by the power of God out of the hands of all other nations. (1 Ne. 13:17-19.) The power of God, not the military genius of George Washington, delivered the colonists out of the hands of the mother country, Great Britain.

What is so remarkable about the outcome of the Revolutionary War is that the Colonists should not have won. The British were better equipped, had a better trained army, and had more experienced leadership. How a ragtag revolutionary army won against superior forces is, in some measure, attributable to the leadership of General Washington; but, as the eminent Winston Churchill wrote, there was a more significant factor:

Rarely has British strategy fallen into such a multitude of errors. Every maxim and principle of war was either violated or disregarded "Seek out and destroy the enemy" is a sound rule. "Concentrate your force" is a sound method. "Maintain your objective" is common sense. The enemy was Washington's army. The force consisted of Howe's troops in New York and Burgoyne's columns now assembled in Montreal. The objective was to destroy Washington's army and kill or capture Washington. If he could be brought to battle, and every man and gun turned against him, a British victory was almost certain. But these obvious truths were befogged and bedevilled by multiplicity of counsel. [^20]

Churchill explained from a secular perspective what the Prophet Nephi had prophesied six hundred years before Christ—that the wrath of God was on those who opposed the colonists, and the power of God delivered them. (See 1 Ne. 13:19.)

On July 2, 1776, the Continental Congress approved the Declaration of Independence. Borrowing from English heritage, the declaration forcefully asserted that "all men are created equal"; "that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights"; "that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness"; "that to secure these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed"; "that whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new government, laying its foundation on such principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness." The declaration noted: "When a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future security." (See appendix 2.)

In approving the declaration, the colonists based their revolution on an appeal to a higher law than man—the natural rights doctrine that "all men are created equal" and that God had given all people unalienable rights of life, liberty, and property. If they could not enjoy their rights as British subjects, they would become independent of Britain. If they could not be equal with the English in the British Empire, they would be equal to the English outside the Empire, but as members of the human race.

The declaration was a climax of humanity's centuries-long struggle for rights and liberty.

Conclusion

The galaxy of incomparable leaders that came on the scene at one time and in one place to provide the world with an ensign of liberty was divinely directed. God held these men in reserve to come forth at a precise moment in history to declare independence for a nation that was fore-ordained to be a sanctuary of freedom. They were not insurrectionists. Their revolution was an appeal to higher law that entitled them to revolt against any government that broke its contract to preserve their unalienable rights. It was done in recognition of natural rights and the established precedent of British common law. Once the revolution was accomplished, these leaders demonstrated their virtue by establishing a new government that ensured to all citizens their God-given rights.

"The situation is too familiar to rehearse. In the last quarter of the century the new United States—a nation with a white population of less than three million, without a single major city, and wholly lacking in those institutions of organized society or civilization so familiar in Europe—boasted a galaxy of leaders who were quite literally incomparable: Franklin, Washington, Jefferson, Hamilton, John Adams, Samuel Adams, John Jay, James Wilson, George Mason, Benjamin Rush, James Madison, and a dozen others scarcely less distinguished.

"What explains this remarkable outpouring of political leadership, this fertility in the production of statesmen—a fertility unmatched since that day? Was it an historical accident? Was it a peculiar response to the time or the place, or to a combination of the two? Or was it a product of conditions and attitudes that were cultivated and directed to calculated ends, and that can be if not recreated at least paralleled in our time?" ("Leadership in Eighteenth-Century America and Today," Freedom and Order [New York: G. Braziller, 1966], pp. 149-50.)

"Men are not born equal. They enter this life with the talents and capacities developed in preexistence."

"The exact words of the Institute containing this declaration read (in translation): `The constitution of the prince hath also the force of a law; for the people by a law, called lex regia, make a concession to him of their whole power.'

"This principle seems to have been basic to Roman law in the West. . . . It seems that not always was the principle fully operative, but it seems, also, that there never was a time when the executive power, whoever held it, and howsoever it was secured, was not more or less supreme in all the affairs of state—legislative, executive, and judicial.

"Thus it was inevitable that this principle of the autocratic power of the Emperor, the executive, which was basic in the laws of Western and Southern Europe and portions of the Near East for over 2,000 years (sometimes the principle lay dormant, but still there, during the period of the Roman Republics; sometimes it was active, as in the days of the Empire, West and East), should be a vital portion of the warp and woof of the law of continental Europe." Ibid., pp. 141-42.

---
Notas:
[^1] Of interest to Latter-day Saints is the fact that the pages on the Bible that Washington kissed are portions of the pages of the 49th and 50th chapters of Genesis, which contain the blessing of Jacob (Israel) on the head of his son Joseph. The blessing on the head of Joseph has special significance to Latter-day Saints, for Joseph's descendants were promised that their blessings would prevail above the blessings of Jacob's progenitors "unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills." The Book of Mormon is an account of some of Joseph's descendants who came to a land of everlasting hills (the North and South American continents) and prophesied that others of Joseph's descendants would inhabit the land, become a great people, and build a holy city to the Lord. (See Ether 13:7-10.)
[^2] Farewell Address, September 19, 1796, The Writings of George Washington, 1745-1799, edited by John C. Fitzpatrick (Washington, D.C.: U. S. Government Printing Office, 1939), 35:229.
[^3] David Whitney, Founders of Freedom in America, Signers of the Constitution of the United States (Chicago: J. G. Ferguson Publishing Company, 1973), p. 203.
[^4] Ibid., p. 129.
[^5] Notes of the Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787 Reported by James Madison (Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1966), p. 406.
[^6] Whitney, Founders of Freedom, p. 122.
[^7] Ibid., p. 167.
[^8] Quoted in Frank Donavan, Mr. Madison's Constitution (New York: Dodd, Mead & Company, 1965), p. 30.
[^9] Notes of the Debates, p. 658.
[^10] Whitney, Founders of Freedom, p. 166.
[^11] Quoted in Richard B. Morris, Framing of the Federal Constitution (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Interior, 1979), p. 46.
[^12] Whitney, Founders of Freedom, p. 157.
[^13] Ibid., p. 158.
[^14] Quoted in Donavan, Mr. Madison's Constitution, p. 34.
[^15] Quoted by Adrienne Koch in the introduction to Notes of the Debates, p. xvii.
[^16] Whitney, Founders of Freedom, pp. 228-29.
[^17] Charles A. Beard, An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the United States (New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1965). Beard's thesis was that the founders of the republic developed the Constitution to protect their own economic ventures and their "class" financially. Claiming that the founders' primary motive was economic, Beard said the founders used force, fraud, and false propaganda to achieve their ends. A devastating critique of Beard's thesis is Robert E. Brown's Charles Beard and the Constitution: A Critical Analysis of "An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution" (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1956).
[^18] See Douglas Adair, "The Tenth Federalist Revisited," William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd Series, Vol. 8, January 1951, pp. 48-67; Garry Wills, Explaining America: The Federalist (New York: Penguin Books, 1981). Both Adair and Wills show that Madison and his Federalist colleagues were motivated by the ideas from Montesquieu and Hume and not the greedy motives to preserve their class or property as Beard had contended.
[^19] Notes of the Debates, p. 19.
[^20] 20. Winston Churchill, A History of the English-Speaking People: The Age of Revolution (New York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 1962), 3:193-94.
