William O. Nelson, Charter of Liberty: The Inspired Origin and Prophetic Destiny of the Constitution ( 1987)

2

"We Laid the Foundation"

I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose. (D&C 101:80; italics added.)

A natural curiosity exists about those who laid the foundation of the American republic. Who were they? What was their background? Why did the Lord designate them as men of wisdom?

Most of the fifty-five delegates to the Constitutional Convention were in the prime of life, their average age being forty-two. Four were in their twenties, twenty-one were younger than forty, and fourteen were over fifty. They were generally men of exceptional character, well-educated, politically experienced, and distinguished in their professions. For the most part, they were religious men. Significantly, none were atheists.

Twenty-nine of the fifty-five were educated in the leading American colleges and in Great Britain. There were nine Princeton graduates, three from Harvard, and four from Yale. Thirty-four had legal training; fourteen were or had been lawyers or judges; six had been or were to be state attorney generals; and five had been or would later be chief justices of state supreme courts.

Forty-two had seen service in the Continental Congress. Seven had signed the Declaration of Independence. Six had signed the Articles of Confederation. Thirty of the forty-three living signers supported the Constitution. Forty-six had served in state legislatures, ten had attended state constitutional conventions, and sixteen had been or would later serve as governors.

At least thirty had served in the revolutionary army, eighteen as officers; four had been on Washington's personal staff during the war.

Among that assembly of the fifty-five delegates were two future presidents of the United States; a vice-president; a secretary of the treasury; a secretary of war; a secretary of state; two chief justices of the Supreme Court, and three who served as justices. Fourteen were to be congressmen; nineteen would become senators; and four were to be cabinet members. And there was the venerable Franklin—diplomat, philosopher, scientist, and statesman.

Let us now look briefly at the thirty-nine delegates who were signatories to the Constitution. Their names appear in the order they signed the document, and the bracketed number is their age at the time of their signing.

President of the Convention

The most illustrious of the signers was George Washington (55). As a youth, he was tutored by his half-brother, Lawrence, whom he idolized. At age fifteen, he left school and became a surveyor. At twenty, he was commissioned a major in the Virginia militia and was subsequently promoted to colonel. By age twenty-three, he was appointed commander in chief of the Virginia militia. Through marriage to a wealthy widow, and through his own inheritance, Washington became one of the wealthiest men in the colonies.

He was later elected as a Virginia delegate to the first and second Continental congresses. When asked who was the greatest man in Congress, Patrick Henry said, "If you speak of solid information and sound judgment, Colonel Washington is unquestionably the greatest man on that floor." Washington supported Henry's resolution for independence from Britain in 1775.

At great personal sacrifice, Washington came out of retirement and left his family, his friends, and his beloved Mt. Vernon to accept the commission as commander in chief of the Continental army. Overcoming incredible odds, he defeated the British army and became the hero of the revolution. When he retired his commission, he said: "I consider it an indispensable duty to close this last act of my official life by commending the interests of our dearest country to the protection of Almighty God, and those who have the superintendence of them to his holy keeping."

When it became apparent that the peace that was won during the revolution would not last under the Articles of Confederation, Washington acceded to his election by the Virginia legislature to the Constitutional Convention.

His greatest contribution at the convention was in acting as the presiding officer. During the ninety-nine days of the convention's proceedings in the heat of summer, Washington calmly guided the sometimes turbulent sessions. Unquestionably, his approval of the new Constitution was its greatest single endorsement. After ratification of the Constitution, Washington was the only logical candidate for president.

At his inauguration as the nation's first president, Washington took the oath of office to defend the Constitution of the United States. He then bowed his head, kissed the Bible, and with reverent feeling uttered, "So help me God!" [^1]

With the Old World watching carefully what they considered as the new American experiment, Washington provided a remarkable example of statesmanship. As a soldier, he had literally beat his sword into a plowshare; he had refused the efforts of his soldiers to make him a king; and after serving eight years as the first president of the United States, he stepped down and let his successor be elected by the procedures set forth in the new Constitution.

In his famous farewell address, Washington warned against geographical discriminations, party strife, hatred toward other nations, and foreign entanglements, but he also cautioned that a nation could not maintain its moral virtue without the indispensable support of religion: "Let us with caution indulge the supposition, that morality can be maintained without religion. Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education on minds of peculiar structure, reason and experience both forbid us to expect that National morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle." [^2]

Thomas Jefferson said of him, "His integrity was most pure, his justice the most inflexible I have ever known, no motives or consanguinity of friendship or hatred being able to bias his decision. He was indeed, . . . a wise, a good and great man. . . . On the whole, his character was . . . perfect, in nothing bad." [^3]

New Hampshire

John Langdon (46) was a wealthy shipowner who helped finance the revolution by building the first American warship, the Ranger. Through his influence and money, he raised New Hampshire troops for the war, served as an officer, and made possible the victory at Bennington in 1777. He served as a delegate to the Continental Congress. He paid the expenses for himself and fellow delegate Nicolas Gilman to the Philadelphia Convention. He represented the small states in the debates and single-handedly persuaded other delegates in New Hampshire to ratify the Constitution. As a result, New Hampshire became the ninth state to ratify, which provided a majority to establish the new government. After the Constitution's ratification, he served for twelve years in the United States Senate, being the first temporary president (pro tempore). On April 6, 1789, he personally counted the first electoral votes and informed Washington of his election as first president of the United States.

Of Langdon's character, Madison wrote: "He was a true patriot and a good man with a noble way of thinking and a frankness and warmth of heart that made his friends love him much, as it did me." [^4]

Nicholas Gilman (32) a bachelor, served as an officer in the Revolutionary War. He was nicknamed "Congress" Gilman because of his cocky attitude and his ambition to make politics a career. He arrived late to the convention and, according to the record, made little contribution to the proceedings. Gilman served for seventeen years in Congress as a representative and a senator.

Massachusetts

Nathaniel Gorham (49) had served as president of the Continental Congress. He was elected as chairman of the Committee of the Whole at the convention. This responsibility was next most important to George Washington's, who was president of the convention. Gorham had an important role in the writing of the Constitution. He strongly opposed limiting voting rights to property owners, as some favored. According to Madison, Gorham told the convention, "The people have been long accustomed to this right in various parts of America, and will never allow it to be abridged. We must consult their rooted prejudices if we expect their concurrence in our propositions." [^5] On the last day of the convention, just before the signing of the Constitution, Gorham moved that there be one representative for every 30,000 rather than every 40,000. George Washington favored the motion—one of the few times he spoke up during the almost four months—and the motion passed. Like several others, Gorham believed that money was to be made on western land speculation. He lost his fortune and died at age fifty-eight, largely from worry over financial losses.

Rufus King (32) was a general's aide in the Revolutionary War and subsequently helped draft the Constitution. After the war, he finished a degree at Harvard and became a prominent lawyer. He was elected to the Massachusetts legislature and represented his state in the Confederation Congress and later the Constitutional Convention. During the convention, he favored a strong national government. He was an ardent spokesman for the large northern states and strongly opposed slavery. He served in both the Committee of Detail and the Committee on Style, thereby influencing the language of the document. He fought for its ratification.

King was twice the Federalist Party's candidate for vice-president and once for president. He served in government positions under six presidents, twice as U.S. minister to Great Britain, and twice as a U.S. senator.

Connecticut

William Samuel Johnson (59), a leading lawyer and brilliant educator, received a master of arts degree from both Yale and Harvard and an honorary doctor of laws degree from Oxford. Johnson originally disapproved of American independence and worked to preserve the relationship between Great Britain and the colonies. He declined election as a delegate at the first Continental Congress because he did not believe that the colonies should separate from Great Britain. As the war came to a close, he was again elected to the Continental Congress. He was one of the leading supporters of the "Connecticut Compromise" or "Great Compromise" that saved the convention proceedings. He presided over the Committee on Style, which drafted the final document.

During ratification in Connecticut, he appealed, "Though no enthusiast, I cannot but impute it to a signal intervention of divine providence, that a convention of states differing in circumstances, interests, and manners, should be so harmonious in adopting one grand system." [^6]

Johnson simultaneously served as first president of Columbia University and United States senator.

Roger Sherman (66) is the only man who signed four of America's greatest documents: the Articles of Association of the Congress of 1774, the First Continental Congress; the Declaration of Independence; the Articles of Confederation; and the Constitution. He had thirty years' experience as a lawyer and legislator when he took his seat at the Constitutional Convention. He took part in many of the debates and helped to structure the "Connecticut Compromise."

A fellow delegate said of Sherman, "No man has a better heart nor a clearer head." He had a reputation for honest common sense and was strongly opposed to slavery, regarding it as "iniquitous." He supported a national government with limited powers, and when the Constitution was completed, he worked for its ratification in the state of Connecticut. He subsequently served as a member of Congress and as a U.S. senator.

New York

Alexander Hamilton (30 or 32) fought at Long Island, White Plains, Trenton, Princeton, and Yorktown during the War of Revolution. He was subsequently promoted as Washington's chief aide at age twenty. He was later elected by the New York legislature to the Congress of Confederation, where he met James Madison and Robert Morris.

During the convention, he favored a strong national government and presented a plan with a hereditary monarch. After fellow delegates rejected his view that the British form of government was the "best in the world," Hamilton left the convention and did not return until August. He urged delegates to sign the finished document by observing that no one's ideas were more remote from the plan than his, but that the alternative was anarchy.

Hamilton's most significant contribution was made while the Constitution awaited ratification. He collaborated with Madison and Jay in writing the Federalist Papers, considered the greatest treatise on federalism ever written in this country. Hamilton and Madison turned out eighty of the eighty-five essays in just six months. Hamilton was the chief contributor.

As the first secretary of the treasury under Washington, Hamilton brought the country from financial disaster. He was subsequently shot in a duel with Aaron Burr and died the next day.

New Jersey

William Livingston (63) was a member of the powerful and wealthy Livingston family. He fought during the revolution and later won fame for his political essays. He took into his household a homeless sixteen-year-old boy and put the boy through school, an act of kindness that greatly affected American history. The boy was Alexander Hamilton.

Livingston served in the Second Continental Congress. As governor of the state of New Jersey, he was elected as delegate to the Philadelphia Convention. Although he could not participate in all the sessions because of his duties as governor, he represented the small states. He subsequently urged New Jersey to ratify the new Constitution.

Livingston served eleven times as governor of New Jersey.

William Paterson (42) graduated from College of New Jersey (now Princeton) in law at age seventeen. He was the leading speaker for the small states, having authored the New Jersey Plan, which called for maintaining the present Articles of Confederation. William Pierce wrote of him:["[Paterson] is a man of great modesty, with looks that bespeak no great talents, but he is a classic, a lawyer and an orator—and of a disposition so favorable to his advancement that every one seemed ready to exalt him with their praises." [^7]

He served as governor of New Jersey, U. S. senator, and associate justice of the Supreme Court.

David Brearley (42) served as lieutenant colonel in the Revolutionary War. He was admitted to the bar in New Jersey at age twenty-one. An outspoken patriot, he was arrested for treason but was freed by friends. He was elected by the state legislature as chief justice of New Jersey. An ardent Episcopalian, he helped compile The Book of Common Prayer.

During the Convention, Brearley strongly opposed the plan of the large states for disproportionate representation. He was a strong supporter of the new Constitution. After Washington's election as president, he was appointed as district judge of New Jersey.

Jonathan Dayton (26) was the youngest delegate to sign the Constitution. He graduated from Princeton at age fifteen and served a distinguished military career as an officer during the revolution. He did not take his seat in the convention until nearly a month after the proceedings had begun.

William Pierce described him as a person of talents "with ambition to exert them." He also said he had "an impetuosity in his temper that is injurious to him." Dayton later urged ratification of the Constitution in New Jersey.

Dayton was elected to Congress five times and served as speaker of the house. He served as United States senator from New Jersey from 1799 to 1805. He was later indicted for treason because of his association with Aaron Burr, but he was never brought to trial. The city of Dayton, Ohio, is named after him.

Pennsylvania

Benjamin Franklin (81), the oldest to sign the Constitution, had the greatest number of years in diplomatic service. He was one of the original signers of the Declaration of Independence. His infirmities precluded active participation in the convention, but his presence and prestige added dignity and weight to the results. Moreover, his humor placated harsh feelings. At one seeming impasse, he petitioned for prayer. William Pierce wrote of him, "He is no Speaker, nor does he seem to let politics engage his attention. He is, however, a most extraordinary man, and tells a story in a style more engaging than anything I have ever heard." [^8]

Franklin's ideas for government were quite dissimilar to the final results of the Convention. He favored a unicameral (one house) legislature and an executive council comprised of several members rather than a single executive. But even though his ideas were not incorporated into the document, he strongly favored the new federal government and urged the delegates to sign the Constitution.

Thomas FitzSimons (46) was the first Roman Catholic to be elected to public office in Pennsylvania. He served as an officer in the Revolutionary War and later served as a delegate to the Congress of Confederation. As a delegate to the Constitutional Convention, he favored property ownership for voting in congressional elections. He later served as a member of the first House of Representatives in 1789.

Thomas Mifflin (43) was Washington's first aide-de-camp in the Revolutionary War. Mifflin's military career, however, was tainted. While serving as quartermaster, he was compelled to resign because of suspicion of misappropriated funds.

Mifflin served as president of the Congress of Confederation that elected Washington as the commander of the Continental Army.

Mifflin was elected to the Constitutional Convention but took little part in the debates except to sign the document. He served three three-year terms as governor from 1790 to 1799. After his last term as governor, Mifflin was appointed as commander in chief of the Philadelphia militia. He also served the last months of his life in the Philadelphia House of Representatives. During the political campaign, he was accused of defalcation of public funds.

Jared Ingersoll (38) was a graduate from Yale at age sixteen. He studied law in England, where he became a supporter of the American cause. He became a distinguished lawyer and later served as attorney general of Pennsylvania. He apparently did not take part in the debates at the convention. However, Madison noted in his journal that Ingersoll supported Franklin's motion to sign the Constitution. "Mr. Ingersoll," Madison wrote, "did not consider the signing either as a mere attestation of the fact . . . but as a recommendation of what . . . was the most eligible." [^9]

He was later an unsuccessful candidate for the vice-presidency on the Federalist party ticket. He died a poor man because of his land speculation.

Robert Morris (53), large and good-humored, was one of the country's wealthiest men. He was one of seven delegates to the Convention who were also signers of the Declaration of Independence. He pledged his credit for supplies during the Revolutionary War, earning him the title "Financier of the Revolution." He was a constant companion to Washington and nominated Washington as president of the convention. Morris favored strong central government and said of the new Constitution: "Some have boasted [the Constitution] as a work from Heaven, others have given it a less righteous origin. I have many reasons to believe it is the work of plain, honest men." [^10] Morris served in the U. S. Senate from 1789-1795. He subsequently lost his fortune on land speculation and served a term in debtors prison.

James Wilson (44), an original signer of the Declaration of Independence, was considered one of the most learned men at the convention. Educated in Scotland, he had studied every revolution in history and helped frame the judicial language of the document. Wilson favored proportional representation in both the House and the Senate but was strongly opposed to wealth as a criterion for representation. Because of Franklin's poor health, Wilson frequently read his speeches during the convention. Speaking with a Scotch burr, Wilson was able to persuade others of the need for a national government. A fellow delegate said that "he draws the attention not by the charm of his eloquence, but by the force of his reasoning." [^11] Wilson served as an associate justice of the Supreme Court. He wrote that "all power is derived from the people—that their happiness is the end of government."

George Clymer (48), a banker, was also a signer of the Declaration of Independence and later a member of the Continental Congress. He successfully opposed Alexander Hamilton's plan for ratification that the Congress of the Confederation should approve the new Constitution before sending it to the individual states for ratification. After the Constitution's ratification, Clymer served as a representative in the first congress.

Gouverneur Morris (35), lawyer and accomplished orator, gave more speeches during the convention than any other in his advocacy of a strong central government. The elegance of the language in the Constitution is attributable to Morris. He wrote much of the final draft and is credited with its preamble. Madison wrote of him: "The finish given to the style and arrangement of the Constitution, fairly belongs to the pen of Mr. Morris." [^12] He attended Kings College (now Columbia University) and later studied law. He was admitted to the bar at age twenty. He was a signer of the Articles of Confederation. When some of the delegates in 1776 hesitated on declaring independence, the twenty-four-year-old Morris made an impassioned speech. In the course of his speech he said: "We have no business with the King. We did not quarrel with the King. He has officiously made himself a party in the dispute against us. And now he pretends to be the umpire. Trust crocodiles, trust the hungry wolf in your flock, or a rattlesnake in your bosom, you may yet be something wise. But trust the King, his ministers, his commissioners, it is madness in the extreme!" [^13]

Morris originated the American decimal coinage system and later served as U. S. minister to France during the French Revolution. Elected as a United States senator, Morris strongly urged the purchase of Louisiana as a means of ridding the territory of Napoleon's rule.

Delaware

George Read (53) was admitted to the bar at age nineteen. He served as a delegate to the Continental Congress. Initially opposing independence from Great Britain, he later signed the declaration at the peril of his personal fortune. During the convention, he advocated a strong central government that would abolish the states. He was also an effective representative for the small states and fought to preserve their vote.

Because of his influence, Delaware was the first state to ratify the Constitution. On the last day of the convention, Read signed the Constitution and also signed proxy for John Dickinson, his close boyhood friend.

Read later served as U. S. senator and as chief justice of Delaware.

Richard Bassett (42) helped found the Methodist Church in the United States. He later became a Methodist lay preacher. He served as a captain in the Revolutionary War. Educated as a lawyer, he favored strong central government. He played an important role in getting Delaware to ratify the Constitution. He was elected as U. S. senator from Delaware and was one of eight members who drew up the bill that established the federal court system of the United States. Bassett served as governor of Delaware and was later appointed U. S. district court judge by President Thomas Jefferson.

Gunning Bedford, Jr. (40), a lawyer, was an aide-de-camp to Washington during the Revolutionary War. He was a classmate of James Madison at Princeton. He was one of the most outspoken of the delegates for the interests of the smaller states. With Bassett and Read, he was influential in persuading Delaware's convention to ratify the Constitution. President George Washington appointed Bedford as the first U. S. district court judge for Delaware, a position he occupied till his death.

John Dickinson (54), a Quaker, studied law in England and was called the "penman of the Revolution" because of the many historic documents he wrote. He wrote the "Petition to the King," which was adopted by the Continental Congress in 1774, and the famed essay "Declaration of Rights and Grievances of the Colonists of America," which challenged the British right to tax the colonies. He also penned the "Declaration on the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms" in 1775. He served as a legislator both in Delaware and Pennsylvania.

Dickinson served in the Continental Congress and is credited with drafting the Articles of Confederation. He also signed the document. He refused to sign the Declaration of Independence because he believed that the British people would recognize the folly of Parliament's actions toward the colonists. He was a strong defender for the rights of small states. His advocacy that the House of Representatives should be elected by the people and the Senate by the state legislatures was the basis for the Great Compromise. Unable to attend the signing of the Constitution, he authorized George Read to sign for him by proxy. At his death, Thomas Jefferson said, "A more estimable man or truer patriot could not have left us."

Jacob Broom (35) was a financier. His major contribution during the convention was his appeal that delegates must agree on a new plan of government, even if by a bare majority. The convention was on the verge of breaking up when Broom made his appeal, and it seemed to have the effect of causing the convention to proceed. He was a member of the Delaware legislature for five years.

Maryland

James McHenry (33), a physician who had fought during the revolution, was an aide to Washington. He was subsequently taken as a prisoner of war by the British. After his release he became the senior surgeon at Valley Forge army hospital.

McHenry served as a representative from Maryland to the Congress of Confederation. He was also a delegate to the Constitutional Convention but attended only about half the sessions. Even though he had some reservations about parts of the Constitution, McHenry signed it, urged its ratification, and remained an ardent Federalist the rest of his life. He was appointed by Washington and Adams as secretary of war. Fort McHenry in Maryland was named after him.

Daniel Carroll (56), a wealthy landowner, merchant, and Roman Catholic, signed both the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution. He was a delegate to the Continental Congress. He replaced his cousin, Charles Carroll, a signer of the Declaration of Independence, at the Constitutional Convention. He defended the new government provided by the Constitution as the "best form of government which has ever been offered to the world." He was a strong advocate for a national government and urged Maryland to ratify the document. He was elected to the first Congress as a representative from Maryland.

Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer (64) was a wealthy landowner, bachelor, aristocrat, and friend of Washington. He was a delegate in the Continental Congress and later served during the Revolutionary War. He subsequently served as a substitute delegate when one of four men from Maryland refused to serve. He took little part in the debates at the convention, but after he signed, he urged Maryland's ratification.

Virginia

John Blair (55) was described by a fellow delegate, William Pierce, as "one of the most respectable men in Virginia, both on account of his family as well as fortune. . . . His good sense, and most excellent principles, compensate for other deficiencies." [^14]

He graduated from William and Mary College and studied law at Middle Temple in London. He was appointed to Virginia's general court at age forty-six and later became its chief judge. He was one of three Virginians (the other two were Washington and Madison) who signed the Constitution. He subsequently opposed Patrick Henry and spoke out in favor of the Constitution at Virginia's ratifying convention.

James Madison, Jr. (36), sometimes referred to as the "Father of the Constitution," possessed a profound knowledge of government and formulated the plan for the large states. Madison received his education at Princeton University, whose president was the Reverend John Witherspoon, a signer of the Declaration. Witherspoon introduced Madison to the Scottish philosophers, the most prominent of which was David Hume. Madison helped draft the Virginian constitution. He also helped organize the government under the Articles of Confederation.

As a delegate to the convention, Madison kept the most complete record of the proceedings in his "Notes on Debate." William Pierce said of him, "He always comes forward as the best informed man of any point in debate." Madison spoke the most often during the debates. Pierce also observed that "every Person seems to acknowledge his greatness. He blends together the profound politician with the Scholar . . . and tho' he cannot be called an Orator, he is a most agreeable, eloquent and convincing Speaker. . . . The affairs of the United States, he perhaps, has the most correct knowledge of, of any man in the Union." [^15] Madison later joined with Hamilton and Jay in authoring the Federalist Papers. He wrote of the Constitution in essay 37, "It is impossible for the man of pious reflection not to perceive in it a finger of that Almighty hand which has been so frequently and signally extended to our relief in the critical stages of the revolution."

He introduced the amendments to the Constitution that became the Bill of Rights. He served as a member of Congress, as secretary of state, and as fourth president of the United States. He lived to age eighty-five, longer than any of the Founding Fathers from the time of the signing of the Constitution.

North Carolina

William Blount (38), born wealthy, was seemingly more interested in using his office for power than in serving his constituency. He was later found guilty of fraud and bribery in achieving his ends. Blount had served as a member of the Continental Congress. While serving as a member of the North Carolina legislature, he acquired immense wealth through devious land speculations.

During the convention, Blount was not particularly involved nor interested and stayed in Philadelphia only the first two weeks. He later returned in August and remained through the signing. He later claimed his signature did not mean that he agreed to the Constitution, only that he was present. His motive for a strong central government was to enhance his western lands development. Although he worked for ratification of the Constitution, the North Carolina legislature was controlled by Antifederalists, and they rejected ratification.

Blount was later appointed governor of the Territory of the United States south of the Ohio River, which gave him innumerable opportunities to enhance his land speculations. Blount later won statehood for the territory and was elected as Tennessee's first senator. Blount's friends were subsequently exposed before Congress, and the U. S. House of Representatives voted to impeach him. The next day he was expelled by the U. S. Senate for conspiracy and land fraud.

Hugh Williamson (51), physician, was an outstanding scholar and scientist. He was one of the most educated men in the convention. He was in the first graduating class of the University of Pennsylvania. His postgraduate studies included ordination to the Presbyterian ministry, a master's degree in mathematics, and a doctorate in medicine from the University of Utrecht (Netherlands). He took up the practice of medicine at age thirty-two. Because of a scientific paper he published in astronomy, Williamson received a doctor of laws degree from the University of Leyden.

He was elected by North Carolina to the Congress of Confederation. Thomas Jefferson said of him, "I found him a very useful member, of an acute mind, attentive to business, and of an high degree of erudition." [^16]

When the convention appeared deadlocked, Williamson urged, "If we do not concede on both sides, our business must soon be at an end." He was the first to suggest that a United States senator serve a term of six years—a proposition that eventually became part of the Constitution.

Williamson became the first representative from North Carolina to the U. S. Congress.

Richard Dobbs Spaight (29) served as lieutenant colonel during the Revolutionary War. He represented North Carolina to the Congress of Confederation and was later elected by the legislature to the Constitutional Convention. Spaight was the first to advocate that senators should be chosen by state legislators, a provision in the original Constitution that remained in effect till the seventeenth amendment.

After the convention, Spaight was elected governor, serving till 1795. He was elected as a representative to Congress in 1798. He was one of three of the founders who died in duels as a result of politics. He died at age forty-four.

South Carolina

John Rutledge (48) was South Carolina's leading citizen and a distinguished lawyer whose legal knowledge was used in drafting the Constitution. Rutledge had studied law at Middle Temple in London. At age twenty-five, he was appointed attorney general of South Carolina. He was a delegate to the first and second continental congresses. As a delegate to the Constitutional Convention, Rutledge had a leading role representing the slave states. After the Constitution was approved, he led the South Carolina delegation in urging ratification.

Rutledge was named associate justice of the Supreme Court but never attended any sessions. He resigned his position in 1791 to accept the appointment of Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of South Carolina. He was later appointed Chief Justice of the Supreme Court in 1795, but the Senate refused to confirm the appointment.

Charles Pinckney (29), the son of a wealthy plantation owner and lawyer, received his education in England, where he commenced his legal training at Middle Temple in London at age fifteen. During the War of Revolution, he was captured by the British and remained a prisoner till the end of the war. He was a member of the Congress of Confederation and was later elected by the state legislature to the Constitutional Convention. During the convention, he authored the so-called "Pinckney Plan," a copy of which has never been discovered. Historians are generally agreed that he was responsible for many provisions in the drafted Constitution. He worked for the ratification of the Constitution in South Carolina, declaring that it was better calculated "to answer the ends of public happiness" than any other form of government.

Pinckney was a cousin to Charles Cotesworth Pinckney. He was four times elected governor of South Carolina, a United States senator, a member of Congress, and United States minister to Spain.

Charles Cotesworth Pinckney (41) was one of the most highly educated of the delegates to the convention. He spent sixteen years at schools in England and France. He studied under William Blackstone, the famous professor of English law who so influenced the framers of the Constitution. During the Revolutionary War, he served as a brigadier general, was captured by the British, and, like his cousin Charles, was taken prisoner. When the British taunted him, he replied, "My heart is altogether American, and neither severity, nor favor, nor poverty, nor affluence can ever induce me to swerve from it." Pinckney was later appointed major general and third in command in the new U. S. Army from 1798 to 1800.

Pinckney's extensive legal background was used in drafting the Constitution. While serving as an envoy to France, he exposed the diplomatic blackmail of the United States by French envoys as a price for their friendship. In doing so, he earned his country's admiration. Pinckney was an unsuccessful candidate for vice-president on the Federalist party ticket and was twice unsuccessful in his bid for the presidency.

Pierce Butler (42) was a strong spokesman for southern slaveholders. He advocated that the number of representatives from each state should be based on the wealth of the state, not population. He served in the South Carolina legislature almost continuously for ten years. He was a strong exponent for states' rights during the convention and opposed any plan that would diminish those rights. He opposed the concept of representation that counted each slave as three-fifths of a person, advocating that slaves ought to have the same representation as free men. He was also responsible for the clause in the Constitution that ensured that runaway slaves should be returned to their owners. Though he was an immigrant, he opposed plans for removing restrictions on immigration because immigrants brought with them foreign ideologies.

Butler urged ratification of the Constitution in South Carolina, and, after it passed, he was elected by the legislature to the Senate.

Georgia

William Few (39) was self-educated and served as a lieutenant colonel in the Revolutionary War. He was elected a delegate to the Continental Congress. He agreed with Madison that the Articles of Confederation were inadequate and favored a national government. He participated in the convention only for the first month and then went to New York to attend Congress, which was in session.

Abraham Baldwin (32) was a Yale-educated lawyer who founded the University of Georgia. Exceptionally bright, he entered Yale at age thirteen and graduated at age seventeen. At the Constitutional Convention, he favored a national government. He regarded his service at the convention as the crowning achievement of his career. Baldwin was elected to the first congress. He was a member of the congressional committee that drafted the Bill of Rights. He was later elected by the legislature in 1799 as a senator from Georgia.

Edmund Randolph of Virginia, who introduced the "Virginia Plan" into the convention proceedings, refused to sign the Constitution but later warmly supported its ratification in Virginia. George Mason (Virginia) and Elbridge Gerry (Massachusetts) also declined to sign. Ironically, Gerry served as vice-president under the new Constitution. All three explained that the Constitution needed amendments. Of the twenty-six amendments to the Constitution, twelve, including the Bill of Rights, were advocated by these three.

Although these signers were hardly the "assembly of demigods" proclaimed by Jefferson, they were distinguished and seasoned in government affairs and were broadly experienced in constitution-making. Their wisdom was derived from practical experience, their guide during the convention. The great genius of their accomplishment at the convention was that they blended their experiences and ideas into a document that has outlived their agrarian society.

Some twentieth-century historians, most notably Charles Beard, [^17] have imputed baser motives to the founders, but their arguments have not held up under scholarly scrutiny. Recent studies have shown the founders to be men of character and virtue in the sense that they placed the interests of the nation before personal interests, in spite of a few exceptions. [^18] The research corroborates this statement by James Madison:

I feel it a duty to express my profound & solemn conviction, derived from my intimate opportunity of observing & appreciating the views of the Convention, collectively & individually, that there never was an assembly of men, charged with a great & arduous trust, who were more pure in their motives, or more exclusively or anxiously [devoted to the object committed to them, than were the members of the Federal Convention of 1787, to the object of devising and proposing a constitutional system which would best supply the defects of that which it was to replace, and best secure the permanent liberty and happiness of their country.] [^19]

Elder B. H. Roberts thought that Washington's placing his hand on and kissing the pages of the Bible on this particular prophecy was more than coincidental. Said he: "What seems singular in connection with these promises made to Joseph and the account of their partial fulfillment in a portion of his posterity inhabiting America is, that after the nations, composed largely of his descendants, had been destroyed and other peoples from Europe—among whom, however, were also large numbers of the descendants of Joseph through the loins of Ephraim had taken possession of the land, at the formal inauguration of that government whose mission it is to control the destiny of the great continent of America—the land of Joseph—the very first executive chosen for that nation, when being sworn to preserve, protect and defend the constitution of this land which God had inspired men to frame, he placed his hand upon the very page of the Bible containing the blessing pronounced upon the head of Joseph by the Patriarch Jacob, and kissed it in token that he swore by God's holy word that he would preserve inviolate the constitution which God prepared for this land!

"Will men call this merely coincidence? Strange coincidence indeed it is, if that be all that it is. Observe that the forty-ninth chapter of Genesis is near the very first leaves of the Bible, and in laying the book open upon a velvet cushion for the use of one about to make solemn oath upon it, it would naturally be parted near the middle of the volume and not parted at the first few leaves.

"Let others believe all this to be coincidence if they choose, but for my own part there is too much that is significant to assign it to that class of phenomena so conveniently disposed of by calling them coincidents. And I believe that the men who opened the old Masonic Bible at the page containing the blessing of Joseph were unwittingly guided by the powers of heaven, and that the act heralded an era big with promise for the descendants of Joseph—the establishment of a government under which they would eventually attain to the full enjoyment of all that was pronounced upon their great progenitor by the inspired patriarchs, Jacob and Moses." (Defense of the Faith and the Saints [Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1907], 1:414-15.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Delaware December 7, 17872. Pennsylvania December 12, 17873. New Jersey December 19, 17874. Georgia January 2, 17885. Connecticut January 9, 17886. Massachusetts February 6, 17887. Maryland April 28, 17888. South Carolina May 23, 17889. New Hampshire June 21, 178810. Virginia June 25, 178811. New York July 26, 1788(The Continental Congress passed a resolution on September 13, 1788, that put the new Constitution into operation.)12. North Carolina (voted not to ratify the new Constitution after its first convention, but then ratified at the second convention) November 21, 178913. Rhode Island (did not call a convention but when the new government came into operation and Rhode Island was in danger of being regarded as a foreign government, it called a convention and ratified) May 29, 1790 "The framers were all advocates of the principle of constitutionalism. According to the principles, constitutions are distinguished from ordinary acts of legislation. They are charters of fundamental laws, drafted by extraordinary assemblages and ratified by special conventions chosen by the people. As supreme law, they cannot be annulled by legislative fiat." (Richard B. Morris, Framing of the Federal Constitution [Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Interior, 1979], p. 26.)
[^2] Friedrich Hayek claims that America's contribution to the world is constitutionalism. See especially chapter 12, "The American Contribution: Constitutionalism," The Constitution of Liberty (Chicago: Henry Regnery Company, 1972), pp. 176-93.
[^3] The Articles of Confederation were the result of a motion for independence by Richard Henry Lee of Virginia on June 7, 1776. When the second Continental Congress convened later that year, they approved the motion to prepare a plan for confederation. John Dickinson, Delaware, headed the drafting committee, and they completed their project within a month. On November 15, 1777, the articles were approved by the congress and sent to the states for ratification. Complete ratification did not occur till March 1, 1781.
[^4] Circular to the States, June 8, 1783, Writings of George Washington, 1745-1799, edited by John C. Fitzpatrick (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1939), 26:488. Quoted in Maxims of Washington, collected and arranged by John Frederick Schroeder (Mount Vernon: The Mount Vernon Ladies' Association, 1942), p. 27.
[^5] Writings of George Washington 29:68.
[^6] Quoted in Frank Donavan, Mr. Madison's Constitution (New York: Dodd, Mead & Company, 1965), p. 8.
[^7] Ibid., p. 39.
[^8] Madison's Notes were published in 1840 after his death. Congress paid $40,000 for the most complete record of the convention proceedings. Adrienne Koch wrote in his introduction to the printing of the Notes: "Certainly it is safe to say that the Notes will not be surpassed by any other single or combined set, and they will continue to give us the fullest, most literate, and most reliable information on the framing of the Constitution. As Charles Evans Hughes once remarked, we owe to Madison `the most direct approach to the intention of the makers of the Constitution.' Were we deprived of its account, we would return to what Jared Sparks once complained of as `such a very skeleton of dry bones with hardly a sinew, muscle, or ligature, to tell that it was a living thing, that it is impossible to ascertain from it the relative standing or prevailing view of any member.' (Notes of the Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787 Reported by James Madison (Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1966), p. xxiii.)
[^9] Ibid., p. 147.
[^10] Ibid., pp. 209-10.
[^11] Ibid., p. 227.
[^12] Ibid., p. 283.
[^13] Congress had already faced the issue on slavery. For tax purposes, it counted slaves at 60 percent or three-fifths of their actual numbers. The convention merely voted to keep that ratio both for apportionment and tax purposes.
[^14] This situation was remedied by the Twelfth Amendment. The amendment was the result of the election of 1800, when the electoral college cast their votes for Jefferson and Burr without distinguishing who should be the president and vice-president. A tie vote resulted, and the House of Representatives elected Jefferson president and Burr vice-president.
[^15] Quoted in David Whitney, Founders of Freedom in America, Signers of the Constitution of the United States (Chicago: J. G. Ferguson Publishing Company, 1973), p. 33.
[^16] Notes of the Debates, p. 652.
[^17] Ibid., pp. 653-54.
[^18] Ibid., p. 659.
[^19] Donavan, Mr. Madison's Constitution, pp. 93-94.
