William O. Nelson, Charter of Liberty: The Inspired Origin and Prophetic Destiny of the Constitution ( 1987)

3

"The Event Is in the Hand of God"

Our greatest possession is not the vast domain; it's not our beautiful mountains, or our fertile prairies, or our magnificent coastline. It's not the might of our Army or Navy. These things are of great importance. But in my judgment the greatest and most precious possession of the American people is the Constitution.

Senator Sam Ervin

The new Constitution was a bombshell to the states. Convention meetings had been secret. State legislatures had sent the delegates to the Philadelphia Convention for the "sole and express purpose of revising the Articles of Confederation." But other delegates, notably Madison and Hamilton, came with an agenda to "devise such further provisions as shall appear to them necessary to render the constitution of the federal government adequate to the exigencies of the Union." It is safe to say that none of the states expected such a revolutionary course as the delegates had taken.

When they emerged from the State House in Philadelphia after their three and a half months of deliberations, they had a written constitution that abolished the Articles of Confederation, nullified the Continental Congress, and created a two-tiered government—one federal to unite the new republic, and the other state and local to keep power close to the people. Conceived thereby was a democratic republic that rested on an elected executive, elected members of Congress to represent the people, and senators elected by the states to represent the states.

The federal government was given specific limitations to protect the people from arbitrary coercion. All powers not vested in the federal government were reserved to the states and the people. Convinced that power corrupts, the framers of the new Constitution divided the powers of the national government and provided for checks and balances. The new charter further provided for an independent judicial review of legislation, procedures for amending the Constitution, and an explicit declaration that the new Constitution was the supreme law of the land. The most extraordinary feature in the document was the declaration that the people were sovereign, not the officers of the government or its institutions.

Never before in the history of mankind had such a noble experiment in self-government been attempted. This effort was premised on the conviction and belief of the delegates that government exists to protect the citizens' rights to life, liberty, property, and pursuit of happiness.

Today we look back on the achievement of that august body and regard what they did as miraculous. But this was not the general perception of their countrymen in 1787 after they returned to their respective states. Their efforts divided the people into two opposing camps—those who supported the Constitution (the Federalists) and those who opposed (the Antifederalists). The latter group claimed that the delegates had overstepped their instructions by creating a new government and had, in effect, defied Congress. Would not such a revolutionary charter, they challenged, result in tyranny and the loss of liberty secured by the war with Britain? Would not the newly proposed government be as autocratic as the monarchy?

Earlier Experiments with Constitutionalism

The fifty-five delegates that eventually came to the Philadelphia Convention were already committed to constitutionalism. [^1] They were agreed that an explicit charter of laws—a written constitution—was necessary to restrain government, guarantee rights, and be regarded as supreme law. Their view of constitutionalism was based on the reasoning that there were commonly accepted principles to which all people should be subject. Constitutionalism implied that all legislatures and judiciaries were bound by these general principles that must guide their actions in securing the rights of individuals. When legislative acts encroach on the people's rights, a petition for judicial review would ascertain whether the act was constitutional or subject to repudiation. [^2]

The experiment with constitutionalism was not new to the delegates. Forty-two of them had belonged to the Continental Congress, and most had helped draft the Articles of Confederation and their respective state constitutions. The British constitutional system, which consisted of laws, customs, and legal precedents established by Parliament, was regarded as unworkable in satisfying the colonists' claims against Parliament. They therefore concluded that there had to be a fixed constitution to protect themselves against arbitrary action.

The Declaration of Independence severed the country from Great Britain but did not specify the type of governmental system that would replace colonial dependency on the monarchy. In fact, as Garry Wills has pointed out, not one country, but thirteen separate ones, came into existence when the declaration was made unanimous in July 1776. The second Continental Congress addressed the problem of a union of states in 1777 and established the first written constitution of the United States called "The Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union." But this document was not ratified by the states until four years later—March 1, 1781. [^3] Six years after ratification, it was discovered that the articles were not practical.

The Articles of Confederation provided for a "firm league of friendship" between the states and for their "common defense, the security of the liberties, and their mutual and general welfare," but it also had serious defects.

The articles provided a national congress but no executive or judicial branch. Sovereignty was left completely to the states. This made the confederation powerless to make the states comply with its resolutions. The major problem under the Articles of Confederation was that Congress had no power to levy taxes and, consequently, could not pay its bills. In effect, Congress could do nothing without approval by two-thirds of the states. The result was that problems that arose between the states, principally over interstate trade and commerce, were not adjudicated. When Daniel Shays, a Revolutionary War veteran, led a revolt in Massachusetts, it seemed to presage what many feared—insurrection and anarchy.

Washington registered his alarm in these words: "It is indispensable to the happiness of the individual States, that there should be lodged somewhere, a Supreme Power to regulate and govern the general concerns of the Confederated Republic, without which the Union cannot be of long duration." [^4] He later wrote, "The fabrick which took nine years, at the expense of much blood and treasure, to rear, now totters to the foundation, and without support must soon fall." [^5] James Madison echoed the same concern in a letter he wrote to Edmund Randolph, governor of Virginia: "Our situation is becoming every day more and more critical. . . . People of reflection unanimously agree that the existing Confederacy is tottering to its foundation." [^6]

The historian John Fiske called this period "the most critical moment in all the history of the American people." Congress recognized the severity of the crisis and approved the calling of a convention in 1787 for the purpose of revising the Articles of Confederation. The selected site was Independence Hall in Philadelphia, where the declaration was signed and adopted. In that time, Philadelphia was the most cosmopolitan city of the states with a population of slightly less than 30,000.

The Constitutional Convention

Seventy-four delegates were appointed by their state legislatures to the convention, but the most that came was fifty-five. Twelve of the thirteen states were represented. Rhode Island boycotted the convention because the state wanted to protect its economic interests from a national government.

The delegates came from different backgrounds, and their divergent views often clashed during the heated summer days. In the end, however, they put aside cherished personal views and made concessions in the interest of a federal union. How these delegates decided on establishing a federal government rather than a federation of states as it existed under the Articles of Confederation is a remarkable story.

The Convention was to have started on May 14, but a quorum of states was not assembled until May 25. The Virginia delegation used the intervening time to draft a plan, the fundamentals of which were to form the new federal constitution.

The convention's first order of business was to select a presiding officer. George Washington was unanimously elected. With characteristic self-effacement, he accepted the responsibility. Before a full quorum had arrived, there had been talk about approving measures that would be acceptable to the people. Washington was reported to have said, "It is probable that no plan we propose will be adopted. Perhaps another dreadful conflict is to be sustained. If to please the people we offer what we ourselves disapprove, how can we afterwards defend our work. Let us raise a standard to which the wise and honest can repair. The event is in the hand of God." [^7]

James Madison chose a seat in front of the presiding officer and recorded the secret convention proceedings. Were it not for his meticulous notes on the convention, knowledge of the debates would be scant. [^8]

On May 29, Governor Edmund Randolph from Virginia presented the Virginia Plan to the convention. The plan, drafted by Madison and containing fifteen resolutions, represented the views of the larger states. It called for a national legislature comprised of two houses based on population. The lower house, elected by the people, was to elect the upper chamber. The national legislature had veto power over the acts of state legislatures whenever the "articles of union" were violated. Congress further had power to compel the states to obedience. The plan also called for a "national executive" elected by both houses and a "national judiciary." The executive and a portion of the judiciary had veto power over legislation by Congress. This executive and judiciary review was empowered to ensure that each state would have a republican form of government. Within this plan was the germ of ideas that were later adopted in the Constitution.

The Virginia Plan was given to a Committee of the Whole. After thirteen sessions, the committee reported to the convention their approval of an amended Virginia Plan that called for a single executive who had veto power and was chosen by the legislature. Also recommended was the election of the upper house by state legislatures.

While the Committee of the Whole was meeting, delegates from New Jersey developed an alternative plan that represented the small states. On June 15, William Paterson countered with the New Jersey Plan to the convention, which was little more than a revised Articles of Confederation. It called for a plural executive, a supreme court, and for giving Congress power to levy duty taxes on imports, to regulate commerce, and to collect taxes. It also provided for an oath by state officials to compel support to the national government, and it specified the supremacy of the Union in its sphere.

Both plans were debated in committee for several days. The small states argued against a national government on the basis that the convention was called only to amend the Articles of Confederation. The larger states argued that the convention had the right to propose whatever was in the best interests of the union. During this debate, Hamilton made a novel proposal that the convention adopt a government based on the British system with a monarch and senate elected for life. The committee quickly dismissed the proposal because it was too similar to the hereditary nobility concept of the British. Hamilton left the convention several days later only to return for brief visits and to sign the final document.

After three days debate on the Virginia and New Jersey plans, the committee voted seven to three on June 19 for an amended Virginia Plan. Thus the convention decided to approve a national government based on an independent, bicameral legislature; a national judiciary; and one executive.

After spending several days on minor details, the convention moved to resolve the most important issue—how representation in the legislature would be determined. The debates were heated and intense. Madison had previously said to the convention: "The great difficulty lies in the affair of Representation; and if this could be adjusted, all others would be surmountable." [^9]

The issue was between the larger and smaller states. The smaller states wanted equal representation. The larger states wanted representation proportional to size. The convention appeared deadlocked. At that juncture, Benjamin Franklin, too weak to speak, wrote out a proposal for his colleague, James Wilson, to read:

The small progress we have made after 4 or five weeks . . . is methinks a melancholy proof of the imperfection of the Human Understanding. We indeed seem to feel our own want of political wisdom, since we have been running about in search of it. . . . In this situation . . . groping as it were in the dark to find political truth . . . how has it happened, Sir, that we have not hitherto once thought of humbly applying to the Father of lights to illuminate our understandings? . . . I have lived, Sir, a long time, and the longer I live, the more convincing proofs I see of this truth—that God Governs in the affairs of men. And if a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without his notice, is it probable that an empire can rise without his aid?

We have been assured, Sir, in the sacred writings, that "except the Lord build the House they labour in vain that build it." I firmly believe this; and I also believe that without his concurring aid we shall succeed in this political building no better, than the Builders of Babel: We shall be divided by our little partial local interests; our projects will be confounded, and we ourselves shall become a reproach and bye word down to future ages. And what is worse, mankind may hereafter from this unfortunate instance, despair of establishing Governments by Human wisdom and leave it to chance, war, and conquest.

I therefore beg leave to move—that henceforth prayers imploring the assistance of Heaven, and its blessings on our deliberations, be held in this Assembly every morning before we proceed to business, and that one or more of the Clergy of this City be requested to officiate in that Service. [^10]

Most historians agree that Franklin's motion was not acted on since the convention lacked funds for a chaplain. But his appeal had altered the mood of the convention. He further appealed for more conciliation between the larger and smaller states: "When a broad table is to be made, and the edges of planks do not fit, the artist takes a little from both, and makes a good joint. In like manner here both sides must part with some of their demands, in order that they may join in some accommodating proposition." [^11]

The issue of representation was finally resolved in mid-July with the first great compromise. The delegates eventually approved a proposal by Roger Sherman of Connecticut that representation in the lower house would be determined by popular election and based on population of free citizens plus three-fifths of the slaves. The upper house (Senate) had equal representation, with two members from each state, elected by the state legislatures. Without this compromise, it is doubtful there would have been a federal constitution as we now know it.

A second compromise occurred over the institution of slavery. Madison wrote that the real "difference of interests . . . lay not between the large & small [states], but the [Northern] & [Southern] States" on the institution of slavery. [^12] The issue was whether slaves should be counted for the purpose of taxation and representation in the national Congress. The South wanted them counted for representation purposes but objected to being taxed for slaves. It was finally decided that three-fifths of the slaves would be counted for both purposes. [^13]

The slavery issue came up again over the regulation of interstate commerce and trade—how importation of slaves would be regulated among the Southern States. Out of this debate came another compromise when the convention decided that Congress would have power to regulate foreign commerce but would be forbidden to abolish importation of slaves till 1808, giving the South time to build its supply of slaves.

The delegates next turned their attention to a discussion of the executive branch. The divergent views during the course of the convention had ranged from Hamilton's monarch-elected-for-life proposal to dividing the office among three men elected for a short time. Questions centered on how the chief executive should be elected, how long his tenure should be, and whether the central government should be weak or strong. Those who favored a strong single executive wanted him elected directly by the people as a counterbalance to the powers of Congress. Those favoring a weak executive wanted him chosen by Congress.

The final compromise, after weeks of discussion and debate within committees, was that a single executive would be elected for four-year terms with eligibility for reelection. He was to be selected by a unique device—an electoral college—where each state was allowed as many electors as it had senators and congressmen in the national legislature. The Constitution originally provided that the person receiving the highest number of votes from the electoral college would be president; the person with the second largest majority would be vice-president. But no provision was made for determining which of the two men was voted on for president and vice-president. [^14]

There was minimal debate over the judicial branch. Early in the convention, the delegates decided that the members of the court would have a lifetime tenure. The delegates were committed to the principle of an independent review by the judiciary. Congress was further empowered to create a lower federal court system, accomplished in 1789 when it passed the Judiciary Act, which provided for appeals from state courts to the Supreme Court.

Another vital decision of the convention was that the laws and treaties of the United States government were to be the supreme law of the land, which all judges at every level were bound to enforce. The Constitution itself was declared to be the supreme law of the land. This decision made the states subservient to a national government.

Once these major issues were decided, the finer points were turned over to committees of detail and style. Gouverneur Morris drafted the preamble and was largely responsible for the Constitution's style. The document was finally presented to the convention on September 13. Washington's letter transmitted to the Congress the newly framed Constitution. After noting the need for a stronger central government and the difficulty in attaining this without sacrificing individual liberties, Washington wrote:

In all our deliberations on this subject we kept steadily in our view, that which appears to us the greatest interest of every true American, the consolidation of our Union, in which is involved our prosperity, felicity, safety, perhaps our national existence. This important consideration, seriously and deeply impressed on our minds, led each State in the Convention to be less rigid on points of inferior magnitude, than might have been otherwise expected; and thus the Constitution, which we now present, is the result of a spirit of amity, and of that mutual deference and concession which the peculiarity of our political situation rendered indispensable. [^15]

On Saturday, September 15, the delegates voted on the approval of the Constitution as amended. Madison recorded, "On the question to agree to the Constitution, as amended. All the States ay. The Constitution was then ordered to be engrossed. And the House adjourned." [^16]

Finally, on September 17, 1787, the delegates signed the document. Of the fifty-five delegates that had come to the convention, only forty-one remained. Thirty-eight signed the document, and George Read signed proxy for the name of the thirty-ninth—John Dickinson from Delaware. Three delegates (George Mason, Elbridge Gerry, and Edmund Randolph) refused to sign.

Before the document was signed, Benjamin Franklin was requested to give his endorsing approval. In his speech, read by James Wilson, Franklin, in part, wrote:

In these sentiments, Sir, I agree to this Constitution with all its faults, if they are such; because I think a general Government necessary for us, and there is no form of Government but what may be a blessing to the people if well administered, and believe farther that this is likely to be well administered for a course of years, and can only end in Despotism, as other forms have done before it, when the people shall become so corrupted as to need despotic Government, being incapable of any other. . . . It therefore astonishes me, Sir, to find this system approaching so near to perfection as it does; and I think it will astonish our enemies, who are waiting with confidence to hear that our councils are confounded like those of the Builders of Babel; and that our States are on the point of separation, only to meet hereafter for the purpose of cutting one another's throats. Thus I consent, Sir, to this Constitution because I expect no better, and because I am not sure, that it is not the best. The opinions I have had of its errors, I sacrifice to the public good. . . . I hope therefore that for our own sakes as a part of the people, and for the sake of posterity, we shall act heartily and unanimously in recommending this Constitution . . . wherever our influence may extend, and turn our future thoughts & endeavors to the means of having it well administered.

Summary of the 1787 Constitutional Convention Proceedings

May 25, 1787 Washington was elected as the presiding officer of the convention.May 29, 1787 The Virginia delegation submitted to the convention fifteen propositions as a plan of government.May 30, 1787 The convention went into a Committee of the Whole, which permitted less formal discussion, on the fifteen propositions of the Virginia Plan. Nathaniel Gorham became the chairman of the Committee of the Whole.June 13, 1787 The Committee of the Whole reported to the convention an amended version of the Virginia Plan.June 14, 1787 New Jersey requested an adjournment to allow the smaller states, dissatisfied with the Virginia Plan, to prepare an alternative plan. The request was granted.June 15, 1787 New Jersey submitted nine resolutions that amended the Articles of Confederation. Vigorous debate ensued on the two plans.June 19, 1787 The convention rejected the New Jersey Plan and voted to discuss the Virginia Plan. The small states threatened withdrawal. Franklin appealed to the convention for prayer (June 28).

July 2, 1787 Convention was deadlocked on the question of each state having an equal vote for the Senate. The matter was referred to a committee of eleven.July 5, 1787 The committee of eleven submitted its report to the convention; this report became the basis for the Great Compromise.July 24, 1787 The fifteen Virginia Resolutions had been expanded to twenty-three in the previous debates. A committee of five (Rutledge, Randolph, Gorham, Ellsworth, and Wilson) were appointed as a Committee on Detail to draft a constitution from the resolutions.August 6-10, 1787 The report of the Committee on Detail was discussed clause by clause. Amendments and compromises were made.September 8, 1787 Another committee of five (Johnson, Hamilton, Gouverneur Morris, Madison, and King) were appointed as a Committee on Style to revise the document and arrange its contents.September 12, 1787 The report of the Committee on Style was printed.September 15, 1787 The Constitution was ordered engrossed.September 17, 1787 The Constitution was signed by thirty-nine of the forty-two delegates.

On the whole, Sir, I cannot help expressing a wish that every member of the Convention who may still have objections to it, would with me, on this occasion doubt a little of his own infallibility, and to make manifest our unanimity, put his name to this instrument. [^17]

While the last members were signing, Madison recorded that Benjamin Franklin looked toward the president's chair, the back of which had a painting of a rising sun. Franklin observed that painters had found it difficult to distinguish between a rising and a setting sun. "I have," said he, "often and often in the course of the Session, and the vicissitudes of my hopes and fears as to its issue, looked at that [sun] behind the President without being able to tell whether it was rising or setting: But now at length I have the happiness to know that it is a rising and not a setting Sun." [^18]

Ratification of the Constitution

Considering that the Articles of Confederation had taken five years to approve, the delegates realistically understood that it would be difficult to obtain the Confederation Congress's approval for a document that nullified the congress's existence. They also realized that state legislators predominantly supported "states rights" and would therefore be reluctant to approve a national charter. So the convention decided upon a revolutionary method of ratification. They took the document directly to the states' ratifying conventions, a decision that was tantamount to taking it directly to the people. They further specified that nine of the thirteen states would be sufficient to establish the Constitution. The decision proved to be ingenious because it worked and eliminated prolonged debate.

Ratification of the Constitution took only nine months, but the controversy over the new charter was intense. Before the delegates returned to their states, Richard Henry Lee denounced it in Congress. Patrick Henry, George Mason, and James Monroe opposed it in Virginia. Governor George Clinton opposed it in New York. Lines were quickly

Order in Which the States Ratified the Constitution

drawn between those who opposed (Antifederalists) and those who favored (Federalists).

A major objection against the Constitution was that it lacked a specific bill of rights. John Adams and Thomas Jefferson, both of whom were out of the country during the convention, deplored this omission, even though they generally favored the document. Jefferson wrote to Madison, "A bill of rights is what the people are entitled to against every government on earth, . . . and what no government should refuse." [^19]

Delaware ratified the Constitution just less than three months after the document was signed. Within eight months, eight states had ratified. On June 21, 1788, New Hampshire became the ninth state to ratify, making the new Constitution legal. But neither New York nor Virginia had ratified, and both of these states were essential for the new government to exist at all, Virginia because of its importance and New York for its location.

Virginia finally ratified five days after New Hampshire, but not until the Antifederalists, led by Patrick Henry, Richard Henry Lee, and George Mason, extracted a concession for another national convention to consider amendments to protect individual liberties. The Federalists, led by Madison, agreed.

Meanwhile, New York watched carefully how the other states voted. The debate in that state had been particularly acrimonious. Most of the delegates were Antifederalist, but through the efforts of Hamilton, Jay, and Livingston, the opposition was won over, and New York ratified the Constitution by a margin of three votes.

Hamilton was particularly persuasive during the debates. At the outset, he conceived the idea of publishing a series of essays under the pseudonym "Publius" to persuade the public to approve the new Constitution. Eighty-five of these essays were published by three Federalists (Hamilton, Madison, and Jay) in the New York papers. Later, the essays were compiled into a book under the title The Federalist. As Garry Wills has noted, "The essays overwhelmed response." [^20] The essays, even today, articulate the best exposition on the Constitution as seen by the founders.

Once the new government was formed in April 1789, one of the first acts of the new congress was to keep the Federalist promise to append to the Constitution a bill of rights. James Madison led Congress to consider twelve amendments, ten of which were approved on December 15, 1791. (See appendix 3.) These amendments, designated today as the Bill of Rights, may correctly be considered part of the original Constitution.

Why the Philadelphia Constitutional Convention Was So Extraordinary

The Constitutional Convention lasted from May 25 to September 17, just over three and a half months. The framers devised a document that established a federal government to protect the rights of U. S. citizens in their day; this was a significant accomplishment in itself. But what is really extraordinary is that the charter they created has proved sufficiently practical and flexible to govern a nation with a population of over 200 million two centuries later.

Significant is the fact that the founders of the republic were not satisfied to live under monarchical rule (their tradition for centuries), nor to exist as separate states with governors over them (their tradition for a century), nor to live under a federation (their tradition of less than a decade). They forged a democratic republic with no parallel tradition in history.

The Articles of Confederation demonstrated that to write rules by law is not a guarantee that its provisions will be enforced. Countries may draft constitutions with idealistic provisions, but to make them work is quite another matter.

There are at least four reasons why this new government worked where others have not. First, the provisions of the document were formed in what Washington called a "spirit of accommodation." [^21] The framers made concessions and compromises that were in the best interests of the young nation's survival. This accommodation was based on what they considered the public virtue—what was good for the whole. They put aside their jealousies and partisan concerns in the interest of a union. Second, the entire process depended on the direct or indirect consent of the people. The constitutional assemblage at Philadelphia was supported by the delegates of the sovereign states. Thus the Constitution was an emanation from the people. They sent the delegates, ordained the document, and established the government. The government that came into being in April 1789 was not a concession to them by a sovereign power; it was the creation of a sovereign people. Third, the people bound themselves to be governed by law and not by rulers, in the English tradition that recognized that the laws of God were superior to the laws of society and that all people had rights specific and inherent at birth. All judges, legislators, and officers were henceforth oath-bound ("so help me God") to "support the Constitution" as the supreme law of the land. Fourth, their efforts were undeniably inspired by God. When their work was completed, the Lord subsequently declared that the new Constitution was "justifiable" before Him and that He had "established the Constitution . . . by the hands of wise men" whom He had "raised up." (D&C 98:5; 101:80.) Thus a new government was established, foreseen and prophesied in the Book of Mormon, that made the United States of America "a land of liberty." (See 2 Ne. 10:10-14.)

The founders not only forged a document that governs our nation, but one that fulfilled Washington's hope that a standard would be raised to which the wise and honest would repair. That standard was raised. In tribute to the Constitution, President Joseph Fielding Smith said that it is "the greatest document . . . ever adopted by organized society for their government, outside of the kingdom of God." [^22]

The Articles of Confederation did accomplish three notable achievements: (1) it made the final peace with Great Britain in 1783; (2) it established a public land policy for the Western-land territory turned over by states that bordered western land and were making claims; and (3) it enacted the 1787 Northwest Ordinance, which established the regulations for government territories and provided policy for their admission as states on the same equal footing as the original thirteen colonies. (See Richard B. Morris, "How America Struggled to Enact a Constitution," U.S. News and World Report, March 9, 1981, pp. 61-62.)

---
Notas:
[^1] What is the basis of our right to life, liberty, and property? The distinction between civil law and common law is fundamental to understanding the Constitution. President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., provided an explanation in a masterful treatise entitled "Let Us Not Sell Our Children into Slavery." [^1] Briefly, his explanation is this: In a general sense, there are only two governmental systems in the world today. The European tradition recognized that the sovereign power was vested in the head of state (a monarchy or dictatorship) or a group of rulers (an oligarchy). Its basis is Roman or civil law and rests on the premise that rulers grant to the people the rights and powers the rulers think the people should have. All dictatorships have recognized this system. Regardless of how benevolent the dictators may be, the system denies that which belongs to all people inalienably—their right to life, liberty, and property. Furthermore, such a political philosophy causes the people to be subservient to the state or to human rulers, thereby violating the will of heaven that "it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another." (D&C 101:79.) The right to a trial by jury, of all violations of federal law, in the state where the crime is committed. The First Amendment protects the individual's right to freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and freedom to assemble and to petition the government for a redress of grievances. [^13] Significant to Latter-day Saints is the first clause of this amendment: "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof." Without freedom of religion, there could be no promulgation of the gospel, and the plan of God would be thwarted because people would be unable to exercise their agency to choose. Without such freedom they could not be accountable for their sins. J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Stand Fast by Our Constitution (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1973), pp. 133-50.
[^2] How should the power of government be limited? In order to safeguard these inalienable rights, the founders provided three specific limitations of power in our written constitution. The right to habeas corpus. This was an old common-law writ that commands the release of a person who is being illegally detained. A writ of habeas corpus is an order from a judge directing that a person held in custody be brought before the court to determine whether he or she is being held lawfully. If the person is being held unlawfully, the court will order his or her release. The Second Amendment does not confer the right to bear arms; it prevents congress from infringing on that right. George A. Peek, Jr., ed., The Political Writings of John Adams (New York: The Liberal Arts Press, 1954), p. 96.
[^3] How are minority rights protected? Recognizing that the majority is omnipotent in a democracy, the founders deliberately devised a constitutional republic described by Jefferson as "action by the citizens in person, in affairs within their reach and competence, and in all others by representatives." [^9] The republic they established was one where the people adopted a written constitution that defined how their views would be represented. Universal suffrage was regarded as a dangerous experiment, particularly if the masses were neither intelligent nor virtuous. The Constitution forbade Congress to pass ex post facto laws. This simply means that a person may not be punished for violating a law if the law had not been passed when the action occurred. The Third Amendment protects an individual's right against military intrusion into his or her home without consent. The Federalist Papers (New York: The New American Library of World Literature, 1961), no. 45, p. 292.
[^4] How are individual rights protected? Fundamental to the philosophy of the founders was their belief that no person could be deprived of certain rights—life, liberty, and property. When the Lord said that the Constitution of the United States was to "be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh," He further explained that such protection was essential so that we could fully exercise the moral agency that has been accorded to us, "that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment." (D&C 101:77-78; italics added.) Protection of individual rights was expressly stated in the Bill of Rights. Before the Bill of Rights was added, the Constitution itself guaranteed certain protections to one's liberty. These four provisions were: Congress is forbidden to pass a bill of attainder. These bills were fairly common in early English history and permitted punishment of the individual without a trial. Under the Constitution, only a court may punish someone for violating a law; a legislative body may not. The Fourth Amendment protects the individual's right against unreasonable search and seizure. Before officers of law can search someone's property, they must show a warrant that evidences good reason to suppose the person is guilty of wrongdoing. Ibid., pp. 292-93.
[^5] The Fifth Amendment protects the individual's right against double jeopardy, meaning that one cannot be tried twice for the same offense; the right against self-incrimination; the right to "due process of law" (presumption of innocence till proven guilty); and the right against having property taken without just compensation. Ibid., no. 51, p. 323.
[^6] The Sixth Amendment protects the individual's right to a trial by jury, to a speedy and public trial, to be informed of charges against him or her, to be confronted by witnesses, and to have legal counsel. Quoted in Jonathan Elliot, comp., The Debates in the Several State Conventions on the Adoption of the Federal Constitution, 5 vols. (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1901), 3:257-58.
[^7] The Seventh Amendment protects the individual's right to a trial by jury in common-law cases. This refers only to federal courts, and only to cases arising out of common law. Church News, Nov. 29, 1952, p. 12.
[^8] The Eighth Amendment protects one's right against excessive bail, fines, and cruel and unusual punishment. This right is also protected by the fourteenth amendment, which prevents states from depriving any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. John Adams, The Works of John Adams, edited by C. F. Adams (Boston: Little, Brown Co., 1851), 5:490.
[^9] The Ninth Amendment protects other rights that may not have been mentioned in the Constitution. Thomas Jefferson, Works of Thomas Jefferson, edited by Paul L. Ford (New York: J. P. Putnam's Sons, 1905), 11:523.
[^10] The Tenth Amendment makes clear that the federal government has only the powers that have been delegated to it. All other powers not so delegated are reserved to the people. "The Constitution was framed in order to protect minorities. That is the purpose of a written Constitution. In order that minorities might be protected in the matter of amendments under our Constitution, the Lord required that the amendments should be made only through the operation of very large majorities—two thirds for action in the Senate, and three-fourths as among the states. This is the inspired, prescribed order." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Selected Papers, edited by David H. Yarn, Jr., (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1984), p. 165.)
[^11] The Federalist Papers, no. 10, p. 81.
[^12] Henry Sumner Maine, Popular Government (Indianapolis: Liberty Classics, 1976), p. 227.
[^13] For a discussion of the first amendment, an excellent treatment is Rex E. Lee, A Lawyer Looks at the Constitution, chapters 10-13.
[^14] The Federalist Papers, no. 57, p. 353.
[^15] Massachusetts Bill of Rights, 1780.
[^16] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Values by Which to Live," Leaders Magazine, volume 7, no. 4, October-November 1984, p. 152.
[^17] Quoted in Hamilton Abert Long, The American Ideal of 1776 (Philadelphia: Your Heritage Books, 1963), p. 208.
[^18] Ibid., p. 659.
[^19] Donavan, Mr. Madison's Constitution, pp. 93-94.
[^20] Garry Wills, Explaining America: The Federalist (New York: Penguin Books, 1981), p. xii.
[^21] 21. "A spirit of accommodation was the basis of the present constitution." George Washington's letter to David Stuart, March 28, 1780, Writings of George Washington, 31:29.
[^22] 22. Joseph Fielding Smith, The Progress of Man (Salt Lake City: Genealogical Society of Utah, 1952), pp. 295-96.
