William O. Nelson, Charter of Liberty: The Inspired Origin and Prophetic Destiny of the Constitution ( 1987)

4

"For the Rights and Protection of All Flesh"

It was from America that the plain ideas that men ought to mind their own business, and that the nation is responsible to Heaven for the acts of State—ideas long locked in the breasts of solitary thinkers, and hidden among Latin folios,—burst forth like a conqueror upon the world they were destined to transform, under the title of the Rights of Man.

Lord Acton

Having considered the background of the development of the Constitution, we shall now turn our attention to an explanation of the "just and holy principles" the Lord approved that were to protect the rights of "all flesh."

The chief complaint of the critics of the new Constitution was the lack of a bill of rights. To many, particularly the small farmers who had been the backbone of the revolution, the rights of the people was what the revolution represented. But the new Constitution only implied these rights. Only after the Federalists promised to make these rights specific and explicit did the key states ratify it; therefore, it is not improper to think of the first ten amendments (the Bill of Rights) as a part of the original Constitution.

Four vital questions that affect the rights of the people were answered by the formation of a constitutional republic. As we consider each one, we can better appreciate how a constitutional system of government was designed to protect and safeguard these rights.

The Founding Fathers deliberately rejected the European system of civil law because it had historically caused tyranny and subjugation and denied the people their rights. But, more important, they were indoctrinated in a different system of thought—the British system of common law, based on the principle that sovereignty rests with the people. This conception of law is illustrated by the opening clause in the Preamble to the Constitution: "We the people of the United States . . . do ordain and establish . . ."

In this statement, the people were declared to be sovereign, not a king, emperor, oligarchy, or state. All rights and powers not granted specifically to the government were retained to themselves. This, as President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., pointed out, was the difference between freedom and despotism.

To say that the people were recognized as being sovereign was not to contradict the biblical truth (accepted by the founders) that God is the source of all human rights—and is therefore supremely sovereign. The founders subscribed to the philosophy of natural rights, the doctrine that people have inherent rights to life, liberty, and property.

John Adams expressed it this way: "All men are born free and independent, and have certain natural, essential, and unalienable rights, among which may be reckoned the right of enjoying and defending their lives and liberties; that of acquiring, possessing, and protecting property; in fine, that of seeking and obtaining their safety and happiness." [^2]

What is the basis of our rights to life, liberty, and property? The answer provided by the founders was that the rights are unalienable, meaning that the rights could neither be surrendered not transferred to another. All people receive these rights at birth. In 1833 the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith that the Constitution, which the Lord "suffered to be established," was to be "maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh." (D&C 101:77.)

A first way the power of government was limited is that the power was distributed to states and local governments. This is the concept of federalism.

One of the great fears, as shown by the debates at the Constitutional Convention, was that power would be concentrated in a centralized government. The founders solved that problem by deliberately devising two overlapping governments: one national (which united the states into a federal republic); the other, the states and local governments. These two levels of government were to exist simultaneously. Power was to be divided between each, and each would act as a check on the other.

Powers delegated to the federal government were to be "few and defined" and to be concerned with "war, peace, negotiation, and foreign commerce." [^3] The Constitution specifically limits the powers that belong to the federal government by enumerating the things it could do, among which were raising and maintaining an armed force, raising taxes, forming treaties and alliances, conducting commerce with foreign nations, and coining money.

But the greater powers were to be retained by the states, the object being to keep the government close to the people. "The powers reserved to the several States will extend to all the objects which . . . concern the lives, liberties, and properties of the people, and the internal order, improvement, and prosperity of the State." [^4]

Among powers granted to the states were these: presidential electors were to be chosen in a manner prescribed by the states; equal representation was given to each state in the Senate; senators originally were to be elected only by state legislators; amendments to the Constitution were possible only by large majorities—three-fourths of the state legislatures—or by the demands of the several states for a constitutional convention; members of the House of Representatives were chosen by districts within each state; and states retained control over most of the police force and court issues dealing with life, liberty, or property.

Furthermore, the tenth amendment of the Bill of Rights reserved to the states all powers not delegated to the federal government.

The purpose of the framers decentralizing power to the states and local government was to preserve maximum "home rule"—to keep the power closest to the people. This was recognized as the only way in which the principles of self-government could operate effectively and without coercion.

But there were also limitations on the states. States were prohibited under the Constitution from making treaties or alliances, coining money, issuing bills of credit, and making anything but gold and silver legal tender in payment of debts. Moreover, each state was to have a republican form of government, namely, a representative form of government created by a written constitution that specifically limited the government by dividing it into three separate branches—executive, legislative, and judicial.

Thus, the founders created, in Madison's phrase, "a compound republic," the advantages being that power is "divided between two distinct governments. . . . Hence, a double security arises to the rights of the people." [^5] For, "if one encroaches on their rights, they will find a powerful protection in the other. Indeed, they will both be prevented from overpassing their constitutional limits, by a certain rivalship." [^6]

Rivalship for power between the national and state governments was anticipated. And our two-hundred-year history has shown that when an inordinate amount of power shifts to one group, national unity and liberty becomes endangered. The Civil War, for example, was precipitated over the constitutional question of states having authority to secede from the Union. That crisis threatened the very existence of the republic.

A second way the power of government is limited is that the functions of government were separated into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial. Almost all the framers of the Constitution perceived government to be a reflection of human nature, which they considered as having a disposition toward power and self-aggrandizement. Therefore, they incorporated into the Constitution the fundamental provision to check tyrannical power of the government by separating its functions into three distinct branches. This doctrine had been earlier espoused by Montesquieu and Locke, who believed that the way to limit government power was to divide its functions.

The functions of each branch were not to be delegated to other branches, nor to encroach on the others. Their functions were to be separate and independent yet interdependent. This blending of independence from each other, and dependence on each other, said J. Reuben Clark, Jr., "constitutes the marvelous genius of this unrivaled document. . . . It was here that the divine inspiration came. It was truly a miracle." [^7]

The independence of each branch may best be appreciated as we consider provisions within the Constitution that protect one branch from the other. Thus, the president of the United States protects himself by a veto power and promises of patronage. The Congress protects itself by setting its own pay, making its own rules, and judging its own members. The Supreme Court has a lifetime tenure and may not have salaries reduced during that tenure.

In two centuries of application, this remarkable principle—separation of powers—has demonstrated that one branch may prove to be a check on the human tendency to usurp more power to its own branch. The term Watergate has become almost synonymous with the abuse of power, but we should also remember that two branches of government—the legislative and the judicial—successfully and cooperatively checked such an abuse of power by the executive branch.

A third way the power of government is limited is that checks and balances were incorporated into the Constitution. In order to maintain the independence of each branch, the founders provided that steps could be taken to check usurpation by another branch to protect its own independence (balance). The way the framers incorporated these checks and balances throughout the Constitution was ingenious.

Congress checks the president by refusing to appropriate money to the executive branch. By majority vote, it may reject presidential appointments and administrative agencies. The Senate can reject any treaties made by the president, since a two-thirds vote of the Senate is required to ratify treaties. The president may take action toward war, but only Congress can declare it. The House of Representatives can impeach a president (charge him with malfeasance of office), but only the Senate, who approves lifetime appointments, can try those officers who are charged with impeachable offenses.

Congress checks the judicial department by its power to abolish lower courts, and it may limit the courts' appellate jurisdiction because the jurisdiction is subject to "such exceptions, and under such regulations as the Congress shall make." Congress can also impeach federal judges.

The president can veto any legislation by the Congress, although his veto can be overridden by a two-thirds vote of both houses. The president can, with the approval of the Senate, influence the direction of the court by his power to appoint federal judges.

The Supreme Court can check the other two branches by declaring legislation by Congress or acts by the president unconstitutional.

Each branch of the government was also made subject to different political pressures. The president was to be chosen by electors, senators by state legislatures, representatives by the people, and the Supreme Court by the president with the consent of the Senate.

The use of checks and balances was, as John Adams said, "to create delays and multiply diversities of interests, by which the tendency on a sudden to violate them may be counteracted." [^8]

The original Constitution provided for both direct representation (representatives elected directly by the people) and indirect representation (officers of government elected by legislative bodies who were elected by the people). These two forms of representation were deliberately devised by the framers to protect minority rights.

As a "concession to the democratic principle," to use Winston Churchill's phrase, the House of Representatives was chosen directly by the people. This body of the national legislature was directly responsible to the majority of the electorate. To make certain they would be responsive to the people, their term of office was limited to only two years.

The Senate, however, was elected by the state legislatures to a six-year term of office. Not being elected directly by the people, this body would not be so susceptible to exchanging political favors for votes and could therefore prevent precipitous or impulsive legislation by the lower House. In this way, a restraining check was placed on the House of Representatives, who would be most directly influenced by the will and demands of the majority. As a further protection, no legislation or bill could pass without the majority approval of both the House and the Senate. Thus the system protected the interests of the minority. [^10]

The original system, of course, was altered by the Seventeenth Amendment, so that today both House and Senate are elected by direct popular vote. Also, there are current efforts to further democratize this republican system of government by eliminating the electoral college, which would further rescind the feature of indirect representation for the executive. The effect of this action may well turn the government to the will of the majority, leaving minority and individual rights further unguarded and unprotected. Surely today we are more vulnerable as a society to "spectacles of turbulence and contention," as Madison warned, [^11] and this departure in philosophy from the original intent of the founders has made our legislative bodies, as the late Sir Henry Sumner Maine said, "the mere reflection of the average opinion of the multitude." [^12]

But as a further protection to the basic rights, the first ten amendments were added. The founders recognized that the people already had these rights and immunities before the Constitution came into existence, but the Bill of Rights was written to secure these liberties against government oppression.

These are the basic provisions of the first ten amendments:

All people possess at birth the rights to life, liberty, and property! Therefore, a governmental system was devised, based on "just and holy principles," to protect those rights. It was for this purpose that the Lord inspired the creation of the Constitution and then sanctioned the work performed by its framers. (See D&C 101:77-80; 98:6.)

The critical feature of the Constitution is not in the words, phrases, clauses, or provisions of the document itself, but rather in the "vigilant and manly spirit which actuates the people of America—a spirit which nourishes freedom, and in return is nourished by it." [^14] Therefore to preserve the advantages of liberty—and to maintain the spirit of the Constitution, there must be "a frequent recurrence to the fundamental principles of the constitution, and a constant adherence to those of piety, justice, moderation, temperance, industry and frugality." [^15]

Three immutable principles need constant affirmation if the spirit of the Constitution, not just the letter of the law, is to be kept alive and the rights of the people preserved.

The first fundamental is that all people are created by God and possess at birth inherent rights pertaining to life, liberty, and property. This philosophy is rooted in the Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of humanity and naturally fosters regard and respect toward one's fellows. When this belief is upheld, honesty, integrity, and respect for the property and possessions and person of others is demonstrated in personal relationships. When this belief does not prevail, as it does not among many societies and governments, the social consequences are apparent. People are seen as creatures of the government, and the state as the benefactor of their rights. President Ezra Taft Benson has profoundly written about the implications of this philosophy:

When human law is regarded as the only source of men's rights, any leader may act capriciously toward his fellow beings. He may deny privileges such as free expression and require even the forfeiture of life. The 20th century has witnessed monstrously evil consequences justified with euphemisms such as resettlement, pogroms, reeducation, until a final solution was decreed.

Likewise, consequences of agnosticism are enormous, particularly when this value is fostered by the state. How does a nation take a stand against the moral evils of totalitarianism if leaders do not recognize a source of law higher than man's? On what grounds may we morally object? The inhumanity of man toward his fellow man is the result of a forgotten relationship to God. When such a value is obscured, the relationship toward one's fellow beings also becomes ambivalent! [^16]

A second fundamental is that all people, as creations of God, are to act and not to be acted upon. By the use of their agency, they are accountable for their actions. People should have the freedom to determine their own fate and destiny, even if wrong. This includes the freedom to reason, speak, make economic and spiritual decisions, and provide for their own and their family's welfare without the dictates of government. This freedom unleashes their initiative, inventiveness, and creative potential. Personal and national prosperity soon follow. But when these rights are denied expression, people become spiritually enslaved, human progress is inhibited, and misery follows.

A third fundamental is that religious liberty is inextricably bound to political and economic freedoms. The four great freedoms, freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, freedom of the press, and freedom of religion, are interrelated and cannot be treated separately. As Samuel Adams noted, they rise and fall together. The Reverend John Witherspoon, president of Princeton and signer of the Declaration of Independence, similarly stated, "There is not a single instance in history in which civil liberty was lost, and religious liberty preserved entire. If we yield up our temporal property, we at the same time deliver the conscience into bondage." [^17]

The establishment of the American republic, based on a written constitution, created a unique philosophy that has permeated the free world. It has given the world an example of prosperity never before witnessed in its history. It has kindled a desire on the part of millions of immigrants to come to this country for opportunity and freedom. It has provided an example of the sanctity of human rights, property ownership, and respect for law, justice, and freedom. That is why the United States Constitution is emulated by all who love liberty. And that is why it is the charter of liberty for all people.

---
Notas:
[^2] The phrase is taken from Thomas Jefferson's First Inaugural Address, The Annals of America, 23 volumes (Chicago: Encyclopedia Britannica, 1973), 4:145.
[^3] In 1820, the Northern States had a population of slightly over two million, with 105 members in the House of Representatives. The Southern, or slave states, had 4,485,000 people and 81 representatives.
[^4] The compromise "forever prohibited" slavery in parts of the Louisiana purchase north of the 36° 30° north latitude, which was the line marking the westward extension of Missouri's southern border. The Missouri Compromise was later repealed in 1854 by the Kansas-Nebraska Act, which allowed states to decide the issue for themselves.
[^5] Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols., 2nd ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51.) 1:426-27, 437-38.
[^6] Ibid. 1:393.
[^7] Ibid. 1:454.
[^8] Ibid. 3:59.
[^10] Ibid. 3:175.
[^11] Ibid. 3:304.
[^12] "The total value of the property destroyed in Missouri, which belonged to the Saints, is beyond our knowledge. It was estimated to be not less than two million dollars, from the time they first settled in that state until their expulsion. . . . In the appeal made to Congress and the President of the United States, in 1839, the amount of their losses was estimated at two million dollars. Claims against Missouri for the losses were presented to Congress in the sum of $1,381,044.00, and this represented only 491 individuals; many others who lost property, entered no claims for damages against that state." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1973], pp. 209-10.)
[^14] Ibid. 4:80.
[^15] Ibid.
[^16] See History of the Church 4:90-92 for the complete statement of the Congressional Committee's report. After receiving the unfavorable report, the Church adopted a series of resolutions in the April 1840 general conference that condemned the congressional report as "unconstitutional" and urged the First Presidency to "appeal our case to the Court of Heaven." (See History of the Church 4:107-9.)
[^17] Ibid. 6:56-57.
