William O. Nelson, Charter of Liberty: The Inspired Origin and Prophetic Destiny of the Constitution ( 1987)

5

"That Every Man Might Be Accountable"

I the Lord will hold the courts, with the officers of government, and the nation responsible for their acts towards the inhabitants of Zion.

Revelation to President Wilford Woodruff

Sunday, November 24, 1889

Well known among the Latter-day Saints is the fact that the Lord gave sanction to the Constitution of the United States, but not well understood is the historic context out of which the revelations that pertain to the Constitution of the United States were given. Nor is it commonly understood why the Constitution is regarded in Latter-day Saint theology as essential in furthering the kingdom of God on this earth.

In the design of heaven, it was not sufficient that the colonies just be free and separate from England. This was to be a united republic, an ensign of liberty to all other nations. It was also to provide a cradle of freedom for an infant Church whose mission it is to establish Zion. God foreordained that from the shores of America, hosts of emissaries would bring the gospel of the restoration to all people "for the law shall go forth of Zion." (Micah 4:2.)

Prophets of God, past and present, foresaw the destiny of America and wrote of its glory. The Prophet Joseph Smith declared that America, both the northern and southern continents, comprise the land of Zion. [^1] At a spot central to the United States of America, the Lord designated a place for a future city to be called "the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God." (D&C 45:66-67.) It is an Article of Faith to Latter-day Saints that Jesus Christ shall eventually come in His glory to a holy sanctuary in that city.

Before Christ's glorious appearance, righteous men and women will gather from the various portions of the earth to establish a city of holiness to their God, crowned with a temple to the Most High. This will be done by members of the true church who have covenanted with God to forsake their sins and to become sanctified before Him. They will bear His priesthood, claim His name, perform ordinances in His name, and promulgate His gospel to all people and nations. In contrast to the greedy, selfish, and materialistic focus of the culture about them, this group of Saints will be unified in purpose, righteous in action, purified in motive, and unselfish in the care of the poor and needy among them. To imagine a society of people motivated by charity, concern, and cooperation rather than greed is to envision Christianity in its ideal state.

The focus of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints upon this noble goal from its beginning is not the pursuit of a utopian scheme. It is a hope that future Saints may attain to the same measure of goodness achieved by the society of the prophet Enoch when God approvingly called them Zion because of their righteousness (see Moses 7:18) it is compliance with the law of God to the Church in this dispensation to "bring forth and establish the cause of Zion" (D&C 6:6) it is faith in the word of the Lord concerning His promise that Zion will be built on the American continent (Article of Faith 10). But before this vision could be realized, there had to exist a nation where freedom of religion could be enjoyed in order that the Church of Christ would be able to declare its message and carry out its divine mission to establish Zion.

Between the implementation of the Constitution in 1789 and the time in which the priesthood of God was returned to the earth in 1829 was an interval of four decades. In that interval, two events took place that, in retrospect, served the purposes of God in laying the foundation of Zion in the American continent.

First was the declaration of the Monroe Doctrine—a unilateral policy of the United States government that provided protection for both North and South America from European interference.

Three administrations of U. S. Presidents (Washington, Adams, and Jefferson) wisely and successfully followed a foreign policy of "peace, commerce, and honest friendship with all nations, entangling alliances with none." [^2]

During the administration of James Madison, the United States became involved in another war of independence with Britain, the first declared by Congress under the new Constitution. Though the United States lost most of the land battles, the war established the country as an industrial nation and a modest sea power; but more important, the war was its last controversy with Great Britain. Thereafter, America and Great Britain fought side by side as allies.

By 1822, many countries in South America had fought wars of revolution to free themselves from Spanish and Portuguese rule. In establishing independence, many of these countries established constitutions based on the Constitution of the United States, so the United States felt sympathetic to their efforts toward independence. But Russia, Austria, and Prussia urged France to help Spain and Portugal restore their monarchical governments in the Americas. Russia, meanwhile, was laying claim to western Canada. This provoked the Monroe administration to issue the famous Monroe Doctrine, which warned these European nations that any efforts toward further colonization would be viewed as a hostile act by the United States. The proclamation had a deterring effect on further colonization attempts, but its real effectiveness was attributable to the sea power of America's new ally, Great Britain.

The Monroe Doctrine established the United States as a recognized international power that was able to safeguard its own borders and prevent incursion by European countries into the Latin American countries. In a prophetic sense, the land of Zion was protected from European domination.

A second significant event took place under the administration of President Thomas Jefferson with the Louisiana Purchase of 1803. This not only afforded western expansion, but it also brought into the United States the territory that would eventually be the centerplace of Zion.

Thus in those four decades (1789-1829), the United States was able to protect the hemisphere from foreign encroachment and had added Florida and the Louisiana territory to its borders. Internally the country was strengthened by feelings of nationalism. Manufacturing and inventions made the new nation a part of the Industrial Revolution. The country was coming of age, enabling it to provide a cradle of freedom for the birthplace of the Church of Jesus Christ.

The new Church, founded in 1830 in the state of New York, was established by revelation on the premise that the ancient church of Christ had been lost through apostasy. By the end of 1830, the Lord commanded the Church to move to Ohio. Kirtland became headquarters for the Church, and for a period of seven years revelations were received by the Prophet Joseph Smith that established and expanded the government of God on earth and laid a foundation for the society of Zion. But it was not until the Prophet brought a portion of the Church's membership into western Missouri that the significance of that place and the Lord's purposes were revealed.

To a number of elders who had come from Kirtland, Ohio, to Missouri with the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord revealed that "Missouri . . . is the land which I have appointed and consecrated for the gathering of the saints. Wherefore, this is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion. . . . Behold, the place which is now called Independence is the center place; and a spot for the temple is lying westward. (D&C 57:13; italics added.)

On August 1, 1831, the Lord revealed to the Saints in Missouri that He had brought them here that they "might be honored in laying the foundation, and in bearing record of the land upon which the Zion of God shall stand." (D&C 58:7; italics added.) Zion was promised to be a condition of glory, but it would not be brought about until after "much tribulation." (See D&C 58:3-5.) That tribulation for the early settlers in Missouri was not long waiting.

Missouri, a slave state, had applied for statehood in 1818. This precipitated a national controversy that centered not on the morality of slavery, but on the objection of the Northern States that by admitting new slave states, they would receive a disproportionate representation in Congress, since 60 percent of the slaves were counted to determine the size of the states' delegations in the House of Representatives. In 1819, the Union had eleven free states and eleven slave states. Northerners saw Missouri's inclusion into the Union as an attempt to increase the voting power of the South. [^3] By the famous Missouri Compromise, Missouri was permitted to enter the Union as a slave state [^4] and Maine as a free state, thus keeping the balance between slave and free states equal.

When Church members settled in Jackson County, there was a natural ideological conflict between them and the Missouri settlers. The old settlers were from the South and upheld slavery. They resented the Mormons, most of whom were from the eastern states, and feared that they would gain political control of the state. The problem was further exacerbated by the fact that some Church members unwisely let it be known that Missouri was to be the place of their inheritance and the city of Zion. Great resentment by other non-Mormon citizens was generated when the Church members purchased land in western Missouri. In 1833 the hostility came to a head.

On July 20, 1833, a group of Missourians presented to the elders of the Church a list of "demands" that no Mormons would thereafter settle in Jackson County and that those already there would give a "definite pledge of their intention within a reasonable time to remove out of the county." Also, the Church was to refrain from publishing their newspaper, the Evening and Morning Star. These demands, of course, required a forfeiture of property rights, religious freedom, and freedom of the press, clearly a violation of the Constitution of the United States. When presented to local Church elders, the demands were refused. The local non-Mormon citizens responded by destroying the press of the Star and by tarring and feathering the editor and his assistant.

Three days later, a mob of about five hundred men threatened the scourging and death of every Latter-day Saint man, woman, and child if they would not leave Jackson County. Presented with this prospect, the elders of the Church were forced to agree to these terms: By January 1, 1834, the leading elders, along with their families, were to leave, in addition to one-half of the Church members; the other half was to leave by April 1. If the terms were met, the Missourians promised to refrain from violence. That promise was not honored, and the depredations and persecution that followed became a context for important revelations to the Saints relative to upholding constitutional government.

Kirtland, Ohio, the headquarters of the Church, was about eight hundred miles from Independence, Missouri. Communication had not come to the First Presidency concerning the extent of the persecution in Missouri, so Oliver Cowdery was sent to advise them. Two weeks before Oliver Cowdery arrived at Kirtland, the Lord told Joseph Smith, "It is my will that my people should observe to do all things whatsoever I command them. And that law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind, and is justifiable before me. . . .

"Therefore, I, the Lord, justify you, and your brethren of my church, in befriending that which is the constitutional law of the land; and as pertaining to law of man, whatsoever is more or less than this, cometh of evil. I, the Lord God, make you free, therefore ye are free indeed; and the law also maketh you free. Nevertheless, when the wicked rule the people mourn. Wherefore, honest men and wise men should be sought for diligently; and good and wise men ye should observe to uphold; otherwise whatsoever is less than these cometh of evil." (D&C 98:4-10.)

The Church was commanded to renounce war and proclaim peace, an extraordinary request for forbearance under their circumstances. The Saints were also told under what circumstances they could retaliate against their enemies. They were given the "law of Nephi," namely, if their enemy struck them, they were commanded to forgive at least three times, after which the Lord would deliver their enemy into their hands. (D&C 98:23-32.) They were told that the only conditions by which they would be justified in going to war was that their enemies refused repeated peace offers, and only if the Lord commanded. (D&C 98:32-38.) If their enemies repented, they were to forgive. (D&C 98:39-43.) Seek peace, forbear, forgive your enemies—trying counsel under circumstances where one's life, liberty, and property are threatened!

When the First Presidency learned more fully of the sufferings of the Saints in Missouri, they sent word for the Saints to seek redress from the governor. The Missouri Saints did so. After receiving the petition of grievances, Governor Dunklin replied that they should take their grievances to court. Even though the advice was followed, it was futile because the local judges, clerks, and constable were in conspiracy with the lieutenant governor of the state, Lilburn Boggs, to dispossess the Mormons of their property. In contravention of their own agreement not to resort to violence, the local citizens of Jackson County took the law into their own hands and proclaimed open war against the local Church members. Repeated attacks were made on Mormon communities, and much property was destroyed. At the direction of Boggs, the state militia was called out to suppress the attacks, but within the ranks of the militia were those who greatly opposed the Mormons. The militia demanded that the Saints surrender their arms. They agreed to do so on the condition that the mob also disarm. When Boggs gave his word to that agreement, the elders of the Church complied, but arms were never taken from the mob. With the members of the Church disarmed, the mob commenced a murderous attack against them. They destroyed 203 homes and forced into exile twelve hundred members of the Church.

The Prophet's journal history recounts some of the nightmarish scenes of depredation:

Thursday night, the 31st of October, gave the Saints in Zion abundant proof that no pledge on the part of their enemies, written or verbal, was longer to be regarded; for on that night, between forty and fifty persons in number, many of whom were armed with guns, proceeded against a branch of the Church, west of the Big Blue, and unroofed and partly demolished ten dwelling houses; and amid the shrieks and screams of the women and children, whipped and beat in a savage and brutal manner, several of the men: while their horrid threats frightened women and children into the wilderness. Such of the men as could escape fled for their lives; for very few of them had arms, neither were they organized; and they were threatened with death if they made any resistance; such therefore as could not escape by flight, received a pelting with stones and a beating with guns and whips. On Friday, the first of November, women and children sallied forth from their gloomy retreats, to contemplate with heartrending anguish the ravages of a ruthless mob, in the lacerated and bruised bodies of their husbands, and in the destruction of their houses, and their furniture. Houseless and unprotected by the arm of the civil law in Jackson county, the dreary month of November staring them in the face and loudly proclaiming an inclement season at hand; the continual threats of the mob that they would drive every "Mormon" from the county; and the inability of many to move, because of their poverty, caused an anguish of heart indescribable.

On Friday, night, the 1st of November, a party of the mob proceeded to attack a branch of the Church settled on the prairie, about twelve or fourteen miles from the town of Independence. . . .

The same night, (Friday), another party in Independence commenced stoning houses, breaking down doors and windows and destroying furniture. . . .

Thursday, November 7th, the shores of the Missouri river began to be lined on both sides of the ferry, with men, women and children; goods, wagons, boxes, chests, and provisions; while the ferrymen were busily employed in crossing them over. When night again closed upon the Saints, the wilderness had much the appearance of a camp meeting. Hundreds of people were seen in every direction; some in tents, and some in the open air, around their fires, while the rain descended in torrents. Husbands were inquiring for their wives, and women for their husbands; parents for children, and children for parents. Some had the good fortune to escape with their families, household goods, and some provisions; while others knew not the fate of their friends, and had lost all their effects. The scene was indescribable, and would have melted the hearts of any people upon earth, except the blind oppressor, and the prejudiced and ignorant bigot. . . .

The Saints who fled from Jackson county, took refuge in the neighboring counties, chiefly in Clay county, the inhabitants of which received them with some degree of kindness. Those who fled to the county of Van Buren were again driven, and compelled to flee, and these who fled to Lafayette county, were soon expelled, or the most of them, and had to move wherever they could find protection. [^5]

Many died in that ordeal, but the majority found refuge in neighboring counties. Thus their residence in a county and land regarded as sacred to them was denied; the property they had lawfully purchased was forfeited. Reflecting on the terrible injustice to the Saints, the Prophet lamented: "The heart sickens at the recital. . . . More than once, those people, in this boasted land of liberty, were brought into jeopardy, and threatened with expulsion or death, because they desired to worship God according to the revelations of heaven, the constitution of their country, and the dictates of their own consciences. Oh, liberty, how art thou fallen!" [^6]

When the Prophet received word about the forcible expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County, he wrote the Saints a letter of great empathy and love, reminding them what the Lord had said earlier: "After much tribulation come the blessings." (D&C 58:4; italics added.) He then confided that the Lord had not answered him regarding two questions: (1) "Why God has suffered so great a calamity to come upon Zion, and what the great moving cause of this great affliction is"; and (2) "By what means He will return her back to her inheritance, with songs of everlasting joy upon her head." [^7] The answers came six days later—December 16, 1834—at Kirtland, Ohio.

Two reasons were given for the affliction and persecution of the Missouri Saints. First, they needed to be chastened and tried, "even as Abraham," and, second, the Lord had permitted the sufferings to come to them in consequence of their transgressions, which were "jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires." (D&C 101:2, 4, 6.) The Saints had been "slow to hearken to the voice of the Lord their God;" therefore, he was slow to hear their petitions. Nevertheless, the Lord promised, "I will own them, and they shall be mine in that day when I shall come to make up my jewels. . . . I will not utterly cast them off." (D&C 101:3, 7, 9.) Most significantly, the Lord promised, "Zion shall not be moved out of her place, notwithstanding her children are scattered." (D&C 101:17.) In due time, the pure in heart would return and build up "the waste places of Zion." (D&C 101:18.) The Saints were commanded to continue to seek redress from judges, governors, and presidents; and if the president would not heed them, the Lord would "vex the nation." For, he said, "It is my will that they should continue to importune for redress, and redemption, by the hands of those who are placed as rulers and are in authority over you." (D&C 101:76.) The reason they were to use constitutional procedures rather than retaliation was given as follows: "According to the laws and constitution of the people, which I have suffered to be established, and should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles; that every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment." (D&C 101:77-78; italics added.)

The main body of the Saints found temporary refuge in Clay County. But when outbreaks of violence threatened them there, they were requested to leave. They had been driven from New York to Ohio, to Jackson County to Clay County; now they were forced to move again.

The Missouri legislature created Caldwell County in 1836 as a place where the Mormons could settle. The members of the Church purchased lands and once again began to build a community. They also settled in two other counties, Daviess and Carroll.

Their brief peace and respite in northern Missouri, however, lasted less than two years. Concerned that the Mormons might become a dominant political majority in the state, their old enemies aroused suspicion and jealousy. A small community political election became the tinder that eventually fueled dormant flames of hostility toward the Mormons and resulted in an "ultimate solution"—an extermination order by the governor—and the expulsion of the Mormons from the state of Missouri.

August 6, 1838, was election day in Gallatin, Daviess County. William Peniston, an anti-Mormon candidate for the legislature, stirred up the voters with the charge that if the Mormons were allowed to vote, the other settlers would lose their rights. When the Mormons went to vote, they were prevented from doing so. A fight ensued, and even though a small group of Mormon voters (about twelve) were badly outnumbered, they held their ground. The Prophet later commended them for so vigorously contending for their constitutional rights and religious freedom. [^8]

When the Prophet Joseph Smith came to Gallatin to investigate the matter, the local justice of the peace certified that he would uphold the Constitution of the United States and not support the mob. But two days later he, along with Peniston and other anti-Mormons, signed an affidavit that 500 armed Mormons had descended on the town of Gallatin for the purpose of driving out the old settlers. Such a claim, of course, was a blatant falsehood.

Lilburn Boggs, an avowed enemy of the Mormons, was now governor of the state. When he received false reports that the Mormons were in a state of insurrection and were preparing for war against the old settlers, he ordered out the militia from each of the northern counties—a force of about twenty-eight hundred men. In their ranks were many bitter enemies of the Church. Armed with the sanction of the highest authority in the state, they could now legally carry out their persecutions on the Mormons.

The community of DeWitt, in Carroll County, was laid under seige. Even though his own militia officers informed Governor Boggs that actions of the Saints were defensive and that there was nothing to fear from the Mormons, he responded, "The quarrel [is] between the Mormons and the mob," and he said that they could fight it out. [^9] Appeals were even made on behalf of the Mormons by nonmembers, but Boggs ignored them. Finally, the Saints were compelled to leave DeWitt.

In Caldwell County, the militia had captured three Mormon settlers. David W. Patten, a Church apostle, led a small company against the militia at Crooked River to rescue the prisoners. A battle ensued, and Patten and Gideon Carter were killed. Another died later from wounds. The militia reported to the governor and falsely accused the Mormons of promoting a civil war. On October 27, 1838, an infamous day in the history of Missouri, the state's governor issued an "Order of Extermination." "The Mormons," he wrote, "must be treated as enemies and must be exterminated or driven from the state, if necessary for the public good." [^10]

Three days later a mob militia carried out the brutal massacre at Haun's Mill, where seventeen defenseless people were shot and killed.

The day following, the militia attacked Far West, plundered the town, destroyed the property, whipped the men, and raped the women, some of whom died. The Prophet and others were arrested, and the militia held a court martial. Without legal defense, or without making an appearance before the court, the prisoners were sentenced to death by firing squad. General Alexander Doniphan was ordered to carry out the execution but defied the orders of his superiors on the basis that it was "cold-blooded murder." His heroic action prevented their execution. Subsequently, Joseph Smith and his companions were incarcerated at the Richmond, Missouri, prison to await trial. After a sham trial, they were imprisoned in the jail at Liberty, Missouri, for five months under the most barbaric conditions. Despite these illegalities, the Prophet magnanimously wrote of the Constitution:

We say, that the Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner; it is to all those who are privileged with the sweets of its liberty, like the cooling shades and refreshing waters of a great rock in a thirsty and weary land. It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded from the burning rays of the sun.

We . . . are deprived of the protection of its glorious principles, by the cruelty of the cruel, by those who only look for the time being, for pasturage like the beasts of the field, only to fill themselves; and forget that the "Mormons," as well as the Presbyterians, and those of every other class and description, have equal rights to partake of the fruits of the great tree of our national liberty. But not withstanding we see what we see, and feel what we feel, and know what we know, yet that fruit is no less precious and delicious to our taste; we cannot be weaned from the milk, neither can we be driven from the breast; neither will we deny our religion because of the hand of oppression; but we will hold on until death.

We say that God is true; that the Constitution of the United States is true. [^11]

When the Saints were forced to leave Jackson County in 1833, they numbered about twelve hundred. All their property was confiscated. When they departed Clay County, they also left valuable property. Now, forced to leave the state, they numbered between twelve and fifteen thousand, and the property left behind was estimated at a value of over two million dollars. [^12] And what price does one place on the loss of innocent lives—men, women, and children—whose "crime" was their religious beliefs?

The Saints eventually sought financial compensation from the Missouri legislature. Without an investigation, but to salve their consciences, a meager sum of $2,000 was appropriated for the "citizens" of Caldwell County, most of which never reached the Saints.

Obeying the Lord's command that "if the governor heed them not, let them importune at the feet of the president," the Prophet Joseph Smith went to Washington, D.C., in 1839 and on two occasions visited the president of the United States, Martin Van Buren, to detail their persecutions and grievances. This was done after the Church leaders had appealed to the governor of the state of Missouri and to the legislature of the state, all to no avail. The reason for the appeal was to bring to the attention of the people of the United States the inhumane treatment given to fellow citizens of the nation. In the appeal, the Prophet Joseph Smith said:

I ask the citizens of this Republic whether such a state of things is to be suffered to pass unnoticed, and the hearts of widows, orphans, and patriots to be broken, and their wrongs left without redress? No! I invoke the genius of our Constitution. I appeal to the patriotism of Americans to stop this unlawful and unholy procedure; and pray that God may defend this nation from the dreadful effects of such outrages.

Is there no virtue in the body politic? Will not the people rise up in their majesty, and with that promptitude and zeal which are so characteristic of them, discountenance such proceedings, by bringing the offenders to that punishment which they so richly deserve, and save the nation from that disgrace and ultimate ruin, which otherwise must inevitably fall upon it? [^13]

In his second interview with President Van Buren, the Prophet reported that the president listened with great reluctance and then replied, "Gentlemen, your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you. If I take up for you I shall lose the vote of Missouri." [^14] This reaction from the president of the United States provoked the Prophet to write:["[Van Buren's] whole course went to show that he was an officeseeker, that self-aggrandizement was his ruling passion, and that justice and righteousness were no part of his composition. I found him such a man as I could not conscientiously support at the head of our noble Republic." [^15]

A further appeal was made to the Congress of the United States, but after a consideration of the charges, a congressional committee concluded that the "petitioners" (the members of the Church) "must seek relief in the courts of judicature of the state of Missouri." [^16]

In spite of the fact that the Prophet was unable to obtain any legal satisfaction for the Saints by seeking redress from the courts of law, or from the nation's highest leaders, he again affirmed his loyalty to the Constitution but noted one defect:

I am the greatest advocate of the Constitution of the United States there is on the earth. In my feelings I am always ready to die for the protection of the weak and oppressed in their just rights. The only fault I find with the Constitution is, it is not broad enough to cover the whole ground.

Although it provides that all men shall enjoy religious freedom, yet it does not provide the manner by which that freedom can be preserved, nor for the punishment of Government officers who refuse to protect the people in their religious rights, or punish those mobs, states, or communities who interfere with the rights of the people on account of their religion. Its sentiments are good, but it provides no means of enforcing them. It has but this one fault. Under its provision, a man or a people who are able to protect themselves can get along well enough; but those who have the misfortune to be weak or unpopular are left to the merciless rage of popular fury.

The Constitution should contain a provision that every officer of the Government who should neglect or refuse to extend the protection guaranteed in the Constitution should be subject to capital punishment; and then the president of the United States would not say, "Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you," a governor issue exterminating orders, or judges say, "The men ought to have the protection of law, but it won't please the mob; the men must die, anyhow, to satisfy the clamor of the rabble; they must be hung, or Missouri be damned to all eternity." Executive writs could be issued when they ought to be, and not be made instruments of cruelty to oppress the innocent, and persecute men whose religion is unpopular. [^17]

In the midst of the Missouri persecutions, the Saints were accused of disloyalty to the government, sedition, and rebellion. They had every reason to feel that their government, under the Constitution, had failed them. Yet, in spite of the injustices that came to them, they issued a declaration of belief that was included with the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, now designated as D&C 134. In the context of their deprived rights and loss of property in Missouri, the document constitutes a remarkable statement in support of government, law and order, and religious freedom:

We believe that governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man; [^18] and that he holds men accountable for their acts in relation to them, both in making laws and administering them, for the good and safety of society.

We believe that no government can exist in peace, except such laws are framed and held inviolate as will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right and control of property, and the protection of life.

We believe that all governments necessarily require civil officers and magistrates to enforce the laws of the same; and that such as will administer the law in equity and justice should be sought for and upheld by the voice of the people if a republic, or the will of the sovereign.

We believe that religion is instituted of God; and that men are amenable to him, and to him only, for the exercise of it, unless their religious opinions prompt them to infringe upon the rights and liberties of others; but we do not believe that human law has a right to interfere in prescribing rules of worship to bind the consciences of men, nor dictate forms for public or private devotion; that the civil magistrate should restrain crime, but never control conscience; should punish guilt, but never suppress the freedom of the soul.

We believe that all men are bound to sustain and uphold the respective governments in which they reside, while protected in their inherent and inalienable rights by the laws of such governments; and that sedition and rebellion are unbecoming every citizen thus protected, and should be punished accordingly; and that all governments have a right to enact such laws as in their own judgments are best calculated to secure the public interest; at the same time, however, holding sacred the freedom of conscience. [^19]

We believe that every man should be honored in his station, rulers and magistrates as such, being placed for the protection of the innocent and the punishment of the guilty; and that to the laws all men show respect and deference, as without them peace and harmony would be supplanted by anarchy and terror; human laws being instituted for the express purpose of regulating our interests as individuals and nations, between man and man; and divine laws given of heaven, prescribing rules on spiritual concerns, for faith and worship, both to be answered by man to his Maker.

We believe that rulers, states, and governments have a right, and are bound to enact laws for the protection of all citizens in the free exercise of their religious belief; but we do not believe that they have a right in justice to deprive citizens of this privilege, or proscribe them in their opinions, so long as a regard and reverence are shown to the laws and such religious opinions do not justify sedition nor conspiracy.

We believe that the commission of crime should be punished according to the nature of the offense; that murder, treason, robbery, theft, and the breach of the general peace, in all respects, should be punished according to their criminality and their tendency to evil among men, by the laws of that government in which the offense is committed; and for the public peace and tranquility all men should step forward and use their ability in bringing offenders against good laws to punishment.

We do not believe it just to mingle religious influence with civil government, whereby one religious society is fostered and another proscribed in its spiritual privileges, and the individual rights of its members, as citizens, denied. . . .

We believe that men should appeal to the civil law for redress of all wrongs and grievances, where personal abuse is inflicted or the right of property or character infringed, where such laws exist as will protect the same; but we believe that all men are justified in defending themselves, their friends, and property, and the government, from the unlawful assaults and encroachments of all persons in times of exigency, where immediate appeal cannot be made to the laws, and relief afforded. (D&C 134:1-9, 11.)

In view of the fact that justice and humanity was denied Church members by a society that professed to uphold constitutional rights, how could Church leaders continue to urge the Church members to uphold constitutional government? Two principles—both a result of revelation—need to be kept in mind.

First, God had promised the Saints protection and blessings if they would live in accordance with all of His commandments which He provided for the establishment of Zion. These commandments were not followed, particularly the living of the law of consecration. In a revelation in June 1834, the Lord rebuked the Saints and said that because they did not "impart their substance, as becometh saints, to the poor and afflicted among them . . . [they] must needs be chastened until they learn obedience, . . . by the things which they suffer." (D&C 105:3, 6; italics added.) With revelation as an indication to their character flaws, they regarded persecution as God's chastisement upon them.

But there was a second principle that involved their appeals for redress. The Constitution of the United States formed a government based on law. The law provided for redress and reparation when there was a deprivation of rights. By commandment, members of the Church were to uphold constitutional law, and to use it—not retaliation—as a means of redress. If injustices occurred, as they did with the early members of the Church, God would "vex the nation." President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote that "when the Saints . . . were denied their civil and religious rights, those officials were left without excuse, and the judgments of the Almighty which later came upon them during the Civil War, were justified." [^20]

In the latter part of the nineteenth century, when plural marriage was practiced, the federal government disenfranchised the Church and confiscated all of its property valued at over $50,000. Under the circumstances of this persecution, President Wilford Woodruff received the following revelation on November 24, 1889:

I the Lord hold the destiny of the Courts in your midst, and the destiny of this nation, and all other nations of the earth in mine own hands; all that I have revealed, and promised and decreed concerning the generation in which you live, shall come to pass, and no power shall stay my hand. . . . If the Saints will hearken unto my voice, and the counsel of my servants, the wicked shall not prevail. Let my servants, who officiate as your Counselors before the Courts, make their pleadings as they are moved upon by the Holy Spirit, without any further pledges from the Priesthood, and they shall be justified. I the Lord will hold the Courts, with the officers of government, and the nation responsible for their acts towards the inhabitants of Zion. I, Jesus Christ, the savior of the world, am in your midst. I am your advocate with the Father. . . . Search the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of me; also those revelations which I have given to my Servant Joseph, and to all my Servants since the world began, which are recorded in the records of divine truth. Those revelations contain the judgments of God, which are to be poured out upon all nations under the heavens, which include great babylon. These judgments are at the door, they will be fulfilled as God lives. Leave judgment with me, it is mine saith the Lord. [^21]

The persistent counsel of the Lord to Latter-day Saints is to uphold constitutional law, and, if injustices occur, to use the courts of the land to resolve the injustices. If justice is not received through these appeals, the Lord will hold the officers of the court responsible. In this manner, every person is made accountable before the Lord.

The Constitution of the United States is regarded by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as a fundamental part of its religious belief. Why? Because it guarantees freedom of religion and holds people accountable to preserve the rights of every person according to "just and holy principles." Contained in the Constitution is the proviso that "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof." That is a guarantee to every man and woman. Therefore, the members of the Church have duties as citizens to see that they use their influence "to keep church and state separated, to sustain civil power in its appropriate realm, and to stipulate in constitutions, in legislative enactments, in executive decrees, in judicial determinations, in every possible way, that men are free to worship as they will and not be subject to compulsion." [^22]

Only with the government of the United States has there been such a guarantee of religious freedom, but, as we have seen with the example of one religious body, when evil people violate this right to worship, they place not only themselves under the judgment of Almighty God, but the nation as well.

To paraphrase the Prophet Joseph Smith's statement during his imprisonment in Liberty Jail, "None but fools will trifle with the [rights] of men." [^23]

"Pending the overruling by Providence in favor of religious liberty, it is the duty of the saints to submit themselves to the laws of their country. Nevertheless, they should use every proper method, as citizens or subjects of their several governments, to secure for themselves and for all men the boon of freedom in religious service. It is not required of them to suffer without protect imposition by lawless persecutors, or through the operation of unjust laws; but their protests should be offered in legal and proper order. The saints have practically demonstrated their acceptance of the doctrine that it is better to suffer evil than to do wrong by purely human opposition to unjust authority. And if by thus submitting themselves to the laws of the land, in the event of such laws being unjust and subversive of human freedom, the people be prevented from doing the work appointed them of God, they are not to be held accountable for the failure to act under the higher law." (James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith, 29th edition [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1960], pp. 422-23.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Gordon S. Wood, The Creation of the American Republic, 1776-1787 (Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 1969), p. 68. Wood is citing discourses from eighteenth-century writers.
[^2] Garry Wills, Explaining America: The Federalist (New York: Penguin Books, 1981), p. 270.
[^3] George Washington, letter to Marquis de Lafayette, Writings of George Washington, 1745-1799, edited by John C. Fitzpatrick (Washington, D.C.: U. S. Government Printing Office, 1939), 29:410.
[^4] George Washington, The First Inaugural Address, April 30, 1789, ibid., 30:294.
[^5] Adams Family Correspondence, 4 vols., L. H. Butterfield et al., eds. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1963), 2:21.
[^6] John Adams, The Works of John Adams, edited by C. F. Adams (Boston: Little, Brown Co., 1851), 4:31.
[^7] John R. Howe, Jr., The Changing Political Thought of John Adams (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1966), p. 185.
[^8] The Federalist Papers (New York: The New American Library of World Literature, 1961), no. 57, p. 350.
[^9] Quoted in Jonathan Elliot, comp., The Debates in the Several State Conventions on the Adoption of the Federal Constitution, 5 vols. (Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Company, 1901), 2:536-37; italics added.
[^10] The Federalist Papers, no. 76, p. 458.
[^11] Wills, Explaining America, p. 269.
[^12] Ibid., pp. 268, 270.
[^13] Morton Borden, ed., The Antifederalist Papers (East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1965), p. 159.
[^14] Notes of The Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787 Reported by James Madison (Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1966), p. 654.
[^15] Ibid., p. 656.
[^16] Albert Henry Smyth, ed., The Writings of Benjamin Franklin, 10 volumes (New York: The Haskell House Publishers, 1970), 9:569.
[^17] "The State of American Values," U. S. News and World Report, December 9, 1985, pp. 52, 57.
[^18] Ibid., pp. 52, 55. The findings of the survey published by U. S. News and World Report was based on a survey conducted by the Roper Organization with more than a thousand Americans over the age of eighteen.
[^19] Ibid., p. 58.
[^20] Terry Eastland, "Teaching Morality in Public Schools," Wall Street Journal, February 22, 1982.
[^21] Ezra Taft Benson, "Cleansing the Inner Vessel," Ensign, May 1986, pp. 4-7.
[^22] McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1985), p. 684.
[^23] 23. History of the Church 3:295.
