William O. Nelson, Charter of Liberty: The Inspired Origin and Prophetic Destiny of the Constitution ( 1987)

EPILOGUE

"Let Us Become a Virtuous People"

If we would most truly enjoy the gift of Heaven, let us become a virtuous people; then shall we both deserve and enjoy it. While, on the other hand, if we are universally vicious and debauched in our manners, though the form of our Constitution carries the face of the most exalted freedom, we shall in reality be the most abject slaves.

Samuel Adams

The genius of constitutionalism as devised under the American system is that it created a republican form of government that guaranteed the states a government by representatives who would be elected by the people. Both the representatives and the people are thereby accountable before God for their actions. Revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1833 prescribed that the Constitution "should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles; . . . that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment." (D&C 101:77-78; italics added.)

How was liberty to be preserved under the new Constitution? In the minds of the founders, it depended on the virtue and wisdom of both the elected and the electorate. Gordon Wood, prize-winning historian, provided this insight into the eighteenth-century perspective:

In a republic, . . . each man must somehow be persuaded to submerge his personal wants into the greater good of the whole. This willingness of the individual to sacrifice his private interests for the good of the community—such patriotism or love of country—the eighteenth century termed "public virtue." A republic was such a delicate polity precisely because it demanded an extraordinary moral character in the people. Every state in which the people participated needed a degree of virtue; but a republic which rested solely on the people absolutely required it. Although a particular structural arrangement of the government in a republic might temper the necessity for public virtue, ultimately "no model of government whatever can equal the importance of this principle, nor afford proper safety and security without it."

"Without some portion of this generous principle, anarchy and confusion would immediately ensue, the jaring interests of individuals, regarding themselves only, and indifferent to the welfare of others, would still further heighten the distressing scene, and with the assistance of the selfish passions, it would end in the ruin and subversion of the state." The eighteenth-century mind was thoroughly convinced that a popularly based government "cannot be supported without Virtue." Only with a public-spirited, self-sacrificing people could the authority of a popularly elected ruler be obeyed, but "more by the virtue of the people, than by the terror of his power." Because virtue was truly the lifeblood of the republic, the thoughts and hopes surrounding this concept of public spirit gave the Revolution its socially radical character—an expected alteration in the very behavior of the people, "laying the foundation in a constitution, not without or over, but within the subjects." [^1]

Virtue in the minds of the founders meant placing the interest of country before the interest of self. Frugality, industry, temperance, and good moral character were essential characteristics to maintain the spirit of unity and solidarity among the nation. Recognized was the fact that there could be no republic without virtue. Unvirtuous character, which seeks its own interests, was regarded as inimical to the republic because it neglected the good of the whole people. Garry Wills has suggested that we cannot historically explain America without understanding "the code of public virtue espoused without embarrassment by its most distinguished leaders." [^2]

So let us consider the testimonials of a few of the most distinguished leaders as they espoused the code.

George Washington:

The general Government . . . can never be in danger of degenerating into a . . . despotic or oppressive form, so long as there shall remain any virtue in the body of the People. [^3]

There is no truth more thoroughly established, than that there exists in the economy and course of nature, an indissoluble union between virtue and happiness, between duty and advantage, between the genuine maxims of an honest and magnanimous policy, and the solid rewards of public prosperity and felicity. [^4]

John Adams:

Statesmen . . . may plan and speculate for Liberty, but it is Religion and Morality alone, which can establish the Principles upon which Freedom can securely stand. . . . The only foundation of a free Constitution, is pure Virtue, and if this cannot be inspired into our People, in a greater Measure, than they have it now, They may change their Rulers, and the forms of Government, but they will not obtain a lasting Liberty. [^5]

On another occasion, Adams wrote: "Liberty can no more exist without virtue and independence, than the body can live and move without a soul." [^6] The Constitution, he emphasized, "was made only for a moral and religious people. It is wholly inadequate to the government of any other." [^7]

James Madison:

The aim of every political constitution is, or ought to be, first to obtain for rulers men who possess most wisdom to discern, and most virtue to pursue, the common good of the society; and in the next place, to take the most effectual precautions for keeping them virtuous whilst they continue to hold their public trust. [^8]

Later in the Virginia Ratifying Convention he said:

Is there no virtue among us? If there be not, we are in a wretched situation. No theoretical checks, no form of government, can render us secure. To suppose that any form of government will secure liberty or happiness without any virtue in the people, is a chimerical idea. If there be sufficient virtue and intelligence in the community, it will be exercised in the selection of these men; so that we do not depend upon their virtue, or put confidence in our rulers, but in the people who are to choose them. [^9]

Alexander Hamilton:

The institution of delegated power implies that there is a portion of virtue and honor among mankind, which may be a reasonable foundation of confidence. [^10]

Was the view unrealistic that virtuous individuals would serve the interest of their community and nation? Garry Wills answers:

Perhaps. But extraordinary men made the vision a reality, at least for a while. They were a privileged few, but they insisted on honest performance within their meritocracy. The most virtuous man did lead Virginia into war—Peyton Randolph. The most virtuous man did conduct that war and form the nation and rule it without Napoleonic excess—George Washington. A galaxy of distinguished men devoted themselves to public service, and launched the first new nation of the Enlightenment, the first successful modern republic formed on a rational plan. States did surrender their sovereignty to form a nobler whole. We cannot suppose the experiment they understood was bound to succeed. What kept us from falling back into monarchy, as France did after her great burst of revolutionary energy? Madison would not have hesitated one minute in answering that question. The public virtue kept us republican. It is the only thing that can. [^11]

But why does Wills belabor the point that public virtue was so imbedded in the founders' consciousness? Because today, Americans "do not even pretend [to] choose . . . politicians for their virtue. That kind of talk would look sappy or insincere in our political discourse. But it was no such thing for Madison and his contemporaries. . . . Without him and his like, without their ideals, their virtuous labors for the common good, there would have been no America to be preserved and passed on through the necessary changes of the centuries." [^12]

A republic preserved by the virtue of an electorate and the elected—that was the grand view of the founders! And no one better represented the reasoning behind their perspective than Virginia's Richard Henry Lee, who said, "A virtuous people make just laws, and good laws tend to preserve unchanged a virtuous people. A virtuous and happy people by laws uncongenial to their characters, may easily be gradually changed into servile and depraved creatures." [^13]

The founders' view about virtue in the electorate was consistent with a revelation, given to Joseph Smith in August 1833, wherein the Saints were enjoined to diligently seek out honest, wise, and good people and then uphold them in public office. (See D&C 98:10.)

Why only the virtuous in public office? Virtuous representatives will act with the public interest and not their own. They will not display a "fervid but false solicitude for the unfortunate" in order to garner votes. They are willing to sacrifice self-interest and their own ideas for the good of society. This was one of the grand achievements of the Philadelphia Convention. The most eminent of the statesmen submerged their own views in the interest of the federal constitution.

Franklin, the eldest among the delegates, urged others to sign with this petition: "I consent, Sir, to this Constitution because I expect no better, and because I am not sure, that it is not the best. The opinions I have had of its errors, I sacrifice to the public good." [^14]

Hamilton echoed the same sentiment: "No man's ideas were more remote from the plan than his were known to be; but is it possible to deliberate between anarchy and Convulsion on one side, and the chance of good to be expected from the plan on the other." [^15] Virtue in leaders presupposes an allegiance to law higher than human legislation. Virtuous leaders not only recognize principles that are immutably constant (whereas human laws are not), but those principles are their lodestar. "There never was yet a truly great man," said Franklin, "who was not at the same time truly virtuous."

But in a republic, moral government requires more than public virtue; it requires private virtue among the electorate. Indeed, virtue is a primary responsibility of the people. To require public virtue of the elected without private virtue in its citizens is to require something that cannot be. An unvirtuous electorate will hardly elect a virtuous legislature. As Franklin pointed out: "Only a virtuous people are capable of freedom. As nations become corrupt and vicious, they have more need of masters." [^16]

Self-government implies self-mastery.

Private virtue (honesty, frugality, self-reliance, industry, chastity) can only result when there are choices between good and evil, and the people have the freedom to act and freely express their choices. Representative government is therefore a system preferable to others because it permits people to act according "to the moral agency" given to them, so that "every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment." (D&C 101:78.) People are deprived of that accountability under despotic or dictatorial systems. This point was made clear in the Book of Mormon, in a discourse by King Mosiah.

Following the family (patriarchal) government initiated by Lehi, the Nephites consecrated Nephi as king. A succession of monarchs followed down through Mosiah II. But when each of Mosiah's sons refused to succeed him, the system of government among the Nephites was changed to elected judges. After the first election of judges, Mosiah counseled his people on the preferred system of government and gave the reasons for it.

Monarchial rule was disadvantageous because monarchs can give capricious, unrighteous law; their judgments are "not always just," and they can create much iniquity. (See Mosiah 29:7, 12, 17, and 23.) The prime example of an unrighteous monarch in Nephite history was King Noah. Using him as an example, Mosiah said that the only way an evil king can be dethroned is through revolution, which causes much bloodshed.

In contrast to a monarchy, elected judges represent the voice of the people, and "it is not common that the voice of the people desireth anything contrary to that which is right." Therefore, the commendable government, advised by King Mosiah, was "to do your business by the voice of the people." (Mosiah 29:26.) If judges do not judge equitably, they may be overturned by higher judges. The strength of the system was that "every man may enjoy his rights and privileges alike." (Mosiah 29:32.)

But the greatest merit of the system of judges is that the burden of virtue was on the people. They had to choose wise judges who would judge according to the laws of God. In this way, the people were accountable for their own sins. (See Mosiah 29:38.)

The essentiality of personal righteousness to the preservation of good government is a repeated theme throughout the Book of Mormon. The book is a testimonial that those nations that do not keep the commandments of God are doomed to destruction. Both the Jaredite and Nephite nations were destroyed because of their failure to obey the divine decree—worship the God of this land or be swept off!

The Book of Mormon, however, is more than a record of a fallen people; it is addressed to the latter-day Gentile nation—the current inhabitants of North and South America. Our tenancy on the "land of promise" remains as conditional as that of the Nephites and Jaredites: we must serve God or we shall be "swept off."

We can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity.

For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God. And it is not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land, that they are swept off.

And this cometh unto you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the decrees of God—that ye may repent, and not continue in your iniquities until the fulness come, that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of God upon you as the inhabitants of the land have hitherto done.

Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by the things which we have written. (Ether 2:9-12.)

The quality of virtue required of the citizens is also specified in the Book of Mormon:

Turn, all ye Gentiles, from your wicked ways; and repent of your evil doings, of your lyings and deceivings, and of your whoredoms, and of your secret abominations, and your idolatries, and of your murders, and your priestcrafts, and your envyings, and your strifes, and from all your wickedness and abominations, and come unto me, and be baptized in my name, that ye may receive a remission of your sins, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, that ye may be numbered with my people who are of the house of Israel. (3 Ne. 30:2.)

Righteousness and personal virtue are not just noble ideals; they are imperative to the republic's survival. Why? Because the people must be dedicated to sustain law higher than their own to make government work. If they cease to sustain the principle of law, the republic will collapse by anarchy. A republic demands an extraordinary character from its citizens to make it work.

Some argue, "What I do in my private life is of no consequence to anyone else." Scripturally, that argument is false. One's actions add to the collective virtue or vice of the nation. Every person's goodness adds to the collective righteousness of the nation; every person's sin diminishes that righteousness. The public virtue is but an emanation of the private virtue of every individual.

What then of the state of American morality today? Evidence of the moral decline in America is everywhere present: gambling, drinking, and premarital sex, all condemned under God's laws, are easily rationalized under an "anything-I-want-to-do-is-right" ethic. Our basic integrity is suspect when one out of four Americans admits to cheating on tax returns and many young people show a permissive attitude toward lying and stealing. It is estimated that Americans "steal" about 160 billion dollars each year from employers, by arriving late, leaving early, or misusing time on the job. [^17]

America is a nation concerned with out-of-wedlock births, but illegitimacy, not immorality, is seen as the problem. In the 1960s, federal statistics indicated that about half of the women surveyed said they had experienced sex before marriage. Today, more than 80 percent report sexual experience before marriage. Sixty-one percent reportedly regard premarital sex as not wrong. [^18]

Drug use has reached epidemic proportions. The U.S. News poll reported that 20 percent of young adults had experimented with cocaine and that half under the age of thirty had tried marijuana. [^19]

The problems are abetted by the sensational treatment of violence and sexuality in films, literature, television, video, and theater. Greed and cynicism among athletes, politicians, and executives show youth that their eccentric life-style is acceptable behavior. Eliminated from the publicschool curriculum is almost any effort to teach fundamental values of honesty, integrity, and morality, or that the nation was founded on Christian beliefs and standards. Today, the mention of personal virtue is seen as a threat to others' liberty. So today, if "young Americans are shaped, they are unfortunately shaped to be moral neuters" [^20] because the inculcation of basic moral principles has ceased as a part of American education.

This secularization of the American school system has contributed to a deplorable outcome: We have matriculated a generation of Americans who live as if they are accountable to no one but themselves and their own perceived needs. Certainly many feel no accountability to God. In place of absolute moral standards to guide behavior is the conventional ethic that whatever society and courts of law permit is all right. The result is a vague, ambiguous generality of what constitutes right and wrong. Our sense of virtue has been blunted by the hysteria and propaganda of the image-makers who would have us believe that the caricature they portray as "the good life" is an accurate picture of all society. That, of course, is a supreme lie that, if believed, will lead this nation—as it has others—to its death.

So how can we prevent such an outcome? Only by doing as Samuel Adams and others of the early founders said: by becoming a virtuous people! By worshiping the God of this land, Jesus Christ, and by accepting His teachings as our standard of moral judgments and behavior. When we do this, we shall share in the perception of those who devised the Constitution, which gives us a form of government under which every person is "accountable [to God] for his own sins in the day of judgment." (D&C 101:78.)

With the divine appointment of President Ezra Taft Benson as prophet, seer, and revelator to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, significant to all members was his maiden message for our time: Repent, cleanse the inner vessel, study the Book of Mormon and heed its teachings, and forsake the sin of the Nephites—personal pride. [^21]

As we do so, we will uphold the "just and holy principles" that undergird our Constitution and thereby save ourselves, our families, and our nation.

---
Notas:
[^1] Gordon S. Wood, The Creation of the American Republic, 1776-1787 (Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 1969), p. 68. Wood is citing discourses from eighteenth-century writers.
[^2] Garry Wills, Explaining America: The Federalist (New York: Penguin Books, 1981), p. 270.
[^3] George Washington, letter to Marquis de Lafayette, Writings of George Washington, 1745-1799, edited by John C. Fitzpatrick (Washington, D.C.: U. S. Government Printing Office, 1939), 29:410.
[^4] George Washington, The First Inaugural Address, April 30, 1789, ibid., 30:294.
[^5] Adams Family Correspondence, 4 vols., L. H. Butterfield et al., eds. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1963), 2:21.
[^6] John Adams, The Works of John Adams, edited by C. F. Adams (Boston: Little, Brown Co., 1851), 4:31.
[^7] John R. Howe, Jr., The Changing Political Thought of John Adams (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1966), p. 185.
[^8] The Federalist Papers (New York: The New American Library of World Literature, 1961), no. 57, p. 350.
[^9] Quoted in Jonathan Elliot, comp., The Debates in the Several State Conventions on the Adoption of the Federal Constitution, 5 vols. (Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Company, 1901), 2:536-37; italics added.
[^10] The Federalist Papers, no. 76, p. 458.
[^11] Wills, Explaining America, p. 269.
[^12] Ibid., pp. 268, 270.
[^13] Morton Borden, ed., The Antifederalist Papers (East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1965), p. 159.
[^14] Notes of The Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787 Reported by James Madison (Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1966), p. 654.
[^15] Ibid., p. 656.
[^16] Albert Henry Smyth, ed., The Writings of Benjamin Franklin, 10 volumes (New York: The Haskell House Publishers, 1970), 9:569.
[^17] "The State of American Values," U. S. News and World Report, December 9, 1985, pp. 52, 57.
[^18] Ibid., pp. 52, 55. The findings of the survey published by U. S. News and World Report was based on a survey conducted by the Roper Organization with more than a thousand Americans over the age of eighteen.
[^19] Ibid., p. 58.
[^20] Terry Eastland, "Teaching Morality in Public Schools," Wall Street Journal, February 22, 1982.
[^21] Ezra Taft Benson, "Cleansing the Inner Vessel," Ensign, May 1986, pp. 4-7.
