Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Preface

After centuries of spiritual darkness, revelation was again received when Joseph Smith beheld the Father and the Son in the spring of 1820. Although the record of the First Vision is not a section in the Doctrine and Covenants, though it is mentioned in the "Explanatory Introduction" of each single copy of this book of scripture, it is the foundation of all revelation received in this dispensation. The loss of the priesthood, the fulness of the gospel, and the Church of Jesus Christ brought the need for a restoration of the authority, principles, and organization by which salvation might be received. The great apostasy from the gospel of Jesus Christ and the restoration of the salvation-oriented Church were prophesied by Old and New Testament prophets. Although the four standard works of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—the Holy Bible, the Book of Mormon, The Doctrine and Covenants, and The Pearl of Great Price—constitute the authorized, accepted scriptures of this dispensation, the Doctrine and Covenants is the standard work which is particularly the modern book of scripture. The revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants provide clarity and understanding of the principles of salvation, including the higher ordinances of the gospel essential for exaltation in the celestial kingdom.

Because of the unique status of the Doctrine and Covenants in this dispensation, it is a major source of inspiration and guidance for members of the Church. In 1967, the material in Volume I of The Doctrine and Covenants Speaks was published by permission of the General Presidency of the Relief Society of the Church, since it was written for the theology department of that organization. This second volume, consisting of discussions about Sections 71 through 136, is also published with permission of the Relief Society. While this material was being written and since then, many members of the Church have expressed the wish that it would be published in book form. The publication of Volume II brings to a conclusion the work of 13 years.

Appreciation is expressed to Gaye Davis and Kay Rice for typing the manuscript.

It is sincerely hoped that the contents of these two volumes will continue to serve the purpose for which they were written—to instruct in the great truths of the Doctrine and Covenants, that faith in God, his Son Jesus Christ, and in the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, might be furthered.

Roy W. Doxey

Brigham Young University

Provo, Utah

January, 1970
