Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 3

The Vision (continued)

(Section 76:50-119)

Jesus Christ was crucified to save the world from sin. (D&C 76:40-42.) By this redemptive act he made it possible for every man to be resurrected from the grave. (D&C 88:27-32.) In addition to universal salvation—the resurrection—the atonement of Christ provides a spiritual life for the individual who will be obedient to the fulness of the gospel. This spiritual life brings the obedient back into the presence of God from which they were excluded by sin after arriving at the years of accountability. (D&C 29:41; John 5:24; 11:25-26; D&C 68:25-27.)

Many Mansions

All who have lived, do live, or ever will live upon this earth are the begotten sons and daughters of God. God's solicitude for them is boundless. Through his merciful plan provision is made for the salvation of all men, except the sons of perdition. Contrasted with the erroneous notion that belief in Christ without works is sufficient for a place with God, the plan just mentioned appeals to us as one of justice and mercy. This is more evident when we realize that those who have not had the opportunity to accept Christ may do so in the spirit world. To say, however, that all men are to be saved does not mean that all will receive equal status with God. Considering the differences that exist in knowledge, faith, and righteousness, it would be unjust to save everyone on the same level. In declaring this doctrine, the Prophet Joseph Smith said:

My text is on the resurrection of the dead, which you will find in the 14th Chapter of John (Verses 1-2)—"In my Father's house are many mansions." It should be—"In my Father's kingdom are many kingdoms, " in order that ye may be heirs of God and joint-heirs with me. I do not believe the Methodist doctrine of sending honest men and noble-minded men to hell, along with the murderer and the adulterer. . . . But I have an order of things to save the poor fellows at any rate, and get them saved; for I will send men to preach to them in prison and save them if I can.

There are mansions for those who obey a celestial law, and there are other mansions for those who come short of the law, every man in his own order. There is baptism, etc. for those to exercise who are alive, and baptism for the dead who die without the knowledge of the Gospel. (DHC 6:365.)

We have just learned that Jesus taught that there are gradations in "heaven." Paul also received a vision of the kingdoms of glory for resurrected man. (1 Cor. 15:40-41.)

The principle of reward and punishment is given in this New Testament scripture: "He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully." (2 Cor. 9:6.)

Celestial Kingdom

In verses 50 through 53 of Section 76, the Lord reveals those who are eligible to receive the highest heaven mentioned in the scriptures. In the words of Joseph Smith, entrance into the celestial kingdom is possible for those who follow these instructions:

. . . I will proceed to tell you what the Lord requires of all people, high and low, rich and poor, male and female, ministers and people, professors of religion and non-professors, in order that they may enjoy the Holy Spirit of God to a fulness and escape the judgments of God, which are almost ready to burst upon the nations of the earth. Repent of all your sins, and be baptized in water for the remission of them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and receive the ordinance of the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power, that ye may receive the Holy Spirit of God; and this is according to the Holy Scriptures, and the Book of Mormon; and the only way that man can enter into the celestial kingdom. These are the requirements of the new covenant, or first principles of the Gospel of Christ; then "Add to your faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity [or love]; for if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful, in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ." (DHC 1:314-315. See also II Peter 1:5-8.)

Celestial Exaltation

As there are three kingdoms of glory—celestial, terrestrial, and telestial—so there are many gradations or levels of reward within these great heavens. In the celestial kingdom there are three heavens or degrees. The Lord has told us that in order for us to receive the highest of these, we must meet all of the requirements of the gospel.

In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees;

And in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage];

And if he does not, he cannot obtain it.

He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase. (D&C 131:1-4.)

The highest of these three degrees in the celestial kingdom is attained by those who receive exaltation. (D&C 132:21-24.) In addition to obedience to the first principles of the gospel, noted above in the scriptures and the Prophet's statement, one must enter into temple marriage (the new and everlasting covenant of marriage), remain just and true, and receive the seal of the Holy Ghost. (D&C 132:19.) This truth mentioned by Paul (1 Cor. 11:11) emphasizes the necessity that every Latter-day Saint understand the importance of temple marriage, the sealing of husband and wife by the authority of the Holy Priesthood. Without this ordinance, though one is married by the civil law, there is no exaltation.

All Things Are Theirs

Section 76 continues the description of the celestial kingdom by indicating that there will be those in that glory who belong to the Church of the Firstborn. Keeping in mind that this refers to man's condition after the resurrection and not in this life, we learn that all things are given to the obedient by the Father. They become priests and kings, having received a fulness of the Father's glory as the Church of the Firstborn. To enter into the preparations for this glory, the Melchizedek Priesthood is necessary for the male and blessings of the Priesthood are received by his faithful wife in the temple marriage. When "all things" are bestowed upon them, they become gods, even the sons of God, joint-heirs with Christ. (D&C 76:54-61; 84:35-38; Romans 8:16-17.)

Exaltation — the Goal

Latter-day Saints are prone to refer to the attainment of the celestial kingdom as the highest objective available in the gospel plan. From the foregoing discussion of eternal life, it should be evident that entrance in the celestial kingdom will not necessarily bring a fulness of powers and glory. If, in using the term celestial glory or kingdom, is meant exaltation in that kingdom, then that is the highest objective. On the other hand, if one ignores that there are different degrees in the celestial kingdom and the highest "heaven" is possible only by obedience to all of the commandments, including temple marriage and its covenants, the expression is misleading.

Celestial Glory

All who receive the celestial kingdom receive celestial glory, for they are in the presence of God and Christ forever. (D&C 76:62.) These are they who shall come with the Christ at his coming and will receive the first resurrection. Their bodies are celestial, like God's body, compared with the sun in brightness. (Verses 63-70.)

Exaltation in that kingdom is given to all who will meet the requirements—keeping all the commandments. Positions in the Church do not necessarily qualify one for this great blessing. President George Albert Smith expressed it this way:

One of the beautiful things to me in the Gospel of Jesus Christ is that it brings us all to a common level. It is not necessary for a man to be a president of a stake, or a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, in order to attain a high place in the celestial kingdom. The humblest member of the Church, if he keeps the commandments of God, will obtain an exaltation just as much as any other man in the celestial kingdom. The beauty of the Gospel of Jesus Christ is that it makes us all equal in as far as we keep the commandments of the Lord. In as far as we observe to keep the laws of the Church we have equal opportunities for exaltation. As we develop faith and righteousness our light is made to shine as a guide and blessing to those with whom we mingle. (Conference Report, October 1933, p. 25.)

Opportunity for All

One of the most informative revelations received by the Prophet Joseph Smith was given in the Kirtland Temple on January 21, 1836. The Prophet said that he saw the blazing throne of God in the celestial kingdom, which was like circling flames of fire. There he saw some who had not received an opportunity to receive the gospel in this life, and the explanation of their being in that kingdom. A "voice" declared that all who died without an opportunity to know the gospel and accept it while on the earth will have the privilege in the spirit world.

If they would have received the gospel while on the earth, given the opportunity, they will be heirs of the celestial kingdom upon acceptance of it in the spirit world. The great truth is proclaimed that the Lord "will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts." (DHC 2:380-381.)

According to Works

To every man there is given opportunity. But all men will not abide the full law that will bring the greatest blessing. Some will have lost the opportunity for exaltation and the celestial kingdom because they did not abide the law to which they were responsible in mortality. The merciful plan of the Father is described by Joseph Smith as follows:

But while one portion of the human race is judging and condemning the other without mercy, the Great Parent of the universe looks upon the whole of the human family with a fatherly care and paternal regard; He views them as His offspring, and without any of those contracted feelings that influence the children of men, causes "His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust." He holds the reins of judgment in His hands; He is a wise Lawgiver, and will judge all men, not according to the narrow, contracted notions of men, but, "according to the deeds done in the body whether they be good or evil, " or whether these deeds were done in England, America, Spain, Turkey, or India. He will judge them, "not according to what they have not, but according to what they have, " those who have lived without law, will be judged without law, and those who have a law, will be judged by that law. We need not doubt the wisdom and intelligence of the great Jehovah; He will award judgment or mercy to all nations according to their several deserts, their means of obtaining intelligence, the laws by which they are governed, the facilities afforded them of obtaining correct information, and His inscrutable designs in relation to the human family; and when the designs of God shall be made manifest, and the curtain of futurity be withdrawn, we shall all of us eventually have to confess that the Judge of all the earth has done right. (DHC 4:595-596.)

Salvation of Children

In the same vision in the Kirtland Temple, revealing an opportunity for everyone to hear the gospel either in this life or in the spirit world, the "voice" declared the following to Joseph Smith:

And I also behold that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven. (DHC 2:381.)

This truth is in harmony with and gives meaning to verse 67 of Section 76, wherein it is given that those in the celestial kingdom will constitute "an innumerable company of angels."

Terrestrial Kingdom

The next vision seen by Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon was that of the terrestrial kingdom. Differing from the celestial kingdom as the moon differs in glory from the sun, those of this kingdom will also consist of an innumerable host. (D&C 76:91-92, 96-98, 71.) Those of the terrestrial kingdom are described as "honorable men of the earth, who were blinded by the craftiness of men." They lived the law to which they were responsible on the earth, but they did not receive the fulness on the earth nor in the spirit world. In this kingdom there will also be those who "died without the law." (D&C 76:72-75.)

In addition to those mentioned, there will be some Latter-day Saints who were honorable in their lives, but who were indifferent to the fulness of the truth. Expressed in the language of the revelation, they were "not valiant in the testimony of Jesus; wherefore, they obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God." (D&C 76:79.) It was their privilege to obtain that crown, but the spirit of apathy toward the work of the Lord gained ascendancy in their lives.

Terrestrial beings will have the presence of Jesus Christ. (D&C 76:77.) In the absence of specific scriptural statement it is reasonable to believe that there are degrees within the terrestrial and also that advancement within that kingdom is possible. (James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith, p. 409.)

Telestial Kingdom

In the lowest of the three degrees of glory—the telestial—there will be innumerable gradations or degrees. (D&C 76:98; 1 Cor. 15:41.) In this kingdom will be assigned those who are described as the wicked of the earth—liars, sorcerers, adulterers. They are those who reject the gospel and the testimony of Jesus Christ and the prophets. They are the followers of man-made systems, who persist in their abominable ways. (D&C 76:99-106, 81-85.) It is these who will come from their graves in the first part of the second or general resurrection at the end of the millennium.

Although coming under this condemnation, they have been cleansed in the spirit world and are prepared to enter a glory "which surpasseth all understanding." (Verse 89.) In their kingdom they will receive the Holy Spirit through the ministry of terrestrial beings and of angels appointed to minister in the telestial world. (Verses 86, 88.) The number who will inherit this glory will be as numerous as the sand upon the seashore. (Verse 109.)

The specific ordinances, if there be such, to enter into the telestial and terrestrial kingdoms have not been revealed. The initiatory ordinances of water baptism and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and other ordinances known to the Latter-day Saint, are for the celestial kingdom only.

Greatness of the Gospel

An example of the magnanimity of the gospel is given in the case of the terrestrial beings, some of whom are honorable "Christians" who believe that the greatest reward of obedience is to be in the presence of Christ. If honorable, they will receive their present desire because they live only that law which will give them the terrestrial glory. On the other hand, those enlightened "Christians" who did not live their law, will find themselves in the telestial kingdom; yet the "unenlightened" heathens living their law will be given the chance to accept the terrestrial law. If they do, then their place of future abode will be the terrestrial kingdom.

When reference is made to these groups of terrestrials and telestials, it should be remembered that the Lord will give to all men an opportunity to hear the gospel of Jesus Christ. The chance for celestial glory is open to all. (D&C 1:2; 128:5.)

Conclusion

It is very gratifying to us who desire the salvation of mankind, and whose work it is to labor for their uplifting, who have been specially called of God and appointed to work under the Captain of our salvation for the redemption of the whole human race, to know by the revelations of God that the time will come, in some future state of existence if not in this, when every soul that can be redeemed will be brought out of darkness and sorrow, and hell, and death, and be placed where they can enjoy existence, to glorify God and obey His commandments. . . . The laws of God are eternal; they are forever and ever; they are inflexible; and it is only by obedience to law that exaltation can be secured. In this condition we are learning to be obedient to law—such law as God has revealed; also to the wholesome rules and regulations that are established in the governments under which we may live. (Charles W. Penrose, Conference Report, April 1901, pp. 42-43.)
