Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 8

The Revelation on Priesthood (continued)

(Section 84:43-120)

Hearken to the Spirit

The call is sent forth in Section 84 that all people should give careful heed to the words of eternal life, and to live by every word that comes from God. (Verses 43-44.) They are reminded that the word of the Lord is light and truth and that this enlightenment comes from the Spirit of Jesus Christ. (Verse 45.) Those who hearken to this Spirit come unto the Father, and then the Father teaches them of the covenant and gives them a testimony of the truth. (Verses 47-48.) But the Spirit of Christ prepares the person for acceptance of the fulness of truth. Every man that comes into the world receives light from that Spirit. (D&C 84:46; 88:11-13.)

With the understanding that everyone is a child of God in the spirit, we recognize why the Lord gives to all of his children a guide to lead them unto all truth. The function of this Spirit and its universality are enumerated by President George Q. Cannon as follows:

. . . it is a Spirit that pleads with men to do right. The heathen have it. There is no degraded Indian in these mountains or valleys who does not have a portion of that Spirit pleading with him to do that which is right. It pleads with all the heathen, the Pagan as well as the Christian; the Methodist and Baptist as well as the Latter-day Saints. Everywhere throughout the earth where man dwells this Spirit rests upon him. It comes from God. It pleads with man to do right. It pleads with man to resist the blandishments of Satan. No man ever did a wrong but that Spirit warned him of it to a greater or less extent. (Journal of Discourses 26:191.)

This Spirit should not be confused with the Holy Ghost which is given to those who obey the principles of the gospel and have hands laid upon their heads for that gift. (Acts 5:32; John 14:16-17.)

The Righteous and the Wicked

In connection with the important truth that all men have to a greater or lesser extent the Spirit of the Lord which enlightens them and gives them power to discern between right and wrong, it must be known that, through succumbing to the enticings of Satan, sin is perpetuated. Each individual, to some degree, is in the bondage of sin, and therefore, in need of repentance. The Lord desires that his children understand the need for their acceptance of the fulness of truth. It is only by the atonement of Jesus Christ that sin is forgiven by obedience to the principles and ordinances of the gospel. That person who does not come unto Jesus Christ in the manner he has prescribed, continues to remain under the bondage of sin or spiritual death. On the other hand, the person who has accepted Jesus Christ through his priesthood has come into spiritual life, which is the state of the righteous. President Joseph F. Smith has set this forth in these words:

. . . Now, all the world today, I am sorry to say, with the exception of a handful of people who have obeyed the new and everlasting covenant, are suffering this spiritual death. They are cast out from the presence of God. They are without God, without gospel truth, and without the power of redemption; for they know not God nor His Gospel. In order that they may be redeemed and saved from the spiritual death which has spread over the world like a pall, they must repent of their sins, and be baptized by one having authority, for the remission of their sins, that they may be born of God. (Conference Report, October 1899, p. 72.)

Unbelief Among the Saints

Notwithstanding the saint has come into spiritual life, he may lose the influence of the Holy Ghost due to sin. When Section 84 was received, the inhabitants of Zion had not paid necessary attention to the revelation and the inspired writings in the Book of Mormon. The consequence of this neglect and unbelief was darkness of mind. (Verses 54-56.) Escape from this condemnation was open to Zion on condition that she abide by the teachings of the revelations and not talk about them only. (Verse 57.) Repentance would bring forth results beneficial to them, but slothfulness would bring a scourge and judgment. (Verse 58.)

Signs Follow the Believer

The elders addressed in this revelation were to go into the world testifying unto all that, as they accepted the first principles and came into the kingdom of God, the Holy Ghost would be received. (D&C 84:62-64.) The Lord then indicated that various signs—wonderful works, casting out of devils, healing the sick, etc.—would follow the believer. (Verses 65-72.)

A very important admonition was given the elder and member who participated in or received such a blessing.

But a commandment I give unto them, that they shall not boast themselves of these things, neither speak them before the world; for these things are given unto you for your profit and for salvation. (Verse 73.)

Miracles have been in the Church of Jesus Christ in all dispensations. The spiritual gifts of the Holy Ghost, one of which is miracles, are a part of the fulness of the gospel. (D&C 46:21.) That signs follow the believer is well known to the Latter-day Saint, for thousands of saints can testify that these blessings have been received.

We may correctly say that miracles (signs) are a characteristic of the true church. Miracles in and of themselves, however, are not evidences of the truth. Men are not saved in the kingdom of God by miracles. As stated by President Brigham Young:

The latter-day Saints and every other person who is entitled to salvation, and all except those who have sinned against the Holy Ghost, may know that Jesus is the Christ in the same way that Peter knew it. Miracles do not give this knowledge to mankind, though they may serve as collateral evidence to strengthen the believer. The miracles of Jesus were known to the Jews, yet they suffered him to be put to death as a deceiver of mankind and one possessed of a devil. (Journal of Discourses 10:193.)

What means are at the disposal of the saint that he may tell his friends how to distinguish between the genuine and the spurious representative of God? Healing is only one of the many parts of the gospel of Jesus Christ. To say that any one of the principles or ordinances is the gospel would be erroneous, and to believe that because an organization has an ordinance, such as baptism, that it is the true church would be equally false. The key to discerning which is the true church may be stated thus:

When all of the principles and ordinances, as taught by Christ, are combined in the one organization, there the true church exists. For our present purpose, if a healing is effected in an organization where all of the truths of the gospel are not taught, then that organization does not have the power of salvation in it. The purpose of the gospel of Christ is to make exaltation in the celestial kingdom possible. If the authority to administer the saving principles and ordinances of the gospel is not present, then there is no exaltation possible.

The Laborer is Worthy of His Hire

With the command that the entire world should have the message of salvation taught to them (D&C 84:75-76), the Lord counseled his servants that they become as his "friends" of old, to preach the gospel with power. (Verse 77.) As of old, they were to travel without purse or scrip (baggage) to prove the world, for the laborer was worthy of his hire. All of those who would take this commission, if faithful in the discharge of their duties, would neither be weary in mind nor in body, and they would not go hungry or without water. They were not to be concerned for the material things of life.

For, consider the lilies of the field, how they grow, they toil not, neither do they spin; and the kingdoms of the world, in all their glory, are not arrayed like one of these.

For your Father, who is in heaven, knoweth that you have need of all these things.

Therefore, let the morrow take thought for the things of itself. (Verses 82-84.)

When Jesus delivered the Sermon on the Mount during his mortal ministry, similar counsel was given to his disciples. (Matt. 6:25-34.) Some writers have criticized this sermon, saying that if this advice were taken by the world, all initiative and progress would be stopped. Clarification of this point is made in the Book of Mormon when the Sermon on the Mount was given on this continent. The resurrected Lord turned to the twelve disciples and gave to them this admonition: it was not for the world. Again, in this dispensation, the counsel is not for the world but for those who are called into his ministry, and if they are faithful, the promises will be fulfilled. The following testimony from President John Taylor summarizes the fulfillment of this promise to the faithful:

. . . I see men around me in every direction who have traveled thousands and thousands of miles without purse or scrip, to preach the Gospel to the nations of the earth. They have traversed plains, mountains, deserts, seas, oceans and rivers; they have gone forth trusting in the living God, bearing the precious seed of eternal life. It is true they have not been comprehended or understood by the nations, but that does not alter the fact. Many who went forth in their weaknesses have returned rejoicing, bringing their sheaves with them, as trophies of the victory of the principles of eternal life that they themselves had communicated. I say there is not another instance on record today of like disinterested, affectionate regard for the welfare of the human family as has been manifested by the Elders of this Church. I have traveled thousands and hundreds of thousands of miles to preach the Gospel among the nations of the earth, and my brethren around me have done the same thing. Did we ever lack anything necessary to eat, drink and wear? I never did. God went with his Elders, and they have gathered together his people as they are here today. They have been seeking to carry out the desire of the Lord and the wish of the Almighty in regard to the human family. They were told to go trusting in the name of the Lord, and he would take care of them and go before them, and that the Spirit should go with them and his angels accompany them. (Journal of Discourses 14:189.)

But what of the present? For many years Latter-day Saint missionaries have taken purse and scrip. With the speed-up of missionary work and with existing laws against this practice, the Lord has ruled otherwise, as he did in the meridian dispensation. (Luke 22:36.) In reference to this change, President Charles W. Penrose has said:

. . . Indeed, all my ministry among the people of the world was literally "without purse or scrip. " Now I do not say that this should be done now. I believe that as circumstances change, the Lord changes his commandments, to correspond therewith. As Jesus taught, a great many of you who went out in the world took "neither brass nor gold nor silver in your purses nor scrip for your journey, nor two coats, for the laborer is worthy of his hire," but afterwards he said: "When I sent you out without purse or scrip, did you lack anything?" And they said, "Nay, Lord, " but now he said, "He that has no purse let him get one and he that hath no sword let him buy one." Circumstances had changed and so the word was changed. He didn't change, but the circumstances being changed the word of the Lord was different. So in these times conditions have changed very much from those times. (Conference Report, October 1921, p. 17.)

Take No Thought Beforehand

The Lord also counseled the missionaries of this dispensation to treasure up in their minds the words of life that when the appropriate hour came, the words of life could be called forth. Although they were instructed to take no thought beforehand what they should say, they were to study diligently the revelations necessary to teach the gospel. (D&C 84:85.) The missionary was to "reprove the world of all their unrighteous deeds, and to teach them of a judgment which is to come." (Verse 87.)

Rewards and Punishment

All who assist the Lord's servants will in no wise lose their reward. On the other hand, those who reject his missionaries or who fail to provide for them when required, will find that they have brought themselves under condemnation. (D&C 84:88-91.) It has been decreed, also, that those places that reject the word of the Lord will be condemned, but diligent search should be made in the cities and villages for those who will hearken to the message. (Verse 92-95.)

When, in the judgment of the Lord, the world has had its opportunity to accept him through his servants, and, as predicted, the world at large will have rejected the message, plagues shall go forth in judgment upon the nations. (D&C 84:96-97; 63:32-37; 45:26-44.) The earth will be cleansed from wickedness, and in that day all shall know the Lord as the King of kings. With knowledge of him as their lawgiver, they that remain will lift up their voices in singing the new song given in verses 99 through 102 in Section 84.

These verses speak of millennial conditions. Zion is now being built upon the earth in preparation for the Lord's second advent. In time, the city of Zion (New Jerusalem) will be erected to the glory of God. When the Savior comes to establish his kingdom upon the earth, great shall be the joy of the redeemed, who have looked for that glorious day from the beginning. Satan, the arch-enemy of man, no longer will have influence for he will be bound. The promised restitution of all things (Acts 3:19-21) will have been accomplished in the gathering together into one of all promises and activities planned for the benefit of man. The Zion of Enoch and the Zion of the latter days will meet joyously. (Moses 7:62-64.) In that day the Lord shall stand on the earth in the midst of his people who have been redeemed by his power. The redeemed shall then send forth their songs of praise to the Most High.

Conclusion

In order that the persons to whom Section 84 was addressed might understand, there is repeated the instruction that the families of the missionaries should be cared for, and the Lesser Priesthood members in that day were to prepare the way for the preaching of the gospel. (Verses 103-108.)

The important counsel was given that each man should stand in his own office and none should say unto the other there was no need of him. (Verses 109-110.) In this priesthood revelation, it is appropriate to observe that the priesthood, which gives life to the Church organization, marks the difference between the true Church of Jesus Christ and the dead forms of religion. Section 84 ends with a command that the bishop of the Church carry the message of warning to certain large cities of the United States. In time, when the cup of iniquity is full, the Lord's power will be manifest, and he shall come to reign with his people. (Verses 111-120.)
