Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 9

The One Mighty and Strong

(Section 85)

By commandment, William W. Phelps was promised certain blessings after his baptism. (Section 55.) At this early period (June 1831), he was given the assignment to travel with the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon to Independence, Missouri, where he was to engage in the printing business. (Verses 4-5.) At the time the Prophet wrote to him (November 27, 1832) about conditions in Missouri, he was editor and printer of the Evening and Morning Star, the first periodical published by the Church. Brother Phelps was also an assistant to Bishop Edward Partridge. In reply to a letter from him, the Prophet, already concerned about the welfare of the saints in Missouri, gave instructions regarding the allotting of inheritances to the saints. Matters of great weight rested upon the Prophet's mind, and by inspiration he sensed the feelings of Brother Phelps in these words:

. . . My God, great and mighty art Thou, therefore show unto Thy servant what shall become of those who are essaying to come up unto Zion, in order to keep the commandments of God, and yet receive not their inheritance by consecrations, by order of deed from the Bishop, the man that God has appointed in a legal way, agreeably to the law given to organize and regulate the Church, and all the affairs of the same. (DHC 1:298.)

Then, revealing the source of his own feelings toward Brother Phelps, the Prophet wrote:

Brother William, in the love of God, having the most implicit confidence in you as a man of God, having obtained this confidence by a vision of heaven, therefore I will proceed to unfold to you some of the feelings of my heart, and to answer the question. (Ibid.)

Letters As Revelations

From this letter of November 27, 1832, we have received Section 85 of the Doctrine and Covenants. (DHC 1:298-299.) Historically, there are many examples of letters becoming scripture as the writer was inspired to pen words of admonition, encouragement, and commandment. The apostle Paul indicated that his knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ was received not from men but from the Lord, the Giver of revelation. (Galatians 1:11-12.) Christian scripture consists of many letters written to branches of the Church and to individuals during the New Testament period. (Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, Colossians, Timothy, etc.) The apostles Peter and John have also contributed scripture in the form of letters. In the Book of Mormon we have the letter of Mormon to his son Moroni that explains the doctrine of the atonement as it relates to little children. (Moroni 8.) Subsequent sections in the Doctrine and Covenants also come from letters. (Section 121, 122, 123, 127, 128.)

Church Record to Be Kept

Important instructions were given to the Lord's clerk in Zion (Missouri) regarding the keeping of a faithful record. Under the law of consecration, the steward was required to manage his inheritance (stewardship) not only for his own welfare but also for the general purposes of the Church. Records were to be kept of those who consecrated their property and of the stewardships received. (D&C 85:1.) The following verse of the revelation describes somewhat the nature of some of our records of today: "And also their manner of life, their faith and works. . . . " In that day those who came to Zion and did not consecrate, and, consequently, did not receive an inheritance, were considered unfaithful to their covenants. A penalty for these and also those who had apostatized after receiving their inheritance was not to have their names enrolled with the faithful. (Verses 2-3.)

Book of Life

An accurate record of acts is maintained in the heavens comparable with recordings made in the "book of the law of God" (D&C 85:1-5) kept by the Lord's clerk on the earth. In a later revelation, the Lord emphasized the necessity for keeping accurate records that there might be agreement with the "book of life" which is kept in heaven. (D&C 128:7.) In the New Testament period, John the Revelator explained that al] things shall be inherited by the faithful, while the disobedient shall not enter into the abode of God.

And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but they which are written in the Lamb's book of life. (Rev. 21:27.)

The Lamb's book of life is the book of life kept in the heavens.

Present Application

In 1832, and as long as the law of consecration was in force, the Lord intended that his saints would prepare themselves against the day of burning when the Savior would come in flaming fire taking vengeance upon those who were not keeping his commandments. (D&C 85:3; II Thessalonians 1:7-8.) This message is similar to the promise that the same judgment would come to those who would not tithe:

Behold, now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man, and verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people; for he that is tithed shall not be burned at his coming.

For after today cometh the burning—this is speaking after the manner of the Lord—for verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of Hosts; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon.

Wherefore, if ye believe me, ye will labor while it is called today. (D&C 64:23-25.)

It is apparent from the discussion about the book of life and its purpose, that the inheritances of the saints in the future life will be determined by their faithfulness. In the annual conference of 1900, speakers mentioned this subject and also applied Section 85 to conditions as they are now. The law of consecration in force in 1832 is not required of the saints today, but every member of the Church is under obligation to keep the commandments, among which is the law of tithing. By commandment, a faithful record is kept of the non-tithe payers as well as of those who pay tithing. In the language of Elder Rudger Clawson:

. . . The lines are being drawn. It must be known to the authorities of this Church and to the people who are faithful and who are not faithful. God requires it and it must be recorded, for the reason plainly set forth in the revelation, that those whose names are not found recorded in the book of the law of God shall have no inheritance in Zion in that day when our eternal inheritances shall be divided out to us. (Conference Report, April 1900, p. 44.)

"The Still Small Voice"

There are various means by which the Lord communicates with his children and, especially, the prophets. In the Doctrine and Covenants there are many forms of revelation noted: for example, the visitation of heavenly beings, Section 27; by vision, as Section 76; the use of the Urim and Thummim, as Sections 3, 6, 7, 11; inspiration, Sections 8, 20 and 21; and other ways.

We come now to another method of revelation—the Lord speaking into the mind. An example is Enos, who, after struggling in the spirit said: "behold, the voice of the Lord came into my mind again. . . . " (Book of Mormon; Enos 10.) Jeremiah experienced revelation in this same way. (Jeremiah 1:4, 11, 13.)

One of the notable experiences of the Prophet Joseph Smith in receiving revelation is found in Section 85, as follows:

Yea, thus saith the still small voice, which whispereth through and pierceth all things, and often times it maketh my bones to quake while it maketh manifest. . . . (Verse 6.)

Nephi, in calling his wayward brothers to repentance, reminded them of the times when an angel "hath spoken unto you in a still small voice, but ye were past feeling, that ye could not feel his words." (1 Nephi 17:45.) Every member of the Church is entitled to receive divine guidance in the daily affairs of his life, as well as in his Church positions. President Heber J. Grant once said:

The Lord gives to many of us the still, small voice of revelation. It comes as vividly and strongly as though it were with a great sound. It comes to each man, according to his needs and faithfulness, for guidance in matters that pertain to his own life. For the Church as a whole it comes to those who have been ordained to speak for the Church as a whole. . . . (Conference Report, April 1945, p. 9.)

Very early in the dispensation, the Lord revealed that there was only one person at a time who has the right and power to receive revelation for the Church. (D&C 28:2-7; 43:2-4; The Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, Vol. 1, Chapter 18.)

Interpretation

Verses 7 and 8 of Section 85 were given by the Lord about Bishop Edward Partridge and his calling in regulating the Church in Missouri, with special reference to the law of consecration. Because of a misunderstanding of this revelation, President Joseph F. Smith and his counselors, John R. Winder and Anthon H. Lund, wrote upon this subject for the benefit of the believer. In their preface to their interpretation, they wrote:

Perhaps no other passage in the revelations of the Lord, in this dispensation, has given greater rise to so much speculation as this one. [D&C 85:6-8.] Also, it has been used by vain and foolish men to bolster up their vagaries of speculation, and in some cases their pretensions to great power and high positions they were to attain in the Church. . . .

One would think in such a matter as this that sufficient native modesty would assert itself to restrain a man from announcing himself as the one upon whom such high honors are to be conferred, and who is to exercise such great powers in establishing the Saints in their inheritances; and that even if one suspected, for any reason, that such a position, and such exceptional powers were to be conferred upon him, he would wait until the Lord would clearly indicate to the Church, as well as to himself, that he has been indeed sent of God to the work of so noble a ministry, as is described in the passage under question. Those, however, who have so far proclaimed themselves as being the "one mighty and strong, " have manifested the utmost ignorance of the things of God and the order of the Church. Indeed their insufferable ignorance and egotism have been at the bottom of all their pretensions, and the cause of all the trouble into which they have fallen. They seem not to have been aware of the fact that the Church of Christ and of the Saints is completely organized, and that when the man who shall be called upon to divide unto the Saints their inheritances comes, he will be designated by the inspiration of the Lord to the proper authorities of the Church, appointed and sustained according to the order provided for the government of the Chuch. (Improvement Era 10:929-930, October 1907.)

These are the verses that concern us in this chapter:

And it shall come to pass that I, the Lord God, will send one mighty and strong, holding the scepter of power in his hand, clothed with light for a covering, whose mouth shall utter words, eternal words; while his bowels shall be a fountain of truth, to set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot the inheritances of the saints whose names are found, and the names of their fathers, and of their children, enrolled in the book of the law of God;

While that man, who was called of God and appointed, that putteth forth his hand to steady the ark of God, shall fall by the shaft of death, like as a tree that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning. (D&C 85:7-8.)

In their explanation of these verses, the First Presidency set forth these ideas:

Bishop Edward Partridge

Bishop Edward Partridge was called to the bishopric February 4, 1831 (D&C 41:9), and at that time the Lord referred to him as "like unto Nathanael of old." Before this, he was a member of the Campbellites and joined the Church in December 1830. During the severe persecution of the saints in Missouri (due partly to their failure to keep the commandments the Lord), he "acted a most noble, and self-sacrificing part, and bore many indignities with the greatest patience." Partly stripped of his clothing, the bishop was taken to the public square in Independence, Missouri, because he would not denounce the Book of Mormon, and he was tarred and feathered as the mob jeered. Later, he, with five others, offered themselves as ransom for the Church, even to be scourged and put to death, if that would stop the inhuman cruelties heaped upon the saints by the Missourians. Later, he assisted the saints in their flight from Missouri and assisted in their location in Illinois. On May 27, 1840, Bishop Partridge died in Nauvoo, accepted of the Lord.

An Alternative

From this revelation it can be seen there is no escape from the definite word of the Lord on how his servants are to be appointed. President Joseph F. Smith and his counselors drew attention to the important truth that if there was ever a need for the "one mighty and strong," he would have to occupy the same position as Bishop Partridge—the Presiding Bishop. It would be that bishop's duty in the future, under the law of consecration, to "arrange by lot the inheritances of the Saints." (D&C 57:7, 15; 58:14, 17; 85:7.) Furthermore, that bishop would have to be called in the Lord's way, and not as men might wish to make their own rules. The order of calling priesthood officers was established early in the dispensation. With the restoration of the priesthood, it was stated that authority is necessary to call men into the Lord's service. Before this, Hyrum Smith was told that he was not to preach the gospel until he had been called. (D&C 11:15.) In the revelation on organizing the Church, it was stated that priesthood officers were to be appointed and ordained. (Ibid., 20:2-3, 38-39, 60.) Moreover, they were to be approved by a vote of the Church in appointed meetings. (D&C 20:61-65.)

These steps are necessary to receive the approval of the Lord: (1) a call by revelation or authority; (2) approval of the members of the Church; and (3) an ordination by one who has the authority. These steps were indicated later, as noted above, to validate the call of the president of the Church. (Ibid., 28:2-7; 43:2-4.) The presiding bishop, as all officers in the Church, is no exception, as witness the instruction concerning the appointment of Bishop Edward Partridge:

And again, I have called my servant Edward Partridge; and I give a commandment, that he should be appointed by the voice of the church, and ordained a bishop unto the church, to leave his merchandise and to spend all his time in the labors of the church;

To see to all things as it shall be appointed unto him in my laws in the day that I shall give them. (Ibid., 41:9-10.) [Italics by the author.]

Future bishops unto the Church will receive their appointment in the same manner. The Lord declares that there can be no exception.

Pretenders to Church office or to the rights and privileges of the Church have arisen and will probably continue to arise occasionally; therefore, it behooves Latter-day Saints to be aware of the foregoing keys against deception. In concluding their message on this revelation (Section 85), President Joseph F. Smith and his counselors wrote in 1907:

. . . we would say that the Latter-day Saints by this time, should be so well settled in the conviction that God has established his Church in the earth for the last time, to remain, and no more to be thrown down, or destroyed; and that God's house is a house of order, of law, of regularity, that erratic disturbers of that order of men . . . ought not to have any influence with them, nor ought the Saints to be disturbed in their spirit by such characters and their theories. The Church of Christ is with the Saints. It has committed to it the law of God for its own government and perpetuation. It possesses every means for the correction of every wrong or abuse or error which may from time to time arise, and that without anarchy, or even revolution; it can do it by process of evolution—by development, by an increase of knowledge, wisdom, patience and charity. (Improvement Era 10:942.)

No Inheritances for Some

The remaining verses of Section 85 reaffirm, with emphasis, that the unfaithful members of the Church not having their names recorded in the book of the law will not obtain an inheritance, but their lot will be found among the unbelievers where there are wailing and gnashing of teeth. (Verses 9-11.) The consequences of disobedience are serious indeed when one considers the penalty imposed upon the children of the priests mentioned in Ezra 2:61-63. They shall be cut off from the ordinances of the house of the Lord, and from their fathers who are dead and who were faithful. The separation of fathers, mothers, and children in eternity, with the loss of eternal life, is far more serious than some members of the Church are prone to consider. President Joseph F. Smith in discussing this matter was emphatic, as brought out in this chapter, that Section 85 not only has reference to the law of consecration, but also to the law of tithing because it took the place of the former law. (Conference Report, October 1899, p. 42.)
