Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 11

God's Power in the World

(Section 88:1-14)

After the Prophet Joseph Smith had visited Jackson County, Missouri, in the spring of 1832, a number of problems arose among the saints in that area. In the chapter on the "one mighty and strong" (Chapter 9), we learned of a problem in connection with Edward Partridge, the Bishop in Zion. Because of the failure of the authorities and saints in Missouri to carry out the plans for their temporal welfare under the law of consecration, the Prophet became concerned. On January 14, 1833, he wrote a letter to W. W. Phelps, editor of the Evening and Morning Star, in which he enclosed the revelation dated December 27, 1832, known as Section 88 in the Doctrine and Covenants. This revelation is named the "Olive Leaf" by the Prophet. He explains that it is "the Lord's message of peace to us." Here are the Prophet's words:

I send you the "olive leaf" which we have plucked from the Tree of Paradise, the Lord's message of peace to us; for though our brethren in Zion indulge in feelings towards us, which are not according to the requirements of the new covenant, yet, we have the satisfaction of knowing that the Lord approves of us, and has accepted us, and established His name in Kirtland for the salvation of the nations; for the Lord will have a place whence His word will go forth, in these last days, in purity; for if Zion will not purify herself, so as to be approved of in all things, in His sight, He will seek another people; for His work will go on until Israel is gathered, and they who will not hear His voice, must expect to feel His wrath. Let me say unto you, seek to purify yourselves, and also all the inhabitants of Zion, lest the Lord's anger be kindled to fierceness. (DHC 1:316.)

Section 88 gives doctrines and great principles of salvation that are outstanding in their scope and sublimity of thought.

In the opening verses of the revelation, several ideas are given that should be known to all. The Lord says that angels rejoice over the brethren, for their prayers have come up to the Lord of Sabaoth and are recorded in the book of the sanctified in the celestial world. (D&C 88:1-2.) Contrary to some ideas, the word Sabaoth does not mean "Sabbath," but "hosts"; consequently, the Lord is the master of many. President Joseph Fielding Smith reminded those attending a general conference of the Church that to have one's name on the membership records does not save one in the eternal world. Our names must be found in the records maintained in the heavens as a result of our having kept the commandments. (Conference Report, September 1950, p. 10.) The good deeds that we do here in placing the kingdom of God first will redound to our everlasting benefit.

The Comforters

When Jesus was in mortality, he taught his disciples that there were two Comforters. (John 14:16-26.) In Section 88 the Lord speaks of only one Comforter, but since the expression "another Comforter" is used in verse 3, it is well for us to recall the discussion of the Savior with his ancient disciples. In the fourteenth chapter of John he tells his hearers that by keeping the commandments they show their love of the Father and that they will be blessed in having the Comforter to be with them. The world does not receive this blessing because they have not accepted him, but the disciples may have the influence of the Holy Ghost through their obedience. Further on, the Lord points out that the Comforter referred to is the Holy Ghost. This Spirit will teach the convert and bring all things necessary to his remembrance. (John 14:16-17, 26.)

During the discourse on the Comforter as the Holy Ghost, Jesus spoke of a second Comforter that would abide with the disciples:

He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him. . . .

Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. (John 14:21, 23.)

In commenting upon this subject, Joseph Smith said that after a person has become a member of the Church and has received the first Comforter, or the Holy Ghost, if he will continue to humble himself in living every word of God and after the trial of his faith, the Lord Jesus Christ will then visit him and make his abode with him from time to time. The Prophet also said that this blessing was received by the ancient saints when they had the heavens opened to them in vision and had communion with God. (DHC 3:380-381.)

In Section 88, the Comforter known as the Holy Ghost is spoken of as "the Holy Spirit of promise," (verse 3) which will "abide in your hearts." The second Comforter, the Savior, cannot abide in one's heart. (D&C 130:22-23.) In the next verse, we learn that this Comforter "is the promise . . . of eternal life, even the glory of the celestial kingdom." (Verse 4.) Eternal life as used here is the same as the attainment of godhood, or exaltation, in the celestial kingdom, or to become a member of the church of the Firstborn after the resurrection. (Ibid., verse 5; 76:54-60.)

The Light of Christ

The members of the Church were promised the wonderful blessing of enjoying the gift of the Holy Ghost to give them guidance to eternal life. (D&C 88:3-5.) Having addressed this comforting message to those who had made covenant with him in baptism, the Lord instructs us concerning his power and the means by which God's children throughout the world receive his blessings. We are informed that there is a light which proceeds "forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space." (Ibid., verse 12.) This Spirit, influence, and force is felt by all men, and it is throughout all parts of man's environment. Although the scripture states that it comes from the presence of God, this Spirit is the light of Christ. Jesus, in the pre-earth life, was creator of this earth, and he is man's Atoner. For these and other reasons, one may say that although this "light" emanates from God, it comes also from those who have attained all power in the exaltation. Four distinct functions performed by the light of Christ are mentioned. These are: (1) creative power; (2) life-giving force; (3) governing or sustaining force; and (4) enlightening or inspiring power.

Creative and Life-sustaining Powers

In the following verses we learn that the "light of Christ" is the power by which the sun, moon, stars, and "even the earth upon which you stand" were created. (Ibid., verses 6-10.)

And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—

The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed. (Ibid., verses 11-13.)

Here is stated the power of God manifest in all creation—in all things. Men have looked into the heavens and have marvelled at the greatness of the universe and the orderliness of these creations. Many thoughtful men have recognized in God's creations the evidence to support the belief that there exists a power greater than themselves. After Korihor, the anti-Christ, had asked Alma for a sign to support his belief in God, the prophet reminded him that he had seen many evidences of God's existence. In addition to the testimony of the prophets, Alma said:

. . . The scriptures are laid before thee, yea, and all things denote there is a God; yea, even the earth, and all things that are upon the face of it, yea, and its motion, yea, and also the planets which move in their regular form do witness that there is a Supreme Creator. (Alma 30:44.)

When one considers the marvels of nature, there is found convincing testimony to support belief in God.

Intelligence—Inspiring Power

In addition to the powers already mentioned as functions of the "light of Christ," the one most important in terms of its personal blessing to each individual is that of imparting enlightenment, inspiration, and guidance.

And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings;

Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—(D&C 88:11-12.)

Job's statement "there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding" (Job 32:8), reminds one of this "light." Also important in understanding additional information about this Spirit are these ideas found in modern revelation: (1) man should live by God's word; (2) what the Lord gives is truth, light, and Spirit, even the "light of Christ"; (3) every man in the world receives this light; (4) to the degree that man seeks for and abides by that Spirit, so is he enlightened until he comes unto the Father. (D&C 88:44-47.)

These truths are not only for the Latter-day Saint, but for all men. When one understands the functions of the "light of Christ," his eyes are opened to the ways in which God governs his universe, and he also sees the application of God's attributes of justice and mercy.

Who are the inhabitants of the earth? They are all spirit sons and daughters of God. "For we are also his offspring." (Acts 17:28.) Is the Father concerned about the welfare of his children? The earth and the things of the earth were created that man might receive the resurrection and, if faithful, eternal life; this is God's work and glory. (Moses 1:39.) The Lord has given to every man sufficient light and understanding that, if acted upon, will lead him back into the presence of the Father. Notice how the Book of Mormon prophet Mormon expressed this truth:

For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil. . . .

And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which ye may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge wrongfully; for with that same judgment which ye judge ye shall also be judged.

Wherefore, I beseech of you, brethren, that ye should search diligently in the light of Christ that ye may know good from evil; and if ye will lay hold upon every good thing, and condemn it not, ye certainly will be a child of Christ. (Moroni 7:16, 18, 19.)

In the words of President Joseph Fielding Smith, we learn:

The Lord has not left us to grope in darkness, but has given to every man that is born with understanding the power to discern between good and evil, truth and falsehood, through the power of the intelligence, light of truth, or light of Christ, born with him. However, as man departs from the truth, the power of intelligence forsakes him and for that cause he does not come unto God. (The Way to Perfection, p. 230.)

The great truth which governs the degree to which men receive the "light of Christ" is given in Section 88, verse 63, that when men draw unto God, he draws unto them by his Spirit. Therefore, the instruction is: seek diligently and he shall be found, and his treasures will be opened unto you.

Revelation—the Book of Mormon

In discoursing on his desires to preach the gospel to all people, Alma taught the doctrine that men of all nations may receive God's light.

For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have; therefore we see that the Lord doth counsel in wisdom, according to that which is just and true. (Alma 29:8.)

One way in which the Lord has given his "word" to all people is through the inspiration received by the "light of Christ." We can see in this principle the important fact again, that the Father gives to all of his children sufficient to guide and direct them regardless of race or place on the earth. To each is given according to his needs as he can assimilate truth for his advancement in the earth life. The final judgment will be made on the great principle of the light and knowledge possessed by the individual. (D&C 76:110-111.) In reference to this principle, Joseph Smith taught:

. . . He holds the reins of judgment in His hands; he is a wise Lawgiver, and will judge all men, not according to the narrow, contracted notions of men, but, "according to the deeds done in the body whether they be good or evil," or whether these deeds were done in England, America, Spain, Turkey, or India. He will judge them, "not according to what they have not, but according to what they have," those who have lived without law, will be judged without law, and those who have a law, will be judged by that law. We need not doubt the wisdom and intelligence of the Great Jehovah; He will award judgment or mercy to all nations according to their several deserts, their means of obtaining intelligence, the laws by which they are governed, the facilities afforded them of obtaining correct information, and His inscrutable designs in relation to the human family; and when the designs of God shall be made manifest, and the curtain of futurity be withdrawn, we shall all of us eventually have to confess that the Judge of all the earth has done right. (DHC 4:595-596.)

God Knows and Rules

One may think of the "light of Christ" as a great communication system. An important lesson to be learned by all men, and especially Latter-day Saints who believe that God does know the thoughts of men and that he rules among the nations, is this expression from Elder B. H. Roberts:

. . . He knows, not only "what's done," but also "what's resisted"; that He knows of the struggle for the attainment of virtue—the hungering and the thirsting after righteousness; that He knows the strength of the temptation, and the weakness of the tempted; that He knows the heart . . . and He will judge, not after the sight of the eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of the ears, but with righteousness shall He judge, and reprove with equity [Isa. 11:3, ; judging, "not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment." [John 7:24.] Men can be assured of a correct registration and truthful report of their deeds, and a judgment upon them neither partial nor prejudiced; which, while it may cause the wicked to tremble, to men conscious of the uprightness of their intentions, and of honest effort in right directions, as God gives them vision to see the right—what encouragement to earnest striving this conception of living in the very presence of God must bring! (The Seventy's Course in Theology, Fifth Year, 1912, p. 13.)

God's Omnipresence

In the great discourse on Mars' Hill in Athens, Paul spoke of the principle that all men live, and move, and have their being in God. (Acts 17:28.) The erroneous concept that God is everywhere and therefore he is a spirit only is held in the apostate Christian world. The teaching of God's omnipresence is true, but that he is not personal is declared false by the Lord in the revelations received in our dispensation. Men have mistaken a manifestation of God, the "light of Christ," as being God himself. God is everywhere present by his Spirit, the "light of Christ," but God and the Christ are personal beings of flesh and bone and individually present in only one place at a time. (D&C 130:22.)

The Holy Ghost and the Light of Christ

There is a difference between the "light of Christ" and the Holy Ghost. Sometimes in scripture the terms denoting one or the other are used interchangeably, but the distinction is evident in each specific case by the use of the term in its context.

The "light of Christ" is given to all men, regardless of race or color. (John 1:9.) On the other hand, the Holy Ghost is received by those who are obedient. (Acts 5:32.) The latter is a special gift received by the laying on of hands. (Acts 8:14-17; D&C 33:15.) Also, there is a power from the Holy Ghost which is "temporary"; that is, if the person having been led to the truth of the gospel by the "light of Christ" receives a testimony by the power of the Holy Ghost (Moroni 10:4-5), and then he does not accept baptism and the laying on of hands by authority, the testimony is lost to him. The case of Cornelius in the New Testament is a case where the power was known and baptism accepted. (Acts 10.) The Prophet Joseph Smith, in commenting upon this case, said that if Cornelius had not accepted the gospel the Holy Ghost would not have remained with him. (DHC 4:555.)

President Joseph F. Smith said the following about the difference between the "light of Christ" and the Holy Ghost:

The question is often asked, Is there any difference between the Spirit of the Lord and the Holy Ghost? The terms are frequently used synonymously. We often say the Spirit of God when we mean the Holy Ghost; we likewise say the Holy Ghost when we mean the Spirit of God. The Holy Ghost is a personage in the Godhead, and is not that which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. It is the Spirit of God which proceeds through Christ to the world, that enlightens every man that comes into the world, and that strives with the children of men, and will continue to strive with them, until it brings them to a knowledge of the truth and the possession of the greater light and testimony of the Holy Ghost. If, however, he receive that greater light, and then sin against it, the Spirit of God will cease to strive with him, and the Holy Ghost will wholly depart from him. (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 67-68.)
