Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 12

The Earth and Man

(Section 88:14-35, 97-104)

In the revelation known as the "Olive Leaf," the Lord gave instructions to his servants regarding the Holy Ghost, also known as the Holy Spirit, with the promise of eternal life. (D&C 88:3-4.)

From a discussion on the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, given only to the obedient who receive the baptism of water and the Spirit by one having authority, to a consideration of the "light of Christ" given to all men because they are spirit sons and daughters of God, the revelation proceeds to speak "peace" to the hearts of the saints in revealing what man should know about the glories of the eternal worlds following the resurrection.

The Soul of Man

The eternal truth is revealed that man had a pre-earth life as a spirit entity. In this second estate, the earth period, man becomes a living soul. (Genesis 2:7.) We learn in Section 88 that "the spirit and the body are the soul of man." (Verse 15.) This concept is immediately followed with the truth that both the body and the spirit are to be resurrected. (Verse 16.) It is the soul that will be redeemed; therefore, we should be mindful of how we care for the body, for it is an essential part of man's eternal make-up. (Verse 28.) With this understanding of the value of the body in the eternal plan, man's body becomes precious, but as Elder James E. Talmage said:

. . . Be not afraid of soiling its hands; be not afraid of scars that may come to it if won in earnest effort, or in honest fight, but beware of scars that disfigure, that have come to you in places where you ought not have gone, that have befallen you in unworthy undertakings; beware of the wounds of battle in which you have been fighting on the wrong side. (Conference Report, October 1913, p. 117.)

The Earth

The revelation continues in pointing out that the earth has an eternal destiny as well as does man. It is decreed that the faithful will inherit the earth. (Matt. 5:5.) The inheritance of the earth as an eternal home will come to those who have lived the law of the celestial kingdom. The earth was created that it would be the habitation of the mortal tabernacles for the spirit sons and daughters of God. (D&C 49:16-17.) But this was not to be the end of the earth's usefulness, for in fulfilling the measure of its creation it would also become a celestial kingdom. (Ibid., 88:18-20.)

In order that we may fully understand that our position in the eternal worlds following the resurrection, is to be determined by the law we obey, we are instructed as follows:

That bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it [the earth] forever and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for this intent are they sanctified.

And they who are not sanctified through the law which I have given unto you, even the law of Christ, must inherit another kingdom, even that of a terrestrial kingdom, or that of a telestial kingdom.

For he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory. (Verses 20-22.)

They who cannot abide the terrestrial law must abide a telestial kingdom. There will be some who will be unable to abide the telestial glory. These are the sons of perdition. (Verses 23-24.) Perdition is also known as a kingdom, but of "no glory." (Verse 24.)

Spiritual Bodies

It requires modern revelation to interpret and understand passages in the Bible which have given rise to erroneous doctrines. An example comes from Section 88 where we find the following words:

For notwithstanding they die, they also shall rise again, a spiritual body. (D&C 88:27.)

The term spiritual body is found in the writings of Paul in a discussion of the resurrection. He said that the body is sown a natural body, but it is raised a spiritual body. (1 Cor. 15:44.) Because Paul in this same letter said that "flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God" (verse 50), it is believed by some not of our faith that the body is not actually raised from the grave, but that it is the spirit of man that is revived or resurrected. It is true that "flesh and blood" (mortals) cannot inherit the kingdoms assigned resurrected beings. The resurrection of which we shall partake will be the raising of the body as flesh and bones—tangible, material substance. (Philippians 3:20-31; Alma 11:43-45; D&C 129:1-2.) This body will not contain blood, but, as Joseph Smith said: "All will be raised by the power of God, having spirit in their bodies, and not blood." (DHC 4:555.) President Brigham Young declared:

. . . the blood will not be resurrected with the body, being designed only to sustain the life of the present organization. When that is dissolved, and we again obtain our bodies by the power of the resurrection, that which we now call the life of the body, and which is formed from the food we eat and the water we drink will be supplanted by another element. (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 374.)

This explains why the scriptures refer to the resurrected body as "a spiritual body" or as Amulek put it, "the whole becoming spiritual and immortal." (Alma 11:45.) In this condition man will not be subject to decay or dissolution, but will remain free from disease and the ills of earth life or mortality. (1 Cor. 15:52; 2 Nephi 9:13.)

"Ye Shall Receive Your Body"

The Prophet Joseph Smith was emphatic in maintaining that in the resurrection we do not lose the fundamental parts of the body which were ours in mortality.

. . . There is no fundamental principle belonging to a human system that ever goes into another in this world or in the world to come: I care not what the theories of men are. We have the testimony that God will raise us up, and he has the power to do it. If anyone supposes that any part of our bodies, that is, the fundamental parts thereof, ever goes into another body, he is mistaken. (DHC 5:339.)

President John Taylor taught that even though the body may be destroyed or blown to the four winds of heaven, yet the particles out of which the body was created cannot be destroyed because they are eternal. (Journal of Discourses, 18:333.)

Perfect Bodies

As resurrected beings we shall have perfect bodies. The disfigurements of the flesh will be removed. A question is sometimes raised as to whether or not there will be a difference in the resurrection between the person who dies in young adulthood and the one who leaves mortality at an advanced age. The scriptures do not speak expressly to this question, but only of the perfected body. (Alma 11:42-45; 40:23; D&C 88:28.) However, President Joseph F. Smith said:

In the resurrection of the dead the child that was buried in its infancy will come up in the form of the child that it was when it was laid down; then it will begin to develop. From the day of the resurrection, the body will develop until it reaches the full measure of the stature of its spirit, whether it be male or female. (Improvement Era, June 1909, p. 594.)

The body will come forth as it is laid to rest, for there is no growth or development in the grave. As it is laid down, so will it arise, and changes to perfection will come by the law of restitution. But the spirit will continue to expand and develop, and the body after the resurrection will develop to the full stature of man. (Ibid., June 1904, pp. 623-624.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught:

As concerning the resurrection, I will merely say that all men will come from the grave as they lie down, whether old or young; there will not be "added unto their stature one cubit," neither taken from it; all will be raised by the power of God, having spirit in their bodies, and not blood. (DHC 4:555.)

Kingdoms of the Resurrection

As discussed in earlier chapters, each person will receive the reward that he has earned in the earth life. (Chapter 3.) In summary, we may quote President George Q. Cannon:

. . . The Lord has shown to us that there are differences of rewards. Some of his children will attain to what is called celestial glory. Others of his children will not have faith enough nor exercise their agency in the direction to gain that glory; but they will gain terrestrial glory. There are others that will not progress that far; they will feel reluctant to obey the laws that pertain to the terrestrial, and they will obtain telestial glory. There are still others that will not attain even to the telestial glory. Why is it that there are these differences? Is it because God has chosen some of us for the telestial glory, some of us for the terrestrial glory and some of us for the celestial glory? No, there is no such predestination as this. We are all born with our free agency; with the power within ourselves, aided by the blessing of God, to attain unto the highest glory. How shall we attain unto the highest glory? There is only one way, and that is by observing the highest laws. The highest laws, when obeyed, bring as a reward the highest glory; and the man or woman who expects to attain to the highest glory without obeying these laws, deceives himself or herself. It cannot be done. If I rise above the telestial glory, I must obey a law that will lift me above that. If I rise to the terrestrial glory, it will be by obeying terrestrial law. If I do not obey laws higher than that, I cannot attain to a higher glory.

I want to impress upon you . . . that our exaltation, our future glory, depends entirely upon our obedience to law. We should not lose sight of this. (Conference Report, April 1900, p. 54.)

The foregoing discussion is in harmony with the "Olive Leaf" revelation where it is also indicated that those who become sons of perdition will be resurrected and return to that place for which they prepared themselves by disobedience. (D&C 88:29-32.)

It is by obedience to God's law—eternal law—that blessings come; and also by disobedience, a loss of one's potential blessing.

And again, verily I say unto you, that which is governed by law is also preserved by law and perfected and sanctified by the same.

That which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin, and altogether abideth in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment. Therefore, they must remain filthy still. (Verses 34-35.)

The Resurrection, When?

The Lord has revealed that every person who has lived upon the earth will receive a resurrection. This means both the "just and unjust." (Acts 24:15; see also Rev. 20:13, 1 Cor. 15:21-22.) By reason of the transgression of Adam, death entered the world, and through the atonement of Jesus Christ all mankind will be redeemed from this temporal death. There is no exception. (2 Nephi 9:6-7, 12-13; Alma 12:16-18.)

The general scriptural pronouncement is that there is a time for the righteous and a time for the unrighteous to be raised from the grave. (Rev. 20:5, 12-13; D&C 29:22-26.) There will be two general resurrections—the first, which is known as the "just," and the second, which is named the "unjust." A modern revelation, however, teaches us that these general classifications should be separated into two parts each. (D&C 88:97-102.) This revelation states that each of these resurrections, four in number, will be heralded by the sounding of an angel's trump. The first trump is at the Savior's second coming.

And they who have slept in their graves shall come forth, for their graves shall be opened; and they also shall be caught up to meet him in the midst of the pillar of heaven—

They are Christ's, the first fruits, they who shall descend with him first, and they who are on the earth and in their graves, who are first caught up to meet him; and all this by the voice of the sounding of the trump of the angel of God. (D&C 88:97-98.)

It is recorded in scripture (Matt. 27:51-53 and 3 Nephi 23:9-10) that many souls arose from the dead at the time of the Savior's resurrection. This, however, did not commence what is known to us as the first resurrection. This is clarified by Joseph Fielding Smith in the following quotations:

While there was a general resurrection of the righteous at the time Christ arose from the dead, it is customary for us to speak of the resurrection of the righteous at the Second Coming of Christ as the first resurrection. (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:295.)

It is the opinion of some that the resurrection is going on all the time now, but this is purely speculation without warrant in the scriptures. It is true that the Lord has power to call forth any person or persons from the dead, as he may desire, especially if they have a mission to perform which would require their resurrection. For example, we have the case of Peter, James, and Moroni.

We are given to understand that the first resurrection yet future, which means the coming forth of the righteous, will take place at one particular time, which is when our Savior shall appear in the clouds of heaven, when he shall return to reign. (Ibid., p. 299.)

The second trump is sounded after the resurrection of the saints. The length of time between these two events is not revealed. Jesus' coming marks the beginning of the millennium, therefore, the resurrection of terrestrial beings occurs after the millennium begins:

And after this another angel shall sound, which is the second trump; and then cometh the redemption of those who are Christ's at his coming; who have received their part in that prison which is prepared for them, that they might receive the gospel, and be judged according to men in the flesh. (D&C 88:99.)

Thus ends the first general resurrection, except as that resurrection will continue into the millennium until all the worthy or honorable dead have received this blessing. At the end of the thousand years of peace and righteousness, the second general resurrection will begin with the telestial beings rising from their graves. Before this, however, they shall be judged to return to the spirit world not to be resurrected until the thousand years are ended.

And again, another trump shall sound, which is the third trump; and then come the spirits of men who are to be judged, and are found under condemnation;

And these are the rest of the dead; and they live not again until the thousand years are ended, neither again, until the end of the earth. (Verses 100-101.)

Without the time interval being indicated, the last part of the last, or second resurrection, that of the sons of perdition, is described as follows:

And another trump shall sound, which is the fourth trump, saying: There are found among those who are to remain until that great and last day, even the end, who shall remain filthy still. (Verse 102.)

Visions of the Resurrection

We have the testimonies of Latter-day prophets concerning the resurrection. These testimonies bring to the saint an awareness, born of the Spirit, that the resurrection is a reality, and that men will come forth from their graves as they were laid down. The Prophet Joseph Smith stated:

Would you think it strange if I relate what I have seen in vision in relation to this interesting theme? Those who have died in Jesus Christ may expect to enter into all that fruition of joy when they come forth, which they possessed or anticipated here.

So plain was the vision, that I actually saw men, before they had ascended from the tomb, as though they were getting up slowly. They took each other by the hand and said to each other, "My father, my son, my mother, my daughter, my brother, my sister." And when the voice calls for the dead to arise, suppose I am laid by the side of my father, what would be the first joy of my heart? To meet my father, my mother, my brother, my sister; and when they are by my side, I embrace them and they me. . . .

All your losses will be made up to you in the resurrection, provided you continue faithful. By the vision of the Almighty I have seen it.

More painful to me are the thoughts of annihilation than death. If I have no expectation of seeing my father, mother, brothers, sisters and friends again, my heart would burst in a moment, and I should go down to my grave.

The expectation of seeing my friends in the morning of the resurrection cheers my soul and makes me bear up against the evils of life. It is like their taking a long journey, and on their return we meet them with increased joy.

God has revealed His Son from the heavens and the doctrine of the resurrection also; and we have a knowledge that those we bury here God will bring up again, clothed upon and quickened by the Spirit of the great God; and what mattereth it whether we lay them down, or we lay down with them when we can keep them no longer? Let these truths sink down in our hearts, that we may even here begin to enjoy that which shall be in full hereafter. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 295-296.)

As President of the Church, Wilford Woodruff related a vision of the resurrection given to him while laboring as a missionary in the State of Tennessee during the lifetime of Joseph Smith.

After laboring in that part (Memphis, Tennessee) for a length of time, I received a letter from Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, in which they requested me to stay in that country and take charge of the churches that we had built up there. The Prophet promised me many things, and said I would lose no blessings by tarrying in that country and doing as he wished me, and letting the other brethren go and get their endowments. I was then at the house of Brother Abraham O. Smoot's mother. I received this about sundown. I went into a little room where there was a sofa, to pray alone. I felt full of joy and rejoicing at the promises God had made to me through the Prophet. While I was upon my knees praying, my room was filled with light. I looked and a messenger stood by my side. I arose, and this personage told me he had come to instruct me. He presented before me a panorama. He told me he wanted me to see with my eye and understand with my mind what was coming to pass in the earth before the coming of the Son of Man. He commenced with what the revelations say about the sun being turned to darkness, the moon to blood, and these stars falling from heaven. Those things were all presented to me one after another, as they will be, I suppose, when they are manifest before the coming of the Son of Man. Then he showed me the resurrection of the dead—what is termed the first and second resurrection. In the first resurrection I saw no graves nor anyone raised from the grave. I saw legions of celestial beings, men and women who had received the gospel all clothed in white robes. In the form they were presented to me, they had already been raised from the grave. After this he showed me what is termed the second resurrection. Vast fields of graves were before me, and the Spirit of God rested upon the earth like a shower of gentle rain, and when that fell upon the graves, they were opened, and an immense host of human beings came forth. They were just as diversified in their dress as we are here, or as they were laid down. This personage taught me with regard to these things. . . . (The Deseret Weekly, Vol. 53, No. 21, November 7, 1896, p. 642.)
