Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 13

The Law, Man, and the Universe

(Section 88:36-75)

The last two chapters have come from Section 88, known as the "Olive Leaf." The revelation began with a discussion of the Holy Ghost and the "light of Christ." Following this information, the Church is instructed in matters relating to the resurrection of man and the earth being the eventual habitat of celestialized beings.

All Kingdoms Have a Law

Law and order exist in all of God's creations. In this revelation, the Lord informs the reader that "All kingdoms have a law given." (D&C 88:36.) This truth pertains to the universe "and there is no space in the which there is no kingdom." These kingdoms have their laws in which there are bounds and conditions. (Verses 37-38.)

These thoughts led President Anthon H. Lund to indicate the value of this reign of law in the universe:

We believe that everything is ruled by law. We are thankful that it is so, for otherwise we would live in a world of chance, in a fearful uncertainty of what would happen next. I believe that the material laws that can be traced in the creation had an intelligent will behind them, that the laws themselves were never superior to the will of God. He made those laws, and by His power they became effective to accomplish His purposes. (Conference Report, April 1916, p. 12.)

These ideas help us to understand that in a world-system comprised of worlds or even in a minute particle of matter, there is order. If the conditions under which we exist were to be less than orderly, then confusion, uncertainty, doubt, and even despair, would be found. On the other hand, as the Lord has said, "all kingdoms have a law" and the laws govern; consequently, when man lives a law, the blessings or benefits of that law are his. Therefore, the Lord declares that all beings who abide in the law are justified because they cleave unto principles (laws) that bring them nearer to God. (Verse 39.) Man discovers that violation of eternal law brings greater influences to bear upon him in continuing to do wrong. No greater truth was spoken than found in verse 40 of Section 88, upon which President Charles W. Penrose had this to say about the attraction of evil to evil and virtue to virtue:

. . . If we do evil, evil impressions come naturally, and if we love to do good a good influence, a good spirit, is with us, and round about us, and in our being and we are sustained and supported thereby; and if we are corrupt and wicked and abominable and rebellious, the effects of our acts are right in our nature, and these things will be disclosed just as naturally as the opening of books made of paper and written upon with ink. (Conference Report, April 1917, p. 18.)

God Is in All Things

In Chapter 11 consideration was given to the manner by which God, though personal, having form and of tangible substance, is able to be in constant communication with his creations and is everywhere, as the scriptures aver. (Psalms 139:7-12; Acts 17:27-28.) God is everywhere by the "light of Christ." (D&C 88:6-13; 84:44-47.) Because of God's omnipresence through this spirit, the Lord said that he is through all things, all things are round about him, he is in all things, and all things are before him. (Ibid, 88:41.)

Not only is God omnipresent, but he is also omniscient. He knows all things. (Ibid., verse 4; 38:2.) The present is before his eyes, as the past may be, as well as the future. Latter-day Saints have a statement in the Lectures on Faith given in Kirtland to the School of the Prophets concerning the necessity of understanding that God possesses all of his attributes in perfection.

. . . God is the only supreme governor and independent being in whom all fulness and perfection dwell; who is omnipotent [all-powerful], omnipresent [everywhere present] and omniscient [all-knowing]; without beginning of days or end of life; and that in him every good gift and every good principle dwell . . . (Lecture Second, p. 13.)

. . . without the knowledge of all things, God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning to the end, that enables him to give that understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God had all knowledge, it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him. (Lecture Fourth, p. 43.)

Joseph Smith Inspired

Elder Orson Pratt called attention to verses 42 through 68 of Section 88 as evidence that Joseph Smith, who had little formal schoolroom education, and was but a youth, was inspired to give information concerning the reign of law in the universe, that other worlds are inhabited, and that it is man's opportunity to be in harmony with eternal law. Brother Pratt said:

. . . Yet these words were given to him, and they contain information and knowledge far beyond that which you will find recorded in the writings of the learned, information expressed so simply that a common mind can, in some degree, grasp it, and yet so sublime and so great that when we come to investigate its depths, it requires greater powers and greater understanding than what man naturally possesses. . . .

. . . We are also told that God is in the stars, those worlds so distant from ours, those great centers around which, no doubt, millions on millions of opaque bodies revolve as our planets revolve around our central body, the sun; that he is in those stars, that he is their light, and the power by which they are governed; or to come home directly to our earth, he is in the earth, and is the power and light and glory that is attached to the elements of our globe.

This would seem to exhibit before us the nature of that Being whom we worship. We worship him because of his glory, greatness, goodness, justice, mercy, knowledge, and wisdom. We worship him, because he has the power to govern and control the universe, and because he has commanded us to do. He is a personage. . . . (Journal of Discourses, 17:324.)

The Lord likened the various kingdoms (worlds) to a parable in which the owner of a field sent his servants into the field at a different hour, even to the twelfth servant, and then the Lord visited each one of his servants at an appointed time. Each servant received the light of the Lord's countenance in the hour in which he was visited. (D&C 88:42-60.) Then the revelation represents the parable as applying to other worlds and their inhabitants:

Therefore, unto this parable I will liken all these kingdoms, and the inhabitants thereof—every kingdom in its hour, and in its time, and in its season, even according to the decree which God hath made. (D&C 88:61.)

We know by revelation that the Lord's creations are numerous. (Moses 1:33-35; 7:30.) In their time each is to be visited by the Lord, that the inhabitants thereof will find the joy and blessing of the light which only he can give to them. In the sermon quoted above from Elder Pratt, we learn that our own earth will be visited by the Lord during the time prophesied as the millennium. As pointed out in the revelations, he shall reign upon the earth for the thousand years. (Ibid., 7:64-65; D&C 43:29-30.) Thus, from world to world will the Lord visit the pure in heart, who make up Zion. (Ibid., 97:21.) Elder Pratt discourses further concerning subsequent events relative to these creations.

But there is another thing I want you to understand. This will not be kept up to all eternity, it is merely a preparation for something still greater. And What is that? By and by, when each of these creations has fulfilled the measure and bounds set and the times given for its continuance in a temporal state, it and its inhabitants who are worthy will be made celestial and glorified together. Then, from that time henceforth and for ever, there will be no intervening veil between God and his people who are sanctified and glorified, and he will not be under the necessity of withdrawing from one to go and visit another, because they will all be in his presence. It matters not how far in space these creations may be located from any special celestial kingdom where the Lord our God shall dwell, they will be able to see him at all times. Why? Because it is only the fall, and the vail that has been shut down over this creation, that keep us from the presence of God. Let the vail be removed, which now hinders us from beholding the glory of God and the celestial kingdom; let this creation be once perfected, after having passed through its various ordeals, after having enjoyed the light of the countenance of our Lord, in our hour and in our season, and let all things be perfected and glorified, and there will be no necessity for this vail being shut down. (Journal of Discourses, 17:332.)

Who are these inhabitants of other worlds? The revelations are clear in this regard. These inhabitants "are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:24.)

Prayers Are Answered

As indicated in last chapter's lesson, through the "light of Christ" men are endowed with conscience, and their ability to come to the fulness of the gospel is determined largely by their response to the light they have received. If a person will seek the Lord earnestly, the Lord has promised to draw close to him. (D&C 88:63.) If he asks for things that are not expedient for him, it shall turn to his condemnation. (Verses 64-65.) Consequently, the Lord has admonished his children to call upon him in sincere prayer that they may know his will concerning them. Prayer is not intended, said President Joseph Fielding Smith, to gratify some desire which may not be the best for you. Actually, we should not be too insistent or demanding of the Father for our own wishes, but seek for light to know the will of the Lord. (Church History and Modern Revelation 1:371.)

The Lord knows our needs better than we do. His vantage point is vastly different from ours. If Latter-day Saints would seek to learn the Lord's will concerning themselves and live by that knowledge, then the scripture would be fulfilled promising that their prayers would be answered. (D&C 88:64.)

Truth Is Eternal

Among the many great truths in the Doctrine and Covenants are those expressed in the following verse:

Behold, that which you hear is as the voice of one crying in the wilderness—in the wilderness, because you cannot see him—my voice, because my voice is Spirit; my Spirit is truth; truth abideth and hath no end; and if it be in you it shall abound. (D&C 88:66.)

We are shut out of the immediate presence of God, therefore, we are in a "wilderness." We can, however, hear the voice of the Lord through his Spirit, which is truth. There follows in the revelation a statement that truth is absolute. Truth is eternal—it has no end! It does not change. Man's conception of a truth may change, but this does not affect the truth.

The fundamental principles of the gospel remain the same. They do not change. The principles that will sanctify people in the past will sanctify the people of our dispensation. Elder James E. Talmage asked the following question and then answered it:

. . . Have you ever found a single passage in Holy Writ that indicates in the least degree any revision or alteration of the fundamental laws and principles of the gospel? Have you ever found it necessary for God to amend Himself and His words? Men make constitutions and enact laws, and then have to repeal and alter them, but the fundamental laws of truth are eternal; they will never be amended, they will never be changed. As declared to Adam, so is it declared unto the world today: Except ye have faith in God and in His Son Jesus Christ, as the one and only Savior and Redeemer of mankind; except ye repent of your sins with a real and genuine repentance; except ye be baptized by immersion in water, at the hands of one having authority, and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost by the authorized laying on of hands, there is no possibility of your finding place in the kingdom of God. . . . You have never learned of any revision, amendment to or alteration in the law of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and in the form of the Church. Like the gospel itself, the Church adapts itself to the necessities of the times, to the conditions of life, but without the alteration of a single vital principle revealed of God. (Conference Report, October 1918, pp. 60-61.)

Keep Your Minds Single To God

"If your eye is single to my glory," and "sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God," are keys to successful Latter-day Saint living as indicated in these verses:

And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things.

Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will. (D&C 88:67-68.)

Does the instruction to keep one's mind single to God mean that all of one's thoughts should be about God? This does not seem reasonable, in view of one's responsibility to care for children, earn a livelihood, and the multitudinous other things that require concentration and attention during a day. But do we as a people think enough about real issues in life, or is our attention on less important things? President Joseph F. Smith decried the many hours spent by Latter-day Saints on matters which are wasteful when more important matters might be considered:

. . . Think of it, how many hours, how many days and months we spend, as the children of God, in the pursuit of the temporalities of life, in devoting our thoughts to those things which pertain to the present temporal life or existence, not the spiritual existence, or that portion or particular part of the temporal existence which pertains to, and is part of, the spiritual existence of man. Men and women talk, they use their tongues and their lips very much in conversation and in the expressions of their views and thoughts which pertain only to worldly things, to trivial matters, of no value, to the groveling things, so to speak, of the world, and devote very few moments to useful and uplifting thought and very few words comparatively, are spoken by them which pertain to the eternal, everlasting growth, development and happiness of mankind. We think of the world, of the present, more in regard to the temporalities of life, than we think about the principles of eternal truth that make for the salvation, happiness and well-being, temporally and spiritually, of our souls. (Conference Report, October 1913, p. 3.)

How can one keep his mind single to God? Two suggestions follow as helps: (1) Undertake the daily practice of studying the scriptures, alone, or with your family. A regular, systematic practice of study will be of great worth in accomplishing this objective and in bringing a spiritual influence into the home. (2) To bring one to a realization of basic truth concerning himself and his relationship to God, every Latter-day Saint might often ask himself these three fundamental questions: Where did I come from? Why am I here? What shall be my place in the future life?

Let Your Eye Be Single to My Glory

It is the will of the Lord that the Latter-day Saints apply their minds faithfully to understand his will. President Lorenzo Snow, after reminding the saints that Jesus was dependent upon the Father and he sought "but the will of the Father" (John 5:30), applied this principle in the following way:

. . . Our eye should be single to the glory of God. That is what we have left the other life for and come into this. We should seek to promote the interests of the Most High God, and to feel as Jesus felt, "I can of mine own self do nothing." Inasmuch as we act today and tomorrow, this week and next week, in the interest of God, and have our eye single to His glory, there can be no failure. . . . A man's mind should be single to the glory of God in everything that he starts to accomplish. (Millennial Star 56:451-452.)

If each member of the Church were to follow this counsel, truly, the heavens would be opened to him, for all mysteries would be unveiled, even the wonders of heaven. (D&C 76:5-10.) Then the promise of the Lord would be fulfilled, wherein he said that by continuing in God, more light is received, "and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." (Ibid., 50:24.)

Idle Thoughts and Loud Laughter

Twice in Section 88 association of laughter, idle thoughts, and light-mindedness is made.

Remember the great and last promise which I have made unto you; cast away your idle thoughts and your excess of laughter far from you.

Therefore, cease from all your light speeches, from all laughter, from all your lustful desires, from all your pride and light-mindedness, and from all your wicked doings. (D&C 88:69, 121.)

Does the Lord condemn laughter and expect his saints to be sober and serious all of the time? Upon other occasions, he has counseled that one should have a "glad heart and a cheerful countenance" (Ibid., 59:15) and receive merriment in the dance, song and music. (Ibid., 136:28.) If one reads carefully the scriptures quoted above, he will be impressed with the ideas that are associated with "loud" or "excess" of laughter—idle thoughts, lustful desires, pride, light-mindedness, and wicked doings. Unseemly and boisterous conduct at any time is out of harmony with the Spirit of the Lord. Laughter motivated by impure thoughts, light-mindedness toward sacred things, and unseemly conduct are condemned by the Lord; yet, happiness, joy, and cheerfulness are earmarks of the Saint.

Purify Your Hearts

The elders who had been called to testify and warn this generation were to return to Kirtland to receive instructions and to be endowed that they might go forth with greater zeal to build up the Church upon the earth. (D&C 88:70-73.)

Consistent with this charge these "first laborers" were to purify their hearts, and, by their delivering their message to this people, they were to be clean from the blood of this generation. (Verses 74-75.)

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr. has given some thoughts to sober our thinking in the realization that we should purify our hearts:

. . . Clean hands—clean of defilement of our fellow men, clean from the goods of our fellow men, clean from the blood of our fellow men; that must be the cleanliness which must be ours. Pure hearts—pure before the Lord; greed and lust and covetousness banished from our hearts, standing pure before God, that he may look therein and see there nothing which would cause him pain, and nothing which would make us blush.

I have often said: "I wonder how we would all stand, and individually how I would stand, if I were told that God was yonder in the mountain and I could go to him if I wished." I wonder if my life has been such that I could go and stand before the Being who could look me through and see my secret thoughts and hopes and ambitions. Unless and until my brothers and sisters, we could stand that test, we are not living as the Lord would have us live. (Conference Report, October, 1935, pp. 90-91.)
