Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 14

Knowledge and Events of the Future

(Section 88:76-116)

Among the many great truths revealed in Section 88, known as the "Olive Leaf," is the promise of seeing the Savior in his own time and in his own way, provided that the Church member will keep his mind single to God that light may dissipate darkness from mind and body. (D&C 88:67-68.)

With this counsel before the elders, they were admonished to assemble themselves together that they might purify their hearts in preparation for their ministry assignments. (Verses 70-75.)

Prayer and Fasting

Immediately following these admonitions, the Lord commands that his people fast and pray. Prayer and fasting have often been counseled, with many beneficial results promised. Elder James E. Talmage points out that faith is developed with the power to do good when one follows this counsel. (Jesus the Christ, p. 395; see also Mark 9:14-29.) Alma received a testimony of the truth by fasting and praying over a long period of time. (Alma 5:46.) In order to qualify in missionary service there is a need to seek the Lord humbly through this method. Alma records that the sons of Mosiah through diligent study and because "they had given themselves to much prayer and fasting" had the spirit of prophecy "and the spirit of revelation, and when they taught, they taught with power and authority of God." (Alma 17:2-3.) One of the many benefits of fasting is to prepare one for sincere and humble prayer.

The Lord, through his prophets, has instituted the fast day, with its opportunity for devout prayer, that the membership of his Church might realize, at least monthly, the benefits of this kind of devotion. (D&C 88:76; Alma 6:6; 3 Nephi 27:1; Moroni 6:5.)

President David O. McKay indicated that fasting from two meals once each month and giving the value of these meals for the relief of those in need is the application of Jesus' teachings. (Conference Report, April 1932, p. 65.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith emphasized the need for all to know God through prayer and to pray over one's temporal possessions. (DHC 5:31.) This counsel joins prayer to keeping the commandments in bringing forth the blessings of the Father. Real intent is the measure of success in prayer and in all of one's devotions. (Moroni 7:6-8.)

Teach One Another

In one of the better known admonitions from Section 88 is the counsel to teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom. (D&C 88:77.) Following this counsel to the early Church, the Lord pointed out the need to become schooled in all things that pertain to the kingdom of God. (Verses 78-79.)

The foregoing advice was given to brethren who had been and would yet proclaim the gospel, as is evident from the verses which follow:

That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you.

Behold, I sent you out to testify and warn the people, and it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor. (Verses 80-81.)

In terms of missionary preparation, with what should the missionary become acquainted in following this instruction to be prepared by study? It is evident from the foregoing verses that the Lord wanted his servants, who were to warn and to testify of the restoration of the gospel, to learn those things which would be of greatest value in discharging this responsibility. Here are the essentials from verses 78 and 79, above:

First and foremost, to learn of the law of the gospel that pertains to the kingdom of God, insofar as it was expedient for them to know. This is the study of the principles and ordinances of salvation, which, of course, includes those great moral precepts that should ever guide the Latter-day Saint. President Brigham Young said:

There are a great many branches of education: some go to college to learn languages, some to study law, some to study physic, and some to study astronomy, and various other branches of science. We want every branch of science taught in this place that is taught in the world. But our favorite study is that branch which particularly belongs to the Elders of Israel—namely, theology. Every Elder should become a profound theologian—should understand this branch better than all the world. There is no Elder who has the power of God upon him but understands more of the principles of theology than all the world put together. (Journal of Discourses, 6:317.)

Second, subjects which further prepare the missionary to testify and warn; that is, specific topics within the framework of the gospel of Jesus Christ and related fields of study. What are they?

(a) "Things both in heaven and in the earth and under the earth."

(b) "Things which have been."

(c) "Things which are."

(d) "Things which must shortly come to pass."

(e) "Things which are at home."

(f) "Things which are abroad."

(g) "The wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land."

(h) "A knowledge also of countries."

To the elders abroad in 1833, this counsel was given:

. . . Apply yourselves diligently to study, that your minds may be stored with all necessary information. (DHC 1:469.)

Another Application

It is true that verses 77 through 79, and especially the latter, when disassociated from their context—addressed to missionaries—set forth the basic Latter-day Saint philosophy of education. The sciences and social studies may be found in this counsel, such as astronomy, agronomy, geology, history, political science, languages, geography, and current events. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 556.) From the beginning of this dispensation the leaders of the Church have encouraged the membership to become educated in the things of God and also in secular subjects. President Brigham Young said this in these words:

Not only does the religion of Jesus Christ make the people acquainted with the things of God, and develop within them moral excellence and purity, but it holds out every encouragement and inducement possible, for them to increase in knowledge and intelligence, in every branch of mechanism, or in the arts and sciences, for all wisdom, and all the arts and sciences in the world are from God, and are designed for the good of His people. (Journal of Discourses, 13:147.)

President John Taylor indicated his feelings regarding the eventual place of the Latter-day Saints in the world of education, in prophesying that Zion will be ahead of the world even in secular learning. (Ibid., 21:100.)

The following remarks of two later presidents of the Church emphasize the purpose of education:

President David O. McKay: But gaining knowledge is one thing and applying it, quite another. Wisdom is the right application of knowledge; and true education—the education for which the Church stands—is the application of knowledge to the development of a noble and Godlike character.

A man may possess a profound knowledge of history and of mathematics; he may be an authority in psychology, biology, or astronomy; he may know all the discovered truths pertaining to geology and natural science; but if he has not with this knowledge that nobility of soul which prompts him to deal justly with his fellow men, to practice virtue and holiness in personal life, he is not a truly educated man. (Gospel Ideals, p. 440.)

President Joseph Smith: Educate yourself not only for time, but also for eternity. The latter of the two is the more important. Therefore, when we shall have completed the studies of time, and enter upon the commencement ceremonies of the great hereafter, we will find our work is not finished, but just begun. . . . (Gospel Doctrine, p. 269.)

Because Latter-day Saints believe that the temporal affairs of life have their spiritual meaning, the incentive to become educated is given greater stimulus. (D&C 29:34-35.)

It seems necessary, always, to keep in mind that the saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ save in this life and in the life to come and should never be neglected in preference to secular learning as such.

Missionary Responsibility

The missionary prepared to teach the principles of salvation and to learn the essentials of his environment is told that he should testify and warn the people. Today, as in 1832, all are to make known the principles of the gospel. This responsibility, so discharged, would free the missionary from the blood of his generation and leave the world without excuse. (Ibid., 88:81-82.) Those people who would come to the Lord early would never be forsaken by him. (Verse 83; Roy W. Doxey, The Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, Vol. 1, Chapter 37.)

Be Free

To be a true disciple of the Lord is to be free. (John 8:31-32.) The elders of the Church were to continue in the freedom which they had received through the gospel of Jesus Christ. The converts of 1832 had come out of the world to become citizens of the kingdom of God. To them the Lord addressed these words:

Abide ye in the liberty wherewith ye are made free; entangle not yourselves in sin, but let your hands be clean, until the Lord comes. (D&C 88:86.)

In terms of a person's purpose in life, true freedom is to be free from those practices which hinder one from advancing on to the goal of eternal perfection. When the Prophet Joseph Smith defined salvation, he said: "Salvation is nothing more nor less than to triumph over all our enemies and put them under our feet." (DHC 5:387.) Examples of man's enemies are the antonyms of the virtues such as those found in Section 4—skepticism, ignorance, hate, intolerance, fear, selfishness, and so forth. Members of the Church have found a new life in Jesus Christ through the benefits of release from the bondage of sin into freedom, a freedom which must be continually maintained through prayer, activity in the Church, and obedience to the other commandments. Habits and practices that bring one into bondage are contrary to the freedom which the gospel teaches one should seek.

"Entangle not yourselves in sin." (D&C 88:86.) The words of Elder James E. Talmage suggest to one that the person who lives close to sin in printed material, television, movies, etc., may soon find himself in bondage.

Hosts of capable souls have heedlessly put themselves into the enemy's power by yielding to the treacherous invitation to fraternize with sin. Such a one is made welcome in the camp of the foe, and, at first a visitor, he sooner or later awakens to the fact that he is a prisoner, and withal a deserter from the ranks of patriotism and honor. . . . (The Vitality of Mormonism, 1948 ed., p. 335.)

Until the Lord Comes

From the beginning of this dispensation, the warning voice of the Lord has been uttered in revelation and the fulfillment of the prophecies by disturbances on the earth. (D&C 1:35; 29:14-21; 43:18-27; 45:26-42.)

Similar warnings of judgments to come were given in 1832, and the Lord's prophets since then have called upon all to repent lest these judgments come upon them. The First Presidency of 1949 (President George Albert Smith, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., David O. McKay) indicated that 5,000 missionaries were proclaiming the gospel in the world, and their purpose was stated as:

. . . The mission of these ambassadors is to cry repentance unto this generation as well as to teach the Gospel of Jesus Christ in its fulness. Should this message be rejected, the Lord has warned the people as follows . . . [D&C 88:89-91 quoted]

As the representatives of our Heavenly Father, we admonish people everywhere to turn unto the Lord and forsake evil, lest His judgments overtake them. Only through a return to the teachings of the Master can peace come to the world and the kingdom of God be made ready for the return of the Prince of Peace to reign as King of Kings and Lord of Lords. (The Deseret News, December 14, 1949.)

Following the predicted earthquakes, war, floods, and commotion among the inhabitants of the earth, angels are to fly through the heavens crying "prepare ye for the Bridegroom cometh." (D&C 88:92.)

The Sign of the Son of Man

When the Savior was asked concerning the signs of his coming in the last days, he replied by mentioning several of these signs, one of which was "the sign of the Son of Man." (Matt. 24:30.) In our generation, he has revealed that during the tribulations of the last days, this sign shall be seen by all people. (D&C 88:93.) What is this sign? The Prophet discoursed upon the signs of Jesus' second coming and said that the Lord would reveal his intent to his servants the prophets concerning the judgments.

. . . There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet, etc. But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east. (DHC 5:337.)

The Seven Trumps

Seven angels are to sound their trumps, each trump marking an event, beginning with the binding of the apostate church. Then silence will reign for an half an hour, preparatory to the second coming of the Lord. At his advent, the resurrection of celestial beings will occur, followed by the resurrection of the terrestrial beings. The millennium will come when the Savior and men shall live in peace and righteousness for a thousand years. At the end of that period, telestial persons will come from their graves, and, finally, after the millennium, the sons of perdition will be resurrected. (D&C 88:94-102; chapter 7.)

The revelation continues with the remaining three trumps, announcing that all shall worship God their Maker "for the hour of his judgment is come." (D&C 88:103-104.) Announcement of the fall of Babylon, or wickedness, will follow with the triumphant cry by the seventh angel:

. . . It is finished; it is finished! The Lamb of God hath overcome and trodden the wine-press alone, even the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God. (Verse 106.)

All Things to Be Known

During the millennium the solution of many vexing problems concerning the earth and its inhabitants will be given. (D&C 101:32-34.) The Lord has revealed that for each of the seven thousand years of earth's temporal existence since Adam's fall, men's acts have been recorded. The revealing of the secret acts of men and "the thoughts and intents of their hearts" and the mighty works of God in each one of these seven periods, will occur during the millennial period of peace and brotherhood upon the earth. (Ibid., 88:108-110; 77:6-7, 12; chapter 56.)

Post-Millennial Events

The last great effort of Satan to ascend to the throne of God will come when he is loosed at the end of the millennium. A great division among the people will result when Satan reigns for a little season. He will gather together his forces, comprising the spirits who followed him in the pre-mortal world and those mortals who apostatized from the truth at the end of the millennium, for the final conflict. Michael, or Adam, the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall gather together his armies, even the hosts of heaven to battle against Satan and his armies. (D&C 88:111-113.)

And then cometh the battle of the great God; and the devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the saints any more at all.

For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him who seeketh the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the Lamb. (Ibid., verses 114-115.)

With the final defeat of the devil and his followers, they will be cast into the hell which was prepared for them from the beginning. (Ibid., 29:38; 76:44.) Then follows the sounding of the last three angels' trumps already mentioned, announcing the judgment, the fall of wickedness, and the triumph of God's work for the salvation of men. (Ibid., 88:103-107.)
