Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 15

Great Truths; The School of the Prophets

(Section 88:117-141)

Through this revelation (Section 88) given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, we have learned that peace is spoken to all men. The section begins with an exposition on the Holy Ghost and the functions and blessings of the "light of Christ." A message of peace to all who read Section 88 is that earth-life—mortality—is of extreme importance in the great plan of life and salvation, for each of us will be resurrected with a tangible, immortal body that, together with our spirit, will endure throughout the eternities in the kingdom which we have merited through our obedience to laws. The physical infirmities of mortality will be corrected, for in the resurrection men will be physically perfect. (Alma 11:42-45; 40:23.)

The Lord further spoke peace to his saints in certifying to the reality of the life beyond the grave, and that the faithful Latter-day Saint will find blessed association with loved ones with the joy of coming forth in the first resurrection to advance onward to the perfection of eternal life. (D&C 88:97-98; 76:50-70.) This revelation also assures man that the universe is governed by law and, thus, man can have a sense of security and faith in himself and in the Creator. The Latter-day Saint realizes that God is omnipotent, omnipresent, and omniscient; that he knows the end from the beginning and is in control of all his kingdoms. He may thus have his prophets foretell the present conditions and also the future, that the saints may enjoy this peace. (James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith, p. 491.)

There is peace in the knowledge that prayers are answered and that God's truth is unchanging—it abideth forever, having no end! We are taught, also, in this revelation of the need for prayer and fasting, and of the application of knowledge—both secular and gospel—that prepares one to be a more effective servant. One of the important segments of knowledge in the 88th Section is the information about world conditions before the coming of the Savior, and also events which will culminate in the final victory of the Eternal Father through His Son Jesus Christ. (Chapter 14.)

Organized Study

The verses which follow in Section 88 (verses 117-141) instruct the elders to organize study activities that they may effectively present their message to the world. In the process of giving directions on how this organized study may be accomplished, great truths are enunciated to guide them in their study.

In this revelation, the Lord calls upon his servants, those who are the first laborers in this last kingdom, to organize themselves and to purify their hearts that they may be accepted by the Father. (Verses 74-75.) They are also instructed to come together in a solemn assembly where the Priesthood members may prepare themselves by study and by faith. (Verse 117.)

"As All Have Not Faith"

The Lord placed emphasis upon the necessity of his people to seek learning from the best books. The following passage is found not only in the "Olive Leaf" but also in the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple. (D&C 109:7.)

And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith. (D&C 88:118.)

Faith is a gift of God through Jesus Christ. The Savior made it possible to have faith in him through his sacrificial death in "bringing about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance." (Alma 34:15.) The spark of faith with which men are born, engendered by the "light of Christ," is increased in many ways. Although faith is a gift, it must be accepted and developed to bring men back into God's presence. One way in which faith is enlarged is through study. When men learn what the Lord Jesus Christ has done for them, there is quickened in their hearts a love which grows and deepens as they realize the meaning of the atonement. In the Book of Mormon, Jacob, son of Lehi, reveals that only through the atonement of Jesus would mankind receive a resurrection from the dead. Without the atonement, all mortals would go into the spirit world to remain forever and ever, "to rise no more." Realizing the wisdom, goodness, mercy, and greatness of the great plan, the Nephite prophet continues:

O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

And our spirits must have become like him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself. . . .

O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell. . . . (2 Nephi 9:8-10.)

When an honest man realizes what might have been had there been no atonement, his love for the Eternal Father and his Atoner, Jesus Christ, is quickened and faith grows in his heart. Alma explained that when the soul is touched by desire through understanding of the Lord's plan, "it beginneth to enlarge" and enlighten the understanding and, as this seed is nurtured by good works of diligence and patience, the rewards of faith come. (Alma 32:21-43.)

In 1832, the brethren were counseled that, since all did not have faith, a way to develop this gift was to study words of wisdom from the best books. Viewed from the purpose of life which can only be considered from the eternity of the past as well as the future, the "best books" are those which give man knowledge and faith in God's eternal purposes. To the Latter-day Saint, these are the standard works of the Church—the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price—and the sermons and writings of God's prophets. Brigham Young, Jr., an apostle, expressed this necessity in these words:

. . . I say unto you fathers, let the Bible, the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Coventants be upon your tables, and have them read in your households. Elders of Israel, read them, especially the Book of Mormon, which is a pure translation from the original. He who reigns above has said that it is true. There is more contained in the Book of Mormon pertaining to this great work of the latter days than can be found in all the rest of the books put together, save only the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. It delineates and foreshadows the destiny of the Latter-day Saints. . . . (Conference Report, October 1901, p. 67.)

It was indicated in the last chapter that all useful knowledge should be sought after, but it remains true that the knowledge that brings exaltation comes by revelation. Elder John A. Widtsoe said:

There are of course many kinds of knowledge; some of lesser, some of higher value. When Joseph Smith said that a man cannot be saved in ignorance, [D&C 131:6] he meant naturally ignorance of the laws which altogether lead to salvation. Such knowledge is of the highest value. It should be sought after first. Then other kinds of knowledge may be added to support and amplify the more direct knowledge of spiritual law. . . . (Evidences and Reconciliations 3:71.)

"By Study and Also by Faith"

In the obtaining of the knowledge that saves here and in the hereafter, effort and faith must be used. The trusting and believing soul, who, in his humility, seeks the Lord's will through the scriptures and the living prophets, finds his reward. The doubter, lacking teachableness and submissiveness, finds himself receiving the lesser portion of revealed truth. Alma gave these ideas in a way that impresses one with the strength of his conviction:

And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full. (Alma 12:10.)

How shall we receive knowledge by faith? Elder B. H. Roberts has given us an insight into this tremendous thought in these words:

Knowledge by faith! What a thought—knowledge by faith! But let no one suppose that knowledge by faith is to be obtained by an easy road or method. It will demand effort and strenuous life and the exaltation of life itself to obtain knowledge by faith. . . .

You perhaps remember in our Word of Wisdom, that it is said if the saints will observe that Word of Wisdom, and keep the commandments of God, that they shall have access to hidden treasures of knowledge by reason of faith. Knowledge by faith requires exalted living. . . .

But it is no lazy man's task—this getting knowledge by faith. It requires the bending of the whole soul, the calling up of the depths of the human mind, and linking them with God—the right connection must be formed. Then comes knowledge by faith. (Discourses of B. H. Roberts, pp. 25-26.)

Seriousness of Purpose

There is nothing in this life that requires more serious study than to learn the purpose of existence and then to determine how that purpose can be accomplished. In order that the Lord's servants might be prepared to undertake their positions as missionaries to testify and warn the world, it was necessary that a house be prepared where they might study, pray, fast, and grow in faith. (D&C 88:119.) Later, the people were reprimanded for not following the counsel to build the Kirtland Temple, which served this purpose. (Ibid., 95:11-17.)

Light speeches, wicked doings, light-mindedness, and loud laughter arising out of boisterous conduct should not be permitted when men come together to be enlightened by the Spirit. (Ibid., 88:121; Chapter 13.)

The following advice, based upon this passage, was given by President Joseph F. Smith:

. . . The Lord has called upon us to be a sober-minded people, not given to much laughter, frivolity and light-mindedness, but to consider thoughtfully and thoroughly the things of His kingdom that we may be prepared in all things to understand the glorious truths of the gospel, and be prepared for blessings to come. Let me read a verse from the Doctrine and Covenants. This is the command of the Lord to the Latter-day Saints.

"Remember the great and last promise which I have made unto you. Cast away your idle thoughts and your excess of laughter far from you." And then again, in the same section, I have read from Section 88:69; I now read from verse 121: "Therefore, cease from all your light speeches, from all laughter, from all your lustful desires, from all your wicked doings." This is the word of the Lord to the Latter-day Saints. I believe that it is necessary for the Saints to have amusement, but it must be of the proper kind. I do not believe the Lord intends and desires that we should pull a long face and look sanctimonious and hypocritical. I think he expects us to be happy and of a cheerful countenance, but he does not expect of us the indulgence in boisterous and unseemly conduct and the seeking after the vain and foolish things which amuse and entertain the world. He has commanded us to the contrary for our own good and eternal welfare. (Conference Report, October 1916, p. 70.)

Cease to Be Covetous

The last of the ten commandments concerns covetousness. Covetousness is to long inordinately for something that is another's. (Exodus 20:17.) Richard L. Evans of the Council of the Twelve, has pointed out that all of the ten commandments are inter-related and the last one—"thou shalt not covet"—is related to the others in this way:

He who covets the mere material "things" of life may have "other" gods before him, and may "bow down before them," in thought and in spirit, if not in physical fact.

He who covets may become coarse and careless in other things also, such as taking "the name of the Lord God in vain."

He who covets may desecrate the Sabbath day to get gain.

He who covets may fail to sustain his father and his mother in their need.

Some who have coveted have killed to get gain.

Many who have coveted a "neighbour's wife" have committed the grievous sin of adultery.

He who covets is more likely to steal (or to swindle or embezzle or engage in sharp practices).

He who covets may bear false witness to get gain. (The Ten Commandments Today, p. 142.)

There is another phase of covetousness implied in the same passage from which this discussion is taken; namely, that one should not be stingy with his knowledge of the gospel. "Learn to impart one to another as the gospel requires." Those who have the ability and the information to enlighten the lives of others should bring forth the words of salvation to their fellow men. As members of the Church we should bear our testimonies—impart one to another as the gospel requires. The words of eternal life are to be spoken appropriately, however, and without giving offense.

Other Truths

Counsel is given the elders to cease from idleness, uncleanliness, finding fault with one another, sleeping longer than is needful. And, then, as if to climax a series of great truths with one truth that, if lived, would comprehend all others—love—the Lord revealed:

And above all things, clothe yourselves with the bond of charity, as with a mantle, which is the bond of perfectness and peace.

Pray always, that ye may not faint, until I come. Behold, and lo, I will come quickly, and receive you unto myself. Amen. (D&C 88:125-126.)

As said elsewhere in this lesson, it is only through what Jesus has done for us that we may receive joy unbounded instead of misery. "Clothe yourselves with the bond of charity." Charity is the pure love of Christ. (Moroni 7:47.) Without this love, no man can inherit the kingdom of heaven. (Ether 12:34; 2 Nephi 26:30.) One can understand the emphasis put upon the need for charity by Paul in view of the Book of Mormon teaching on this great virtue. (1 Cor. 13.) Peace is promised the Church in the truths given in this lesson and ending with the counsel to become clothed with the love of Christ.

School of the Prophets

In order that the holders of the priesthood might learn their duties and receive instruction in the gospel and other subjects which would prepare them for the ministry, the Lord commanded that there be organized a School of the Prophets. (D&C 88:119-120, 122, 127-141.) The manner in which this school was to be conducted is given in this revelation. (Verses 122, 128-136.) Only those, however, who were clean from the blood of this generation were to participate. (Verse 138.) Preaching the gospel and keeping the covenants were the means by which these elders could be made clean.

In the winter of 1832-33, the School of the Prophets was organized in Kirtland, where meetings were conducted. The ordinance of washing of feet was attended to as commanded. (Verses 139-141; Essentials in Church History, p. 151.)

The brethren (many of whom had not had the opportunity for formal school education) were thirsting for knowledge. The Lord made provision through this plan that they might learn of the doctrine of the kingdom and secular subjects. These men were different from others in that they had the Holy Ghost to enlighten them in their learning. President John Taylor said:

Now, then, if men, without much of the advantage of what is termed education in this world, are filled with the Spirit of God, the revelations of the Holy Ghost, and can comprehend the relationship of man to God, can know their duties, and can teach a people, a nation, or a world how they may be saved and obtain thrones, principalities, powers and dominions in the eternal worlds,—if men can understand these principles by the gift of the Holy Ghost and the revelations of the Most High, and are enabled to place them before the people so that they can comprehend them, then, I say, these are the men of education—the men of intellect—the men who are calculated to bless and ennoble the human family. This is the kind of education that we want; and the more simple those principles can be conveyed the better: they are more adapted to the wants and intelligence of the human family. . . .

This is the difference between the system that we have embraced and the systems of the world—they are of men, this is of God. . . .

What did any of us know as rational, eternal beings, until we were educated in this Church? (Journal of Discourses 5:260-261.)
