Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 19

John's Testimony of Jesus

(Section 93:1-20)

The material for study in this chapter comes from one of the most important revelations received by Joseph Smith. Probably better than any other revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 93 provides us with information concerning the Savior that is intended to enable us to worship him better. (D&C 93:19.)

The Lord mentioned in the first verse is Jesus Christ. Unmistakably the reader is told that the only way by which a person may come unto Him is by forsaking his sins. This truth, stated differently, is that the atonement of Christ remits sins only if the person repents and accepts the Savior by baptism. (D&C 29:17; 42:1.)

To Know Him

The promised blessing of those who keep the commandments is to know God. (John 17:30.) To know God means more than the usual meaning that one may, by the Holy Ghost, know of his existence and of his plan of salvation. (This means of knowledge is known to thousands of Latter-day Saints. Keeping the commandments is an essential to meet the requirements.)

Men may also literally "see his face" in this life. (Ibid., 67:10-14; 93:1.) The Prophet Joseph Smith, in commenting upon the word of Jesus to his disciples in John 14:12-27, said:

The other Comforter spoken of is a subject of great interest, and perhaps understood by few of this generation. After a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins, and is baptized for the remission of his sins and receives the Holy Ghost, (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him, Son, thou shalt be exalted. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and his election made sure, then it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter, which the Lord hath promised the Saints, as is recorded in the testimony of St. John, in the 14th chapter, from the 12th to the 27th verses . . . [Especially verses 16, 17, 18, 21 and 23.]

Now what is this other Comforter? It is no more nor less than the Lord Jesus Christ Himself; and this is the sum and substance of the whole matter; that when any man obtains this last Comforter, he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him, and the Lord will teach him face to face, and he may have a perfect knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; and this is the state and place the ancient Saints arrived at when they had such glorious visions—Isaiah, Ezekiel, John upon the Isle of Patmos, St. Paul in the three heavens, and all the Saints who held communion with the general assembly and Church of the First Born. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 150-151.)

Many names might be furnished of those who have literally seen the Lord other than those who are named by the Prophet Joseph Smith. The brother of Jared (Ether 3:13-20); Nephi and his brother Jacob (2 Nephi 11:2-3); Moroni (Ether 12:38-41); Stephen, the first Christian martyr (Acts 7:54-56); Sidney Rigdon (D&C 76:22-24); Oliver Cowdery (Ibid., 110:1-10); and many others of this dispensation have seen the resurrected Lord.

To know God is in the ultimate sense to become like him. For this purpose the Melchizedek Priesthood is available to man that the ordinances of the House of the Lord might prepare him for this greatest measure of salvation. (Ibid., 88:19-23; 124:27-28, 41-42.)

Elder Marion G. Romney of the Council of the Twelve, counsels us as follows in the way to eternal life:

With complete surrender to the spirit of the gospel let us, honestly and without guile, search our own souls and find the weakness which presently impedes our upward climb to eternal life. If that weakness be faultfinding, evil speaking of the Lord's anointed, or profaning the name of Deity, let us desist. If it be neglecting our prayers, let us pause night and morning in our mad rush and kneel with our families and in our secret chambers while we pour out our souls in thanksgiving and petition, until hungering and thirsting after righteousness we are filled with the Holy Ghost. If it be failure to obtain the sealing ordinances of the temple for ourselves and families, let us straightway prepare to enter that holy place and obtain them before it is too late. If it be the giving way to anger, of appetite for the things forbidden in the Word of Wisdom, or surrendering to baser lusts; if it be desecration of the Sabbath day or refusing to contribute of our time and means according to the laws of the Church for the building of the kingdom; whatever it be, let us find it, recognize it, and do something about it daily. (Conference Report, October 1965, p. 17.)

The True Light

He who comes to the Savior may not only see his face, and know that he is, but he will also understand some other basic truths about Him. First, that he is the light which lighteth every man that comes into the world. (D&C 93:2.) About this principle, known as the "light of Christ," we have already learned several other facts: (1) it proceeds from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space (Ibid., 88:12); (2) it performs the following functions: (a) creative, (b) life-giving, (c) governing, (d) enlightening or inspiring (Ibid., verses 6-13); (3) it is a great communication system by which God's power is everywhere in the world; (4) as men draw closer to God, his light is received more abundantly, even to bringing them to the Father. (Chapter 11.)

Jesus Christ is the true light. This truth is related to the property of the light of Christ that inspires and gives enlightenment to men. It is this influence in the world that ennobles man, raises him to greater heights of accomplishments, and teaches him that there is joy in right doing; whereas, regret and sorrow follow when man does not live up to the light he possesses. (D&C 84:45-47; Moroni 7:10-19.)

In other revelations the Lord speaks of himself as the light which shineth in darkness but the darkness comprehends it not. (D&C 6:21; 39:1-2; 45:7.) In this sense the revelations from the Lord are light, as opposed to darkness. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, pp. 36-37.)

The Oneness of the Father and the Son

In Section 93 and other scriptures, the doctrine that the Eternal Father and his Son Jesus Christ are one is known. (D&C 93:3; John 10:30; 1 John 5:7.) As a part of this concept, further emphasis is given in this language: the Son is in the Father, and the Father is in the Son. (John 14:10.) This truth should not confuse a Latter-day Saint in his belief that the Eternal Father and the Son are separate and distinct as to their individuality. (D&C 130:22; John 17:11, 20-24.) Of what does this oneness consist? Elder James E. Talmage wrote:

This unity is a type of completeness; the mind of any one member of the Trinity is the mind of the others: seeing as each of them does with the eye of perfection, they see and understand alike. Under any given conditions each would act in the same way, guided by the same principles of unerring justice and equity. The one-ness of the Godhead, to which the scriptures so abundantly testify, implies no mystical union of substance, nor any unnatural and therefore impossible blending of personality. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are as distinct in their persons and individualities as are any three personages in mortality. Yet their unity of purpose and operation is such as to make their edicts one, and their will the will of God. (The Articles of Faith, p. 41.)

The Father and the Son

Jesus speaks of himself as having received a fulness from the Father, and he is therefore known as the Father. He, of course, was the Son because he was tabernacled in the flesh as the offspring of the Father. (D&C 93:4.) That Christ is known in the scriptures as the Father is well known. (Isa. 9:6; Ether 3:14; 2 Nephi 19:6; Mosiah 16:15; Alma 11:38-40.)

According to an exposition on the doctrine of the Father and the Son by the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles, issued on June 30, 1916, there are three different meanings of the title "Father" as applied to Jesus Christ. These are: (1) "Father" as Creator (Ether 4:7; Mosiah 16:15); (2) "Father" of those who abide in His Gospel (D&C 50:41; 25:1; 34:3; 39:1-4); (3) "Father" because he represents the Father who gave him the right to use the title (John 5:43; 3 Nephi 20:35; 28:10; D&C 50:43).

The Works of the Father Manifest

Jesus came into the world to perform the works of his Father and that men might know of the Father. (D&C 93:5; John 5:19.) In this latter sense he became the revelation of God to the world, and therefore, he was known as the "Word." (John 1:1, 14; D&C 93:8; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 346.) Jesus was also the "Word" because "the word of God came through Him and was embodied in Him. (Charles W. Penrose, Conference Report, April 1915, p. 37.)

John's Record

The introduction to Section 93 in the Doctrine and Covenants and also the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary (p. 590) identify the testator of the Savior in this revelation to be John the Beloved, the apostle of the Lord. Of him it is recorded that he saw and bore record of the Lord's glory, but his complete record is yet to be revealed. (D&C 93:6.) The author of the Book of John reveals the incompleteness of the record by saying that "the world itself could not contain the books that should be written about the Savior." (John 21:25.)

The promise is given, however, that the fulness of John's record will be revealed if faithfulness is present. (D&C 93:18.)

Jesus As Creator

Jesus was in the beginning before the world was created. (D&C 93:7.) As the messenger of salvation he brought the words of the Father to men, and he also revealed the character of God in his life. Only the being who was truth, who taught only the truth, could redeem men and the world. Jesus paid for the transgression in Eden that brought spiritual and physical death into the world, by sacrificing his life, the life of a being who was sinless and capable of rescuing men from these deaths. (Ibid., verses 8-9; 2 Nephi 9:6-12; D&C 45:3-4.) The Savior redeemed us, as the Apostle Paul said: "he hath purchased [us] with his own blood." (Acts 20:28.)

John testifies that men were made by him; in fact, all things were his creation. This earth was created by him through the "light of Christ"; consequently, all men and animals were created through him for all are made of the dust of the earth. (D&C 88:10.) The fulness with which Christ is the creator is expressed in this authoritative source:

Christ was the actual Maker of the worlds, as an architect is the actual maker of the houses he builds. They were made by Him. But they were also made through Him; for He was as stated before, the Executive of the Father in the work of creation. They were also made of Him; for He is the very source of the light and life that permeate creation. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 591.)

It should also be noted that not only was Christ the creator of this earth but of "worlds." (D&C 93:10; 88:6-10.)

The Only Begotten of the Father

The references to Jesus in the scriptures as the "Only Begotten of the Father" are many. (John 3:16, 18; 2 Nephi 25:12; Alma 9:26; D&C 20:21; Moses 6:52.) The First Presidency in 1916 affirmed the literalness of Jesus' birth by his mortal mother, Mary, and the Eternal Father, and Elder James E. Talmage has written about this doctrine. (The Articles of Faith, p. 466; Jesus the Christ, p. 81.) Because he was the Begotten Son of the Father in the flesh, it was possible for him to offer the infinite atonement for men.

From Grace to Grace

John's testimony is that Jesus grew from grace to grace, that all things were not his at first.

And I, John, saw that he received not of the fulness at the first, but received grace for grace;

And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness;

And thus he was called the Son of God, because he received not of the fulness at the first. (D&C 93:12-14.)

Born as a babe, reared from boyhood to manhood, the Child Jesus developed as other children. As with us, the memory of his former life in the spirit world was withheld that his growth might be an experience of mortality. Elder Talmage points out that this growth was "from good to greater good, not from evil to good." (Jesus the Christ, p. 112.)

In the temple, at the age of twelve, Jesus knew of his divine parentage through the Eternal Father. He was about his Father's business, not the business of Joseph, his legal father. (Jesus the Christ, pp. 113-116.)

The Bible is silent on Jesus' boyhood and the years up to the time of his ministry at thirty years, except for the event of the temple at the age of twelve. (Luke 2:41-52.) Additional information regarding his formative years to the time of his ministry is given us by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

And it came to pass that Jesus grew up with his brethren, and waxed strong, and waited upon the Lord for the time of his ministry to come. And he served under his father, and he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him. And after many years, the hour of his ministry drew nigh. (Inspired Version, Matt. 3:22-25.)

"For he needed not that any man should teach him" suggests that the normal difficulties of teaching and disciplining were not present in his life, except for the period of infancy.

Ultimately, as an exalted man, Jesus declared that he had received all power from the Father. (Matt. 28:16-18; D&C 93:16-17.) Even as Jesus received a fulness after the resurrection, so also may the faithful in their exalted state. (Romans 8:17; D&C 84:38.)

The Heavens Were Opened

In testifying of Christ's divinity as the Only Begotten Son of God, John refers to the time when Jesus was baptized. (D&C 93:15.) Several times the Father testified from the heavens of his relationship to his Only Begotten Son; the occasion of Jesus' baptism is one of these. (Matt. 17:5; John 12:27-28.)

At Jesus' baptism the heavens were opened and John the Baptist saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, with the voice of the Father saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." (Matt. 3:16; c.f. Mark 1:9-11; Luke 3:21-22.)

Does the Holy Ghost come in the form of a dove? No, said the Prophet Joseph Smith, but the dove is the sign of the Holy Ghost. (DHC 5:260-261.)

Summary

The intent of John's testimony given by the Savior to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the first 19 verses of Section 93 is to show wherein Jesus Christ is divine. What truths about Christ are pointed to in establishing this greatest of truths?

First, the Savior is the true light, which gives understanding to all men through what is known as the "light of Christ." This "light" is life-giving and sustains man's environment as a place where he can work out his salvation.

Second, he is the "Word," the giver of the revelations, and also he was the revelation of God to the world while in his mortal ministry.

Third, so completely does he represent the Father that he and the Father are one in will, mind, purpose, etc. Because this is so, he is known as the "Father" in the scriptures.

Fourth, by giving his life in atonement for sin, he became man's Redeemer and Savior.

Fifth, he is the creator of worlds, including our earth, and therefore, since man is created of the earth, he is man's creator.

Sixth, he is literally the Only Begotten Son of the Father in the flesh. Thus, Jesus had power over death and yet he was capable of dying that he might become man's Redeemer.

Seventh, notwithstanding his divine birth, he like all men, developed as a babe to manhood, but he grew faster and understood early in life his mission. Through this process, he received a fulness from the Father.

Eighth, from the heavens the Father acknowledged Jesus Christ as his Son and also that he was pleased with his ministry while in mortality.

Conclusion

What do these truths mean to the Latter-day Saints? The Savior says that they were given,

. . . that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness.

For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace. (D&C 93:19-20)

To accept the foregoing truths about Jesus Christ indicates that the way to godhood is possible. The application of this truth was well expressed by Elder B. H. Roberts as he contrasted common beliefs of the world about Jesus Christ and the truth as revealed in the scriptures:

Jesus Christ is God manifested in the flesh, proved to be so from the scripture; the character of God is revealed in the wonderful life that Jesus, the Son of God, lived on earth; in it we see God in action; and from it we see the gentleness, the compassion, the love, and also the justice and severity of God. Jesus Christ is God; and He is also man; but I deplore those sectarian refinements which try to tell us about the humanity of Jesus being separate from the divinity of Jesus. He Himself made no such distinctions. He was divine, spirit and body, and spirit and body was exalted to the throne of His Father, and sits there now with all the powers of the Godhead residing in Him bodily, an immortal, glorified, exalted man! The express image and likeness of God the Father; for as the Son is, so is the Father. Yet when the Latter-day Saints announce to the world that we believe God to be an exalted man, we are told that we are blasphemers. But as long as the throne of Jesus Christ stands sure, so long as His spirit remains in His immortal body of flesh and bones, glorified and everlasting, shall keep His place by the side of the Father, so long will the doctrine that God is an exalted man hold its place against the idle sophistries of the learned world. The doctrine is true. It cannot be unthroned. A truth is a solemn thing. Not the mockery of ages, not the lampooning of the schoolmen, not the derision of the multitude, not the blasphemy of the world, can affect it; it will always remain true. And this doctrine, announced by Joseph Smith to the world, that God is an exalted man, that Jesus Christ is the revelation of God to the world and that He is just like his Father, and that those who are His brethren may become as He is, when they have walked in His footsteps—that is a doctrine that will stand sure and fast as the throne of God itself. For Jesus Christ was God manifested in the flesh. He was the revelation of God to the world. He was and is and ever will remain an exalted man. He is, and always will remain, God. ("The Doctrine of Deity," The Seventy's Course in Theology, p. 188-189.)
