Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 20

Pre-mortal Existence

(Section 93:21-23, 27-29, 33-34)

In the last chapter we learned of Jesus' pre-mortal existence. John bore record that Jesus was in the beginning, before the world was. (D&C 93:7.) In fact, in that existence, Jesus created "worlds"; he was the creator of men and of all things. (Ibid., verse 10.) And then, he was made flesh and dwelt among men. (Ibid., verse 4.)

Faith in Christ

In the Christian world many theologians teach that Jesus Christ was not literally the son of God, that he was only mortal—not divine; that his excellence was only in his teachings and not that he died for man's sins and that man might live as a resurrected being. An indication of the beliefs of some "religious liberals" regarding this understanding of Jesus is found in the following excerpts:

For traditional Christianity maintains that Jesus was the literal Son of God, of the same substance as the Father, an immortal and divine creature who, as part of an involved plan for the salvations of men's souls, assumed mortal form and came to earth for a brief period nineteen hundred years ago. On this arbitrary assumption as to the divinity of Christ rests the whole imposing structure of orthodox Christianity . . . For him, Jesus was a man, not a superman; a Jew thoroughly versed in the customs and religious ideas of his people; a teacher and preacher in the grand traditions of the Hebrew prophets . . . but withal, gloriously, a man, even as you and I. . . .

The religious liberal is committed . . . to a belief as "not God who made himself a man, but a man who made himself a god." (Waldemar Argow, What Do Religions Liberals Believe? pp. 49, 50, 54.)

These thoughts regarding Jesus seem to be increasing in a Christian world committed by the Bible to the acceptance of Jesus as the Son of God.

In a comprehensive survey conducted a few years ago, it was indicated that despite the acknowledged belief in God by over 96 per cent of Americans, there was little real vitality in their belief. When the leadership is steeped in false teachings that do not give real, genuine faith, then it can be expected that the followers will not have a vital faith. In this survey, the following was revealed by three leading theologians of the Jewish, Protestant, and Catholic faiths:

Most Americans regard religion as a private, painless pathway to heaven.

Nearly three-quarters of them do not think of God as having any intimate relation to their daily life.

Nearly three-quarters do not consciously connect their religion with their judgments of right and wrong.

Religious education in America ends in the elementary stage. College students get adult education in the secular field, but only infant education in the religious field. (Henry C. Link, The Way to Security, p. 213.)

In the Lord's Preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, purposes for the restoration of the true church and gospel are given. Among these is the intent of the Lord that faith shall increase in the hearts of men. (D&C 1:21.) Fundamentally, this was to be accomplished through an awakening of the spirit within one to a recognition of the truth as taught in the gospel of Jesus Christ. Without the true knowledge of the Godhead, consisting of the Father, his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, it would be impossible to come to the faith that saves. The Spirit which converts accompanies truth as people are prepared for it. (John 17:3; 1 Cor. 2:14.) Has the true knowledge of the members of the Godhead, and especially of the being and mission of the Savior, kindled faith in the breasts of Latter-day Saints? Elder Orson F. Whitney eloquently expresses an answer to this question, using Latter-day Saint pioneers as an example:

There is no more eloquent preaching than when men and women will forsake their native land, their homes, their parents, their children, their material possessions—every earthly thing, and cross the stormy ocean, the heated plains, the frosty mountains, many of them laying down their lives, to be buried in a lonely grave by the wayside, pulling handcarts, wading rivers, crossing deserts, climbing mountains, and settling in a barren waste—all for what? Was it for gold and silver, houses and lands, flocks and herds, and the betterment of their temporal condition? Was it for the honors of men and the applause of the world that they did these things? No, it was because they loved God and wanted to build up his kingdom. They had heard the voice of the Shepherd; they were his sheep, and a stranger they would not follow. (John 10:1-5.). . . . There is no more eloquent preaching of the Gospel than is found in the toils and privations, in their struggles and achievements. (Conference Report, April 1915, p. 101.)

Jesus the Firstborn

Jesus Christ is proclaimed by the prophets, ancient and modern, as the literal son of God in the spirit and also in the flesh. Jesus is the Firstborn of all the spirit sons and daughters of God.

And now, verily I say unto you, I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn. (D&C 93:21; c.f. Rom. 3:14; Col. 1:15.)

Because he is the Firstborn, we know the Savior as our Elder Brother. The First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles, on June 30, 1916, expressed a word of caution to the members of the Church concerning the status of the Redeemer and our relationship to him as our Brother. It is as follows:

There is no impropriety, therefore, in speaking of Jesus Christ as the Elder Brother of the rest of human kind. That He is by spiritual birth Brother to the rest of us is indicated in Hebrew: "Wherefore in all things it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people." (Hebrews 2:17.) Let it not be forgotten, however, that He is essentially greater than any and all others, by reason (1) of His seniority as the oldest or firstborn; (2) of His unique status in the flesh as the offspring of a mortal mother and of an immortal, or resurrected and glorified Father; (3) of His selection and foreordination as the one and only Redeemer and Savior of the race; and (4) of His transcendent sinlessness.

In order that none might be mistaken in their understanding of the relationship of Jesus to us mortals, the First Presidency continued:

Jesus Christ is not the Father of the spirits who have taken or yet shall take bodies upon this earth, for He is one of them. He is the Son, as they are sons or daughters of Elohim. (James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith, pp. 472-473.)

Church of the Firstborn

The important truth is given that only through Jesus Christ may one be a partaker of the glories of the eternities. The expression "through Jesus Christ" is significant in its meaning, for to understand this is the key to eternal life. One must be begotten through him. (D&C 93:22.) To be born of Christ, in this sense of begetting, is to accept him literally as the Savior who bought us with his blood. (Acts 20:28.) This acceptance must be total, unqualified, as stated in the following by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr.:

Jesus is the Messiah, he is the Savior of the world. Through his atoning blood, his suffering, his death and his resurrection, we may become perfect beings, and in no other way and by no other means. That is the great truth which permeates every thing which God has said to his children on this earth. Without that we would be as dead bodies and dead spirits, shut off from true salvation, from exaltation, from eternal progression, the great new truth of modern revelation. We must never forget that Jesus is the Christ, the Redeemer of the world. There is no escape from this . . . Turn, twist, philosophize, mass sophistries as we will, this truth remains. (Conference Report, April 1934, p. 93.)

The "by no other means" in addition to faith, are repentance of sins, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, and the receiving of the Holy Ghost by one having authority. To follow this path leads to exaltation in the celestial kingdom. But the path must be one of faith in Christ. All those who follow him, walking in obedience to the commandments, including marriage for eternity, will become members of the "church of the Firstborn." (D&C 76:53-62.) Entrance into the celestial kingdom, following the resurrection, will not insure exaltation or godhood. Some in that kingdom will not have observed all of the commandments, especially temple marriage and its obligations, so they must become ministering servants—though saved in the celestial kingdom—to those who become members of the church of the Firstborn. (Ibid., 132:15-17.)

The church of the Firstborn will consist of those,

. . . into whose hands the Father has given all things—

They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory . . .

Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God—

These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood. (Ibid., 55-56, 58, 69.)

Ye Were in the Beginning

In Section 93 there are two verses that reveal a doctrine that has tremendous meaning for Latter-day Saints and all who desire to receive knowledge that gives meaning to the earth-life. The verses are:

Ye were also in the beginning with the Father.

Man was also in the beginning with God . . (Verses 23, 29.)

In this message about man, including other modern scriptures, an entire vista of information is opened up. It is not the Doctrine and Covenants that gives much information about man's pre-earth life, but the Pearl of Great Price. (Abraham 3:22-23; Moses 3:5.) Upon the basis of the modern scriptures the prophets of this dispensation have provided sufficient about that life to make a clear picture of its principles and implications for the earth-life.

Basic to an understanding of the plan of salvation is man's relationship to God. Concerning man, we learn that he is a dual being consisting of a physical body and a spirit entity. The most important truth regarding man's spirit is to be understood as literally having parents in the life before this. The word "begotten" is to be understood as literally as the begetting of Jesus Christ in the spirit and also in the flesh by our Heavenly Father. Paul the Apostle taught that we are the offspring of God. (Acts 17:27, 28.) Old Testament prophets referred to the relationship of man and God by saying he is "the God of the spirits of all flesh." (Numbers 16:22; 27:16.) The writer of Hebrews speaks of the "Father of Spirits." (Heb. 12:9.)

The importance of the doctrine of the Fatherhood of God is known in many ways: (1) the highest measure of salvation, exaltation or godhood, is possible because of the divine birth that man received as the Father's child—the child may attain the heights of the Father; (2) the concern for the well-being of the child by earthly parents is many times magnified with our Heavenly Father; (3) greater meaning is attached to prayer and the assurance of its being answered; (4) security is found in knowing that whatever happens in life, there is meaning in those events.

Man's Creation

Man's origin is clarified by the First Presidency composed of Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, and Anthon H. Lund:

Adam, our great progenitor "the first man" was, like Christ, a pre-existent spirit, and like Christ he took upon him an appropriate body, the body of a man, and so became a "living soul." The doctrine of pre-existence—revealed so plainly, particularly in the latter days, pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man's origin. It shows that man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father, prior to coming upon the earth in a temporal body to undergo an experience in mortality. It teaches that all men existed in the spirit before any man existed in the flesh, and that all who have inhabited the earth since Adam have taken bodies and become souls in like manner . . . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, basing its belief on divine revelation, ancient and modern, proclaims man to be the direct and lineal offspring of Deity. ("The Origin of Man," Improvement Era, XIII, pp. 75-81.)

Man's Spirit

The spirit of man is in the form of his earthly body. In an explanation concerning a passage of scripture, the Lord revealed to the Prophet that "the spirit of man [is] in the likeness of his person." (D&C 77:2.) This divine truth, stated catagorically, should be understood to mean that certain disfigurements of the flesh in mortality would not be inherited from the shape of the spirit. The fact that the body conforms to the pre-existent spirit is also made known in the Book of Mormon. In a wonderful revelation to the brother of Jared, whose faith permitted him to behold the pre-existent Jesus Christ, the Son of God said:

Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ—Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all men were created in the beginning after mine own image. Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh. (Ether 3:14-16.)

Man Is Eternal

We have learned that man was in the beginning with God. Latter-day Saint theology teaches, however, that man is eternal. If there was a beginning to man as a spirit, and man is eternal, without beginning or end, then, how is this possible? As to form, spirit, man had a beginning, but not as to conscious existence. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, in this manner, the wonderful truth that man is eternal:

I have another subject to dwell upon, which is calculated to exalt man . . . the soul—the mind of man—the mortal spirit. Where did it come from? All learned men and doctors of divinity say that God created it in the beginning; but it is not so; the very idea lessens man in my estimation. I do not believe the doctrine; I know better. Hear it, all ye ends of the world; for God has told me so; and if you don't believe me it will not make the truth without effect . . . We say that God himself is a self-existent being . . . Man does exist upon the same principles . . . The mind or the intelligence which man possesses is co-equal [co-eternal] with God himself . . . I am dwelling on the immortality of the spirit of man. Is it logical to say that the intelligence of spirits is immortal, had no beginning, neither will it have an end. There never was a time when there were not spirits; for they are co-equal [co-eternal] with our Father in Heaven. (DHC 6:310.)

From what source did the Prophet receive his information on the eternal nature of man? From the same source—revelation—that Abraham received the following:

. . . there is nothing that the Lord thy God shall take in his heart to do but what he will do it. Howbeit that he made the greater star; as, also if there be two spirits and one shall be more intelligent than the other, yet these two spirits, notwithstanding one is more intelligent than the other, have no beginning; they existed before, they shall have no end, they shall exist after for they are gnolaum, or eternal. (Abraham 3:17-18.)

Section 93 points out that:

Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be . . . For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy; and when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy. (Verses 29, 33, 34.)

These passages suggest the same idea expressed by the Prophet when he used the expression, "the intelligence of spirits" in the above quotation—the spirit of man consists of intelligence, the uncreatable substance. Eternal matter—spirit—combined with intelligence constitutes the eternal man.

President Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve once wrote this observation concerning intelligence and spirit:

Some of our writers have endeavored to explain what an intelligence is, but to do so is futile, for we have never been given any insight into this matter beyond what the Lord has fragmentarily revealed. We know, however, that there is something called intelligence which always existed. It is the real eternal part of man, which was not created or made. This intelligence combined with the spirit constitutes a spiritual identity or individual. The spirit of man, then is a combination of the intelligence and the spirit which is an entity begotten of God. (The Progress of Man, p. 11.)

Summary

We have learned that in a "Christian" world that has generally departed from faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, modern revelation affords Latter-day Saints a concept of Christ as the literal Son of God in the spirit and in the flesh; that he was the Firstborn of all the spirit sons of God. Furthermore, we learned that all men lived before birth into this life. In fact, man is eternal in his nature because of the uncreatable intelligence which is a part of his spirit entity. Many benefits are received by man in this life by his knowing of his relationship to God. The knowledge of this relationship provides the Latter-day Saint with the motivation to become a member of the church of the Firstborn after the resurrection, or to be exalted in the celestial kingdom. To reach this blessing demands full obedience.

And no man receiveth a fulness unless he keepeth his commandments.

He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things. (D&C 93:27-28.)

Some Values

Without the knowledge of the pre-earth life, Latter-day Saints would be unable to understand many phases of this life. One's place in the eternal plan is better known. We believe that chance in our coming to this life is ruled out. All of us are here because of planning made in the councils in the heavens before the foundation of the earth was laid. To realize that, while in this life, one is fulfilling a purpose holds tremendous value in shaping one's life.

The life in the pre-mortal world has conditioned us in this life. Elder James E. Talmage expressed his belief that the pre-mortal life has a definite influence upon this life.

In the antemortal eternities we developed with individual differences and varied capacities. So far as we can peer into the past by the aid of revealed light we see that there was gradation of intelligence, and consequently of ability, among the spirits, precisely as such differences exist amongst us mortals . . . Every spirit born in the flesh is an individual character, and brings to the body prepared for its tenancy a nature all its own. The tendencies, likes and dislikes, in short the whole disposition of the spirit may be intensified or changed by the course of mortal life, and the spirit may advance or retrograde while allied with its mortal tabernacle. . . . The spirit lived as an organized intelligence before it became the embodied child of human parents; and its pre-existent individualism will be of effect in its period of earth life. Even though the manifestations of primeval personality be largely smothered under the tendencies due to bodily and prenatal influence, it is there, and makes its mark. This is an analogy with the recognized laws of physical operation—every force acting upon a body produces its definite effect whether it acts alone or with others and even opposing forces. (The Vitality of Mormonism, pp. 240-241.)

Foreordination

There were among the spirit children of our Father many who had excelled in that world. Among those who were recognized as his "rulers" was Abraham. (Abraham 3:23.) Others who were foreordained to positions of responsibility in this life were: Adam (2 Nephi 2:22-26); Jeremiah (Jer. 1:4, 5); and Joseph Smith (2 Nephi 3:14-15; D&C 124:1.) Our Father's knowledge about these servants and all of his children was such that he could "see the end of their earthly career even from the first." (Articles of Faith, p. 191.) Elder James E. Talmage also believed that, "Everyone of us was known by name and character to the Father, who is 'the God of the spirits of all flesh' (Numbers 16:22; 27:16), in our antemortal or primeval childhood; and from among the hosts of His unembodied children God chose for special service on earth such as were best suited to the accomplishment of His purpose." (The Vitality of Mormonism, p. 237.) The foreknowledge of God does not hold that people are designated for glory or condemnation or demerit. Elder Talmage believed that "God's knowledge of spiritual and human nature enables Him to conclude with certainty as to the actions of any of his children under given conditions; yet that knowledge is not of compelling force upon the creature." (Articles of Faith, p. 119.)

Other Values

We are thus able to see that the Lord is directing the affairs of men not only in religious events but also in other areas of earth-life. The Prophet Joseph Smith once said:

Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before the world was. (DHC 6:364.)

The mission of Columbus was foreknown. (1 Nephi 13:12.) The Lord also raised up men to write the Constitution of the United States. (D&C 101:79-80.)

The doctrine of premortality also gives us light upon the question of the different races in the world. President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote that assignments were made to the tribes and nations before the earth was created; that the more choice spirits would come through better grades of nations and that this distribution was in accordance with the laws of mercy and justice. (The Way To Perfection, pp. 46-48.)

Unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Israel) the promise was given that their posterity would have special privileges in holding the priesthood and would be custodians of the gospel through the ages. It is from these ancient patriarchs that the Latter-day Saints are descended. Why these special privileges to a certain lineage? Because they were entitled to these blessings due to their valiancy in the pre-earth life. These values and others afford Latter-day Saints considerable advantage in understanding not only their own place in this life but also the Lord's purposes for all men.

The doctrine of premortality sheds a flood of light upon many questions that confront us in life.
