Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 21

Man and Truth

(Section 93:24-26, 30-53)

Introduction

The last two chapters, written from Section 93, have given information about the Savior and also man. Jesus Christ is the literal Son of God in the spirit and in the flesh. Man is also a child of God in the spirit. Man is eternal. His spirit, in the likeness of his mortal body, consists of intelligence and spirit element, which are uncreatable. Since man was in the pre-earth life with God, that life influences his present existence. This doctrine also answers many questions about this life that otherwise would be mysteries.

Great Truths

The revelation for study in this chapter carries some teachings of power worthy of new revelation. In connection with man's premortality, the Lord also revealed:

Ye were also in the beginning with the Father; that which is Spirit even the Spirit of truth;

And truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come;

And whatsoever is more or less than this is the spirit of that wicked one who was a liar from the beginning. . . .

Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be.

All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence.

Behold, here is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man; because that which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light.

And every man whose spirit receiveth not the light is under condemnation.

For man is spirit. . . .

The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth.

Light and truth forsake that evil one. (D&C 93:23-25, 29-33, 36-37.)

In verse 23 our Father in Heaven and men are declared to have the same quality—spirit of truth. Then there follows a definition of truth. Also, intelligence, the uncreatable material that gives eternalness to man, is called the "light of truth." What man does in accordance with this divine quality depends upon what he shall be.

Truth—Absolute

Truth is knowledge! Truth is constant—absolute! Truth never changes; men may change as to their concepts of truth, but truth, never! It is that which was, is, and will continue to be. Expressed in another revelation—"truth abideth and hath no end." (Ibid., 88:66.)

Men of science consider truth to be relative; that is, it changes. What is "true" today may change tomorrow. This belief concerning men's research is necessary in order that man's investigations may continue. The scientist builds upon the findings of others and thus advancement is made in discovering additional fragments of truth.

But what about religious truth, as contained in the gospel of Jesus Christ, restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith and his successors? Latter-day Saints may not accept the belief that the truths revealed in this dispensation are merely the result of an evolutionary change from the distant past through man's experience. Such a belief omits the important fact of revelation from a personal God to his Prophet. Bear in mind that as far as the gospel is concerned, its truths have come from revelation. Ultimately, the standard by which men may know about God and their relationship to him comes from revelation. Man by reason, searching, cannot find out God.

Man's environment will not provide the answers; it must be revealed! The acceptance of this truth will bring this understanding:

We take the sacred writings into our hands, and admit that they were given by direct inspiration for the good of man. We believe that God condescended to speak from the heavens and declare His will concerning the human family, to give them just and holy laws, to regulate their conduct, and guide them in a direct way, that in due time He might take them to Himself, and make them joint heirs with His Son. But when this fact is admitted, that the immediate will of heaven is contained in the Scriptures, are we not bound as rational creatures to live in accordance to all its precepts? Will the mere admission, that this is the will of heaven ever benefit us if we do not comply with all its teachings? Do we not offer violence to the Supreme Intelligence of heaven, when we admit the truth of its teachings, and do not obey them? Do we not descend below our own knowledge, and the better wisdom which heaven has endowed us with, by such a course of conduct? For these reasons, if we have direct revelations given us from heaven, surely those revelations were never given to be trifled with, without the trifler's incurring displeasure and vengeance upon his head, if there is any justice in heaven. . . . (Joseph Smith, DHC 2:11.)

All truth has not been revealed. Some truths are withheld because men lack faith. (Alma 12:9-11.) Our ninth Article of Faith declares that God "will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the kingdom of God." We have, however, all that is necessary for the attainment of exaltation in the celestial kingdom. If there should be more for this purpose, he who has faithfully done all that is required of him will find opportunity and ability to do whatever else may be necessary. The further acquisition of knowledge to exalt will be available in the spirit world for the dead; in the Millennium for the living. (D&C 101:32-34.)

Truth—Differentiation

Is all truth of equal value?

Elder James E. Talmage said:

Not all knowledge is of equal worth. The knowledge that constitutes the wisdom of the heavens is all embraced in the Gospel as taught by Jesus Christ; and willful ignorance of this; the highest type of knowledge, will regulate its victim to the inferior order of intelligences. (The Vitality of Mormonism, p. 277.)

Elder John A. Widtsoe:

While Latter-day Saints understand that all truth is from God, and is desirable, and will be ours in time, yet we also know that all truth is not of equal value to humanity . . . Latter-day Saints understand that the truth of the greatest worth to humanity is that which controls and shapes human actions, that which interprets to us our relationship to God, our Maker, and to our fellowman; that which lays before us the great plan of salvation and explains why I am here, whence I came, where I am going and what I must do to conform to the greater laws of life. Such knowledge becomes the greater truth. (Conference Report, October 1926, pp. 81-82.)

Does all truth have the same validity? Elder Widtsoe says:

Not only do Latter-day Saints distinguish carefully between the greater and lesser truths, but they also recognize that not all truth has the same validity. We cannot accept all knowledge as being of equal certainty. Some knowledge I know to be absolutely certain, some appears to be true, and some I hope may be true . . . Latter-day Saints are careful to examine the validity of the truth set before them. We make the satisfying claim that the truth of greatest validity, that of greatest certainty, is the truth that has come from the mouth of God by revelation to his children in this and in every age through the history of the world. (Ibid., p. 82.)

Why is the foregoing true? Because of what has already been learned from Section 93. We lived with God before we were born upon this earth. We are here for a purpose, primarily to advance through faith toward godhood. If we learn all of the information about secular things in a given field of endeavor important for this life, and yet we do not measure up to the purpose of our existence, we have lost our grand opportunity.

Truth Is of God

"The Spirit of truth is of God." (D&C 93:26.) How may one receive truth? President Stephen L Richards answers as follows:

. . . we must, of necessity, have God's aid in the acquisition of truth. His aid comes through faith and prayer. Faith contemplates the acceptance of the spiritual reality of a world outside the domain of science. It postulates humility and dependence on divine power, the antipathies of egotism and self-sufficiency. A contrite heart is a fertile field for planting the seeds of truth. In such a field they come to fruition in a knowledge, understanding, and conviction of the great concepts of life which defy the reason and philosophy of the arrogant, and self-sufficient who will not stoop to the methods of the humble.

The Power of Truth

There is a quality about truth—the power to testify of itself. The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

In relation to the power over the minds of mankind which I hold I would say, it is in consequence of the power of truth in the doctrines which I have been an instrument in the hands of God of presenting unto them, and not because of any compulsion on my part. (DHC 6:273.)

There is a spirit about truth that captures the attention and allegiance of those who are prepared for it. Elder Orson F. Whitney told the following experiences with a minister who had written against the Book of Abraham in The Pearl of Great Price:

. . . I met (minister), with whom I was quite well-acquainted and he said to me: "Why have you not answered me?" "I have," was my reply; "I have been answering you all over the country, but it hasn't gotten into the papers." "Oh indeed, and what have you been saying?" he inquired. "I have been saying this:

Truth is truth, where'er 'tis found

On Christian or on heathen ground.

And whether it be taken from an ancient hill in North America, as was the Book of Mormon, or from the catacombs of Egypt, as was the Book of Abraham, if it's true, no matter who translated it, or how many supposed flaws appear in the translation. The character of the content and spirit that goes along with it, determines better than all else its truth, its authenticity. We know Shakespeare's writings by the very sound of them, they have the Shakespearean ring. Literary experts can tell the difference between those writings and all others. We recognize Milton's poetry by the Miltonic ring; the poetry of Byron and Tennyson. Then, if God speaks, why should it not have a God-like ring, something that no man can counterfeit, not any but a spiritual expert fully appreciate."

(He) agreed with me. Not as to the Book of Abraham, but as to the best way of testing any book. "I am one with you," he said, "in the belief that the highest evidence of the truth of any work is the spirit that it breathes and the wisdom that it inculcates. "Then," said I, "this Book of Abraham needs no defense from men or from anyone else. It speaks for itself; it defends itself. By the majesty of its language, by the sublimity of its teachings and by the Spirit that permeates them, it proclaims itself divine." (Conference Report, April 1926, pp. 34-35.)

Light and Truth

The glory of God is intelligence, or in other words, light and truth.

Light and truth forsake that evil one. (D&C 93:36-37.)

The divine essence in man, intelligence, is light and truth. In discussing faith and knowledge, Alma mentions faith that,

. . . it hath sprouted up, that your understanding doth begin to be enlightened, and your mind doth begin to expand.

O then, is not this real? I say unto you, Yea, because it is light; and whatsoever is light, is good, because it is discernible, therefore ye must know that it is good . . . (Alma 32:34-35.)

After defining truth in the absolute sense, the Lord reveals that "whatsoever is more or less than this is the spirit of that wicked one who was a liar from the beginning." (D&C 93:25.) Light, then, "is the wisdom and ability to forsake everything 'more or less' than truth." (Marion G. Romney, BYU Bulletin, May 31, 1957.)

Because man is intelligence (light and truth) he is capable by reason of his nature to recognize truth and by his free agency reject error. Men may cloud their ability to discern light and truth because of sin. The greater the sin and the continuance in sin, the more is negated the power to distinguish between truth and falsehood. It is probable, however, that men do not lose all of this power, except the sons of perdition.

The Way of Truth

Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me. (John 14:6.)

The Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth; (D&C 93:26.)

But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me: (John 15:26.)

Verily I say unto you, he that is ordained of me and sent forth to preach the word of truth by the Comforter, in the Spirit of truth, doth he preach it by the Spirit of truth or some other way? (D&C 50:17.)

For the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

And the Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit. (D&C 84:45-46.)

In the foregoing scriptures we learn several things about the Spirit of truth: (1) Jesus is the Spirit of truth; (2) the Comforter—the Holy Ghost—is the spirit of truth; (3) there is a spirit which imparts truth known as the spirit of Jesus Christ, called elsewhere the "light of Christ" (D&C 88:6-13; Moroni 7:14-19), and which light gives understanding to all men. We have learned of the functions and place of this Spirit in our world. (Chapter 20.) Briefly, the words of the Savior—the Scriptures—are revelation. All revelation received since the creation has come through Jesus Christ. (D&C 76:12-13.) There are different ways in which truth is revealed—by dreams, visions, pure intelligence into the mind, etc.—but always through Jesus Christ. To the obedient to the teachings of Christ—faith, repentance, baptism, the receiving of the gift of the Holy Ghost, and the keeping of the commandments—the Holy Ghost may be the constant companion culminating in an everlasting dominion. (Ibid., 121:46.) On the pathway to exaltation, revelation is received to enlighten, comfort, guide against error, and testify of the truth—of the Father, the Son Jesus Christ, and gospel teachings. In addition to the Comforter, there is the "light of Christ" which gives inspiration to all men. It is the spirit by which men discern truth from error.

All of these powers and influences guide men into "light and truth." All of them come from Jesus Christ to bless men that they might succeed in the journey back to the Father's presence to receive a fulness of joy after the resurrection. (Ibid., 93:33-34.)

Standard of Judgment

After quoting Moroni the Book of Mormon prophet as follows, Elder Marion G. Romney of the Council of the Twelve interprets this test by which one may know truth from falsehood:

Take heed, my beloved brethren, (he said), that ye do not judge that which is evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God to be of the devil. . . .

For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God. (In other words that it is truth.)

But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, (he continued), and believe not in Christ, and deny Him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil; for after this manner doth the devil work. . . .

And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which ye may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge wrongfully; for with that same judgment which ye judge ye shall also be judged. (Moroni 7:14-19.)

Here is Elder Romney's interpretation:

In applying this test, that everything which persuadest to believe in Christ is of God and that everything which persuadeth not to believe in Christ is of the devil, we start with the assurance that whatever the Lord has revealed is truth, "diamond truth" to borrow a phrase from the Prophet, that it is consistent with all that is, all that was, and all that is to come. This is and must be so because God's wisdom is infinite, being founded upon complete knowledge. "All things," said the Prophet Lehi speaking of things of the works of God, "have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things." (2 Nephi 2:24.)

Implicit in this text is the assumption that wisdom is dependent upon knowledge and that God's wisdom is infinite because He is omniscient. "He knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it." (2 Nephi 9:20.) He possesses with respect to all matters that knowledge which is truth, the object of our search, "knowledge of things as they are . . . as they were, and as they are to come. . . .

Does what you have learned persuade you "to do good" and "to believe in Christ?" If so, it is "of God," and being of God it is truth. It will never have to be repudiated.

To elucidate upon this standard of judgment, Elder Romney provides this example:

That you may understand more clearly what I have in mind, let me give you an illustration or two. One of the fundamental doctrines of revealed truth is that in the garden of Eden, God endowed man with free agency. (Moses 7:32.) The preservation of this free agency is more important than the preservation of life itself, for without it, "there is no existence." (D&C 93:30.) It is, therefore, clear that everything which militates against man's enjoyment of this endowment persuades not to believe in Christ, for He is the author of free agency. . . .

Do they [programs and ideas affecting our daily lives] facilitate or restrict the exercise of man's divine endowment of free agency? Tested by this standard, most of them will fall quickly into their proper category as between good and evil.

In giving another example, Elder Romney reminds us that when men exercise their free agency they will be held accountable for their choices. (Alma 42:27.) Then, he gives this example:

Recently I heard a sociologist explain to a gathering of young people that society and not the individual is responsible for his misconduct. How does this concept stand up when tested by the revealed principle of accountability "that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression," (The Articles of Faith) and that every man in the day of judgment, will "be accountable for his own sins." (D&C 101:78.)

Truth and error cannot be reconciled. All you need to do is distinguish between them, accept truth and forsake the error. That is what the Lord has always done. In fact, His ability to do so is, as we have seen, inherent in the intelligence which is His glory. The error of Lucifer and the truth of Jesus could not be reconciled even in heaven. Error had to be cast out. (Brigham Young University Bulletin, May 30, 1957.)

Why Men Are Accountable

As indicated above, man is a free agent with the right to choose. Because he enjoys this right, aided by the "light of Christ," he is responsible for his acts. The additional truth is given in Section 93 that since man is intelligence, this divine essence, "light and truth," makes man responsible.

All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence.

Behold, here is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man; because that which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light.

And every man whose spirit receiveth not the light is under condemnation. (D&C 93:30-32.)

Because of the power in truth, man should be able to recognize it; for part of his being is "light and truth."

In the beginning every spirit was innocent, but in the war in heaven Lucifer rebelled, taking many with him. These spirits lost their innocence, but those who kept their first estate come to earth in mortal bodies and are innocent. (Ibid., 93:38.) This innocence continues until the age of eight is reached and then each person becomes accountable for his sins. (Ibid., 68:25-27.)

The Voice of the Good Shepherd

Satan takes light and truth from men as they disobey the commandments. Some of man's disobedience to the commandments is due to the tradition in which he was reared. (Ibid., 93:39.)

When it comes to accepting the truths of the Gospel, men may not understand them because they have lost the ability to comprehend due to the traditions of their fathers and of individual sin which has darkened their susceptibility to truth. (Ibid., 76:75; James E. Talmage, The Vitality of Mormonism, pp. 279-282.) The voice of the Good Shepherd becomes too dim to be understood.

Latter-day Saints may know the voice of the master as they observe the commandments. (John 10:1-14; D&C 50:17-22.) President Brigham Young asks and then answers the question "How are we to know the voice of the Good Shepherd from the voice of a stranger?" He proceeds to say that when the Spirit of God reveals and testifies, it cannot be mistaken.

When an individual, filled with the Spirit of God, declares the truth of heaven, the sheep hear that, the Spirit of the Lord pierces their inmost souls and sinks deep into their hearts; by the testimony of the Holy Ghost light springs up within them, and they see and understand for themselves . . . I have said to the Latter-day Saints, many and many a time, and I would say to them now, live your religion, that the Spirit of God may be within you like a well of water springing up to everlasting life . . . Be prepared that you may know the voice when it comes through the servants of God, then you can declare for yourselves. "This is the word of the Lord." My caution and counsel to the Latter-day Saints, and to all the inhabitants of the earth is—"Live so that you will know truth from error." (Journal of Discourses 16:74-75.)

Children—Light and Truth

The Lord has commanded Latter-day Saints to rear their children in light and truth. (D&C 93:40, 49.) There is none in the Church who is beyond this commandment. Even members of the First Presidency in 1833 were told they had not kept this commandment. This was said of President Frederick G. Williams and Sidney Rigdon, counselors to President Joseph Smith. Unless they were obedient in setting their houses in order Satan would continue to have power over them. (Ibid., 93:41-44.) Even the Prophet lacked in this matter also. An important truth was also taught regarding children.

Your family must needs repent and forsake some things, and give more earnest heed unto your sayings, or be removed out of their place. (Ibid., 93:48.)

In other words, responsibility is not only the parent's but also the child's. But the major obligation is with the parents who are to teach their children principles of righteousness. (Ibid, 68:25-31.) The home evening program in use throughout the Church is one of the best means by which this commandment can be lived by parents and children. No other people have the opportunity to rear their children in light and truth as do the Latter-day Saints. It is also true that no other people are under the same responsibility as they are. When one considers the truth that the children who come into a Latter-day Saint family are known to have come from our Father and that what we do or do not do for them here, determines, in a large measure, their eternal future, the weight of this responsibility is better appreciated.

Latter-day Saint families are intended to be eternal. The association of parents and children throughout the eternities is the desired goal of every faithful member of the Church. Eternal marriage is the qualifying ordinance, together with keeping the commandments and obligations received in the House of the Lord. The words of President Joseph F. Smith are especially pertinent to these thoughts:

We are living for eternity and not merely for the moment. Death does not part us from one another, if we have entered into sacred relationships with each other by virtue of the authority that God has revealed to the children of men. Our relationships are formed for eternity. We are immortal beings, and we are looking forward to the growth that is to be attained in an exalted life after we have proved ourselves faithful and true to the covenants that we have entered into here, and then we shall receive a fulness of joy. (Gospel Doctrine, 6th edition, pp. 277-278.)
