Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 22

Two Temples and Persecution

(Sections 94, 95, and 96)

Background

Six months after the Church was organized in 1830 a revelation appointed Oliver Cowdery to preach the gospel to the Lamanites. (D&C 28:8.) Subsequently, others were appointed to accompany him, including Elder Parley P. Pratt, a recent convert to the Church from the Campbellites, whose headquarters were in Ohio. (Ibid., 30:5-6.) Although the mission to the Lamanites did not bring many of them into the Church, the mission was highly successful among the people in the Ohio Valley. Especially in and around Kirtland was the harvest bounteous. The opening of this area brought increased strength to the fast-growing kingdom of God. Only a few months later, the Lord commanded the members of the Church in other places to assemble to Ohio. (Ibid., 37:3.) Less than a month later, the Prophet Joseph Smith was told by revelation that he should go to Ohio where further instruction would be received to guide the Church. (Ibid., 38:32, 42.) In this same revelation the land of Ohio was designated as a "land of promise, a land flowing with milk and honey . . . a land of your inheritance." (Ibid., verses 18-20.)

Upon the Prophet's arrival in Ohio in February, 1831, a movement was instituted to make of Kirtland the headquarters of the Church. By commandment in July of that year the Prophet arrived in Jackson County, Missouri, where that area was appointed the place of the city of Zion, or New Jerusalem, long prophesied as the city of glory where the Lord would rule the nations of the earth during the Millennium. (Ibid., 57; 45:66-75.) Returning to Kirtland the Prophet continued to receive revelation for the building up of the Lord's kingdom.

Build a Stake

On May 6, 1833, the Lord commanded that preparations be made for laying the foundation of "a city of the stake of Zion" in the land of Kirtland. (Ibid., 94:1.) Once before in the revelations we find reference to a stake. In order that all might know their responsibility to their children the Lord said in 1831, that parents "in any of her stakes" were to teach their children correct principles and to see that they were baptized. (Ibid., 68:25-31.) At that time a stake of the Church had not been organized. The first, as commanded was organized in Kirtland, Ohio.

The term "stake of Zion" indicates that these places are a part of the Zion which consists of North and South America, according to the Prophet Joseph Smith. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 362.) Stakes are territorial divisions within the Church, presided over by a president and his two counselors; while wards are divisions within the stake, with a bishopric consisting of the bishop and two counselors. Stakes may be, and have been, organized outside the confines of North and South America since they are divisions of the Church. President Brigham Young said that eventually Zion will be everywhere on the earth. (Journal of Discourses 9:138.) The city of New Jerusalem is the center place of Zion. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith informs us that,

The term "Stake of Zion" . . . is a comparison to the stakes which bind a tent. Isaiah says: "Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken." (Ch. 33:20.) Again: "Enlarge the place of thy tent and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine inhabitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes." (Ch. 54:2.)

Zion is the tent, the settlements surrounding her, are the cords and stakes. (Essentials in Church History, pp. 146-147.)

A further command was given to organize a stake in Kirtland in January 1832, while the Prophet was in Jackson County, as follows:

For I have consecrated the land of Shinehah (Kirtland) in mine own due time for the benefit of the saints of the Most High, and for a stake of Zion.

For Zion must increase in beauty, and in holiness; her borders must be enlarged; her stakes must be strengthened; yea, verily I say unto you, Zion must arise and put on her beautiful garments. (D&C 82:13-14.)

A committee was appointed on March 23, 1833, to purchase lands in Kirtland in order that the stake of Zion must be established. This committee reported that several farms were available for purchase. Contributions were made by members of the Church to purchase property, one of whom was Sister Vienna Jaques who was commanded to consecrate her means for this purpose. (Ibid., 90:28-29.) On September 4, 1833, the Prophet addressed a letter to this good sister in Jackson County, Missouri, in which he said that the Spirit prompted him to always remember her for what she had done for the kingdom. (DHC 1:407-409.) In order to remove the mortgage from one farm, the Lord commanded Brother John Johnson to pay off this mortgage. (D&C 96:6-9.) By these arrangements, the Church obtained property upon which the Kirtland Temple was eventually built.

Section 94

By revelation the Church was instructed to build two houses in Kirtland. One of these was for the First Presidency that they might have a place in which to perform their work and obtain revelations. (Ibid., 94:3.) The size of the building and a general pattern was supplied. The second building was for the printing and translation of the scriptures and for other purposes. Specific instructions were also given concerning this house. (Ibid., verses 10-12.) Other brethren were to receive an inheritance on the properly also. (Ibid., Verses 13-17.)

Buildings and Revelation

Many times as in Section 94, the Lord instructs his Prophet concerning matters which some might not consider proper subject matter for a revelation. Why should the Lord reveal that a printing plant, or a house for the First Presidency, or some other purely temporal project be commanded?

These questions with others of a similar nature are important because the answer is based upon a fundamental principle upon which the Lord has spoken. The Lord said that at no time has he given a commandment which was solely temporal, but all of his commandments are spiritual. (Ibid., 29:34-35.) This principle makes of the gospel a practical, every-day religion. Because Latter-day Saints know that they are to contribute their time, means and skills to the building of Zion on the earth, this principle means very much in their lives. Elder Albert E. Bowen, member of the Quorum of the Twelve (1937-1953), said:

We have a very practical religion. It pertains to our lives now. And the reward of observance of the law is not altogether postponed to a future on the other side of the grave. Building up the kingdom involves some very practical things. It is not altogether concerned with the non-material lying out in the ethereal realm. The building of meetinghouses, places of worship, schools, temples, for example, clearly is for spiritual purposes. But they involve a large element of the material. They are essential to the building up of the Kingdom of God. And where would you classify the beautifying of your home; the making of refined surroundings? It is necessary to provide the things that sustain life, to master the arts and crafts and trades that meet the needs of progress and improvement. I do not think I can find the line that divides the spiritual from the temporal. (Conference Report, April 1951, p. 124.)

Elder John A. Widtsoe said:

The all-important thing in life, after all, is to find a place in the universal scheme of things, for all the acts of our lives. There is a spiritual meaning of all human acts and earthly events. . . . It is the business of man to find the spiritual meaning of earthly things. (Ibid., April 1922, pp. 96-97.)

This principle answers the questions, "why work on a welfare project? a work meeting project in Relief Society? a chapel under construction, etc.? Also, why contribute money in tithing, fast offerings, and other donations?"

Introduction—Section 95

With the commandment before the brethren that two houses were to be built, the Lord informs them in Section 95, given one month later, that they were under condemnation because they had failed to observe another commandment given December 27, 1832, six months before. Section 94 said that they were not to begin construction until commanded; so the construction of these two houses was postponed. (D&C 94:16.) The earlier commandment was to build a House of the Lord, to:

Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God;

That your incomings may be in the name of the Lord; that your outgoings may be in the name of the Lord; that all your salutations may be in the name of the Lord; with uplifted hands unto the Most High. (Ibid., 88:119-120.)

This is the commandment to build the Kirtland Temple; the neglect of which brought forth the following:

Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you whom I love, and whom I love I also chasten that their sins may be forgiven, for with the chastisement I prepare a way for their deliverance in all things out of temptation, and I have loved you—

Wherefore, ye must needs be chastened and stand rebuked before my face;

For ye have sinned against me a very grievous sin, in that ye have not considered the great commandment in all things, that I have given unto you concerning the building of mine house; (Ibid., 96:1-3.)

Chastisement

People sometimes wonder wherein chastisement is beneficial. The ideas mentioned above provide an answer. Through chastening repentance often comes, resulting in forgiveness of sins. Thus Latter-day Saints find deliverance even from temptation; for, humility born of chastisement strengthens one against temptation.

Chastisement may come in many forms. Suffering is one of these. The partial answer to the question, "why suffering?" is found in these ideas: Pain brings humility in the recognition that men are dependent upon God. It also teaches obedience. Our awareness of God's suffering for us is brought closer to us through our own suffering. As Elder Mark E. Petersen said:

Suffering sometimes comes in the form of loving chastisement. "As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten." (Rev. 3:19.) The Lord said at one time "Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth." (Heb. 12:6.) At another time the writer of the Proverbs said under the inspiration of the Lord, "My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord; neither be weary of his correction; for whom the Lord loveth he correcteth; even as a father the son in whom he delighteth." (Prov. 3:11.) (Your Faith and You, p. 257.)

Through chastisement we learn our lessons sometimes better than in any other way. This provides an opportunity to know wherein we erred and also the means of making necessary corrections.

A Grievous Sin

In failing to begin the building of the temple commanded for Kirtland, the brethren were chastized. This was a grievous sin. The members of the Church were in poverty. Despite this the commandment had been given, and it was expected that they comply with it. The implications of this fact are very important for each member of the Church. Throughout Nephi's life he saw barriers and obstacles surmounted as he learned this truth:

. . . I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them. (1 Nephi 3:7.)

Poverty is not a reason for not observing the commandments. All too often some members of the Church feel that they cannot pay a full tithing because they have other financial obligations which should be paid first. If there is a time when full obedience to this law, as well as others, should be made, it is when one needs the Lord's blessings to bring oneself out of financial bondage. On these occasions, it would seem that the member who rejects the tithing principle feels that he doesn't need the Lord's help to find deliverance. It is the faithful, dedicated Latter-day Saint who, through his obedience, despite the circumstance, finds the rich blessings.

Purpose of the Temple

Immediately the brethren met to begin the preparations for the temple as commanded. The committee, consisting of Hyrum Smith, Reynolds Cahoon, and Jared Carter, issued a plea for support in building this edifice.

The revelation stated that the purpose of this building was that the Lord's disciples might go forth to prune the vineyard for the last time. In the circular sent out by the committee, it was said that this house would be the place where the Elders might call a solemn assembly, treasure up words of wisdom, that they might go to the Gentiles for the last time. (DHC 1:349.)

Before the Saints had established Kirtland as a gathering place, the Lord promised that when his servants were endowed there would be a gathering to the bosom of the Church. (D&C 38:38.) This endowment would be such that they would be taught from on high to accomplish this purpose. (Ibid., 43:16.) Although missionary work had been performed, yet the great missionary program would be inaugurated when the temple would be built in which his servants would be endowed. But only those who walked in the light would be chosen in that day. (Ibid., 95:5-9.)

Power to Build

The brethren were motivated by the promise that the commandment given to build a temple could be accomplished provided they kept the commandments. (Ibid., verses 11-12.)

Specific directions were given as to the interior size—fifty-five feet wide, sixty-five feet long—and the purpose of each floor of the building (a place of sacrament and preaching services, and a school for the apostles). (Ibid., verses 13-17.)

Two Months' History

Between June and August 1833, the spirit of persecution increased against the Saints in Jackson County. Also, work commenced immediately on the Kirtland Temple. On July 23rd the Prophet records that the cornerstones of the temple were laid after the order of the priesthood. (DHC 1:400.) Although the "order of the Priesthood" in laying the cornerstones of a temple were not at that time recorded by the Prophet, he gave specific directions about the service performed at the Nauvoo Temple, as follows:

If the strict order of the Priesthood were carried out in the building of Temples, the first stone would be laid at the southeast corner, by the First Presidency of the Church. The southwest corner should be laid next, the third, or north-west corner next; and the fourth, or north-east corner last. The First Presidency should lay the south-east stone and dictate who are the proper persons to lay the other cornerstones.

If a Temple is built at a distance, and the First Presidency are not present, then the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles are the persons to dictate the order for that Temple; and in the absence of the Twelve Apostles, then the Presidency of the Stake will lay the south-east cornerstone; the Melchizedek Priesthood laying the cornerstones on the east side of the Temple, and the Lesser Priesthood those on the west side. (DHC 4:331.)

Later, this edifice was completed and the keys of the priesthood restored that the servants of the Lord might go forth with power to teach the nations. (D&C 110.)

It will be remembered that in July 1831, the site of the New Jerusalem was revealed and that in August the temple site was dedicated in Independence, Jackson County, Missouri. (D&C 57; DHC 1:199.) This was the beginning of an event that had been predicted by the ancients. (Ether 13:4-6.)

Toward the end of June 1833, the First Presidency sent instructions to the brethren in Zion on the future plans for the building of the city and also the temple. Actually this temple will consist of 24 compartments, the details of which are found in the history of the Church. (DHC 1:359-362.)

July 1833, was a fateful month in the lives of the members of the Church in Jackson County. A manifesto of the mobocrats in that county charged the Saints with certain evils that they believed were sufficient to deny them residence in the county. A summary of these reasons are provided by President Joseph Fielding Smith, as follows:

Some of the "evils" of the "Mormons" were stated to be as follows: The declaration that miracles have been performed and supernatural cures achieved among the sick; a belief in heavenly manifestations and that they have held converse with God and his angels; possession and exercise of the gifts of divination and unknown tongues; and "fixed with the prospect of obtaining inheritance without money and without price." Yet they were well aware that the "Mormons" had never made the attempt to obtain lands except by purchase, as the Lord had commanded them. Nevertheless all these "crimes" must be punished; for against such evils "self preservation, good society and public morals," made demands that the "Mormons" should be expelled. The following articles were drawn up and unanimously approved, to be submitted to the elders of the Church.

(1) "That no Mormon shall in future move and settle in this county.

(2) "That those now here, who shall give a definite pledge of their intention within reasonable time to remove out of the county, shall be allowed to remain unmolested until they have sufficient time to sell their property, and close their business, without any material sacrifice.

(3) "That the editor of the Star be required forthwith to close his office and discontinue the business of printing in this county; and as to all other stores and shops belonging to the sect, their owners must in every case strictly comply with the terms of the second article of this declaration; and upon failure, prompt and efficient measures will be taken to close the same.

(4) "That the Mormon leaders here are required to use their influence in preventing any further emigration of their distant brethren to this county, and to counsel and advise their brethren here to comply with the above requisitions.

(5) "That those who fail to comply with these requisitions be referred to those of their brethren who have the gifts of divination, and of unknown tongues, to inform them of the lot that awaits them." (Essentials of Church History, pp. 158-159; also, DHC 1:374-376.)

With these demands before them the Saints were denied time to communicate with their Prophet. The Lord had commanded them to come to the land of their inheritance where the New Jerusalem would be built, a fact seized upon by the Missourians as having their lands taken from them. Finally, they were given only fifteen minutes to comply. The mob then determined that the Church's printing plant be destroyed where the Evening and Morning Star was published. Missouri was a slave state and the mob had interpreted an editorial in the Star as favoring the bringing of free negroes and free mulattoes into the state. Brother William W. Phelps, the Church printer, lost his personal belongings and the printing equipment was also destroyed. Bishop Edward Partridge and Brother Charles Allen were taken to the public square and tarred because they would not renounce their belief in the Church.

On the same day the cornerstone of the Kirtland Temple was laid, the mob threatened the members of the Church in Jackson County with beatings and the destruction of their homes. Several of the leaders of the Church—John Corrill, John Whitmer, William W. Phelps, Algernon S. Gilbert, Edward Partridge and Isaac Morley, offered themselves to be beaten to death, if necessary, that the other members of the Church might not be harmed. The mobbers demanded, however, that every member of the Church leave the county or be beaten to death. The leaders then agreed to the demands of the Missouri mob to begin moving by January, with the exodus to be completed by April 1834.

Jackson County, Missouri, was the promised land for the saints. It was there that the rich blessings of the earth were to be found. The laying of the foundation of the city of Zion, the New Jerusalem, was their privilege, but the Lord had said that their permanence in that land was not intended at that time. Two years earlier, the Lord said that the saints could not understand the glory which would follow after much tribulation, but the hour was not yet. (D&C 58:1-5.)
