Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 23

How to Act amid Persecution

(Sections 97; 98:23-48)

In the month of July the persecution of the Saints in Jackson County, Missouri commenced. At the beginning of the following month, the Prophet Joseph Smith received a revelation that concerned primarily the saints in Missouri. (D&C 97.) He did not know what had happened to the saints in Jackson County, although he knew that trouble was possible. Many of the members were endeavoring to learn the truth, and upon them the Lord would be merciful at the judgment. (D&C 97:1-2.)

Special commendation was given to Elder Parley P. Pratt who was conducting the School of Elders in Missouri. (Ibid., verses 3-5.) He labored diligently to succeed in this calling. He walked barefoot about six miles to attend this school held in the outdoors. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 93-94.)

Not all of the saints were acceptable to the Lord, for he said:

The axe is laid at the root of the trees; and every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. I, the Lord, have spoken it.

Verily I say unto you, all among them who know their hearts are honest, and are broken, and their spirits contrite, and are willing to observe their covenants by sacrifice—yea, every sacrifice which I, the Lord, shall command—they are accepted of me. (D&C 97:7-8.)

As a preliminary to some strong admonitions concerning the need for greater diligence upon the part of some members of the Church, the Lord probably had reference to the fact that already the deadwood in the Church was hewn down and cast into the fire.

Sacrifice

There are several meanings of the word sacrifice but it seems that the one most pertinent to the language of Section 97 is: the giving up of some cherished or desired object. The sacrifice required of the saint is the giving up of everything, if necessary, even life itself. (Ibid., 98:13-15; 101:35-38.) To be accepted of the Lord means that the Lord approves of one's actions, but to remain in this condition, requires continued faithfulness to commandments.

President Brigham Young points out in the following how trivial some of the sacrifices we make on this earth compared with the greatness of the blessings to be received:

Now, you Elders who understand the principles of the kingdom of God, what would you not give, do, or sacrifice, to assist in building up His kingdom upon the earth? Says one, "I would do anything in my power." Says another, "I would sacrifice all my property." Wonderful indeed! Do you not know that the possession of your property is like a shadow, or the dew of the morning before the noonday sun, that you cannot have any assurance of its control for a single moment! It is the unseen hand of Providence that controls it. In short, what would you not sacrifice? The Saints sacrifice everything; but, strictly speaking, there is no sacrifice about it. If you give a penny for a million of gold! a handful of earth for a planet! a temporary worn out tenement for one glorified, that will exist, abide, and continue to increase throughout a never ending eternity, what a sacrifice to be sure! (Journal of Discourses 1:114.)

The reward of sacrifice, as required, will bring forth precious fruit. (D&C 97:9.) "Precious fruit" may refer to the fruit of the tree of life mentioned in Lehi's dream—"the greatest of all the gifts of God." (1 Nephi 15:36; D&C 14:7.)

Jackson County Temple

Instructions had been given that a temple should be built in Jackson County, Missouri, and the site had been dedicated August 3, 1831, by the Prophet Joseph Smith. (D&C 57:3.) Section 97 contains a command to build this temple, and this was the sacrifice required of the people. Above all, its purpose was for the salvation of the members of the Church, a place of thanksgiving, a place of instruction where the Church might be perfected in all things pertaining to the kingdom of God. This perfection would come by reason of understanding the principles and doctrines of the gospel through the keys which had already been conferred. (Ibid., 97:10-14.) With the fulfillment of this commandment, and the sanctity of that edifice being preserved, the promise of the Lord's presence was given. In that temple the pure in heart would see God. The seeing of God should not be considered figurative. In all dispensations the pure in heart have known him. Elder Orson Pratt in a commentary on Section 97 said:

No natural man hath seen God at any time. A natural man could not behold the face of the Lord in his glory, for he could not endure it; but when a mortal man or woman here on the earth has put away the natural or carnal mind; when he or she has put away all sin and iniquity, and has complied with the laws and commandments of God, then, like Jacob of old, he or she may see God face to face, and, like Moses, talk with the Lord as one man talks with another. It is written here in this book which you and I have received as a part and portion of our rule of faith and practice, "The Doctrine and Covenants," as follows: [quoted Section 93:1-3.] Again it is written in another revelation: [quoted 97:15-17.] (Journal of Discourses 14:272-273.)

If Zion Do These Things

If the saints would faithfully discharge their responsibilities as given in Section 97, great blessings would come to the Church in Zion. She would become very great and very glorious in her prosperity. Zion would be honored by the nations, never to be moved out of her place, for it was to be the abode of God. The temple was to allow the faithful to be endowed with powers. As pointed out in an authoritative place, temples bring assistance against the powers of the Adversary.

The history of Temples teaches us that the people of God have been strong, or weak, in proportion to the faithfulness with which they have attended to their sanctuaries. The history of the Temple of Jerusalem is, as Dr. Joseph Angus, in his Bible Handbook, notes, "an index to the history of the Jews. When it fell, they were scattered; as it rose from its ruins, they gathered round it again; and history dates the captivity, with equal accuracy, from the destruction of the Temple, or from the first capture of Jerusalem." Speaking of the Temples in his dispensation, someone has declared that the completion of the Nauvoo Temple was the salvation of the Church from annihilation, although the Saints were forced to flee into the desert. Since the completion of the Salt Lake Temple, the adversary has had less power to injure the Church than he had before. If we remember that the Temples are the palaces of God, where His Presence is manifested, we can understand why, when the adversary was marshalling his forces against the Church, our Lord urged the Saints to build the Temple speedily. We can also understand why the evil one planned to have them scattered before they could rear that sacred edifice. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 612.)

All of this was dependent upon how well Zion—the pure in heart—kept the commandments.

And, now, behold, if Zion do these things she shall prosper . . .

Therefore, verily, thus saith the Lord, let Zion rejoice, for this is Zion—THE PURE IN HEART . . . (D&C 97:18, 21.)

The saints were already being persecuted in Jackson County, and the order to move or to be killed had been given by the mob. Despite this situation, fully known to the Lord, he promised that if they would do as commanded, Zion could be redeemed. The challenge to be pure in heart was complied with by many, but apparently not in sufficient strength to warrant the blessings of Zion's redemption at that time. How many must keep the commandments in order to forestall the judgments predicted? In reference to the judgments to be poured out upon the world in the last days, President Brigham Young said if the judgments of God come upon the Latter-day Saints it will be because the majority have turned from the Lord. If six-tenths or three-fourths will keep the commandments the judgments will not come upon them. (Journal of Discourses 10:335-336.)

Zion as the "pure in heart" is a condition rather than a place. Ordinarily, we think of Zion as a place, such as North and South America, the center place in Jackson County, or the western part of the United States, but as true as these geographical places are Zion, the most important factor is the condition. Appropriate to the meaning of Zion and its application to what has already been written, President Young said:

We can make Zion, or we can make Babylon, just as we please. We can make just what we please of this place. The people can make Zion: they can make a heaven within themselves. When people gather here, they should come with a determination to make Zion within themselves, with the resolution that "I will carry myself full of the Spirit of Zion wherever I go; and this is the way in which I will control evil spirits; for I mean that my spirit shall have control over evil," and do you not see that such a course will make Zion? (Ibid., 5:4.)

Covenanted Zion

The saints in Jackson County in 1833, as also the saints throughout the world today, were under covenant to build Zion, but this could be done only by having the spirit of Zion in their hearts. (D&C 6:6.) To accomplish this goal one must always be on guard against the Adversary of righteousness. President Stephen L Richards categorized the present world as "self-sufficient, egotistical, materialistic, and skeptical," whereas, "the philosophy of Zion is humility, not servility, but a willing recognition of the sovereignty of God and dependence on his providence." Zion is being attacked from all sides today, he continued. The attack is on our concept of personal moral purity, and in the home it is the curtailment of the size of the family. A serious aspect of our times is that of indifference and neglect among the membership. Zion, however, will survive, notwithstanding some will succumb to these attacks of Satan. Those, however, who feel themselves self-sufficient do not enjoy the one great blessing for aid and comfort—the Spirit of God. (Conference Report, October 1951, pp. 110-117; quoted in Roy W. Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants, 3:333-335.).

Saints Did Not Heed

Elder Parley P. Pratt recorded in his Autobiography that the revelation numbered Section 97 was not complied with by the Church leaders in Jackson County, although there were many faithful there. Because Zion did not then consist of sufficient to bring to pass the fulfillment of Zion's destiny, "the threatened judgment was poured out to the uttermost, as the history of the five following years will show." (p. 96.) Within that period the saints were expelled from the State of Missouri.

Judgments of the Last Days

These following verses concerning the judgments to come upon the wicked apply to the time before the second coming of Christ (Conference Report, October 1917, pp. 44-45; Progress of Man, p. 478):

For behold, and lo, vengeance cometh speedily upon the ungodly as the whirlwind; and who shall escape it?

The Lord's scourge shall pass over by night and by day, and the report thereof shall vex all people; yea, it shall not be stayed until the Lord come;

For the indignation of the Lord is kindled against their abominations and all their wicked works. (D&C 97:22-24.)

In the "Lord's Preface" to the Doctrine and Covenants, given in 1831, it is said that the time will come when peace shall be taken from the earth. (Ibid., 1:35.) The American Civil War was the beginning war of modern times. (Ibid., 87:1.) As said in the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary:

The American Civil War was only the beginning of a series of conflicts, each leading up to the world-war of 1914. This is all the more remarkable, because since the middle of the 19th century, the peace movement in the world assumed so definite proportions as to warrant the hope that there would be no war in the 20th century. (p. 536.)

During the Civil War the area of Jackson County was invaded and the land laid to waste. (B. H. Roberts, New Witnesses for God, Vol. 1, pp. 298-299.) Because of wickedness the people of the earth are to feel the wrath and indignation of the Lord. These judgments—the "Lord's scourge"—will continue until the second coming of Christ.

Zion Shall Escape If . . .

In a context of promised destruction upon Jackson County in particular, and the world in general, because of wickedness, the revelation then turns to the members of the Church, who are known as "Zion."

Nevertheless, Zion shall escape if she observes to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her.

But if she observe not to do whatsoever I have commanded her, I will visit her according to all her works, with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fire. (D&C 97:25-26.)

The only way of safety is through keeping the commandments. In the words of Elder Melvin J. Ballard of the Council of the Twelve:

Why should we hope to escape, who have been baptized into this Church, yet ignore the commandments of the Lord? For there are among us those who do not keep the Word of Wisdom, some of us do not pay our tithing; we do not sanctify ourselves by adding unto our faith, virtue; to virtue, knowledge, temperance, and patience, and godliness, and brotherly kindness. Why should we claim exemption—we who will testify that we believe God has spoken—why should we escape if we do not keep the commandments of the Lord? (Conference Report, June 1919, pp. 88-89.)

On the other hand, if Zion keeps the commandments, the Lord has promised to multiply blessings upon her and upon her generations forever. (D&C 97:27-28.)

Background Section 98

Only a few days after Section 97 was received and seventeen days after the Missouri mob began their work of destruction among the saints, the Lord revealed further information regarding the manner in which they should conduct themselves.

The saints are enjoined to be patient in tribulation. Their prayers had been heard and their fulfillment would be realized. We also learn of the important principle that afflictions work to one's good and for the glory of God. (Ibid., 98:1-3.)

Three laws are explained in this revelation that the saints might know what the Lord commanded of the ancients and what should be expected of us today.

The Law of Retaliation

The first of these laws is the law of retaliation discussed in verses 23 through 32. It requires that families in the Church bear patiently the abuse and smiting of others the first, second, and third time, but if the offense is committed the fourth time, then a warning should be given and, if necessary, the offender should be rewarded according to his works. However, if one patiently endures after the fourth time, his reward will be even greater. The doctrine of patience under persecution is the teaching of the Sermon on the Mount. (Matt. 5:21-22, 43-44.) An example of not striking back at an enemy is that of the converted Lamanites who were attacked by the Lamanites. They would not retaliate though many of them were killed. Their example was the means of bringing many to repentance. (Alma 24:17-25; 27:3.)

The Law of War

The next law is the law of war. First, we should understand that anciently the Lord told his people when they could go to war. Then they would be justified. War in itself was not the object of life, and if a nation would come against his people they should sue for peace. If, after this, the enemy did not accept this offer of peace the second or third time the Lord would fight their battles. This promise extended to their children's children to the third and fourth generations. (D&C 98:33-38.) Ancient Israel was not to go to war until their peace offer was refused. (Deut. 20:10; c.f. Deut. 2:26-29.)

The Book of Mormon provides us with a concept of war that is consistent with the counsel given in Section 98. Moroni, who lived in the first century before Christ, is described as a man of perfect understanding, a true believer in liberty, and one who did not delight in bloodshed. The Nephites at that time followed this instruction:

Now the Nephites were taught to defend themselves against their enemies, even to the shedding of blood if it were necessary; yea, and they were also taught never to give an offense, yea, and never to raise the sword except it were against an enemy, except it were to preserve their lives.

And this was their faith, that by so doing God would prosper them in the land, or in other words, if they were faithful in keeping the commandments of God that he would prosper them in the land; yea, warn them to flee, or to prepare for war, according to their danger;

And also, that God would make it known unto them whither they should go to defend themselves against their enemies, and by so doing, the Lord would deliver them; and this was the faith of Moroni, and his heart did glory in it; not in the shedding of blood but in doing good, in preserving his people, yea, in keeping the commandments of God, yea, and resisting iniquity. (Alma 48:14-16.)

The Nephites looked to their prophets for help in defeating their enemies once they were called upon to defend their families, homes, country, and religion. On one occasion this help came from the Lord through the Prophet Alma's giving vital information that brought victory over the Lamanites. (Alma 16:1-8.)

The Nephites believed that notwithstanding the Lord would fight their battles if they kept his commandments, it was necessary that they do everything possible to bring about victory in war. In charging Pahoran the Governor of the land with withholding men and supplies with which to fight the Lamanites, Moroni wrote him as follows:

Or do you suppose that the Lord will still deliver us, while we sit upon our thrones and do not make use of the means which the Lord has provided for us? (Alma 60:21.)

An official statement adopted in 1831 gives the position of the Church regarding this principle:

We believe that all men are bound to sustain and uphold the respective governments in which they reside, while protected in their inherent and inalienable rights by the laws of such governments; and that sedition and rebellion are unbecoming every citizen thus protected, and should be punished accordingly; and that all governments have a right to enact such laws as in their own judgments are best calculated to secure the public interest; at the same time, however, holding sacred the freedom of conscience. (D&C 134:5.)

The Law of Forgiveness

In closing Section 98 the law of forgiveness is given. This law contains the elements of the other two laws in this revelation. Repeated transgressions by one people or nation against another should be forgiven. This practice of forgiveness should be continued as long as they repent; however, if they do not repent then the nation should bear it patiently, even unto the third time. If it happens the fourth time, they should not be forgiven and these testimonies should be brought before the Lord. Repentance should include four-fold restitution. If, however, repentance is not done then their children unto the third and fourth generation should receive the Lord's vengeance. If the children or their children should repent, no judgment would fall upon them. (D&C 98:39-48.)

As pointed out above, a nation should not engage in an offensive war, but it has the right to defend itself against those who come against her. President Charles W. Penrose counseled the Latter-day Saints against the desire to shed blood or to destroy. (Conference Report, April 1917, pp. 20-22; quoted in The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants, 3:362-364.) Effort should be made to avert war. But if a country is drawn into a war after having tried to keep out of the conflict, every effort should be made to win the victory, as indicated in this chapter.
