Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 24

The Constitution of the United States

(Sections 98:1-22; 101:76-80)

Not long before receiving Section 98, the saints in Missouri had undergone persecution. Threats were made against their lives and some property had been destroyed. In that revelation, laws concerning war and forgiveness were given in order that the saints might understand the manner in which they should conduct themselves in a period of persecution.

The Prophet at this time did not know of the serious events that had happened in Jackson County although he did know that trouble was brewing. The Lord referred to the saints' afflictions and informed them that they "shall work together for your good, and to my name's glory." (D&C 98:3.)

In view of the difficulties in Jackson County, it is a testimony to the inspiration of this revelation, that it should contain information relative to the fundamental law of the land whose purpose is to give certain rights and privileges to those who live in America.

America—a Choice Land

Latter-day Saints have a deep appreciation of the Lord's words concerning the land of America. The Book of Mormon tells of the city of Zion to be built upon the American continent in the last days. (Ether 12:4-6.) In 1831, it was revealed that this city would be built in Jackson County, Missouri. (D&C 57:1-3.) Later the Prophet Joseph Smith said that all of North and South America was the land of Zion in which the gathering would be in this dispensation. (DHC 6:318-319.)

Elder Ezra Taft Benson of the Council of the Twelve, before a general conference of the Church, specified the manner in which the Lord raised up "the first free people in modern times":

First: Prophecy is abundant that God deliberately kept the American continent hidden until after the Holy Roman Empire had been broken up and the various nations had established themselves as independent kingdoms. Keeping America hidden until after this time was no accident. (2 Nephi 1:6, 8.)

Second: At the proper time, God inspired Columbus to overcome almost insurmountable odds to discover America and bring this rich new land to the attention of the gentiles in Europe. (1 Nephi 13:12; Dr. Samuel Eliot Morison, Admiral of the Ocean Sea, pp. 46-47.)

Third: God revealed to his ancient American prophets that shortly after the discovery of America there would be peoples in Europe who would desire to escape the persecution and tyranny of the Old World and flee to America. (1 Nephi 13:13-16.)

Fourth: God told his prophets that the kingdoms in Europe would try to exercise dominion over the people who had fled to America, but that in the wars of independence the American settlers would win. (This is a remarkable prophecy in that 2300 years before the Revolutionary War was fought, God through his prophets predicted who would win it.) (Ibid., 13:16-19.)

Fifth: The prophets were told that in the latter days when the gentiles came to America they would establish it as a land of liberty on which there would be no kings. The Lord declared that he would protect the land and whosoever would try to establish kings either from within or without would perish. (2 Nephi 10:8-14.)

Sixth: Having declared America to be a land of liberty, God undertook to raise up a band of inspired and intelligent leaders who could write a constitution of liberty and establish the first free people in modern times. The hand of God in this undertaking is clearly indicated by the Lord himself in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith in these words: . . . "I established the Constitution of this land by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose . . ." (D&C 101:80.)

Seventh: God declared that the United States Constitution was divinely inspired for the specific purpose of eliminating bondage and the violation of the rights and protection which belongs to "all flesh." (Ibid., 101:77-80.)

Eighth: God placed a mandate upon his people to befriend and defend the constitutional laws of the land and see that the rights and privileges of all mankind are protected. He verified the declaration of the founding fathers, that God created all men free. He also warned against those who would enact laws encroaching upon the sacred rights and privileges of free men. He urged the election of honest and wise leaders and said that evil men and laws were of Satan. (Ibid., 98:5-10.)

Ninth: God predicted through his prophets that this great gentile nation, raised up on the American continent in the last days, would become the richest, most powerful nation on the face of the earth: even "above all other nations." (See 1 Nephi 13:15, 30; Ether 2:12.) (Conference Report, October 1961, p. 69.)

The foregoing steps in the development of America establish the truth that God's hand had been over this land in order that the restoration of the gospel might be possible and that the work of the Lord in the last days might come to fruition. This chapter is about the divinely inspired constitution of the United States mentioned in items six and seven above. A review of some of the history which brought this great document into existence follows.

The Beginning of a Nation

Thirteen colonies flourished along the eastern seaboard of the country under the rule of England. By 1763 England had fought and won the French and Indian wars to protect these colonies, and in order to pay part of the cost heavy taxes were levied upon the colonies. There went up the cry "no taxation without representation." In 1774 colonial delegates to a convention met and drew up a "Declaration of Rights and Grievances" to be submitted to King George III. To make their protest heard, the colonists agreed that they would not import any goods from England until satisfaction was met. Ten thousand English troops were sent to America to enforce the law.

On April 19, 1775, the Lexington militiamen died in defense of their claims against England. In July, 1775, the Continental Congress appointed General George Washington commander-in-chief of the Continental Army. The Revolutionary War was a fact with continued fighting between England and the colonies. Only July 4, 1776, in Philadelphia, the Declaration of Independence was adopted. Thus the nation was born. As expressed in the words of President J. Reuben Clark, Jr.:

The reason for this new birth into the family of nations, was not for the division of a great empire (this was not the division of a Roman empire); it was not that some royal son needed a throne (this was not placing a Louis of Holland, or a Joseph of Naples); it was not that an emperor wished to make secure a tributary state (this was not setting up an Herodian tetrarch in Roman Palestine); it was not that some noble house might set up its mastery over a kingdom (this was no War of Roses); it was not a group, lustful for power, warring to gain dominion over their fellows (this was not a rebellion of a Praetorian Guard). This birth was the result of none of the motives that to that time had given birth to new States. The reason for this birth was new, and it was that there should come into the world and take a guiding place among the family of nations, a government and a people dedicated to the principles that certain great fundamental truths were self-evident; "that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness. That to secure these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed."

. . . I say that in establishing this government, God moved forward according to His promise and declared purpose, as set out in Holy Writ to make this land "a land choice above all lands." This is the great motif which runs through our whole history. (The Deseret News [Church Section] March 4, 1939, p. 1.)

In 1777 the colonies drew up the Articles of Confederation in order to win the war with England and also to establish a lasting union. This form of government, which continued from 1781 to 1789, was one where the States retained their sovereignty, freedom and independence. This league of States lacked a central power by which the Confederation could function as a nation.

Because of the inadequacy of the Articles, a convention was called to amend them. This convention in 1787, under the leadership of George Washington, set the Articles aside and drafted a new document, known as the Constitution. Washington's words were: "Let us raise a standard to which the wise and honest can repair, the event is in the hand of God."

Earlier, in the writing of the Declaration of Independence, which declared the birth of a new government, divine assistance was implored by the body responsible for that great document. Was the hand of God in the writing of the Constitution of the United States? Latter-day Saints know that prophetically the land of America is a choice land, free from captivity, and it will continue to be if the people serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ. As we have learned, this land, set aside by God, for the bringing forth of the fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ and the bringing to pass of God's purposes for man in the last days, was shielded through the ages.

During the Constitutional Convention, and after four or five weeks of discussion and argument, the progress being very slow, Benjamin Franklin addressed himself to the presiding officer, George Washington, and asked the following:

In this situation of the Assembly, groping as it were in the dark to find political truth, and scarce able to distinguish it when presented to us, how has it happened, Sir, that we have not hitherto once thought of humbly applying to the Father of lights to illuminate our understanding?

He then reminded the convention that divine assistance had been sought during the struggle with Great Britain and that their prayers were answered. Then he said:

I have lived, Sir, a long time, and the longer I live, the more convincing proofs I see of this truth—that God governs in the affairs of men.

His resolution to the Assembly was that they henceforth implore the assistance of Heaven in their deliberations.

Following this plea, the motion was seconded and several offered their opinions on the resolution, with the following ideas expressed:

To begin prayers now, so late in the session, might cause talk, and lead the public to suspect that there was trouble behind the closed doors. It was not the Quaker custom to have prayers at political gatherings, and this was Philadelphia. Among the delegates were members of various Protestant denominations—Quaker, Episcopalian, Presbyterian, Methodist, Baptist—and Roman Catholics. Williamson of North Carolina pointed out that the Convention had no great money to pay a chaplain or chaplains. (Carl Van Doren, The Great Rehearsal, pp. 101-102.)

The motion was never put to a vote and the meeting adjourned. Despite this decision, the great Benjamin Franklin, senior statesman, set forth this important truth accepted by god-fearing people everywhere: God governs in the affairs of men! The men who formulated the Constitution were foreordained for this very purpose:

. . . I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood. (D&C 101:80.)

The opportunity to receive the fulness of the gospel at the hands of the priesthood of God was not possible to these "wise men," but through the principle of salvation for the dead the Lord revealed that this was possible. President Wilford Woodruff said about the signers of the Declaration of Independence, some of whom were in the Constitutional Convention:

I am going to bear my testimony to this assembly, if I never do it again in my life, that those men who laid the foundation of the American government and signed the Declaration of Independence were the best spirits the God of heaven could find on the face of the earth. They were choice spirits, not wicked men. General Washington and all the men that labored for the purpose were inspired of the Lord.

Another thing I am going to say here, because I have a right to say it. Every one of those men that signed the Declaration of Independence, with General Washington, called upon me, as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the temple at St. George, two consecutive nights and demanded at my hands that I should go forth and attend to the ordinances of the House of God for them. Men are here, I believe, that know of this, Brother J. D. T. McAllister, David H. Cannon and James G. Bleak. Brother McAllister baptized me for all those men and then I told those brethren that it was their duty to go into the Temple and labor until they had got endowments for all of them. They did it. Would those spirits have called upon me, as an Elder in Israel, to perform that work if they had not been noble spirits before God? They would not.

I bear this testimony, because it is true. The Spirit of God bore record to myself and the brethren while we were laboring in that way. (Conference Report, April 1898, pp. 89-90.)

Among the members of the General Authorities of the Church who have spoken often about the Constitution of the United States is President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., counselor in the First Presidency to three presidents of the Church. Because the Lord had declared that he had established this document by the hands of wise men, President Clark, accepted it as a part of his religion. The genius of the Constitution, he felt, was not only in the freedoms and rights granted to the citizens of the United States, but the separation of the fusion of governmental functions—the legislative, the executive, and the judicial.

. . . the different branches were bound together, unified into an efficient, operating whole. These branches stood together, supported one another. While severally independent, they were at the same time, mutually dependent. It is this union of independence and dependence of these branches—legislative, executive, and judicial—and of the governmental functions possessed by each of them, that constitutes the marvelous genius of this unrivalled document. The Framers had no direct guide in this work, no historical governmental precedent upon which to rely. As I see it, it was here that the divine inspiration came. It was truly a miracle. (Stand Fast by Our Constitution, p. 148.)

Origin of the Bill of Rights

In order to further guarantee the right of the individual, ten amendments known as the Bill of Rights went into effect in 1791. Although there were provisions in the Constitution that belonged to a Bill of Rights the states approved the Constitution with the understanding that such a bill would be a part of the Constitution.

That our forefathers were wise in not leaving such vital matters to inference, implication, or construction will be shown by an examination of the first ten amendments.

"The executive in our governments is not the sole—it is scarcely the principal—object of my jealousy," wrote Jefferson from Paris, urging upon Madison the need of amendments making a Bill of Rights; "the tyranny of the legislatures is the most formidable turn, but it will be a remote period." (The Constitution of the United States Its Sources and Its Applications, p. 196.)

The additional safeguards of the Bill of Rights were not new to the colonists. They were inherited from their English ancestors.

Revelation and Rights

In 1833, when the Lord revealed that he had established the Constitution of the United States, it was fifty years old. In addition to the Bill of Rights, two amendments had been made; one in 1798 concerning the Federal judicial power, and the other in 1804 about the election of President and Vice President. It wasn't until thirty years later that the two amendments abolishing slavery and guaranteeing citizenship and its protection were enacted. The Lord in Section 101, said:

According to the laws and constitution of the people, which I have suffered to be established, and should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles;

That every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment.

Therefore, it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another.

And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land . . . (Verses 77-80.)

Bill of Rights Provisions

The first ten amendments are:

Article One

Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.

Article Two

A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms shall not be infringed.

Article Three

No soldier shall, in time of peace be quartered in any house, without the consent of the Owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by law.

Article Four

The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.

Article Five

No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the Militia, when in actual service in time of War or public danger; nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, not be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation.

Article Six

In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence.

Article Seven

In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no fact tried by a jury, shall be otherwise re-examined in any Court of the United States, than according to the rules of the common law.

Article Eight

Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.

Article Nine

The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.

Article Ten

The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.

Regarding these amendments, President Clark counseled as follows and gave his testimony concerning the Constitution:

Now, there are others of these great political blessings that you may have taken for granted, but they are not like the air, the sunshine, and the rain. You can lose them. Read and study the Bill of Rights; you will conclude you cannot afford to lose any of those rights. . . .

I repeat, to me the Constitution of the United States is a part of my religion; it has become so because of the words of the Lord which I have read to you. So far as I know, he has never given an approval such as this to any other government in the world. So far as I can see, the Constitution of the United States, as of 1833, was his plan of government, reserving and guaranteeing these great rights which you must enjoy if you are going to remain free, if you are going to worship as you wish, if you are going to be a free people. ("Some Political Blessings," Address at Brigham Young University, May 21, 1957.)

Conclusion

The Prophet Joseph Smith believed that the Constitution was a part of his religion for he said:

The Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner; it is to all those who are privileged with the sweets of its liberty, like the cooling shades and refreshing waters of a great rock in a thirsty and weary land. It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded from the burning rays of the sun. . . .

We say that God is true; that the Constitution of the United States is true; that the Bible is true; that the Book of Mormon is true; that the Book of Covenants is true; that Christ is true. . . . (DHC 3:304.)

In the words of the Lord given by revelation, as the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, March 27, 1836:

Have mercy, O Lord, upon all the nations of the earth; have mercy upon the rulers of our land; may those principles, which were so honorably and nobly defended, namely, the Constitution of our land, by our fathers, be established forever. (D&C 109:54.)

In prophetic fulfillment of the Lord's statement in verses 77 and 78 of Section 101, President Clark has said:

Speaking of the destiny that the Lord has offered to mankind in his declarations regarding the scope and efficacy of the Constitution and its principles, we may note that already the Lord has moved upon many nations of the earth so to go forward. The Latin American countries have followed our lead and adopted our constitutional form of government, adapted to their legal concepts, without compulsion or restraint from us. Likewise, the people of Canada in the British North America Act have embodied great principles that are basic to our Constitution. The people of Australia have likewise followed along our governmental footpath. In Canada and Australia, the great constitutional decisions of John Marshall and his associates are quoted in their courts and followed in their adjudications. I repeat, none of this has come because of force of arms. The Constitution will never reach its destiny through force. God's principles are taken by men because they are eternal and true, and touch the divine spirit in men. This is the only true way to permanent world peace, the aspiration of men since the beginning. God never planted his Spirit, his truth in the hearts of men from the point of a bayonet. (Conference Report, April 1957, p. 51.)
