Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 25

How to Preach the Gospel

(Sections 99 and 100:1-12)

During the lull in persecution of the saints in Missouri, the work of the Lord continued in other parts of the country. Missionaries continued to preach the gospel of peace as commanded by the Lord. Hate, envy, and bigotry were eliminated from the soul of the person who truly accepted Jesus Christ as his Savior and who sought to receive the spirit of peace—the Holy Ghost.

John Murdock

A few days after Section 98 was received in August 1833, the Lord called Elder John Murdock to the Eastern States on a mission. (D&C 99:1.)

Elder Murdock, an early convert to the Church, actively engaged in many important responsibilities in the Church. His first contact with the Church was through the missionaries assigned to the Lamanites in 1830. After only a short time in the Ohio Valley many were baptized by these missionaries, among whom were Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Edward Partridge, and Brother Murdock. Responsibility came early, when with some of the others he was left to take care of the branches of the Church raised up in that area. He had the honor of being a member of Zion's Camp that treked the thousand miles from Ohio to Missouri to give succor to the persecuted saints. Other service in the Church included membership on the high council in Clay County, Missouri, and in Far West, and being a bishop in Nauvoo, Illinois.

Missionary Call

Elder Murdock faithfully discharged his duties as a member of the Melchizedek Priesthood. One can imagine the thrill which came to him as he listened to the words of the Savior through the Prophet Joseph Smith about his missionary call:

And who receiveth you receiveth me; and you shall have power to declare my word in the demonstration of my Holy Spirit.

And who receiveth you as a little child, receiveth my kingdom; and blessed are they, for they shall obtain mercy.

And whoso rejecteth you shall be rejected of my Father and his house; and you shall cleanse your feet in the secret places by the way for a testimony against him. (D&C 99:2-4.)

These words are as applicable to present-day missionaries as they were to Brother Murdock. (Ibid., 93:49; 84:35-38, 88-91.) When men act with the authority of the priesthood, performing their duties faithfully, seeking the Spirit to assist them, their priesthood acts are binding. The Lord recognizes his servants as though he were performing the act. Elder Orson F. Whitney emphasized this truth when he wrote:

When the Son of Man, sitting upon "the throne of his glory," shall require of all nations and of all men a final accounting, and shall put to them the crucial question: "How did you treat my servants whom I sent unto you?" happy the nation or the man who can reply: "Lord, I showed them the respect to which they were entitled—I honored them as I would have honored Thee."

Grievous the sin and heavy the penalty incurred by those who mistreat the servants of the Master. (Saturday Night Thoughts, pp. 219, 221.)

One of Brother Murdock's missionary companions was Elder David W. Patten, the first apostolic martyr of the dispensation.

Cleansing of Feet

On several occasions the Lord has counseled his servants to shake the dust off their feet against those who reject them (D&C 24:15; 60:15) or to cleanse the feet in testimony. (Ibid., 84:92; 99:4.) Concerning the missionary obligation to testify, President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote:

The elders were to seek out from among the people the honest in heart and leave their warning testimony with all others, thus they would become clean from their blood. The cleansing of their feet, either by washing or wiping off the dust, would be recorded in heaven as a testimony against the wicked. This act, however, was not to be performed in the presence of the offenders, "lest thou provoke them, but in secret, and wash thy feet, as a testimony against them in the day of judgment." The missionaries of the Church who faithfully perform their duty are under the obligation of leaving their testimony with all with whom they come in contact in their work. This testimony will stand as a witness against those who reject the message, at the judgment. (Church History and Modern Revelation 1:206.)

The purpose of the gospel of Jesus Christ is to save and not to condemn, but men are responsible for their rejection of the truth. Condemnation comes because of the wrong use of free agency in making decisions. In order to administer the principle of testimony as commanded above, it is apparent that the person must be living so well that the Spirit will dictate when and if such condemnation be uttered. The missionary and also every member of the Church should follow the counsel of President Lorenzo Snow, who said:

There is a way by which persons can keep their consciences clear before God and man, and that is to preserve within them the Spirit of God, which is the spirit of revelation to every man and woman. It will reveal to them, even in the simplest of matters, what they shall do, by making suggestions to them. We should try to learn the nature of this spirit, that we may understand its suggestions, and then we will always be able to do right.

This is the grand privilege of every Latter-day Saint. We know that it is our right to have the manifestations of the spirit every day of our lives. (Conference Report, April 1899, p. 52.)

Murdock Twins

Upon the death of the twins of the Prophet and his wife, Emma, they took into their home the twin boy and girl of Brother John Murdock when his wife had died. A mob attacked the Prophet's home, tarred and feathered him, and because of exposure, the twin boy died. In Section 99 Brother Murdock is told that before his mission, arrangements were to be made for his motherless children to be sent to Zion (Missouri). One of these, John Riggs, found a home in Jackson County and lived amid the persecutions in that county and elsewhere. Later, he came to Utah, and no one in Utah equalled his record of bringing so many saints across the plains, eleven trips being made. Later he was called to be bishop in Beaver City. He founded the Church academy at that place.

Elder John Murdock also lived in Missouri with the saints and filled many responsible Church positions there and in Illinois.

Background Section 100

The Prophet's journal of October 1833, records that he left for the East and Canada in company with Elder Sidney Rigdon and Freeman Nickerson. (DHC 1:416.) Six months before this, Brother Nickerson joined the Church and, realizing his responsibility to bring the gospel to others, performed missionary work in the Kirtland, Ohio area, where the Prophet was located. With this missionary desire he felt that his sons who lived in Canada should receive the gospel and for this purpose he elicited the Prophet's help in converting them. The party, including Mrs. Nickerson, traveled to Perrysburg, New York, where they stayed at the home of Brother Nickerson. It was at this place on October 12, 1833, that Section 100 was received.

Missionary Journey

An indication of the events that took place while on this missionary trip is found in the Prophet's account from the day the revelation was received until his return to Kirtland on November 4th, as follows:

. . . Elder Rigdon preached to a large congregation, at Freeman Nickerson's, and I bore record while the Lord gave His Spirit in a remarkable manner.

Monday, 14. Continued our journey towards Canada, and arrived at Lodi, where we had an appointment, and preached in the evening to a small assembly, and made an appointment for Tuesday, the 15th, at 10 o'clock A.M. to be in the Presbyterian meeting house. When the hour arrived, the keeper refused to open the doors, and the meeting was thus prevented. . . .

Sunday, 20. At 10 o'clock we met an attentive congregation at Brantford; and the same evening a large assembly at Mount Pleasant, at Mr. Nickerson's. The people gave good heed to the things spoken.

Tuesday, 22.—We went to the village of Colburn; and although it snowed severely, we held a meeting by candle-light on Wednesday evening, and were publicly opposed by a Wesleyan Methodist. He was very tumultuous, but exhibited a great lack of reason, knowledge, and wisdom, and gave us no opportunity to reply.

Thursday, 24.—At the house of Mr. Beman, in Colburn, whence we left for Waterford, where we spoke to a small congregation; thence to Mount Pleasant, and preached to a large congregation the same evening, when Freeman A. Nickerson and his wife declared their belief in the work, and offered themselves for baptism. Great excitement prevailed in every place we visited.

Saturday, 26.—Preached at Mount Pleasant; the people were very tender and inquiring.

Sunday, 27.—Preached to a large congregation at Mount Pleasant, after which I baptized twelve, and others were deeply impressed, and desired another meeting, which I appointed for the day following.

Monday, 28.—In the evening, we broke bread, and laid on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and for confirmation, having baptized two more. The Spirit was given in great power to some, and peace to others.

Tuesday, 29.—After preaching at 10 o'clock A.M., I baptized two, and confirmed them at the water's side. Last evening, we ordained F. A. Nickerson an Elder; and one of the sisters received the gift of tongues, which made the Saints rejoice exceedingly.

Tuesday, the 29th of October, also we took our departure from Mount Pleasant, on our return to Kirtland, and arrived at Buffalo, New York, on the 31st.

Friday, November.—I left Buffalo, New York, at 8 o'clock A.M., and arrived at my house in Kirtland on Monday, the 4th, 10 A.M. and found my family well, according to the promise of the Lord in the revelation of October 12th, for which I felt to thank my Heavenly Father. (DHC 1:421-423.)

In addition to the foregoing, Elder B. H. Roberts, author of the notes in the Documentary History of the Church, adds some expressions of the Prophet which show his "deeply religious and prayerful nature" as he always remembered the Lord, sought for his Spirit, and requested his protecting power, in this way:

"O God, seal our testimony to their hearts:" "I feel very well in my mind." "The Lord is with us;" "The Lord gave His Spirit in a remarkable manner to some Saints, for which I am thankful to the God of Abraham," "Lord bless my family, and preserve them." "This day we expect to start for Canada. Lord be with us on our journey. Amen." (DHC 1:423, footnote.)

Promises Fulfilled

Several items in the Prophet's missionary journey should be given further consideration. One of these is the reference to the well-being of his family. The promise of the Lord that his family would be well was fulfilled, as reported by him. (D&C 100:1.) The natural concern that the missionary has for his family at home should not detract from his call to preach the gospel. Many brethren who went forth to teach the nations have shown their faith and trust in the Lord not only to provide for them but also for their families. President John Taylor remarked:

It is true there ought to be sympathy and some care for those with whom they have been immediately associated; yet their families as well as our families, and all of us and our affairs are in the hands of God, and, inasmuch as they go forth putting their trust in the living God all will be peace, and they will find peace and contentment from this time forth until they return, inasmuch as they will magnify their callings and lean upon their God. In this is their safety, in order that they may be enabled to bear a faithful testimony to the world among whom they may travel to deliver their message of warning and of glad tidings of great joy to the honest in heart. (Journal of Discourses 10:37.)

Another promise in Section 100 that was fulfilled in this missionary journey was the opening of that region for teaching the gospel. The Prophet's success in baptisms performed is evidence that an "effectual door was opened up in that region" and thus the salvation of souls accomplished. (D&C 100:3-4.)

A Wonderful Promise

In view of what happened on this mission the following promises to the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon were literally fulfilled:

Therefore, verily I say unto you, lift up your voices unto this people; speak the thoughts that I shall put into your hearts, and you shall not be confounded before me;

For it shall be given you in the very hour, yea, in the very moment, what ye shall say.

But a commandment I give unto you, that ye shall declare whatsoever thing ye declare in my name, in solemnity of heart, in the spirit of meekness, in all things.

And I give unto you this promise, that inasmuch as ye do this the Holy Ghost shall be shed forth in bearing record unto all things whatsoever ye shall say. (D&C 100:5-8.)

When the Prophet's party arrived in Mount Pleasant, Canada, Freeman Nickerson introduced them to his two wealthy sons, Moses and Freeman, the latter told his father: "Well father, I will welcome them for your sake, but I would just about as soon you had brought a nest of vipers and turned them loose upon us."

Through the eyes of a young girl, Lydia Bailey (later married to Newell Knight), who stayed at the Nickerson home, we learn of this description of the Prophet and Elder Rigdon:

. . . a tall, well built form, with the carriage of an Apollo, brown hair, handsome blue eyes, which seemed to dive down to the innermost thoughts with their sharp, penetrating gaze, a striking countenance, and with manners at once majestic yet gentle, dignified yet exceedingly pleasant.

Elder Rigdon was a middle-aged man of medium height, stout and quite good-looking, but without the noble grandeur that was so distinguishing a mark of the prophet. (Lydia Knight's History, p. 17.)

Freeman, the son, became anxious to hear something of the Prophet's religion.

"Oh," said he, "Just let him talk; I'll silence him if he undertakes to talk about the Bible. I guess I know as much about the scriptures as he does."

This was to his wife whom he directed to place the family Bible on the table in the parlor.

As soon as supper was over, he invited his visitors and family to go up stairs to the parlor, where he said they would have some talk. All, accordingly repaired to the large well-furnished room, and the Mr. N. said to the Prophet:

"Now, Mr. Smith, I wish you and Mr. Rigdon to speak freely. Say what you wish and tell us what you believe. We will listen."

Turning to his wife, he whispered, "Now you'll see how I shall shut him up. "

The Prophet commenced by relating the scenes of his early life. He told how the angel visited him, of his finding the plates, the translation of them, and gave a short account of the matter contained in the Book of Mormon.

As the speaker continued his wonderful narrative, Lydia, who was listening and watching him intently, saw his face become white and a shining glow seemed to beam from every feature.

As his story progressed he would often allude to passages of scripture. Then Mr. N. would speak up and endeavor to confound him. But the attempt was soon acknowledged even by himself to be futile.

The Prophet bore a faithful testimony that the Priesthood was again restored to the earth, and that God and His Son had conferred upon him the keys of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods. He stated that the last dispensation had come, and the words of Jesus were now in force—"Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned."

Following this, Elder Rigdon spoke; whereupon, Mr. N. said:

And is this then the curious religion the newspapers tell so much about? Why if what you have just said is not good sound sense, then I don't know what sense is." (Ibid., pp. 17-19.)

Within a few days, Lydia and Mr. N. and all of his household were baptized. In a meeting the following day, the Prophet recorded of that event that "one of the sisters received the gift of tongues." Moses Nickerson spoke up and said he wished that someone would receive the gift of tongues as the ancient saints did. The Prophet said:

"If one of you will rise up and open your mouth it shall be fulfilled, and you shall speak in tongues."

Every one then turned as by a common instinct to Lydia, and said with one voice, "Sister Lydia rise up. "

And then the great glory of God was manifested to this weak but trusting girl. She was enveloped as with a flame, and, unable longer to retain her seat, she arose and her mouth was filled with the praises of God and His glory. The spirit of tongues was upon her, and she was clothed in a shining light, so bright that all present saw it with great distinctness above the light of the fire and the candles. (Ibid., pp. 21-22.)

Missionary Principles

Argument and contention is of Satan, and never converts. (3 Nephi 11:29.) In another revelation, the Lord counsels his servants to treasure up in their minds the words of life, and it will be given to them what to say. (D&C 84:85.) Study and understanding of the scriptures—the words of life—are necessary that the Lord may bring forth what is necessary for every situation. The promise is that if his servants will do this they shall not be confounded by men. The case of Mr. Nickerson is an excellent example of this truth. The power of testimony in this example, brings conviction to the hearer. When a man speaks by the power of the Holy Ghost, that Spirit carries the message into the hearts of men. (2 Nephi 33:1.) All things must be done in the spirit of humility, solemness of heart, and in the name of the Savior. If this is done, the Holy Ghost will bear witness of the truth spoken. (D&C 100:7-8.) The results of this program are expressed in these words:

Therefore, why is it that ye cannot understand and know, that he that receiveth the word by the Spirit of truth receiveth it as it is preached by the Spirit of truth?

Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together. (Ibid., 50:21-22.)

Sidney Rigdon, Spokesman

Joseph, who was sold into Egypt and is the progenitor of most Latter-day Saints, prophesied that in the last days that prophet who would be named Joseph, as well as his father, would have a spokesman. (2 Nephi 3:18.) Section 100 informs us that Sidney Rigdon was that spokesman. (D&C 100:9.) Moses, the prophet, also had a spokesman in the person of his brother Aaron. (Exodus 4:15-16.)

Sidney Rigdon is described as a forceful speaker, eloquent, and convincing. He performed well in this calling.

Joseph the Testator

Unto the Prophet Joseph Smith was promised the power to be "mighty in testimony." (D&C 100:10.)

Although the account of the Prophet's testimony at the Nickerson's is an example of this power, an event a few years later gives more powerfully the fulfillment of this promise. For many months the Prophet remained in a Richmond, Missouri jail under false charges, and upon one of these nights, Elder Parley P. Pratt recorded:

In one of those tedious nights we had lain as if in sleep till the hour of midnight had passed, and our ears and hearts had been pained, while we had listened for hours to obscene jests, the horrid oaths, the dreadful blasphemies and filthy language of our guards, Colonel Price at their head, as they recounted to each other their deeds of raping, murder, robbery, etc., which they had committed among the "Mormons" while at Far West and vicinity. They even boasted of defiling by force wives, daughters and virgins, and of shooting or dashing out the brains of men, women, and children.

I had listened till I became so disgusted, shocked, horrified, and so filled with the spirit of indignant justice that I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and rebuking the guards; but had said nothing to Joseph, or anyone else, although I lay next to him and knew he was awake. On a sudden he arose to his feet, and spoke in a voice of thunder, or as the roaring lion, uttering, as near as I can recollect, the following words:

"SILENCE, ye fiends of the infernal pit. In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die THIS INSTANT!"

He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained, and without a weapon; calm, unruffled and dignified as an angel, he looked upon the quailing guards, whose weapons were lowered or dropped to the ground; whose knees smote together, and who, shrinking into a corner, or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and remained quiet till a change of guards.

I have seen the ministers of justice, clothed in magisterial robes, and criminals arraigned before them, while life was suspended on a breath, in the Courts of England; I have witnessed a Congress in solemn session to give laws to nations; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns; and of emperors assembled to decide the fate of kingdoms; but dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 210-211.)

Conclusion

Section 100 provides us with some principles and illustrations from the experiences of the Prophet Joseph Smith on how to preach the gospel. Since all members are counseled to be missionaries, the information is appropriate to all, with special reference to appointed missionaries. First, one must know what he is to teach. Second, he must seek to enjoy the guidance of the Holy Ghost by (a) living the commandments and (b) praying for the inspiration that comes from the Spirit. Third, rely, in faith, upon the Spirit to guide one in what to say. Fourth, remember the source from which the inspiration comes by acknowledging the Lord's hand in all things. Fifth, be earnest, enthusiastic, serious of heart, yet not boastful, but meek in all exhortations.

The promise is that the Holy Ghost will bear witness to the message so delivered.
