Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 26

Discipleship

(Section 100)

The forepart of Section 100 (verses 1-12) are instructions to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon on how they should perform their missionary labors while in Canada with the Nickerson family. Sidney Rigdon, in fulfillment of a Book of Mormon prophecy, is designated as a spokesman to the people. (2 Nephi 3:18; D&C 100:9.)

Zion Shall be Redeemed

The Zion of Jackson County, Missouri, was undergoing persecution. Because of the knowledge of Zion's greatness from the prophets and also the revelations he had received, the Prophet had a sincere concern for the success of the saints to establish Zion. (Ether 13:2-12; D&C 58:2-14.) This heartening message was received from the Lord:

And now I give unto you a word concerning Zion. Zion shall be redeemed, although she is chastened for a little season. (D&C 100:13.)

In the due time of the Lord the center place of Zion or the New Jerusalem will yet stand upon the land of America.

Orson Hyde and John Gould

When persecution broke out in Jackson County, the brethren sent Oliver Cowdery to Kirtland to report to the First Presidency. Soon thereafter, Orson Hyde, who later became an apostle, and John Gould were sent to Jackson County with instructions from the First Presidency. While the Prophet and his party were in Canada, the Lord revealed that these two brethren were in his hands, and if they kept the commandments they would be saved. (Ibid., verse 14.) From the following we learn the experience of the servants of the Lord as they endeavor to serve him:

During the entire history of the Latter-day Saints, the Lord has preserved His faithful servants, often miraculously, in dangers on land and sea, among enemies and false friends, until their mission was completed. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 634.)

Promises and Prophecies

The last three verses of Section 100 contain some promises and prophecies regarding the saints and the Lord's work.

Therefore, let your hearts be comforted; for all things shall work together for good to them that walk uprightly, and to the sanctification of the Church.

For I will raise up unto myself a pure people, that will serve me in righteousness;

And all that call upon the name of the Lord, and keep his commandments, shall be saved. Even so. Amen. (Verses 15-17.)

It is the promises and prophecies in those verses that this chapter is about. (1) All things shall work together for the good of the sanctified, who will find rich blessings. (2) Those who keep the commandments will be saved. And (3) the Lord will raise up a people who will serve him.

Be Comforted

In the time of worry, concern, mourning, and tribulation, the member of the Church of Jesus Christ may be blessed by the Comforter, who is the Holy Ghost. (John 14:26; 15:26.) One may receive the witness of the truth which the Lord bestows upon the sincere seeker with that Spirit.

Peace in this world, rest, and comfort are the blessings of obedience. (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 126-127.) Comfort comes to all those who seek for that blessing. Missionaries find comfort amid difficulties and discouragements. The sons of Mosiah rejoiced with Alma as they related their missionary experiences among the Lamanites. Because they had prepared themselves by prayer and fasting,

. . . it came to pass that the Lord did visit them with his Spirit, and said unto them: Be comforted. And they were comforted. (Alma 17:9-10.)

It is also written that those who mourn will find comfort. (Matt. 5:4; 3 Nephi 12:4.) To those who mourn for loved ones departed this life the knowledge of conscious existence at death continues to be a bulwark of strength in time of mourning. Faithful, devoted service in this life brings its rewards. (D&C 59:2; 63:49.)

Every Latter-day Saint finds comfort in the many prophecies regarding the ultimate victory of the Lord's work. The Spirit testifies to this truth bringing joy and happiness. Moroni, the last Nephite historian was concerned as to whether or not the readers of the Book of Mormon in the last days might not heed his message because he was not mighty in writing. The Lord's answer was that if men will come unto him in faith he will make them mighty and the Lord will show the people that faith, hope, and charity will bring them to him in the last days. When Moroni heard these words his fears left, for he was comforted. (Ether 12:24-30.)

All Things Good

In the promises to the saints of our times, the Lord makes known that "all things shall work together for good to them that walk uprightly." (D&C 100:15.) To walk uprightly is to keep the commandments. And for what purpose? The Lord has given the answer: "considering the end of your salvation." (Ibid., 46:7.) If the member of the Church is salvation oriented, he will walk uprightly before the Lord and will acknowledge that this life is purposeful. His acceptance of trials, tribulations, sorrow caused by death of loved ones, and other vicissitudes through which one might pass in life, will be accepted as a part of the total experience, and therefore good. (Ibid., 122:5-8.) However, only he who keeps the commandments can understand. (Ibid., 59:20.) Knowledge, peace, and comfort give rest and understanding.

Sanctification of the Church

To become sanctified is the goal of the knowledgeable Latter-day Saint. (D&C 88:67-68.) Elder Marion G. Romney has told us that through the gate of baptism and the ordinance of confirmation into the Church we have begun this process.

Through these principles and ordinances we were cleansed and purified. Having thus washed our garments in the blood of Christ, we entered through the straight gate and stood redeemed on the narrow way which leads to life eternal. It should have then been, and it should now be, the controlling desire of every Church member, and it is the desire of every member who is on the way to eternal life always to retain this redeemed status. (Conference Report, October 1956, p. 17.)

To be born again by the Holy Ghost is the step to sanctification or the state of holiness, by changing from the carnal to the spiritual state. (Moroni 10:32-33; 3 Nephi 27:19-21.) Sometimes this admonition is stated in terms of seeking perfection. (3 Nephi 12:48.) Throughout the change one is to apply the principle of repentance. Elder Romney continues to explain some ways in which this goal is possible:

With complete surrender to the spirit of the gospel let us, honestly and without guile, search our own souls and find the weakness which presently impedes our upward climb to eternal life. If that weakness be faultfinding, evil speaking of the Lord's anointed, or profaning the name of Deity, let us desist. If it be neglecting our prayers, let us pause night and morning in our mad rush and kneel with our families and in our secret chambers while we pour out our souls in thanksgiving and petition, until hungering and thirsting after righteousness we are filled with the Holy Ghost. If it be failure to obtain the sealing ordinances of the temple for ourselves and families, let us straightway prepare to enter that holy place and obtain them before it is too late. If it be the giving way to anger or appetite for the things forbidden in the Word of Wisdom, or surrendering to baser lusts; if it be desecration of the Sabbath day or refusing to contribute of our time and means according to the laws of the Church for the building of the kingdom; whatever it be, let us find it, recognize it, and do something about it daily.

Let us resolve never to relax in our striving for that perfection in ourselves which will bring us to eternal life. (Ibid.)

The prophetic statement that the Church will become sanctified is a requisite to the eventual building up of Zion upon the American continent. The Lord's army in that day will constitute a large number, greater than what existed in 1834 when the saints were expelled from Jackson County, Missouri. (D&C 105:31.) Although the number of those who will be sanctified will be great, there is no assurance that this will include all who are members of the Church. Sanctification in this life and enduring to the end will warrant receiving the celestial kingdom. (Ibid., 88:2, 116.) As members of the Church follow the admonition of the Lord to sanctify themselves, so much nearer is brought the day when Zion shall be redeemed. (Ibid., 43:9, 11, 16; 133:4.)

A Pure People

Closely associated with the building of Zion is the need for the people to become pure in heart. The Lord says that his people will be pure in heart for they will serve him in righteousness. (Ibid., 100:16.) Zion is the pure in heart. (Ibid., 97:21.).This thought is in harmony with the definition of a saint given by the Prophet Benjamin:

For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father. (Mosiah 3:19.)

We are to become saints in very deed, or pure in heart; that is, a change from the natural man to the spiritual man who is born again. (Ibid., 5:7.)

Can it be expected that one will be eligible for the celestial kingdom and be in the presence of God unless purity of heart is one's possession? The pure in heart, Jesus said, would see God. (Matt. 5:8.) This quality of the faithful eliminates much of what today causes so much contention and evil in the world. As Elder Albert E. Bowen wrote:

Jesus extolled the pure in heart, declaring it is they who shall see God. No one can challenge their right to that supremacy. As an ideal for a human society it is not subject to question. If men's hearts were pure we should not have the reports of bestiality which come from the battlefields respecting the treatment of helpless prisoners. Neither should we have the oppression under which the inhabitants of the world groan. Our press would not be filled with accounts of the appalling delinquencies which forebode the disintegration of personal integrity and the undermining of our very civilization itself. If men were pure in heart there would be no war at all either among nations, between classes or individuals, for there be no covetousness, or greed, or seeking of advantage or desire to destroy. Vice dens, whose noisome stenches pollute the moral atmosphere of our cities, would be cleansed and sweetened by the simple process of purification of the human heart. That one achievement would renovate the world. (Constancy Amid Change, pp. 37-38.)

Steps to Discipleship

To become sanctified by purifying one's heart demands complete and full allegiance to the teachings of Jesus Christ. This idea of discipleship is that a person disciplines himself to surrender completely his life as a follower. How may one be a follower of the Master in this sense? Here are some guidelines that will, if applied, bring success: (1) cleaving to the truth by study; (2) prayer; (3) righteous conduct; (4) obedience to the prophets; (5) church service.

Cleave to the Truth by Study

Without knowledge there is no salvation. (D&C 131:6.) Gospel knowledge, if applied, will increase faith. One of the principal reasons for lack of interest in the gospel and the resultant inactivity in church work is the lack of understanding of gospel principles. Elder John A. Widtsoe concludes that applied knowledge brings strong faith.

Knowledge tested and tried is the beginning of faith. For that reason, "it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." The extent of a person's faith depends in part on the amount of his knowledge. The more knowledge he gathers, the more intensive becomes his field of faith.

The degree of faith possessed by any man depends not upon the extent of his knowledge but upon the certainty of his knowledge, which leads to the proper use of his knowledge. Thus a man of great knowledge may have weak faith, while one of limited information may have strong faith. (Alma 32:34-41; Joseph Smith, p. 163.)

If faith is to be enlarged to bring about salvation, it must be placed in truth. (Alma 32:21.) As the certainty of knowledge also increases, the ability to discern truth is augmented because truth is discernible to the faithful. (Ibid., verse 35.)

In a world beset with false doctrines, theories, and ideologies inconsistent with the teachings of the gospel, it is increasingly necessary that Latter-day Saints be able to discern between truth and error. The Lord told his ancient disciples that in order to keep from being deceived they should treasure up his word.

And whoso treasureth up my word, shall not be deceived, for the Son of Man shall come, and he shall send his angels before him with the great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together the remainder of his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other. (Joseph Smith 1:37.)

Prayer

In Section 100, the Lord promises salvation to all who keep his commandments. The importance of prayer in the keeping of the commandments is indicated in his promise, as follows:

And all that call upon the name of the Lord, and keep his commandments, shall be saved. Even so. Amen. (D&C 100:17.)

Only those who have enjoyed the influence of family and secret prayer can truly understand the relationship of prayer to salvation. Even in the beginning Adam was counseled to "call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore." (Moses 5:8.) From then to the present dispensation considerable emphasis has been placed upon this important principle. The place of prayer in one's life was stated by Nephi as:

Ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ, that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee, that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul. (2 Nephi 32:9.)

The Latter-day Saint who strives to keep the commandments, increasing in knowledge, learns an important principle of prayer given in a modern revelation, as follows:

Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name it shall be given unto you, that is expedient for you;

And if ye ask anything that is not expedient for you, it shall turn unto your condemnation. (D&C 88:63-65.)

In a day when many efforts are made to deceive both young and old, it is essential that families follow the injunction of the Lord of holding family prayer.

Pray in your families unto the Father, always in my name, that your wives and your children may be blessed. (3 Nephi 18:21.)

The counsel is: "Watch and pray always, lest ye enter into temptation." (Matt. 26:41; D&C 10:5.)

Righteous Conduct

There is probably nothing that will keep a person from praying and seeking to follow the Lord's instruction more than sin will. In the following words President George Q. Cannon expressed the way in which the Lord keeps his Church from becoming corrupt:

God is cleansing this people and purging those who practice sin from their midst. Those who commit sin gradually leave the Church. They get into the dark and they become cold and indifferent, and finally leave the Church. If it were not for God's power in this respect, we would soon become corrupt, doubtless, as other people. But God in His wonderful providence has so arranged matters that impurity cannot live in this Church for any length of time. There is a cleansing process going on. God is cleansing His Church, and He is purging out the wicked and the ungodly, and He is leaving the residue. No man can be confident of standing in His Church unless he is pure in heart; for the Holy Ghost will not dwell in unholy tabernacles. Men may deceive their fellow men; women may deceive their sisters; but they cannot deceive God. They cannot commit sin and retain the Spirit of God. It will leave them sooner or later. It will decrease with them, and finally leave them, unless they repent of their sins. . . . (Millennial Star 57:801-802.)

He who treasures his membership in the Church will repent speedily of those things that will take him away from the Lord's Spirit and communion with the saints.

It is safe to say that no one can be a successful Latter-day Saint and disregard the teachings of the prophets who live today. To court the disfavor of the Lord by rejecting his servants is to lose one's exaltation. (D&C 84:35-38, 49-53.)

And if my people will hearken unto my voice, and unto the voice of my servants whom I have appointed to lead my people, behold, verily I say unto you, they shall not be moved out of their place.

But if they will not hearken to my voice, nor unto the voice of these men whom I have appointed, they shall not be blest, because they pollute mine holy grounds, and mine holy ordinances, and charters, and my holy words which I give unto them. (D&C 124:45-46.)

Church Service

Wherein does church activity redound to the salvation of the participant? If we serve the Lord devotedly, we must also serve our fellowmen. Participation gives communion with fellow Church members and thus the desire to keep the commandments is increased and faith is enlarged. The development of talents and gifts is possible through service to others. President George F. Richards expressed it this way:

One might ask: Why all the activity we see in the Church, in the ministry abroad, in the ministry at home, in the stakes and wards, in the genealogy and temple work, in Church school and seminary work, etc.? The answer might be briefly given thus: The salvation of man depends upon it. It is the work and glory of God to accomplish the salvation of his children, by the plan of the Gospel which he has revealed. The religious activities seen in the Church and in which we are engaged are for the purpose, and are assisting the Lord in the noblest work, the most important service in which man may be engaged. If we be not called officially into the service, there are many things we can do of our own volition which will contribute to our happiness and salvation and to the happiness and salvation of others. (Conference Report, April 1936, p. 79.)

It is wisdom to understand this principle, said the Prophet Benjamin.

And behold, I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God. (Mosiah 2:17.)

Conclusion

The Lord has made specific promises to his followers that if they walk uprightly before him, seeking to sanctify themselves and thereby to sanctify the Church, they shall be comforted. The Lord says that he will raise up a people who are pure in heart. For us the wise decision is to be one of those who shall have an opportunity to build Zion upon the earth and to be one with the sanctified to inherit the richest blessings the Lord bestows upon his faithful children.
