Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 27

The Millennium

(Section 101:23-42)

In the first part of Section 101 the Lord said that because of the transgressions of the Saints they were persecuted in Jackson County, Missouri. Despite the fact that the Saints had been driven from the land of their inheritance, the Lord said that they would return to build up the waste places of Zion. (D&C 101:17-18.) In the meantime, the Saints were to gather together in stakes that the strength of Zion might be increased. Since 1833 when the Saints left Jackson County, the number of stakes have multiplied many times over. At this writing, there are 496 of these territorial divisions in the Church. These "holy places" are to be places of refuge against the storm of calamities which would befall the earth in the last days. (Ibid., 20-23.)

The Coming of Christ

While the Saints are established in the stakes of Zion, they are to prepare for the time when the Savior will come the second time. The covering between his abode in the heavens and the earth will be removed and "all flesh shall see me [him] together." (Ibid., 101:23.)

The coming of Christ will be a literal appearance as a personage of flesh and bones. When he ascended into the heavens after his final instructions to his apostles, they were promised that he would come in like manner as they had seen him go into heaven. (Acts 1:11.) Jesus was resurrected with his physical body, which had been placed in the sepulcher following his death. (Luke 24.) He is today enthroned in the heavens, having the same body that he took into the heavens. (D&C 49:6; 130:22.) On March 7, 1831, the Lord had said that he would come with his holy angels in great power and glory, and he who would not watch for his coming would be cut off. (Ibid., 45:44.)

As we take the scriptures literally in regard to his personal appearance, so also we should remember that his coming will be attendant with great destruction. The brightness of his glory will even surpass the brightness of the sun. (Ibid., 133:49.) The wicked will enter the spirit world to be judged according to their works. (D&C 29:9-10; 133:64; 76:106-112.) This is what the Lord has revealed about his coming:

And every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed. (Ibid., 101:24.)

Corrupted animal life as well as wicked men and women will be destroyed. Apparently, some animals so change their natures that they may be called "corruptible."

The destruction of the wicked at the second coming of Christ is referred to in the scriptures as the end of the world. (Joseph Smith 1:4, 31; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 100-101.) When that time comes, the millennial reign of Christ will commence. (D&C 29:10-11.) In some scriptures the condition of the earth is referred to as "a new heaven and a new earth." (Isa. 65:17; Richards and Little Compendium, pp. 185-186.) Whereas the present environment of the earth is known as telestial, during the Millennium it will be terrestrial. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 1:82.) The tenth Article of Faith describes the millennial condition of the earth as "paradisiacal." This word, given by the Prophet Joseph Smith, suggests a beautiful garden; that is, the earth will become as it was before the fall of Adam. (Ibid., pp. 84-85.)

The Celestialized Earth

After the earth has served its purpose as the habitat for mortal man, it will undergo a further transformation known as celestialization. Then it will be like a sea of glass having the properties of the Urim and Thummim. By this means, knowledge of kingdoms lower than the celestial will be revealed. (Ibid., 130:9.) This condition is not the same as during the Millennium.

Millennial People

Sometimes members of the Church have an erroneous idea concerning the people who will dwell on the earth during the Millennium. Mortals will live during this time. Because the scriptures speak of a resurrection at the time of the second coming of Christ and that people will be caught up to meet him, it does not follow that the mortals caught up to meet him or those who are not destroyed at his coming will undergo the resurrection. (Ibid., 88:97-98.) Mortals will live on the earth and follow the same pattern of life that we do now. Isaiah said that people will eat of the fruit of the vine and inhabit houses. (Isaiah 65:21-23.) Children are mentioned in the scriptures as living also. (Isaiah 11:6; 65:20; D&C 63:49-51.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith says that honorable people who presently live the terrestrial law will have the right to life then. It will not be only faithful members of the Church who will survive the destructions before and at the Lord's coming.

There will be millions of people, Catholics, Protestants, agnostics, Mohammedans, people of all classes, and of all beliefs, still permitted to remain upon the face of the earth, but they will be those who have lived clean lives, those who have been free from wickedness and corruption. All who belong, by virtue of their good lives, to the terrestrial order, as well as those who have kept the celestial law, will remain upon the face of the earth during the millennium.

Eventually, however, the knowledge of the Lord will cover the earth as waters do the sea. But there will be need for the preaching of the gospel, after the millennium is brought in, until all men are either converted or pass away. In the course of the thousand years all men will either come into the Church, or kingdom of God, or they will die and pass away. In that day there will be no death until men are old. (Doctrines of Salvation 1:86-87.)

Among those of "all beliefs" mentioned by President Smith will be those who "knew no law" or the heathen nations. (D&C 45:54.) These will enjoy the blessings of the Millennium. If among these nations there are those, however, who will not come up to worship, they will suffer "the judgments of God and must eventually be destroyed from the earth." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 269.) This is in accord with what the Prophet Zechariah said of the nations who were left of those who came up to fight against Jerusalem. (Zech. 14:16-19.)

On the other hand, it is not to be expected that all Latter-day Saints will survive the great desolations that visit the earth before and at the second coming of Christ. The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

I explained concerning the coming of the Son of Man; also that it is a false idea that the Saints will escape all the judgments, whilst the wicked suffer; for all flesh is subject to suffer, and "the righteous shall hardly escape;" still many of the Saints will escape for the just shall live by faith; yet many of the righteous shall fall prey to disease, to pestilence, etc., by reason of the weakness of the flesh, and yet be saved in the kingdom of God. So that it is an unhallowed principle to say that such and such have transgressed because they have been preyed upon by disease or death, for all flesh is subject to death; and the Savior has said, "Judge not, lest ye be judged." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 162-163.)

Among the people who will live on the earth during the Millennium will be the lost tribes. They will return from the land of the north sometime near or at the second coming of Christ. The destructions of the last days will prepare the way, said the Prophet Joseph Smith, "for the return of the lost tribes from the north country." (DHC 1:315.) We know from the scriptures that the Savior visited them and taught them the gospel and that they have their own scriptures. (3 Nephi 15; 16.) They shall come to the Latter-day Saints and there receive their blessings. (D&C 133:26-34; 3 Nephi 21:26; Ether 13:11.)

Death

Children will be born and live to the "age of a tree" as mortal beings, but there shall be no sorrow arising from death. (D&C 101:29.) Separation from loved ones today brings sorrow, but those who die during the Millennium "shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be caught up, and his [their] rest shall be glorious." (Ibid., 31; 63:5.) The changing of the body will be from mortality to immortality or resurrection. It is said of children that they will "grow up without sin unto salvation." (D&C 45:58.)

For how long shall people live? Isaiah said that men would live to the age of a tree which he believed to be 100 years. (Isaiah 65:20.) The Doctrine and Covenants Commentary gives this information on this question:

Some trees grow quite old. An authority of the Forestry Service at Washington is quoted to the effect that the pine tree may attain 700 years as a maximum length of life; the silver fir 425 years; the red beech, 245; the aspen, 210; the birch, 200; the ash, 170 years. The heart of the oak begins to decay when the tree is about 300 years old. When man lives in accordance with the laws of God, and is clean and temperate in all things, there is no reason, as far as known, why he should not live to the same age as the Patriarchs before the flood. (P. 644.)

Animals and Man

The millennial period is known as a period of peace. "And in that day the enmity of man, and the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of all flesh, shall cease from before my face." (D&C 101:26; Isa. 11:6-9.) With Satan's power absent and honorable people inhabiting the earth, war shall cease. (Micah 4:4.) Men will convert their military equipment into instruments of peace and productivity. (Isa. 2:4.) With the Spirit of the Lord upon the earth in rich abundance, the present enmity existing between animals will cease, and man and animal will also be at peace.

Increased Knowledge

One of the blessings to be received during the Millennium is the understanding of many mysteries that have perplexed man. It is promised that knowledge concerning man and the earth will be increased greatly. By revelation, men will know the truth regarding man's creation.

Yea, verily I say unto you, in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things—

Things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—

Things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven. (D&C 101:32-34.)

As a part of the restoration of the fulness of the gospel, it was prophesied that there would be a "restitution of all things" spoken of by the mouths of the holy prophets since the world began. (Acts 3:19-21.) Among these prophecies is the restoration of the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon plates, which contain a history of the world from the beginning to the end. These plates will not be revealed during the time of wickedness and abominations, but when the Lord reveals "all things" during the Millennium. (2 Nephi 27:7, 8, 10, 11, 22.) Another prophecy about the Millennium is found in the following:

And then shall the first angel again sound his trump, in the ears of all living, and reveal the secret acts of men, and the mighty works of God in the first thousand years.

And then shall the second angel sound his trump, and reveal the secret acts of men, and the thoughts and intents of their hearts, and the mighty works of God in the second thousand years—

And so on, until the seventh angel shall sound his trump; and he shall stand forth upon the land and upon the sea, and swear in the name of him who sitteth upon the throne, that there shall be time no longer; and Satan shall be bound, that old serpent, who is called the devil, and shall not be loosed for the space of a thousand years. (D&C 88:108-110.)

Greater knowledge has ever been promised those who seek sincerely, and individuals during this period will receive whatsoever they ask. (D&C 101:27; 112:10; 42:68; James 1:5.) The principle upon which this blessing is received is given in Section 88:63-65. Men today, as well as during the Millennium, should ask only for what the Spirit prompts them.

Purpose of the Millennium

There will be a great many of the Father's children who will not have received salvation when the Millennium is begun. Men will continue to be taught the truth and be capable of exercising their free agency.

One of the principal purposes for the thousand year reign of peace is to perform temple work for those who are eligible for the fulness of the gospel. From the other side of the veil will come messengers that will provide mortals with names of those who, having accepted the gospel in the spirit world, are eligible to receive the ordinances of the temple. Expressed in the language of President Brigham Young, we read:

Before this work is finished, a great many of the Elders of Israel in Mount Zion will become pillars in the Temple of God, to go no more out: they will eat and drink and sleep there; and they will often have occasion to say—"Somebody came into the Temple last night! we did not know who he was, but he was no doubt a brother, and told us a great many things we did not before understand. He gave us the names of a great many of our forefathers that are not on record, and he gave me my true lineage and the names of my forefathers for hundreds of years back. He said to me, You and I are connected in one family: there are the names of your ancestors; take them and write them down and be baptised and confirmed, and save such and such ones, and receive of the blessings of the eternal Priesthood for such and such an individual, as you do for yourselves." This is what we are going to do for the inhabitants of the earth. (Journal of Discourses 6:295.)

Resurrected Saints

Because the Millennium will be a period of the resurrection, it is improbable that these beings will continue upon the earth as do mortals. Christ will reign personally upon the earth. About this subject, the Prophet Joseph Smith said:

Christ and the resurrected Saints will reign over the earth during the thousand years. They will not probably dwell upon the earth, but will visit it when they please, or when it is necessary to govern it. (DHC 5:212.)

During that reign "judgment will be administered in righteousness; anarchy and confusion will be destroyed," and "nations will learn war no more!" (DHC 5:63.)

Two Capitals

During the millennial period there shall be two capitals on the earth. These will be the Zion on the American Continent and the Old Jerusalem on the eastern continent. (Isa. 2:3.)

The Salt of the Earth

What manner of saints should we be to inherit the blessings of the Millennium, if alive when it is ushered in?

The early saints were reminded that when they accepted the everlasting gospel, they became the salt of the earth and the savor of men. (D&C 101:39.) President Brigham Young said:

All Latter-day Saints enter the new and everlasting covenant when they enter the Church. They covenant to cease sustaining, upholding and cherishing the kingdom of the Devil and the kingdoms of this world. They enter the new and everlasting covenant to sustain the Kingdom of God and no other kingdom. They take a vow of the most solemn kind, before the heavens and earth, and that, too, upon the validity of their own salvation, that they will sustain truth and righteousness instead of wickedness and falsehood, and build up the Kingdom of God, instead of the Kingdom of this world. (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 160.)

Salt was used among the Lord's people anciently as a preservative and also in animal sacrifices. (Lev. 21:13; Ezek. 43:24; Mark 9:49-50.) It was a symbol of the covenant made between God and his people. (Lev. 2:13; Num. 18:19; 2 Chron. 13:5.) When salt is used to represent a people it means that they would be an influence in carrying forward the truth of the gospel and thus become the savor of men. But if they should be as salt that loses its savor, they would be cast out of the kingdom. (D&C 101:40.) To break the commandments brings a loss of effectiveness with others and a loss of the spirit and eventual denial of the faith.

He That Exalteth Himself

The children of Zion, though not all, had sinned against their covenants and were cast out of Jackson County, Missouri. Transgressions bring chastisement, said the Lord. (Ibid., 101:41.)

He that exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that abaseth himself shall be exalted. (Ibid., 42.)

The Lord had told the saints in this revelation that they did not serve him well during their peace and prosperity, and therefore they lost their present inheritance. (Ibid., 6-8.) In this way they had exalted themselves above his commandments. One of the most serious sins is to become a law unto one's self. To consider that one is beyond receiving counsel from those in authority constitutes exalting one's self. (Ibid., 63:55.)

Shall Be Abased

The person who exalts himself lacks humility. Perhaps the instruction of the Lord to Martin Harris might serve to explain what is necessary to become humble. In order for Martin Harris to see the plates of the Book of Mormon, he was told that he must no longer exalt himself but become humble.

Behold, I say unto him, he exalts himself and does not humble himself sufficiently before me; but if he will bow down before me, and humble himself in mighty prayer and faith, in the sincerity of his heart, then will I grant unto him a view of the things which he desires to see. (Ibid., 5:24.)

Another requisite for greatness in the kingdom of God is to become the servant of all. (Mark 10:43-44.) Submitting to the will of the Lord is true humility. "Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time," is the way of success. (1 Peter 4:6.)
