Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 28

The Eventual Triumph of God's Work

(Sections 101:43-75; 103)

Section 101 of the Doctrine and Covenants contains reasons for the persecution of the saints in Jackson County, Missouri. Also, stakes of Zion were to be places of refuge where the saints might gather, but eventually they would return to the Zion of Missouri. (Verses 17-22.)

The saints are the salt of the earth by covenant, but the unfaithful will, as salt that has lost its savor, lose their usefulness in the kingdom. The Lord said that some might be called upon to give their lives in defense of the faith, and of these he said there would come a fulness of joy in the eternal worlds. (Verses 35-40.)

A Parable

By parable the Lord revealed wherein the saints transgressed in Zion, and a plan by which the saints in Missouri might be restored to their lands. Anciently, religious truths were given by parable, comparable to the one found in Section 101. (Isaiah 5:1-7; Matt. 21:33-46.) This form of instruction is described as follows:

The parable conveys to the hearer religious truth exactly in proportion to his faith and intelligence; to the dull and unintelligent it is a mere story, "seeing they see not," while to the instructed and spiritual it reveals the mysteries of secrets of the kingdom of heaven. Thus it is that parable exhibits the condition of all true knowledge. Only he who seeks finds. . . .

The word itself, "parable," is Greek in origin, and means a setting side by side, a comparison. In parables divine truth is explained by comparisons with material things. ("Bible Dictionary," L.D.S. Missionary Bible, p. 114.)

The parable in Section 101:43-62 interpreted in the light of Latter-day Saint Church history, is as follows: A master (the Lord) sends his servants (members of the Church) into his vineyard (Jackson County, Missouri) to plant olive trees. They are to build a tower (temple) from which they would detect the movements of any enemy who would come to destroy the fruit of the vineyard. The servants did as the Lord of the vineyard required even to the building of the foundation of the tower; however, they began to question the building of the tower since it was a time of peace.

Because the servants were not united in this project an opportunity was afforded the enemy (Missouri mobs) to overrun the vineyard and cause the servants to flee. Upon hearing of this destruction, the master reminds the servants that if they had done as commanded, even to building the tower and placing watchmen (officers of the Church) upon the walls, preparation would have been made for the preservation of the vineyard. What should be done? One of the servants (Joseph Smith, Section 103:21) was commanded to gather together other servants, the young and the middle aged, and redeem the vineyard (gather together sufficient brethren to purchase land, Section 103:23) for it was the master's, he had paid for it. But someone asks, when should the vineyard be redeemed? The answer was: "When I will," but the servant was to do as commanded in gathering the faithful to redeem in the vineyard. (D&C 101:43-60.)

The revelation continues to explain that the Prophet Joseph Smith had received a seal and blessing. He was proclaimed by the Lord as a faithful and wise steward, a ruler in the kingdom of God. (Ibid., verse 61.) The Lord knew that the Prophet would do as commanded, for he revealed to Nephi that the Prophet would be a dedicated servant, "for he shall do my work." (2 Nephi 3:8.) In the parable just related, the servant did as the master commanded, "and after many days all things were fulfilled." (D&C 101:62.)

Gather Before the Judgment

The driving from Jackson County did not dishearten the saints from continuing the work of salvation in which they were engaged. Those who could were counseled to continue to gather to places appointed—holy places. These are designated in the revelation as stakes. (Ibid., verses 20-21.) In this revelation the Lord calls attention to the parable of the wheat and the tares explained earlier in Section 86. At the second coming of Christ there will be a separation of the righteous from the wicked. The wheat, his saints, will find eternal life in that day while the tares, the wicked, will be brought to judgment. Eventually all men will be judged according to their works. (Ibid., verses 63-67.)

Purchase Land

If the saints would return to the land of their inheritance it was necessary for them to purchase land in and around about Zion, a commandent which is repeated. (Ibid., verses 69-71; 63:25-31.) It was intended that the various branches of the Church should contribute to the purchase of lands. (Ibid., 101:71-75.)

Seek for Redress

The saints were told to importune for redress for the crimes committed against them according to the law of the land. The constitution of the United States was prepared by men whom the Lord raised up that protection might be afforded against loss of property and liberties. (Ibid., 101:76-80; Chapter 24.)

The Lord refers to the parable of the woman and the unjust judge that the saints might know how to seek for redress. (Luke 18:1-8; D&C 101:81-84.) As applied to the saints, they were to seek assistance from the judge; if he would not help then they were to go to the governor, and finally to the President of the United States. If satisfaction were not then obtained, the Lord would in his time deal with the nation. (Ibid., verses 85-91.)

Results

An informative source has summarized the attempts of the saints to follow the Lord's counsel on how to return to their lands in Jackson County, as follows:

The Saints did importune the rulers for redress. After having knocked at the doors of judges, they addressed several communications to Governor Dunklin of Missouri. In a letter dated February 4th, 1834, this official acknowledged the duty of the authorities to reinstate the Saints in their homes and to inquire into the proceedings of Col. Pitcher in depriving them of their arms. He also admitted that the entire State was interested in the faithful execution of the laws; "for that which is the case of the Mormons today, may be the case of the Catholics tomorrow, and after them, any other sect that may become obnoxious to a majority of the people of any section of the State." He proposed to provide protection for the people while suing in the courts and returning to their homes, but he did not guarantee protection in the continued possession of the homes, and the Saints, therefore, wisely declined to return and invite the mob to commit new outrages. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 652.)

Following these unsatisfactory promises, additional appeals were made of the civil authorities when the saints were driven from the state of Missouri, as this source continues:

Petitions were sent, and, finally, the Prophet Joseph Smith appealed in person to the President of the United States, but this only elicited the famous answer, "Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you." (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 652.)

Section 103

The saints in Clay County, Missouri, held a conference and asked for volunteers to go to the Prophet in Ohio to see what could be done to restore the saints to their homes in Jackson County. Elder Parley P. Pratt wrote the following about this circumstance:

The poverty of all, and the inclement season of the year made all hesitate. At length Lyman Wight and myself offered our services, which were readily accepted. I was at this time entirely destitute of proper clothing for the journey; and I had neither horse, saddle, bridle, money nor provisions to take with me; or to leave with my wife, who lay sick and helpless most of the time.

Under these circumstances I knew not what to do. Nearly all had been robbed and plundered, and all were poor. As we had to start without delay, I almost trembled at the undertaking; it seemed to be all but an impossibility; but "to him that believeth all things are possible. . . . " (Mark 9:23.) We were soon ready, and on the first of February we mounted our horses, and started in good cheer to ride one thousand or fifteen hundred miles through a wilderness country. We had not one cent of money in our pockets on starting.

We traveled every day, whether through storm or sunshine, and, rain, or snow; except when our public duties called us to tarry. We arrived in Kirtland early in the spring, all safe and sound; we had lacked for nothing on the road, and now had plenty of funds in hand. President Joseph Smith and the Church in Kirtland received us with hospitality and joy unknown except among the Saints, and much interest was felt there, as well as elsewhere, on the subject of our persecution. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 107-109.)

The Lord revealed Section 103 which gave the answer to the most pressing questions before the saints—when shall Zion be redeemed? As the Lord had said before, it was necessary for the members of the Church in Ohio and elsewhere to gather sufficient money to help redeem Zion, and also to organize a relief expedition. If they would not follow the Lord's counsel, they would be as salt that had lost its savor. A great obligation was placed upon the Church to assist to redeem Zion. It was so important that the Prophet Joseph Smith made the following prophecy:

If Zion is not delivered, the time is near when all of this Church, wherever they may be found, will be persecuted and destroyed in like manner. (DHC 2:53.)

Subsequent events proved that Zion would not be redeemed at that time. The branches of the Church were scattered from Missouri into Illinois and subsequently into the West.

God's Work to Triumph

In a larger sense the saints were promised that if they kept the commandments they would prevail over their enemies and they would eventually inherit the earth. This prophecy is in process of fulfillment today:

But verily I say unto you, that I have decreed a decree which my people shall realize, inasmuch as they hearken from this hour unto the counsel which I, the Lord their God, shall give unto them.

Behold they shall, for I have decreed it, begin to prevail against mine enemies from this very hour.

And by hearkening to observe all the words which I, the Lord their God, shall speak unto them, they shall never cease to prevail until the kingdoms of the world are subdued under my feet, and the earth is given unto the saints, to possess it forever and ever. (D&C 103:5-6.)

This remarkable prophecy has its roots in the ancient prediction made by Daniel, concerning the setting up of the kingdom of God upon the earth in the last days. (Daniel 2.) The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is that kingdom, and it is destined to fill the whole earth. The keys of the kingdom have already been restored and only time will see the complete fulfillment when it will cover the earth. (D&C 65:2.) The assaults of its enemies will never overcome God's work. There may appear to be times when the Church is overcome by the adversary, but these victories are only temporary. Regarding this prophecy in Section 103, President Joseph F. Smith in a general conference challenged the world to show that this prophecy was not true. Despite deadly opposition, the prophecy is in process of fulfillment, and the remainder will find complete fulfillment, he predicted. (Journal of Discourses 25:98.)

When the saints were driven from Illinois after being expelled from Missouri in 1839, they had founded the city of Nauvoo, which grew to some 20, 000 inhabitants. At the time President Joseph F. Smith gave his testimony and assurance of the continuance of God's work, the Church membership was slightly over 160, 000. Since that time, eighty years later, the Church has grown to almost three million, with an annual increase of about 100, 000. Latter-day Saints do not look to the complete fulfillment of the prophecy that the Church will cover the whole earth until the Millennium. They know that when the earth is celestialized it will belong to the saints permanently, and they know that prophecy is in process of fulfillment.

That the Prophet Joseph Smith had a certain knowledge of the continuous growth of the Church very early in the dispensation is indicated in the following account reported by President Wilford Woodruff in 1898. A number of the brethren met in a priesthood meeting in 1833 and testified to the on-rolling progress of the kingdom of God on the earth, and then the Prophet made this prophecy:

"Brethren I have been very much edified and instructed in your testimonies here tonight, but I want to say to you before the Lord, that you know no more concerning the destinies of this Church and kingdom than a babe upon its mother's lap. You don't comprehend it." I was rather surprized. He said "it is only a little handful of Priesthood you see here tonight, but this Church will fill North and South America—it will fill the world." Among other things he said, "It will fill the Rocky Mountains. There will be tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints who will be gathered in the Rocky Mountains, and there they will open the door for the establishing of the Gospel among the Lamanites, who will receive the Gospel and their endowments and the blessings of God. . . . "

I name these things because I want to bear testimony before God, angels and men that mine eyes behold the day, and have beheld for the last fifty years of my life, the fulfillment of that prophecy. . . . (Conference Report, April 1898, p. 57.)

No one could truthfully say that this prophecy, comparable to the one in Section 103, but more in detail, is not also in process of fulfillment.

A Light to the World

Latter-day Saints by covenant of baptism are to be a light to the world. In this calling, they are to show the way to eternal life. If obedient to this commandment, they join with the saints to become the saviors of men. (D&C 103:9-10.) As the Savior commanded, they should not hide their talents under a bushel, but "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 12:14-16.) This sobering thought suggests that members of the Church may be saviors of men in several ways: first, to be exemplary in their lives that people will see the fruits of the gospel and seek it; second, in being exemplars of the truth people will believe their words when they are taught the gospel; and third, those who labor through genealogical research and the performance of temple work for the dead also become helpers in the salvation of others.

Promise of Redemption

The saints shall return to the center place of Zion to build the city and temple. The Lord has so stated. (D&C 101:17-19; 103:11.) The living prophets have looked forward to the time when this will be accomplished.

The accomplishment of the purposes for which the Church has been restored is assured, but as to all members of the Church there is not the same assurance. Those who pollute their inheritances will be thrown down. (Ibid., 103:14.)

Victory Through Dedication

The way to victory and glory, said the Lord, was through three qualities: diligence, faithfulness, and prayers of faith.

Diligently performing the duties and responsibilities of one's calling and keeping the commandments bring the Lord's choicest blessings. In a priesthood revelation the Lord said:

Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence.

He that is slothful shall not be counted worthy to stand, and he that learns not his duty and shows himself not approved shall not be counted worthy to stand. Even so. Amen. (D&C 107:99-100.)

The importance of faithfulness in a Latter-day Saint's life and its blessing is given by Elder Delbert L. Stapley in this passage:

Complete obedience and faithfulness obtain full fellowship in the household of faith and, more importantly, merit jointheirship with Christ our Lord in all that the Father has committed unto him. (Conference Report, April 1961, p. 65.)

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr. admonished the Church to live the commandments and then the prayer of faith would be meaningful.

Now . . . are you living so that you can go to the Lord with reasonable confidence that he will hear you? Can you go and ask him to heal your little ones? or yourself? or your wife? If you can, when the time comes you will be happy and you will go to the Lord in faith, and the prayer of faith availeth much.

As I said . . . it has always seemed to me that in our prayer, and in our faith, we should always say to the Lord, "not our will, but thine be done." (Sec. 109:44.)

Now, brethren, do not put off putting yourselves in order, if you are not in order, yielding obedience to the commandments of the Lord, so that when the time comes, if it comes, and I pray that it will not come to any of you, but when the time comes, you will be able to go to the Lord with a pure heart, and invoke his blessings upon you. (Conference Report, October 1942, p. 84.)

Every person who serves the Lord diligently, faithfully, and with the prayer of faith, will find eternal life.
