Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 33

The Kirtland Temple (Dedicatory Prayer)

(D&C 109)

As early as 1832, the Lord commanded his people to build a temple in Kirtland, Ohio. (D&C 88:119-120.) A committee was appointed to obtain funds for the construction of the temple. The Lord had told his people that a purpose of this building was that the disciples might go forth to prune the vineyard for the last time. (Ibid., 95:4.) In the circular sent out by the committee, it was said that this house would be the place where the elders might call a solemn assembly and treasure up words of wisdom that they might go to the Gentiles for the last time. (DHC 1:349.)

The Kirtland Temple

On March 27, 1836, the day of the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, the structure, consisting of two stories and an attic, was finished except for the second story. The first and second stories each had two pulpits, one at each end, consisting of four different compartments, one arising above and a little behind the next one and each capable of seating three persons. One set of the pulpits was for the Melchizedek Priesthood while the one at the other end of the room was for the Aaronic Priesthood. By means of curtains or veils hanging from the ceiling, each room could be divided into four compartments or classes. The doctrine of baptism for the dead had not been revealed at this time, consequently there was no baptismal font in the building. The building was, however, constructed to suit and accommodate the various quorums of the priesthood and the worship of the Church at that time. In the attic, five rooms were built for the holding of school and the use of different quorums of the priesthood.

Dedicatory Service

The dedicatory service consisted of praying, congregational singing, preaching, testimony bearing, and the dedication of the building by the reading of the prayer given by revelation. Following the prayer the congregation was led in the Hosanna Shout. An important part of the service was the approval of the General Authorities under the law of common consent. It was upon this occasion that the Prophet Joseph Smith asked the people to sustain the twelve apostles as prophets, seers, and revelators. (DHC 2:410-428.) Many spiritual manifestations were observed during the day.

Section l09

Section 109 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the dedicatory prayer for the Kirtland Temple, was received by revelation. (DHC 2:420.) Although this prayer was given for a special purpose, there are many elements in it which may assist members of the Church to understand the two following aspects of prayer: (1) prayer form, and (2) prayer content. It is understood that prayer should be appropriate to the occasion and should come from the heart. Particularly where members of the Church are called upon to offer public prayers in behalf of those assembled in meetings, there is suggested the need to use language that expresses the purpose of the prayer. In a study of this dedicatory prayer, one should not consider that all things for which a person should pray are mentioned, because of the special purpose of this prayer. One can learn, however, many important points about prayer that may be beneficial. This revelation is the model for the dedication of temples and other structures in the Church.

Prayer Content

Some members of the Church are concerned as to how they can keep their daily prayers from becoming formal and trite. If one prays for individual needs only, there is a reason for reviewing the many possibilities for which one might sincerely pray. Section 109 gives many of these points. Some of these elements are as follows: (1) purpose; (2) expression of gratitude; (3) remembrance of others; (4) protection and assistance; (5) forgiveness of sin; (6) the Church and the gospel.

Purpose

Frequently members of the Church who represent a group or congregation in giving the invocation, mention the purpose for which the meeting is being held. Sometimes reference is made to the faith and diligence of those present.

In the dedicatory prayer one reads a review of the events in the building of the Kirtland Temple. The fulfillment of the commandment to build the temple is mentioned (D&C 109:1-4) and the tribulations experienced amid poverty, "that the Son of Man might have a place to manifest himself to his people." (Ibid., 109:5.) President Sidney Rigdon gave a two and one-half hour address during the service, the purpose of which was to compare the privations and hardships of the people in building the temple with that of the saints during the time of the Savior. (Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 90.) The Prophet also prayed, as we do, for success in a calling, that the solemn assembly commanded to be held, might be acceptable. (Ibid., 109:6-13.)

Remember the Missionaries

Those members of the Church who have had members of their families serve as missionaries, or who themselves have been on missions for the Church, or who may have been converted through the labors of missionaries, have a strong feeling for the success of those who labor in the mission field. All members of the Church who have a sincere desire for the growth of the Church are anxious to have the Lord's power with his servants. Many verses in the dedicatory prayer are devoted to this subject.

The desire of the Prophet was that nothing which might thwart the progress of the Church would be successful. That those who lied or published slanderous material against the saints might be confounded was a part of that petition. (Ibid., 109:24-33.)

Before the saints had established Kirtland, Ohio, as a gathering place, the Lord promised that when his servants were endowed there would be a gathering to the bosom of the Church. (Ibid., 38:38.) This endowment would be such that they would be taught from on high to perform missionary work. (Ibid., 43:16.) With the temple built, the great missionary program would be inaugurated.

Apparently the endowment referred to in reference to the Kirtland Temple was an outpouring of the Holy Ghost. The Prophet prayed for this blessing for those who would go forth to preach the gospel. (Ibid., 109:22-23, 35, 42.)

Remember the Suffering Saints

The Prophet prayed that the actions of wicked men against the saints would cease, and that their persecutors might repent of their wicked ways. (D&C 109:45-53.)

The persecution suffered by the saints of the Missouri period consisted of both physical and mental persecution. Although the saints today do not receive persecution from arms or the loss of homes and a lack of the necessities of life, still, in some mission fields, there are possible loss of employment and some forms of ostracism. Latter-day Saints throughout the world may well pray for their fellow members that persecution may cease, but that if tribulations come, they may be able to withstand them.

Remember the Heads of Governments

Latter-day Saints are known as a peace-loving people. They wait for the day when there will be a permanent peace with the coming of the Savior. (Ibid., 101:26.) They have been commanded, also, to renounce war and to seek peace through the turning of the hearts of the children to the fathers and the hearts of the fathers to the children. (Ibid., 98:16-17.) This admonition to preach the gospel that peace may be generated in the hearts of men is consistent with the truth that surcease from war and calamity is not promised for this dispensation. (Ibid., 1:35; 97:22-23.) Latter-day Saints have the opportunity to pray for the day when the Savior will come, that a new day will dawn upon the world. They also may pray for the rulers of nations, as did the Prophet Joseph Smith, that their hearts and the hearts of their subjects may be softened, that they may accept the servants of the Lord who will preach to them the gospel of peace. (Ibid., 109:54-58.)

Remember the Leaders of the Church

We have learned that Latter-day Saints, by their prayers, should sustain those who preside over them. (Ibid., 108:7.) In the following words, President George Albert Smith encouraged the saints to do this:

. . . I hope that we will be found in the lines of our duty, praying for and sustaining our present leaders, blessing them by our kindness and our love, and presenting them before our Heavenly Father in our daily prayers, asking him that he will give them the richness of his love and blessing. (Conference Report, October 1934, p. 53.)

Not only did the Prophet Joseph Smith pray that the Lord would remember him, but also his family and relatives, together with the other leaders of the Church. (D&C 109:68-71.)

Remember the Poor and Afflicted

A purpose of earth life is that man may experience pain, sorrow, and tribulation. (Ibid., 122:7-8.) Through these experiences a sympathetic understanding is developed toward others who suffer.

The dedicatory prayer included the petition to remember the various families of the Church with their sick and afflicted, and also the poor and the meek of the earth. (Ibid., 109:72.)

Protection and Assistance

Life is precious. We cling to life when sickness or accident threatens the taking of life. The prophecies are abundant that refer to the judgments of the last days, and we see that these predictions are coming to pass. It is our desire that we and our loved ones can withstand these calamities. (Ibid., 29:14-21; 43:22-26; 45:31-33.)

In reference to these judgments, the Prophet indicated that the Lord's predictions would be fulfilled and that we should recognize that the Lord's will would be done. Recognizing that these conditions will prevail on the earth, he prayed that the saints might be delivered from that wickedness. (Ibid., 109:43-46.)

Forgiveness of Sins

Forgiveness of sins comes through the atonement of Jesus Christ. Latter-day Saints should express to their Heavenly Father appreciation for the gift of repentance through Jesus Christ. (Ibid., 109:34.)

The Church and the Gospel

In the gospel plan there are many events predicted for the dispensation in which we live. Those mentioned in the dedicatory prayer are events for whose speedy fulfillment Latter-day Saints might well pray. The Prophet prayed on behalf of the membership of the Church that the Lord would have mercy upon the various segments of scattered Israel. He called attention to the need for the Jews to return to their ancient homeland. (Ibid., 109:61-64.) The Lamanites, about whom the Book of Mormon reveals a great destiny, are mentioned as subjects of salvation to be converted to the fulness of the gospel. (Ibid., 109:65-66.) Finally, the Prophet prayed that the rest of scattered Israel might be gathered into the Church from the nations of the earth. (Ibid., 109:67.)

Thy Will Be Done

Man's understanding is limited. He is unable to see beyond his own vista except through the eye of prophecy. God's sight is an eternal one—from the beginning to the end. He knows all things, and he is all-powerful.

Latter-day Saints have the privilege of learning the will of the Father and of understanding by the light of revelation, insofar as revelation allows. There are times in men's lives when they must accept through faith the unrevealed, and say, as the Prophet Joseph Smith prayed in this dedicatory prayer: "Thy will be done, O Lord, and not ours." (D&C 109:44.)

Implementation

Latter-day Saints have been counseled from the beginning to express their faith through individual prayer, through family prayer, and, when asked, before the congregations of the saints. They have come to realize that without prayer they cannot receive salvation.

Children reared in Latter-day Saint homes learn to pray. There are times when it seems that there is a need to express oneself beyond the usual requests for individual needs. The possibilities of expressing one's innermost feelings concerning the Church and the gospel are almost limitless. As one comes to understand the plan of salvation better, his desires for success of the kingdom are increased, and his appreciation for what the Lord has provided mankind through the gospel is greatly enlarged.

The dedicatory prayer for the Kirtland Temple, given by revelation, is a source of inspiration for those who seek to enlarge their prayer possibilities. Out of this revelation, one may receive confirmation of matters about which he has prayed and may also learn of other opportunities which, apparently, the Lord would have us understand. Might it not be well seriously to consider further expressions of gratitude for the numerous privileges that are ours? One need not mention all possible prayer elements in a given prayer, but perhaps one or more new items may be spoken, to be replaced by other thoughts in subsequent prayers as the Spirit may direct. The Lord has said that he who obeys his ordinances and prays with a contrite spirit is accepted of him. (D&C 52:15.)
