Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 34

The Restoration of the Keys of the Priesthood

(Section 110)

Without the priesthood there would not be The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Although the priesthood was restored by John the Baptist, and Peter, James, and John, it was necessary that the keys of the priesthood be restored to direct the use of the priesthood for salvation purposes.

With the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, on March 27, 1836, a structure known as the House of the Lord was available that priesthood keys might be given to man again. When one considers that the inhabitants of the earth were without divine authority for many centuries and, thus were without the knowledge of God, the importance of restoring the priesthood may be appreciated. (D&C 84:20.) Without the knowledge of God—that is not only the knowledge of the true God, but also the means by which a faithful man may reach his eternal destiny—the purpose of man's earth-life would be thwarted.

Keys of the Priesthood Restored

On Sunday, April 3, 1836, one week after the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, four personages appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. These resurrected beings were: Jesus Christ, Moses, Elias, and Elijah. One other account appears in sacred history when beings from the other side of the veil appeared for a similar purpose. During his mortal ministry, the Savior took his apostles, Peter, James, and John, with him on the mount where there appeared Moses and Elias. (Matt. 17:1-8.) For what purpose did the Savior, Moses, and Elijah meet with these apostles? President Joseph Fielding Smith provides us with this answer:

. . . When Moses and Elijah came to the Savior and to Peter, James, and John upon the Mount, what was their coming for? Was it just some spiritual manifestation to strengthen these three apostles? Or did they come merely to give comfort unto the Son of God in his ministry and to prepare him for his crucifixion? No! That was not the purpose. I will read it to you. The Prophet Joseph Smith has explained it as follows:

"The Priesthood is everlasting. The Savior, Moses, and Elias, gave the keys to Peter, James and John, on the mount, when they were transfigured before him. The Priesthood is everlasting—without beginning of days or end of years; without father, mother, etc. If there is no change of ordinances, there is no change of Priesthood. Wherever the ordinances of the Gospel are administered, there is the Priesthood. . . . Christ is the Great High Priest; Adam next." [Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, compiled by Joseph Fielding Smith, page 158.]

. . . The Lord preserved him [Moses], so that he could come at the proper time and restore his keys, on the heads of Peter, James, and John, who stood at the head of the dispensation of the meridian of time. He reserved Elijah from death that he might also come and bestow his keys upon the heads of Peter, James, and John and prepare them for their ministry. (Doctrines of Salvation 2:110-111.)

Kirtland Temple Fame

It was prophesied that the fame of the Kirtland Temple would spread to foreign lands and that the blessings available through that temple would be poured out upon the heads of the members of the Church. (D&C 110:10.) Although this temple was repudiated by the Lord when it fell into unworthy hands following the exodus of the saints from Kirtland, Ohio, the events of April 3, 1836, will continue to bless the lives of both member and nonmember throughout the generations. (Ibid., 124:28; 110:9.)

The Savior as head of his Church upon the earth came to the Kirtland Temple to accept it as his house. (D&C 110:7.) The Church is the kingdom of God upon the earth. (Ibid., 124:27-28.)

Jesus Christ Lives

In a world gone astray from the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, Latter-day Saints stand as testators to the truths restored in that gospel. Paramount above all other truths are the facts that God lives and that his Only Begotten Son is the Redeemer of men.

Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery saw the resurrected Jesus Christ in a glorified vision in the Kirtland Temple similar to the vision received by John the Revelator. (Rev. 1:12-18.)

The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of rushing waters, even the voice of Jehovah. . . . (D&C 110:1-3.)

Jesus Our Advocate

Following the description of the Savior in the Kirtland Temple, the Lord declared that it was he who was slain for mankind, for he is "your advocate with the Father." (D&C 110:4.) Man alone is neither capable nor does he have the power to save himself from sin. It is the Lord Jesus Christ who pleads the cause of repentant man before the Father. As man's Advocate, he is the spokesman, or intercessor, to bring about salvation from sin. On another occasion, the Savior instructed his Church to listen to him as the Advocate with the Father:

Saying: Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified;

Wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life. (Ibid., 45:4-5.)

By reason of the redeeming sacrifice of Christ, he provides rescue from the effects of sin. Knowing that imperfect man sins, he stands with outstretched arms to all who seek for his pardoning grace. (Ibid., 38:4; 62:1.)

Every member of the Church should be profoundly grateful for the privilege to receive forgiveness of sins through repentance. By entering into spiritual life through baptism, the symbol of the atonement of Christ, the member of Christ's Church need not receive additional baptisms for sins committed. (Repentance is the principle of forgiveness for those in spiritual life.) Every person in the Church needs his Advocate with the Father that he may eventually be clean to be qualified to enter God's presence.

Moses and His Keys

The second personage to appear to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery was Moses, the ancient lawgiver and leader of captive Israel from Egyptian bondage. In these words, his appearance and purpose are given:

After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north (D&C 110:11.)

Inasmuch as the ten lost tribes are unknown to us today, we should consider that the use of the conjunction "and" in this verse separates them from the other branches of Israel who are known today; therefore, we should accept the fact that they will return from the land of the north as prophesied, when they are commanded.

Among the other branches of Israel are: (1) the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh who join The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, including the Lamanites (2 Nephi 30:4-6); and (2) the Jewish people who are returning to the Holy Land.

Five years before the keys of the priesthood were restored in the Kirtland Temple, the Lord promised his people that when they got to the Ohio Valley they would be endowed with power to go forth among the nations to do his work. He also promised them that he would lead them whithersoever he would, for Israel would be saved. (Ibid., 38:31-33.)

Salvation Through Gathering

There are two concepts of gathering as found in the scriptures. The first is for a people to be gathered out of the world into the kingdom of God. (Rev. 18; D&C 133:4-7, 14.) The second is for those who have accepted the gospel of Jesus Christ to gather into designated places as commanded by the Prophet. (Ibid., 29:7-9.) Later, the Saints were told to gather to holy places called stakes of Zion. (Ibid., 101:20-22.) We are living today in the period prophesied by Nephi when members of the true Church would be scattered among the nations and armed with righteousness and power. (1 Nephi 14:14.)

Purposes of Gathering

To be gathered into the Church provides the way of salvation. The scriptures and the modern prophets teach several major purposes for the gathering of the saints to designated places. These are: (1) to be instructed in the principles of righteousness and to be obedient to those instructions; (2) to build temples and perform temple ordinances; and (3) to escape the destruction of wars and other calamities.

To Become Instructed

Anciently, two prophets foretold the time when Israel, in the last days, would gather together to learn of God's ways and to walk in his paths. (Micah 4:1-2; Isaiah 11:11-12.) This fundamental purpose has been taught throughout the dispensation in which we live. President John Taylor once said:

We stand, then, really in an important position before God and before the world. God has called us from the world. He has told us that we are not of the world.

. . . And you have gathered to Zion that you might be taught and instructed in the laws of life and listen to the words which emanate from God, become one people and one nation, partake of one spirit, and prepare yourselves, your progenitors and posterity for an everlasting inheritance in the celestial kingdom of God. (Journal of Discourses, John Taylor, 14:188-189.)

Temples and Gathering

Temples are commanded to be built that the Lord may reveal to his people principles of exaltation. In these holy edifices the worthy members of the Church are instructed in the ways of God and learn to walk in his paths. It was the Prophet Joseph Smith who declared that the main objective for the gathering of a people together in any age of the world was to build a temple to the Lord where they might be taught the way of salvation. (DHC 5:423-424.) Other modern prophets have confirmed this same fact. (Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, 11:161-162; George A. Smith, Ibid., 2:214; John Taylor, Ibid., 26:70.)

Elias and His Keys

It is recorded that following the visitation of Moses in the Kirtland Temple, the following occurred:

After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed. (D&C 110:12.)

In the dispensation of the fulness of times the keys of all dispensations with their powers, authorities, rights, privileges, and covenants were to be restored. (Acts 3:19-21; Eph. 1:9-10.) Consequently, ancient prophets came to the Prophet Joseph Smith and conferred the keys of their dispensations. (D&C 128:21.)

Elias, who held the keys of the Abrahamic dispensation, conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery everything that pertained to that dispensation, including the blessings and covenants that were pronounced upon Abraham's head. (Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation 3:127.)

What characterized the dispensation of Abraham, or as it is called in the revelation, the gospel of Abraham? (D&C 110:12.) From the Old Testament and the Pearl of Great Price, we learn of these two promises made to Abraham (Genesis 17:1-9; Abraham 2:6-12): (1) his posterity was to be numerous; (2) through his seed the nations of the earth would be blessed by bearing the priesthood and as custodians of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

With the restoration of the keys brought back to the earth by Elias, Latter-day Saints who seek the highest blessings of the gospel in the temple may receive the same promises made to Abraham. Marriage for eternity provides for the faithful the privilege to have a continuation of the seeds forever; that is the power to beget spirit offspring following the resurrection. This blessing is made possible by the covenant the Lord made with Abraham and his seed. (D&C 132:29-32.) When one considers that exaltation is the purpose for which God made man, and that these keys have been restored through Elias, every Latter-day Saint should be grateful that this power is again on the earth. (Moses 1:39.)

Elijah and His Keys

The last personage to appear in the Kirtland Temple on April 3, 1836, was Elijah the prophet who lived in the days of King Ahab of Israel. (1 Kings 17; 2 Kings 2.) He was translated in a chariot of fire, but modern revelation states that he was resurrected at the time of Christ's resurrection. (D&C 133:35.)

The importance of his mission in the last days was prophesied by Malachi, who declared that, before the second coming of Christ, Elijah would "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers." (Malachi 4:4-6.) The Angel Moroni told the Prophet Joseph Smith that Elijah would restore the priesthood and would plant in the hearts of the children the promises that were made with their fathers. (D&C Section 2.)

If Elijah restored priesthood keys in our day, what specifically did he restore in view of the fact that before 1836 the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods were restored? (D&C 27:7-8, 12-13.) The Prophet Joseph Smith gave the answer when he said that Elijah held the key of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood that all ordinances of the gospel might be administered in righteousness. (DHC 6:251; 4:211.) These powers are called the sealing powers of the priesthood whereby all ordinances of the gospel become valid by that power. (Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, p. 161.)

Elijah's Powers and Salvation for the Dead

From the discussion above, it is evident that the keys restored by Elijah included more authority than the work of salvation for the dead. It is true, however, that the sealing powers of the priesthood are necessary to make valid all ordinances whether for the dead or the living, but these powers also make possible a welding link between fathers and children. Fathers in the spirit world have the opportunity to hear the gospel, to accept it, and then receive by proxy the ordinances of salvation in the temples. (D&C 128:18.)

Implementation

In view of the glorious events that occurred in the Kirtland (Ohio) Temple on April 3, 1836, every Latter-day Saint may have the opportunity to work out his salvation in this life and in the life to come.

The appearance of the resurrected Savior to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery upon that occasion attests that Jesus Christ is the resurrected Savior. The member of the Church does not have to rely only upon evidence from ancient books; there is modern scripture to affirm his faith. Not only is this information available to him, but he may know of this truth by the power of the Holy Ghost. Furthermore, the Latter-day Saint is grateful that the Lord has committed to man upon the earth certain priesthood keys that make it possible for him to receive salvation. He may participate in missionary work and assist in the instruction of his fellow man in the way of salvation as a part of the gathering process going on in the world. Also, he may receive the promise of eternal increase in the House of the Lord whereby his exaltation in the celestial kingdom is possible. For this intent the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored in the last days. Finally, through the sealing powers of the priesthood returned to the earth by Elijah, the member of the Church may receive the opportunity to perform a necessary work for his kindred dead. He may also rest assured that the ordinances of the gospel in his behalf are efficacious throughout eternity, provided that his life is lived in accordance with the terms of the covenants he has made with the Lord in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
