Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 2 ( 1970)

Chapter 46

Government and Laws

(Section 134)

Latter-day Saints are known as loyal citizens of the countries in which they live. About eighteen months after The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized, the Lord commanded his people not to break the law of the land, for if they kept the laws of God there would be no reason for breaking the laws of the land. (D&C 58:21-22.) Before this time, instructions were given to the authorities of the Church that in cases of infractions of the moral law, the guilty should be delivered up to the law of the land. (D&C 42:84-87.) Later, in two revelations, the saints came to know that the Constitution of the United States was an inspired document and that they should uphold it. (D&C 98:4-7; 101:76-80.)

Prophecy Fulfilled

An incident in American political history involving the Prophet Joseph Smith and Stephen A. Douglas, a political figure, emphasized the point that the Lord respects his people when they conform to his laws and to the laws of the land. The prophecy also affirms the truth that Joseph Smith enjoyed the prophetic gift. (B. H. Roberts, New Witnesses for God 1:304-13.) On May 18, 1843, the Prophet gave the following prophecy to and about Stephen A. Douglas, a little-known judge in Illinois at that time:

Judge, you will aspire to the Presidency of the United States; and if you ever turn your hand against me or the Latter-day Saints, you will feel the weight of the hand of the Almighty upon you; and you will live to see and know that I have testified the truth to you; for the conversation of this day will stick to you through life. (Ibid., p. 305.)

By 1857 Judge Douglas, United States senator from the state of Illinois and then aspirant to the Presidency of the United States, delivered a speech in which he alleged that the Mormons in Utah Territory were disloyal to the federal government and that they incited Indian tribes against that government. He then referred to the saints as a "pestiferous, disgusting cancer which is gnawing into the very vitals of the body politic. It must be cut out by the roots, and seared over by the red hot iron of stern and unflinching law." (Ibid., p. 308.)

Although Senator Douglas knew the Latter-day Saint people as a law-abiding people and knew their persecutions in Missouri, he disregarded the voice of prophecy and, in the presidential election of 1860, was defeated by the Republican candidate, Abraham Lincoln.

Doctrine and Covenants—1835

When the Church sought to print a compilation of the revelations received by Joseph Smith by 1833, a mob destroyed the printing press and practically all of the printed material. (DHC 1:390.) Consequently, the Book of Commandments was never available to the members of the Church, except for a very few copies.

On August 17, 1835, a general assembly of the Church met to agree on publishing a second compilation to be known as the Doctrine and Covenants. The priesthood members present testified to the truth of the revelations. Oliver Cowdery read an article entitled "Governments and Laws in General." The article was approved and ordered printed in the volume. (DHC 2:243-47.)

In order to present the truth concerning the Church's belief about law, because of accusations that it did not uphold the law, it was felt necessary to prepare this article.

"Our Opinion"

It was printed in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants and appears as Section 134 in the current edition. The following preamble to the article is not a part of Section 134:

That our belief with regard to earthly governments and laws in general may not be misinterpreted nor misunderstood, we have thought proper to present at the close of this volume our opinion concerning the same. (D&C 134, introduction.)

This article is an "opinion" and not a revelation, and therefore "does not hold the same place in the doctrines of the Church as do the revelations." (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 852.) On the other hand, Section 134 was presented to the Church assembled in 1835 and several times since that year as binding upon the members of the Church.

The laws that now govern the nations of the earth will be supplanted by laws instituted by the Savior when he takes his place to reign as King of kings. (Ibid., pp. 204-05; D&C 38:21-22.)

God-Ordained Governments

The Lord raised up men to formulate the Constitution of the United States that principles of freedom might be exercised in this promised land. Only in this kind of political climate could the Church of Jesus Christ be established in the last days. The land of America was kept hid from the nations that this land might indeed be a place where divine prophecies might be fulfilled. (Ezra Taft Benson, Conference Report, October 1961, p. 69.)

The perfect form of government was instituted in the days of Adam, but later the sons of men rebelled against these principles of righteousness. (Moses 5:12-13.) Although Section 134 suggests that governments were instituted for the benefit of men, it is evident that all governments are not in this category. (D&C 134:1.) The Lord does not originate laws contrary to eternal principles like free agency. As Elder Erastus Snow said, all forms of government are better than none at all, in that order is maintained by governments, though some of them may not be the best forms. (Journal of Discourses, 22:151.) Nonetheless, God controls the nations though he is not the originator of those governments. (Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, 6:342.)

Standard of Judgment

The governments set up by men serve a purpose in the eternal plan by requiring men to govern their lives according to law. (D&C 76:111; 134:1.) The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

He [God] will award judgment or mercy to all nations according to their several deserts, their means of obtaining intelligence, the laws by which they are governed, the facilities afforded them of obtaining correct information, and His inscrutable designs in relation to the human family. . . . (DHC 4:596.)

This statement is recognized to be true when one realizes that God is the author of righteousness and that, woven in the various laws of the nations, there are laws which are also found in the gospel of Jesus Christ. (Stephen L Richards, Conference Report, October 1923, p. 47.) Also, there are many laws that are contrary to righteous principles. The framers of laws and governments are held accountable for their acts in relation to them, both in making and administering them. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, pp. 852-53; D&C 134:1, 6.)

Section 134

By 1835, when Section 134 of the Doctrine and Covenants was prepared, the saints had suffered persecution, loss of property and lives, and their freedom of religious belief had been challenged. It is understandable why they would want their own beliefs concerning law and governments made known. This section might be divided into the following parts: (1) basic rights; (2) governments and officials; (3) religious societies and beliefs; and (4) noninterference in the rights of others.

Basic Rights

After the statement that men are accountable to the governments under which they live, man's fundamental rights are stated in these words:

We believe that no government can exist in peace, except such laws are framed and held inviolate as will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right and control of property, and the protection of life. (D&C 134:2.)

President David O. McKay has called attention to the fact that "there is innate in man a feeling that will rebel against tyranny." (Deseret News, Church Section, January 2, 1952, p. 3.) Men have come up from the oppression to overthrow coercive governments. The Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States are examples of the declared rights of men and the protection afforded.

Where there is an infringement of these basic rights, the following belief is expressed:

We believe that men should appeal to the civil law for redress of all wrongs and grievances, where personal abuse is inflicted or the right of property or character infringed, where such laws exist as will protect the same; but we believe that all men are justified in defending themselves, their friends, and property, and the government, from the unlawful assaults and encroachments of all persons in times of exigency, where immediate appeal cannot be made to the laws, and relief afforded. (D&C 134:11.)

Governments and Officials

Latter-day Saints during this dispensation, and especially during the time of Joseph Smith, have had many unfortunate experiences with government officials who have not upheld the constitutional rights of the saints. The following verse points out the obligation of civil magistrates upholding the law of the land in their decisions:

We believe that all governments necessarily require civil officers and magistrates to enforce the laws of the same; and that such as will administer the law in equity and justice should be sought for and upheld by the voice of the people if a republic, or the will of the sovereign.

We believe that all men are bound to sustain and uphold the respective governments in which they reside, while protected in their inherent and inalienable rights by the laws of such governments; and that sedition and rebellion are unbecoming every citizen thus protected, and should be punished accordingly; and that all governments have a right to enact such laws as in their own judgments are best calculated to secure the public interest; at the same time, however, holding sacred the freedom of conscience. (D&C 134:3, 5.)

In an earlier revelation the saints were counseled to uphold wise and honest men in public office; otherwise, evil would result. (D&C 98:8-10.) It may not always be possible to determine between the wise and the unwise, but the Lord has given some standards by which to make decisions about principles or political issues. Laws which deny men their agency (D&C 98:4-8) and those which permit them to do evil should be changed. (Moroni 7:14-19.)

By divine commandment the Prophet Joseph Smith appealed to the President of the United States and the Congress for redress of crimes committed against them in Missouri. (D&C 101:81-95; Joseph Fielding Smith, Essentials in Church History, pp. 287-94.)

One is reminded that the Lord counseled his saints who had been driven from Jackson County, Missouri, in 1833 and 1834 that they were not to fight for the redemption of Zion, but that he would, in his time, fight their battles. (D&C 105:14-15.)

Breakers of the Law

Those who break the law should be punished according to the seriousness of the offense. Governments have the right to regulate their societies for the preservation of peace and order. Latter-day Saints are enjoined to bring offenders against the law to justice. (D&C 134:8.) They should also sustain the law enforcement arms of government that all might have justice.

Religious Societies and Beliefs

Eleven years after Section 134 was written, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote the Articles of Faith. The eleventh article is as follows: "We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience, and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may."

This same statement of belief lies at the basis of what is contained in verse 4 of Section 134. The privilege of religious worship is the right of every man provided it does not infringe upon the rights and liberties of others. Equally so, Latter-day Saints believe that government does not have the right to prescribe rules of worship, nor dictate forms for public or private devotion. (D&C 134:4, 7.)

There should not be favoritism shown for one religion over another. (D&C 134:9.) The following principles were given by the First Presidency of the Church:

We declare that from principle and policy, we favor:

The absolute separation of church and state;

No domination of the state by the church;

No church interference with the functions of the state;

No state interference with the functions of the Church, or with the free exercise of religion;

The absolute freedom of the individual from the domination of ecclesiastical authority in political affairs;

The equality of all churches before the law.

("An Address, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to the World," Conference Report, April 1907, p. 14.)

Excommunication and Disfellowship

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints maintains that religious societies have the right to deal with their members for disorderly conduct, but the punishment should not extend to taking their property or jeopardizing their lives. The penalties for misconduct in the Church are excommunication and disfellowship. (D&C 134:10.)

To be disfellowshipped means that the person remains a member of the Church, but he is limited in what he may do. He may attend meetings, but he may not participate in the activities of the Church. Excommunication removes one from the records of the Church and thus he loses all of the privileges of Church membership. There are three offenses for which one may be punished: (1) the breaking of the moral law, (2) deliberate disobedience to the regulations of the Church, and (3) incorrect interpretation of doctrine when the correct teachings have been explained and the person is unwilling to accept them. (John A. Widtsoe, Priesthood and Church Government, p. 209.)

Implementation

Not long after The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized, a conference of the Church adopted a set of principles regarding governments and laws in general. (D&C 134.) Since then the members of the Church have accepted these beliefs as binding upon themselves. To indicate the consistency and application of that early document to the present, the following statement from President David O. McKay is given:

. . . I repeat that no greater immediate responsibility rests upon members of the Church, upon all citizens of the Republic and of neighboring Republics than to protect the freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution of the United States.

Let us, by exercising our privileges under the Constitution—

(1) Preserve our right to worship God according to the dictates of our conscience.

(2) Preserve the right to work when and where we choose. No free man should be compelled to pay tribute in order to realize this God-given privilege. Read in the Doctrine and Covenants this statement: ". . . it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another." (D&C 101:79.)

(3) Feel free to plan and to reap without the handicap of bureaucratic interference.

(4) Devote our time, means, and life if necessary, to hold inviolate those laws which will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right and control of property, and the protection of life.

To sum up this whole question: In these days of uncertainty and unrest, liberty-loving people's greatest responsibility and paramount duty is to preserve and proclaim the freedom of the individual, his relationship to Deity, and . . . the necessity of obedience to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ—only thus will mankind find peace and happiness. (Conference Report, April 1950, p. 37.)
