As we strive to draw closer to the Lord and receive answers to our prayers, we can seek His guidance through temple worship. In addition to rendering vital service to those in the spirit world, we also receive important personal blessings from attending the temple. The Lord promises, “I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house” (D&C 110:7).

John A. Widtsoe (1872–1952), who became a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, testified that “the temple is a place where revelations may be expected.” If we attend the temple, he said, “at the most unexpected moments, in or out of the temple will come to [us], as a revelation, the solution of the problems that vex [our lives]” (“Temple Worship,” The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, April 1921, 63–64).

As the sun rose one June morning, a couple started their day with a prayer of thanksgiving. This day they were witnessing the answer to 13 years of earnest prayer. Their 27-year-old son and his wife had worked with loving bishops to put their lives in order so they might be worthy to enter the temple. That morning they would be sealed for all eternity.

This grateful mother reflects: “The joy we felt was unspeakable. As we sat in the temple with our son and his sweet companion, my mind was taken back to the time when this boy was 14 and began making choices that drew him away from the guidance of the Spirit. The time came when we needed extra help from a loving Heavenly Father.

“Attending the temple had always been important to us, and we felt prompted to pray for our son in this holy place. Each time we attended the temple, we placed our son’s name on the prayer roll.

“We wanted our prayers to be answered today—or tomorrow at the latest. But years passed, and our son remained less active. We were not left without hope, however. We often felt the comforting influence of the Holy Ghost. One evening while my husband and I were praying in the temple, the Spirit let us know unmistakably that our son was being watched over and that he would eventually repent and return to Church activity. We were also taught that we must never give up and never stop loving him. Our faith was strengthened, and a great peace settled into our hearts.

“And then came that sacred day when our prayers were answered.”

This couple’s experience was the joyous fulfillment of a prophetic statement by President Gordon B. Hinckley: “I make you a promise that if you will go to the house of the Lord, you will be blessed, life will be better for you. … Avail yourselves of the great opportunity to go to the Lord’s house and thereby partake of all of the marvelous blessings that are yours to be received there” (fireside, Lima, Perú, 9 November 1996).

Some Church members live far from a temple. But all of us can live worthy of and receive a temple recommend. And we can help our ancestors receive temple blessings by researching and submitting their names for temple ordinances. Whatever temple service our circumstances will allow will bless us with increased peace, faith, hope, and spiritual guidance.
