When I read “‘The Least of These’” in the December 2000 A Liahona (Portuguese), I was touched by the project described in the article. I have a similar project, but I am trying to help improve the well-being of children—their self-worth and self-reliance—as Jesus Christ did in His ministry. Reading about the example of other people in A Liahona articles makes me feel even more motivated to help.

Cleodeth Sena Macedo,
Paraíso Branch, Macapá Brazil Amapá District

I want to congratulate you for your church’s devotion to missionary efforts around the world. I had the wonderful opportunity to become friends with two missionaries in Carbonia, Italy. I was very impressed with their positive attitude, even though they were separated from their families.

I am not a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but I eagerly read the Liahona (Italian). I admire your prophet, President Gordon B. Hinckley, and his counselors. The missionaries brought a cassette tape of your April 1999 general conference into our home, and I listened to the addresses with great interest.

The true Church promotes unity and acceptance of others. It teaches respect and kindness and love. The missionaries I met demonstrated these attributes.

Angela Bratu,
A friend of the Church in Carbonia, Italy

Editors’ note: We invite you to inform us of your concerns and suggestions regarding the Liahona. We also welcome letters for the Comment page, answers to questions posed in the Questions and Answers section, accounts of faith-affirming experiences, and insightful articles about gospel principles. Please contact us at Liahona, Floor 24, 50 East North Temple Street, Salt Lake City, UT 84150-3223, USA; or e-mail to liahona@ldschurch.org.

While we welcome your feedback and submissions, we do receive many letters and e-mails unrelated to our responsibilities with the Liahona. For instance, we are often asked to help contact members living in other countries or to provide special materials for lessons. We would be delighted to accommodate these requests, but doing so would hinder us in producing the Liahona. We therefore ask that you limit your communications to items related to the Liahona. Your local leaders are better prepared to direct you to resources and help you with other matters.
