In recent years, the Church has been building more and more temples. Temples are places of love and beauty. Heavenly Father wants all of us, His children, to have the opportunity to go to His temples and receive all that is necessary to be with our families forever and to return to live with Him someday. In temples, we are taught Heavenly Father’s plan for us. There we can be sealed together as eternal families, and we can perform the ordinances necessary to provide our ancestors with these same blessings.

You can begin preparing now to go to the temple by increasing your faith in Jesus Christ, learning to recognize and follow the promptings of the Holy Ghost, and keeping the commandments. As you memorize and learn about the scriptures on the poster, be prayerful. Your love for temples and your desire to live worthily to go there someday will grow.

1.  Remove the poster from the magazine. Cut along the dotted lines above the name of each month.

2.  Cut out the pictures at the side of the poster and place them in an envelope.

3.  Cut out and color one of the two figures holding a suitcase. Cut out the window in the front of the suitcase. On the back of the suitcase, fill in your name and the name of the temple you are preparing to attend. Fold the suitcase in half and glue the side and the bottom edges together. Leave the top open.

4.  If possible, glue the poster onto lightweight cardboard. Be careful not to put glue around the slots in the poster where the suitcase will go. If you wish, glue a picture of the temple closest to your home over the illustration of the Salt Lake Temple. Hang up the poster.

5.  Starting in January 2002, at the beginning of each month, read the theme and memorize the scripture on the pathway. Pack the picture for the month in your suitcase, with the picture showing through the window. Slide the suitcase into that month’s slot on the pathway to the temple. As the year progresses, your suitcase will become filled with things that will teach you more about the temple and help you prepare to go there someday.

Additional copies of the poster are available from Church distribution centers.

© 2001 by Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

January

I love to see the temple.

“Who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart” (Ps. 24:3–4).

February

My family can be together forever through the blessings of the temple.

“And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven” (Matt. 16:19).

March

The temple is the house of the Lord.

“Establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God” (D&C 88:119).

April

The temple brings the blessing of heaven to earth.

“And, if you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God” (D&C 14:7).

May

My body is a temple.

“Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? … For the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are” (1 Cor. 3:16–17).

June

Temples are a sign of the true Church.

“I command you, all ye my saints, to build a house unto me” (D&C 124:31).

July

Temples bless Heavenly Father’s children throughout the world today.

“And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, … and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths” (Micah 4:2).

August

We serve others through temple work.

“And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers” (Mal. 4:6).

September

I will live now to be worthy to go to the temple and serve a mission.

“He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me” (John 14:21).

October

I prepare to go to the temple as I follow Heavenly Father’s plan for me.

“We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: first, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost” (A of F 1:4).

November

I am thankful for temple blessings.

“Let the hearts of all my people rejoice, who have … built this house to my name” (D&C 110:6).

December

When Jesus comes again, He will come to the temple.

“And if you are faithful, behold, I am with you until I come—And verily, verily, I say unto you, I come quickly” (D&C 34:11–12).
