Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

Preface

One of the greatest sermons ever given by the Master Teacher, Jesus Christ, is the Sermon on the Mount. This sermon is considered by students of Christianity to be the first relatively full declaration by the Master of the essence of Christian faith and the Christian way of life. It is a blueprint for us to use in our personal path toward perfection, as well as a pattern of many of the attributes and qualities we must develop in our eternal quest to approach the perfection Jesus exemplifies. Therefore, those who would "come unto him" will seek to follow these admonitions and try to make daily progress toward the goal he has so clearly put forth.

The message of this sermon was so important that Jesus declared the same concepts to his followers on the American continent. Fortunately, the second account of this greatest of all sermons is recorded in the Book of Mormon, and we might also conclude that he gave it to other peoples he visited elsewhere. We who have the Book of Mormon account have the opportunity to compare that version with the one recorded in the Bible and to enjoy fully each additional degree of insight or information that comes to light through that comparison.

In order to appreciate the setting when this message was given, it might be well to review some of the things we know about what was happening those many centuries ago near the Sea of Galilee. Elder James E. Talmage, in Jesus the Christ, notes that Matthew mentions the sermon early in his account of the Savior's life and ministry, placing it even before he tells about his own call as an apostle. Luke places it after his ordination. Matthew tells us that Jesus went up a mountain and that he sat as he taught (it is interesting to note that other biblical writers tell us that the Jewish custom in the synagogue was to sit in order to give emphasis to the content of one's words). Luke records that Jesus and the Twelve descended from the mountain to a plain, and Jesus stood. I enjoy Elder Talmage's remark: "Critics who rejoice in trifles, often to the neglect of weightier matters, have tried to make much of these seeming variations." (See Jesus the Christ, 1983 ed., note 1, p. 230.) Jesus probably spoke first to the apostles on the mount and then gave the same sermon to the multitude at a later time.

The physical setting is not important, but we remember that Jesus was baptized by John in the Jordan River to fulfill all righteousness and in order to begin his ministry. He then probably returned to his home in Nazareth and from there went to the Sea of Galilee and the city of Capernaum to begin his ministry—perhaps because he knew it would not be easy to preach at home, where he was known as the son of Joseph and Mary. He taught in the synagogues and he healed many people. The multitudes following him grew. The Matthew account then says that "seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain," and when he had sat down, he taught them. (Matthew 5:1-2.)

In my mind, I see a scene of peaceful beauty. It is late afternoon, softening toward dusk. High, wispy cirrus clouds stand almost motionless in the clear blue sky. Below, on the coast of the sea, soft waves slap against moored fishing boats. The great crowd, sitting on the ground, is hushed. Looking up at the Lord, they listen to him tell them about the personal attributes they need to acquire in order to follow him and achieve eternal life. It is a scene no photographer can accurately capture on film because of its spiritual dimension.

The setting of the sermon in the Americas is very different from that in Galilee. Here some twenty-five hundred believers are gathered at the temple in the land Bountiful. They are the more faithful ones whose lives were spared during the terrible earthquakes and fires and floods at the time of the Crucifixion. They are marveling about these events and talking about the Savior. When they hear a soft voice out of heaven, they do not understand it. They hear the voice again, and still they do not understand. When it speaks a third time, they look toward heaven, and this time they hear Heavenly Father saying, "Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him." Then they see "a Man descending out of heaven . . . clothed in a white robe." Then, we are told, the Savior comes down and stands "in the midst of them." (3 Nephi 11:7-8.)

This account, which is found in 3 Nephi, chapters 11, 12, and 13, is both moving and beautiful. In it, Jesus gives authority to baptize in his name all who repent of their sins. He counsels the people to stop any disputations and anger. Several times he commands them to have faith in him, to repent, and to be baptized. He calls and commissions twelve apostles. Then he delivers a discourse similar to the Sermon on the Mount.

I will not try to identify any Book of Mormon site with a specific geographical area, so we cannot accurately describe the setting in the Americas with the same detail we can give the New Testament account. However, having traveled the countries where most Latter-day Saint scholars believe the Book of Mormon history unfolded, I do have several favorite sites. In one such location, I saw the ruins of an ancient city with impressive temples, set well above the fertile plain of lush green tropical vegetation. "Islands" of rain forest are intermixed with banana plantations, coconut palms, and green patches of pastures where animals graze peacefully. Abundant water from many streams flows placidly toward the ocean a short distance away. The site of the ruins overlooks a rolling plain that surely could have been called Bountiful, as evidenced by the plentiful harvest of delicious fruits and vegetables still growing there today. Foliage covers most of the ruins: gigantic trees, long, hanging vines, elephant-eared plants, and a profusion of orchids and other flowers. Behind the tallest temple, which is now partially restored, mountains covered with an impenetrable jungle camouflage other lost secrets. In the Americas are many sites similar to this, but I leave them to the imagination, since our faith should be based on the content of the Sermon on the Mount and not on the physical setting. But I can see my Savior descending out of that blue tropical heaven just as clearly as I can see him sitting on a rock on a mount overlooking the Sea of Galilee.

The reader also deserves an explanation as to why each chapter begins with four different versions of the same basic scriptural passage. This is perhaps just a personal preference, but many years ago I found that different translations of the same scripture provided texture and depth to the message. This study led me to greater introspection on the subject and challenged me to arrive at my own conclusion as to which seemed to fit best into my feeling of what the prophets or the Savior originally said.

I have spent over forty years living and working and preaching the gospel in Latin America, speaking in Spanish and some Portuguese. I have studied languages enough to know that many words or ideas are not presently translatable and must await the perfection of the Adamic language. Therefore, I do not expect a perfect translation of any one language into another except when a prophet is translating as a seer and revelator and divine translator. First, the Book of Mormon version is cited because the records that the Prophet Joseph Smith translated are, to my mind, the only pure and absolutely correct translations. The King James Version is shown also, because that is the Bible we as Latter-day Saints accept and use, even though we believe that some of the material may be missing or may not have been translated correctly. I use the Jerusalem Bible translation because I have found it to be the translation most similar to the Spanish scriptures we use in the Church (a.d. 1602 Cipriano de Valera version). And finally, I have selected the Phillips Modern Bible translation as a version that often gives different words to compare with the King James Version, while maintaining the integrity of the subject.

The chapters of this book are organized in the order in which the principles are taught in the Matthew account of the Sermon on the Mount. Not all verses are included, but rather a selection has been made with the purpose of identifying those thoughts which are intended for our own personal challenge to follow Christ. Points of doctrine are therefore not included, although they are important. After quoting at the beginning of each chapter the various versions of the scripture to be discussed, I present an introduction to the subject and then add ideas, experiences, and other information to support the principle given.

The narrative begins, as does the Sermon itself, with the Beatitudes. These eight blessings were not passive philosophical suggestions; rather, they were perceived as somewhat revolutionary: "Blessed are the poor . . . blessed are the meek . . . blessed are the persecuted." If these are blessings, what might condemnations be from this new teacher? But God's ways are not man's ways, and his wisdom is not our wisdom. There is a good explanation in support of why each one of these is a blessing. The Beatitudes are requirements for salvation, and as such, they are commandments to every person

who wants to follow in the footsteps of the Savior, our Redeemer. They are also promises to which blessings are attached, contingent upon one's obedience. Stated in another way, "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.) The Lord states that he is bound, or under contract to bless us, when we obey his commandments. (D&C 82:10.)

In the Book of Mormon recording of the first beatitude, we find an addition that carries a universal application. This addition is so important that I have chosen to add it to each of the eight beatitudes and to every one of the other twelve points in this book—the phrase "who come unto me." The Savior said, "Blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me." (3 Nephi 12:3; italics added.) This important phrase changes the meaning from a relatively passive blessing to a requirement of action upon which the blessing is predicated. It is not enough just to be "poor in spirit." Rather, we must turn to Christ and his saving grace after all we can do. If those who are poor in spirit are to be blessed if they come unto Christ, it would seem that likewise those who mourn, who are persecuted, who are meek, and so on, will be blessed if they, too, come unto Christ.

The stated purpose of the Book of Mormon is to convince people that Jesus is the Christ, a theme that is repeated by virtually all of the writers of that sacred book. As representative of the many passages to that effect, I will quote from Moroni's farewell to the Lamanites: "I would exhort you that ye would come unto Christ. . . . Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him." (Moroni 10:30, 32.)

The mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is to bring to Christ, through the process of faith, repentance, and baptism, those who are not members of the Church, and to bring to Christ, through their becoming more like him, those who are members. We can help redeem our ancestors as well by performing for them here in mortality the saving ordinances, thus opening the door for them to accept Christ in the spirit world. All of this involves coming unto Christ.

Another theme of the Sermon on the Mount is that we are to perfect ourselves by becoming submissive to God's will. If we follow Christ's example and live in accordance with his teachings, happiness and peace will come, even though sometimes we must go against the common current of popular thinking. In other words, we should not do as the world would have us do, if it is at variance with what Christ did and what he wants us to do. Part of the inspiration of the sermon is that it teaches us to lay aside those things which do not contribute to our progress toward eternal life and exaltation. Instead, we are encouraged to sacrifice, to deny ourselves, and to render service to others. We must do his will rather than our own. Self-control will lead to Christ, but that means giving up the things of the world and changing our thoughts, our words, our actions, our habits, our very heart and character in order to become like him and to think like him. Then we will eventually be worthy to be with him eternally.
