Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

1

Blessed Are the Poor in Spirit

Book of Mormon: "Yea, blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." (3 Nephi 12:3.)

King James Version: "Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." (Matthew 5:3.)

Jerusalem Bible: "How happy are the poor in spirit; theirs is the kingdom of heaven."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "How happy are those who know their need for God, for the kingdom of Heaven is theirs!"

Much has been written about the blessings of being poor. The Savior was a carpenter, as was his earthly father, Joseph, so Jesus' family were likely not affluent. He understood what it meant to live simply and frugally. When he was upon the cross, the soldiers gambled for the only material article he had that was of any value—a seamless robe. Many of today's poor identify with Christ and know that he understands their plight.

The Savior also does not deal favorably with the rich who have their focus on worldly possessions. He finds many of them lacking in humility and spirituality. He said, "A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven." (Matthew 19:23.) To impress the lesson more thoroughly, he applied one of the figurative proverbs of that day, saying, "It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God." (Matthew 19:24.)

What prompted this statement from the Savior was that a rich young man asked him how he might inherit eternal life. The man's question may give us a clue as to how he obtained his riches: he did not ask how to work for this blessing but rather how to inherit it. After a short conversation, the Savior listed some specific commandments that the young man should live. In simplicity and without apparent pride, the youth said that he had kept all of these commandments and then asked what else he should do. The Master, with love but with powerful insight, stated the one thing the rich young man did not expect. He said, "If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell [all] that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me." (Matthew 19:21.)

Luke tells us the young man was a ruler—perhaps a high official of the local synagogue or possibly even a member of the Sanhedrin. For him to give up position, honors, and status, and to go on a mission, follow the Savior and do his bidding, was more than this man could do because "he had great possessions." (Matthew 19:22.)

Spirituality is closely related to seeking first the kingdom of heaven. (See chapter 13.) Spirituality increases when one does not seek riches. Seeking to come unto Christ must be our first priority; then, if we obtain much of this world's goods, we will surely use them in the way the Lord has outlined.

Other accounts in the scriptures also indicate that the Savior had a dark view of the rich and tended to exalt the poor. His story of Lazarus and the rich man is a pointed example. (See Luke 16:19-31.) I would like to paraphrase a bit of the interpretation of Elder James E. Talmage. (See Jesus the Christ, 1983, pp. 433-36.) Elder Talmage presents Lazarus and the rich man as extremes of contrast between wealth and destitution. The rich man was clothed in the costliest attire; his everyday meals were sumptuous feasts. Lazarus, on the other hand, although honored in the scriptures with a name while the rich man was not, was a poor, helpless beggar, sick and covered with sores.

Then the scene changes dramatically. The same two men are on the other side of the veil, both having died. Lazarus's festering body was probably thrown into a pauper's unmarked grave, while the rich man probably was given an elaborate funeral with pomp and ceremony befitting his status. He is now suffering in hell, but angels have borne Lazarus's immortal spirit up to paradise. Their roles and conditions are completely reversed from what they were on earth.

The rich man, tormented by the hot flames of hell and seeing Lazarus in comfort, cradled symbolically in "Abraham's bosom," pleads for relief and asks that Lazarus come to him with a tiny bit of water to cool his tongue. But the great principle of compensation is explained to him by Abraham in these words: "Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented." (Luke 16:25.) There are a lot of lessons to be learned from this parable. Apparently in the Savior's mind, those who are rich and who are also selfish and proud can look forward to a time of torment after death, while many of those faithful ones who have suffered poverty and afflictions and wretchedness in this life can look forward to compensation in the next, with freedom from sickness, hunger, oppression, and torment.

We should point out that the rich man's fate was not necessarily the consequence of hard work and the success and goals he achieved, nor was the paradise of Lazarus totally the reward of his poverty. Evidently the rich man failed to use his wealth properly and gave in to self-indulgence and sensuous enjoyment of earthly things to the exclusion of concern for the needs of his fellowmen. Conversely, Lazarus apparently obeyed the commandments and worked hard when he had good health, and in every way he deserved the blessings he received.

The Joseph Smith translation of James 2:1-9 adds the following illustration of the Savior's compassion toward those who are poor:

"My brethren, ye cannot have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, and yet have respect to persons. For if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment; and ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool: are ye not then in yourselves partial judges, and become evil in your thoughts?

"Hearken, my beloved brethren, Hath not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that love him? But ye have despised the poor. Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats? Do not they blaspheme that worthy name by the which ye are called? If ye fulfil the royal law according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, ye do well: but if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of the law as transgressors."

To be poor in spirit means to be humble, teachable, contrite, meek, obedient. As the Phillips Modern Translation states, the meek are those who "know their need for God." To be poor in spirit is to recognize that we are not self-sufficient spiritually (or materially, for that matter), but rather that we are always in debt to our Heavenly Father, from whom all blessings flow. In fact, our posture before our God is as the needy, even as beggars. President Harold B. Lee spoke on this subject in the following way:

"To be poor in spirit is to feel yourselves as the spiritually needy, even dependent upon the Lord for your clothes, your food, the air you breathe, your health, your life; realizing that no day should pass without fervent prayer of thanksgiving, for guidance and forgiveness and strength sufficient for each day's need. If a youth realizes his spiritual need, when in dangerous places where his very life is at stake, he may be drawn close to the fountain of truth and be prompted by the Spirit of the Lord in his hour of greatest trial. It is indeed a sad thing for one, because of his wealth or learning or worldly position, to think himself independent of this spiritual need. [Poor in spirit] is the opposite of pride or self-conceit. To the worldly rich it is that 'he must possess his wealth as if he possessed it not' and be willing to say without regret, if he were suddenly to meet financial disaster, as did Job, 'The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.' (Job 1:21.) Thus, if in your humility you sense your spiritual need, you are made ready for adoption into the 'church of the Firstborn,' and to become 'the elect of God.' " (Stand Ye in Holy Places, pp. 343-44.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie made a statement that combines these two thoughts—that of not being encumbered by much of this world's goods (maybe the poor do have a spiritual advantage) and of being poor in spirit. He quoted Luke, "To the poor the gospel is preached" (Luke 7:22), and James, "Hath not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that love him?" (James 2:5).

He continued, "The poor in spirit! If they come unto Christ, salvation is theirs; and it is so often easier for those who are not encumbered with the cares and burdens and riches of the world to cast off worldliness and set their hearts on the riches of eternity than it is for those who have an abundance of this world's goods." (The Mortal Messiah 2:121.)

One of the most powerful scriptures on this attitude is found in the Book of Mormon, where King Benjamin declares that a person must become "a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and [become] as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19.)

President Hugh B. Brown illustrated this principle with his often-quoted classic parable: He had a lovely currant bush in his yard that he had carefully trimmed to be attractive and to produce the best fruit. One day, noticing that it had started to branch out again, he reached for the pruning shears, and as he approached the currant bush, he imagined it to say, "Oh, please don't cut me back. I'm just getting started, and I want to be big like the shade trees." He imagined his response to be: "No, my little bush, I am the gardener here. I have planted you to be a source of fruit and an adornment in this part of my garden, and I am going to prune you back to size."

Many years later, as a colonel in the Canadian forces during World War I, President Brown hoped for an illustrious military career. The next promotion to general should have been his, but when the vacancy occurred, his superiors told him, "We are promoting someone else." He retired to his quarters, crushed with disappointment, and knelt in prayer, asking fervently, "Heavenly Father, why couldn't my prayers have been answered? Haven't I lived up to my covenants? Haven't I done everything I was supposed to do? Why? Why?"

And then he seemed to hear a voice, an echo from the past saying, "I am the gardener here. You were not intended for what you sought to be." Humbled, he then prayed for patience to endure the pruning and to grow and develop as the Lord would have him. (See An Abundant Life: The Memoirs of Hugh B. Brown, ed. Edwin P. Firmage, pp. 49, 56-57.)

Both the Joseph Smith Translation and the Book of Mormon accounts of this beatitude indicate that a person who is poor in spirit is blessed when he comes unto Christ and learns to do his will.

Humility is the goal that Alma tried to teach to his son Shiblon when he counseled, "Do not pray as the Zoramites do, for ye have seen that they pray to be heard of men, and to be praised for their wisdom. Do not say: O God, I thank thee that we are better than our brethren; but rather say: O Lord, forgive my unworthiness, and remember my brethren in mercy—yea, acknowledge your unworthiness before God at all times." (Alma 38:13-14.)

This same concept is demonstrated dramatically in the Savior's parable of two men who went into the temple to pray. One was a Pharisee, a member of an ancient Jewish sect that emphasized strict interpretation and observance of the Mosaic law, and the other was a publican, a collector of public taxes in the Roman Empire and rumored to be subject to bribes and other misdeeds. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus: "God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess." The publican, standing far off, "would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote [himself] upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me, a sinner." (See Luke 18:10-14.) The Savior said the second went home "justified," or forgiven.

Even today we find some who are like the Pharisee, filled with pride, claiming to be fully active in the Church, holding a temple recommend, doing their home teaching regularly, serving in a visible calling, sitting on the front row, and professing to offend no one. And there are many like the publican, recognizing their sins and imperfections and seeking for help to overcome.

This first of the Beatitudes teaches us that Jesus wants us to follow him and become humble as he was humble. He also wants us to be teachable, which is a manifestation of humility. I once heard a faithful Latter-day Saint mumble about a new leader, "How can you help someone who already knows everything?"—meaning that the new leader was not humble enough to listen to anyone because he thought he knew it all. The humble have ears to hear and open hearts and open minds. They are like vessels that yearn to be filled, and they learn from everyone around them.

Unfortunately, young people usually are less humble and teachable than their elders; we have to learn some things from the harsh lessons of life. I know of a young married man who was very self-sufficient, successful in his career and business interests, recognized in the community, and honored in various ways of the world. He was also active in the Church, serving in a high-profile leadership position. He told me that he had not learned humility and teachableness until a tragedy in the family caused him to realize how fragile life is and how uncertain the future is. He came to realize that the only security in life is to look beyond the veil to the eternities and measure how your life and values and priorities will stand up there. After the tragedy he became much more teachable, did not consider himself better than anyone else, and learned to find joy through service and sacrifice rather than through the honors of men and the power of position and money.

At general conference in April 1989, President Ezra Taft Benson spoke of the roles that disobedience, selfishness, and contention have in pride. He referred to scriptural passages that point out that the proud are easily offended and hold grudges, do not receive counsel or correction easily, and justify and rationalize their frailties and failures.

"Pride is the universal sin, the great vice," he said. "The antidote for pride is humility—meekness, submissiveness. . . . It is the broken heart and contrite spirit. . . . God will have a humble people."

President Benson said that members can choose to humble themselves by conquering enmity toward others, receiving counsel and chastisement, forgiving others, rendering selfless service, going on missions and preaching the word that can humble others, going to the temple more frequently, and confessing and forsaking sins and being born of God. "We can choose to humble ourselves by loving God, submitting our will to His, and putting Him first in our lives." (Ensign, May 1989, pp. 6-7.)

We have all seen men and women, young and old, who have been afflicted with incurable diseases, stricken down by accidents or illnesses that have ruined promising careers, and who have submitted to suffering and to radical changes in life-style. Yet many of these individuals have demonstrated patience and acceptance of the changing circumstances and have in turn helped others through their example and words of encouragement.

One such story of inspiration, a story recorded in the November 1988 New Era, is about a beautiful young woman, Diane Ellingson, a promising gymnast who had loved to perform ever since she was a child. Her family couldn't afford to pay for lessons, so she went to the gym herself and convinced the coach to let her work at the gym in exchange for lessons.

She started training when she was fourteen and a half, a late start by competitive standards, but within a year she was competing against the best in the country. . . . In college she led the University of Utah's women's gymnastics team to their first national collegiate title.

After her eligibility for college competition was up, she decided to go on a national professional tour. . . . She says she knew her gymnastics career was mostly over, but she just wanted to hold on to the thrill of the spotlight and the fun of the sport for as long as she could.

During training for the tour Diane was practicing a vault she'd done thousands of times. She ran toward the vault just like she had done every other time. She jumped on the springboard like all the other times and flew into the air—just like all the other times. This time was different though. This time she rotated just a little too much. This time when she landed, she broke her neck. The accident put her in the hospital for almost half a year and in a wheelchair for the rest of her life.

That was on December 15, 1981. Diane spent that Christmas and the next five months in the hospital, trying to comprehend a life without gymnastics. After so many years of loving the sport, it was difficult for Diane to adjust.

"I hated being in the hospital, and I felt like I was in prison," says Diane. For one month of the five she was in the hospital, she was in traction and couldn't move at all except when the nurses came in and turned her a few inches every two hours. . . . "When I was first injured I thought for sure that in a month I'd be back on the tour and back in shape. I thought, 'If I have enough faith and believe in God and in myself, I'll be okay.' And I just knew it."

Recovery wasn't quite so easy though, and things seemed to get worse. . . .

Finally Diane came to a turning point. "Near the end of my traction one day I was in the depths of despair. I just felt like I couldn't bear it anymore," Diane says. She asked for a blessing. She knew the power to heal her was present, "but I only wanted that to happen if it was Heavenly Father's will. I had this blessing and I felt the greatest sense of peace. It was like I knew that no matter what happened it would be okay. If I didn't walk away from the hospital there would be a reason for it. I knew that I had always tried my best to live the gospel and do what I was supposed to do, so if anybody was worthy to have that blessing, I was. But from that point on I was a different person. I was totally comforted."

Ironically, one of the biggest aids to her recovery was gymnastics. "I don't know if I could've gotten up again if I hadn't had that training in gymnastics," she says. "I had a lot of chronic injuries when I was a gymnast that I just had to deal with. It was always down, up, down, up in gymnastics and this was just one more down I had to get up from. Gymnastics to a big degree made me so I could be a champion again."

Being a champion is what Diane is all about. [Her sister] Marie says, "Her attitude's always been, 'If you want it, go for it.' She decided when she was young that she would never give up." . . .

Diane made the decision to return to school to finish her degree on the day she finally realized she would never walk again. She was lying on her bed amid scrapbooks filled with souvenirs and photos of her performances. Tears dripped down her face and splashed on the scrapbook pages. "I just realized right then that things weren't going to get any better. As I lay there crying I thought, 'I can either give up or get on with my life,' and that's when I decided to go back to school and get my degree."

Now she teaches a class of third graders who are just the right height to look her in the eye. . . . [She] also gives fireside talks to teenagers who listen, captivated, as she gives her message of hope and perseverance, without bitterness for what has happened. . . . Her main message is one for potential champions: Don't give up, no matter what happens. . . . Diane says, "It makes me feel really good when people tell me they're going to try harder after they've heard my talk. . . . People always think, 'You're so amazing, you're so incredible,' but I'm not. People will say, 'If that happened to me I could never cope with it,' and the thing I have to say is, 'Either you cope or you die.' You have to take whatever life gives you and deal with it, even if you might not want to. You know, if somebody dies in your family, you have to live with it. If you break your neck you have to live with it, but you just learn and that's what's so great about time and the healing process. You don't have to be miraculous." (Kendra Kasl Phair, "A Champion Again," New Era, November 1988, pp. 21-25.)

Moroni, adding a few words of explanation into the record of Ether, says: "I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:27.)

We truly feel more humble when we consider the infinite creations of our Heavenly Father, who declared: "Worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten." (Moses 1:33.) Enoch expressed a similar idea: "Were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth, yea, millions of earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the number of thy creations; and thy curtains are stretched out still; and yet thou art there." (Moses 7:30.)

Bishop Henry B. Eyring, of the Presiding Bishopric, shares this insight:

"Because God is so great and I am so small, it is easy to admit what I do not know. Therefore, I am teachable.

"My father was an internationally famous research chemist. When he would give talks to audiences of nonscientists, he would often . . . give his idea of an explanation of a scientific question and then he would laugh and say, 'You know, sometimes I think that God watches me and laughs at me as I struggle like a little child. Someday I will be with Him and He will show me how childlike my ideas were.'

"That always got a chuckle from the audience, and it endeared Dad to people because they thought it was a sign of his humility. It was far more than a sign of humility. It was an explanation of why he was a lifelong learner. . . . He really saw himself as a little child. Because of that, it was easy for him to admit that there were better explanations than the ones he had already offered. He was constantly changing, constantly trying to learn." (Commencement address, Ricks College, April 21, 1988.)

Thirty-five years ago I flew a small single-engine Cessna, its cabin the size of that of a Volkswagen "bug"—and the power not much greater—from New York to Buenos Aires, Argentina. The greatest obstacle on the route was the fearsome Andes mountain range between Chile and Argentina, which has the highest peak on both American continents. My co-pilot and I circled and climbed, and climbed and circled, trying to get enough altitude to begin crossing the Andes through a mountain pass. Low clouds kept the mountains from view, and we knew that without a clear pathway we could not make it. Finally the aircraft was at its absolute ceiling, but we were still blocked by the clouds.

The weather report on our radio indicated that the mountains were clear, so the barrier was just a buildup on the near side of the range. We could not make the crossing on instruments since many peaks were higher than our reachable ceiling, so we decided to poke our nose into the clouds for a fixed number of minutes. If we broke into the clear we would continue; if not, we would turn back. The minutes and seconds ticked by, and just before the limit we broke clear and faced the most awe-inspiring sight I had ever seen. It was spectacular—like a view from a throne of the Gods.

We saw sharp-toothed mountains, snow-covered but blue, stretching left into the distance, and to the right off into infinity. At intervals, giant peaks, crowned with a lenticular cloud denoting high winds and turbulence ahead, rose up to 23,000 feet above us, and we could see the pass beneath us. God's creations had never been grander or more majestic, with a sense of mystery that made us aware of our own puny limitations. We had been somewhat arrogant, feeling that we had conquered the length of the hemisphere, but suddenly we recognized that we needed to humble ourselves before our Creator and acknowledge that it was he who had allowed us to view his works and that we should be grateful and worship him. The mountains spread out before us like an infinite wonder and we knew there was no end to his greatness. I have never fully recovered from that humbling experience. My copilot was equally subdued. We continued our journey in silence, silently praising the Lord for the privilege of witnessing his true artistry.

In the Book of Mormon rendering of this beatitude on the poor in spirit, the phrase "who come unto me" has been added. And what an addition it is! This is the primary focus of the gospel today. It is the main focus of the Book of Mormon. The mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is to bring people to Christ. Otherwise, the Atonement holds no validity for them. It is altogether fitting that this most important keystone of the gospel of Christ should be the central theme of the first beatitude. What a shame that this key has been lost for centuries to Christianity! What a joy that it has been restored!

It is appropriate also to note that some modern translations of the Bible have changed the word blessed to happy. Most people are intrinsically happy a good part of the time, but problems—such as poor health, financial reverses, disappointments, frustrations, guilt, and fear—all occur at times in every life. When these times come, turning to the Savior in faith and love will reward us with affirmations of the spiritual joy and hope we can find in the gospel.
