Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

2

Blessed Are They That Mourn

Book of Mormon: "And again, Blessed are all they that mourn [who come unto me], for they shall be comforted." (3 Nephi 12:4.)

King James Version: "Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted." (Matthew 5:4.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Happy those who mourn: they shall be comforted."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "How happy are those who know what sorrow means, for they will be given courage and comfort!"

This second beatitude appears, at first glance, to be the most unusual and contradictory of all. How can it be a blessing to be in mourning? To mourn usually means to show grief or pain at the death of a loved one. This intense feeling cannot be hidden from the world or from God; it cannot be eased or pacified except with comfort and consolation from God through the Holy Ghost.

Elder James E. Talmage comments that "the mourner shall be comforted for he shall see the divine purpose in his grief." (Jesus the Christ, 1983, p. 216.) Perhaps this means that as we bear our sorrows by turning to Christ, and as we sorrow for others, we will become more like Christ, because he sorrowed for the pain of others; as we sorrow for the sins of the world we progress somewhat toward the perfection of him who interceded and became the great sin-bearer for us all. As we mourn, we can see his divine purposes fulfilled in many ways.

So why would the Savior say that it is a blessing to mourn? It might be that pain and suffering at the death of loved ones is an essential part of our mortal experience, one that obliges us to face the question of the reality of the spirit world and the hope of the resurrection. Could it be that through suffering we discover what is eternally important?

On the other hand, it might be that it is a blessing for us to become more fully aware that God's ways are not always our ways, and that we must trust him when things don't go as we believe they should. When we can see the Lord's purposes fulfilled in our times of grief and sorrowing, then the Holy Ghost can console us and the Atonement and the Resurrection can become the cornerstones of our faith.

The traditional interpretation of this beatitude is that Christ is speaking of mourning the death of a loved one. We will treat that aspect first, but we will also discuss the possibility of additional facets of this second beatitude, such as mourning because of our sins, or mourning the sins of the world, or mourning iniquity in general, or mourning ignorance or wars or afflictions.

Mourning the Death of a Loved One

Some students of cultures both ancient and modern philosophize that one important way to measure a culture or civilization is to observe the way they honor their dead—the way they bury them, the way they remember them. For example, some cultures or religions honor and bury a deceased leader with elaborate ceremonies. They may wait weeks for the funeral because of the complexity of the established protocol. Others bury their loved ones within no more than twenty-four hours, because embalming is not available. Some families return regularly to the grave sites of loved ones to place flowers there in remembrance of birthdays, anniversaries, Easter, and other special occasions, while others find it unnecessary or uncomfortable or even impossible to visit the grave sites of loved ones.

Funerals in some instances are short, basic, and spare. Others are long and feature much protocol and ceremony. Which is correct? Which is best? Is there any standard to follow?

As with any cultural situation, it is inappropriate to judge one practice against another, saying what is best or what is inferior, appropriate or inappropriate. All we should say is that one is different from another. Feelings are too sensitive to make comparisons or judgments. However, we shall discuss the typical Latter-day Saint funeral.

The purpose of a public or private LDS funeral, whether it is held at a meetinghouse, at a funeral home, or in a private home, is threefold: (1) to honor the dead, (2) to comfort the loved ones, and (3) to worship God, remembering and teaching the Atonement and the Resurrection. In addition to services presided over by the priesthood, there is a private family prayer before the funeral, and a service at the cemetery for loved ones and family members, when the final resting place is dedicated by an authorized person holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, usually a close member of the family.

To honor the dead, we usually have a eulogy that includes the basic facts that history should record about the individual and his or her parents, family, and survivors.We also speak about the person's accomplishments, recognitions, outstanding Christian virtues and values, missions, military service, Church callings, and community service. This is really a time to inspire the living with the best qualities of the person recently deceased.

To comfort the family in their grief, we quote scriptures and the inspiring words of prophets, poets, and philosophers.

We mention discreetly the circumstances or details of the death in such a way as to give insight or understanding, to help ease the grief. Those who have suffered intense pain are now released and are free, so we should accept their passing more easily. Those who have lived a long and full life, dying in their golden years, are relatively easy to speak of and there is less need for comfort because all were ready for the event. It is more difficult to ease grief when death was caused by an accident or the deceased person is young. No one is ever prepared in such situations. These are the times when the doctrines of the gospel of Jesus Christ are most relevant and especially needed. Friends and loved ones need spiritual meat for consolation, not platitudes. The plan of salvation, the true understanding of our relationship with our Heavenly Father, the Savior, and the Holy Ghost, and the assurance that life after death is a reality—all give peace and comfort.

To worship God, who moves in mysterious ways, who gives and who takes away, who knows the beginning from the end; to worship Christ; and to worship the Holy Comforter, who truly comforts—these are important reasons for which we hold funeral services. When we accept God's will, it is easier to be consoled and comforted, but if we are fighting against reality, there is little that the Spirit can do to help. We all must submit to the Father's will, even as a child must submit to his earthly father.

The basic declarations of faith in our Redeemer and in his mission as the Son of God to overcome death and bring about the resurrection of all who have been born are well described by Elder James E. Talmage in his books Jesus the Christ and Articles of Faith. Especially helpful for funeral sermon preparation are chapter three in Jesus the Christ, titled "The Need of a Redeemer," and chapter four in Articles of Faith, "The Atonement and Salvation." Those who speak at funerals usually obtain the doctrinal parts of their sermons from such sources, as well as from the writings and sermons of apostles and members of the First Presidency and from their own study of the scriptures.

To all who have lost a loved one, the promise in this beatitude is the climactic part. They will be comforted; the promise is true. Faith and hope lead to consolation and comfort. Those who weep now over the loss of a loved one, after learning or remembering the purposes of the Lord and the role of that brief separation we call death, shall be comforted in time. It is seldom as quick as we would like, but there is wisdom in the Lord in this, and the best healing is that which is thorough and deep. Peace that surpasses understanding is promised to all those who have a testimony and knowledge of the plan of salvation. There is no greater comfort than to know that death is part of the plan of God for this life, and that our departed loved ones shall be part of the family group or circle with us in the life to come. When we can look into the beauty of the family in the next life, we see glories that help heal the wounds of this present estate. When the Savior comes again to rule in glory during the Millennium, he will wipe away our tears and there shall be no more death nor sorrow, crying nor pain. (See Revelation 21:4.)

Fullness of comfort does come from the sure knowledge that the deceased are not dead; they are only separated from us, and their spirits have gone through another door into the hallowed halls of a higher existence, as God intended. They that mourn shall truly be comforted.

When my father died, I was just a little boy. My widowed mother did not easily get over the shock of the unexpected death of her bishop husband. Although I do not remember much of that period, I do remember the deep sorrow and constant grief of my mother. In my mind's eye, I can see so clearly a mental picture of us kneeling in prayer at the bedside or in the woodstove-heated kitchen on the linoleum floor. My mother would pray aloud with my hand in hers. She would pray a bit, then break down and cry. Then she would regain her composure and continue praying. Again she would cry and then pray some more. I grew up knowing what it meant to cry unto the Lord. I still find it easy to shed tears while praying. Later, when I passed through a similar kind of test, I again found that there is no stopping the shedding of tears when a loved one leaves us to pass to the other side of the veil. I also rediscovered that vocal prayer helped more than silent prayer.

The Comforter is near, ready to help, and the burden is bearable. The hope of the Resurrection sustains us, and we can look forward in faith to a glorious reunion in the spirit world and in the Millennium.

The Brazilians have a sad song with lyrics that reflect the deepness and permanence of sorrow, even when one has the gospel and looks forward to the next life. They sing "Tristeza no tem fin, mas felicidade, si." Translated it means "Sadness has no ending; only happiness does." Time does help; time even heals. But, in a way, the mourning is always there. It is hidden, but it erupts now and then in unexpected ways that none of us can control. Yet life goes on and we find new sources of happiness; we know that in the promised resurrection, the lingering mourning caused by temporary separation will disappear.

Since mourning is so universal, the Lord must have a purpose for having us experience it. There is no doubt but that he softens and molds us and touches us most deeply when we are mourning. He led Israel in the wilderness for forty years of suffering and afflictions in order to humble them. In the Old Testament we are told that as a man chasteneth his son, so the Lord our God will chasten us. (See Deuteronomy 8:2-3, 5.) In the chastening, or in an event that causes us so much sorrow and grief, he can reach us and talk to us about his divine purposes and plan.

It appears that Heavenly Father never expected us to walk through life with uninterrupted, Garden of Eden innocence and pleasure. There is no such thing as a life of continual plains of smooth happiness.

God created a life in which we would face tests and trials and tribulations. Christ said, "In the world ye shall have tribulation." But he assured us that "in me ye might have peace." (John 16:33.) He planned this world to include frustrations, anxieties, difficulties, and other tests, such as death of loved ones, terminal illnesses, and fatal accidents. Out of our difficult experiences, we will have the opportunity for genuine growth and development of a Christlike character.

Job tells us that there is divine purpose behind grief and suffering: "Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty: for he maketh sore, and bindeth up: he woundeth, and his hands make whole." (Job 5:17-18.) Job knew that suffering sometimes causes bitterness and a kind of poison in the individual. He also seemed to be aware that in one life difficulty can ennoble, while in another life the same difficulty will cause depreciation. It is our responsibility to handle sorrow in a positive way and not let it destroy us. We are being tested. Our reaction to sorrow is perhaps more important than what is happening to our loved one who has gone on before. That individual is all right. We are the ones to be concerned about. We ought to ask, What is God trying to teach me now? What am I to learn about myself? The answer is: Come unto Christ—now more than ever.

To Mourn for One's Own Sins

Another aspect of mourning that we might consider in connection with this beatitude is mourning for our own sins. Perhaps we can learn something from the example of David. He sincerely grieved and pleaded for forgiveness after he had sinned with the wife of Uriah. His tragic lament is quoted here in part: "Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy lovingkindness: according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgression. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. . . . Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. . . . Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me. . . . Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy free spirit." (Psalm 51:1-2, 7, 9-10, 12.)

All our sins are to be deeply mourned by us, and surely by those who love us the most and who are thus affected by our acts. David poured out his soul on behalf of all who mourn for their sins. But also David spoke for all in an eloquent way when, in Psalm 32, he spoke of the blessings of being forgiven (if we are truly repentant). It is almost like another beatitude: "Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile." (Psalm 32:1-2.)

The great leader David had fallen in sin. He had cried out in remorse and desperation. He seems to have mourned most because he had sinned against God, who had given so much to him. He really wanted to be forgiven, and the words seem to fit the promise, "Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven."

President Harold B. Lee had some thoughts which further illuminate this concept:

"To mourn, as the Master's lesson here would teach, one must show that 'godly sorrow that worketh repentance' (2 Corinthians 7:10) and wins for the penitent a forgiveness of sins and forbids a return to the deeds of which he mourns. It is to see, as did the Apostle Paul, "glory in tribulations . . . knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope.' (Romans 5:3-4.) You must be willing 'to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light." (Mosiah 18:8.) You must be willing to 'mourn with those that mourn, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort.' (Mosiah 18:9.) When a mother mourns in her loneliness for the return of a wayward daughter, you with compassion must forbid the casting of the first stone. . . . In a word, you must be as the publican and not as the Pharisee. 'God be merciful to me a sinner.' (Luke 18:13.) Your reward for so doing is the blessedness of comfort for your own soul through a forgiveness of your own sins." (Stand Ye in Holy Places, p. 344.)

To Mourn for the Sins of Others

In the Old Testament, we find the example of the prophet Daniel, who mourned for the sins of all of Judah. He felt the burden of all and recounted those sins for which he lamented. Following are some of his words taken from the ninth chapter of Daniel: "I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes. . . . We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts and from thy judgments: neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the prophets, which spake in thy name. . . . Neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his laws, which he set before us by his servants the prophets. Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy law, even by departing, that they might not obey thy voice. . . . For our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to all that are about us. . . . O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolations. . . . O Lord; hear, O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do."

The prophets all cry unto God with broken hearts for the sins of the people. The Savior himself cried over the sins of the people. He tried to gather them as a hen gathers her chickens, but they would not. Our Heavenly Father grieves most of all, I am sure.

When we, the sinners, mourn for our sins and the sins of those about us, there is the promise of consolation. After Daniel mourned for the sins of the people, the Lord consoled him by telling him, through the angel Gabriel, that the Savior was coming, and he even spoke of the second coming of the Savior. It was of great consolation to him in his mourning to learn of the resurrection of the just to everlasting life. (See Daniel 12.)

In the Book of Mormon we read of Nephi, son of Helaman, who mourned the sins of the once righteous people of Nephi, "seeing the people in a state of such awful wickedness, and those Gadianton robbers filling the judgment-seats—having usurped the power and authority of the land; laying aside the commandments of God, and not in the least aright before him; doing no justice unto the children of men; condemning the righteous because of their righteousness; letting the guilty and the wicked go unpunished because of their money. . . . "And when Nephi saw it, his heart was swollen with sorrow within his breast; and he did exclaim in the agony of his soul: . . . I am consigned that these are my days, and that my soul shall be filled with sorrow because of this the wickedness of my brethren."

Then Nephi went up on a tower to pour out his soul unto God, and multitudes of people gathered together so they might know the cause of such great mourning. "Why have ye gathered yourselves together? . . . Because I have got upon my tower that I might pour out my soul unto my God, because of the exceeding sorrow of my heart, which is because of your iniquities! And because of my mourning and lamentation ye have gathered yourselves together, and do marvel." (Helaman 7:4-6, 9, 13-15.)

The prophet after whom the Book of Mormon was named mourned the exceedingly great sins of the people of his time. He said: "A continual scene of wickedness and abominations has been before mine eyes ever since I have been sufficient to behold the ways of man. And wo is me because of their wickedness; for my heart has been filled with sorrow because of their wickedness." (Mormon 2:18-19.) We can feel the depth of his sorrow, almost unbearable as he mourns their willful transgressions: "My soul was rent with anguish, . . . and I cried: O ye fair ones, how could ye have departed from the ways of the Lord! O ye fair ones, how could ye have rejected that Jesus, who stood with open arms to receive you!" (Mormon 6:16-17.)

In his parting testimony, Nephi, the son of Lehi, mourned about those whose hearts were hardened against the Holy Spirit and the messages of the prophets, saying, "I pray continually for them by day, and mine eyes water my pillow by night, because of them." (See 2 Nephi 33:2-3.) Perhaps we would all try harder and live better if we knew how the prophets have mourned over our sins and how the Savior himself has tried personally to bring each one of us to him.

Consolation to Those Who Mourn

The Savior's invitation, "Come unto me," is the true source of consolation and comfort. He says, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11:28-29.) The ultimate promise of the Savior is found in the book of Revelation written by John the Beloved. We have this beautiful hope: "God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain." (Revelation 21:4.)

Finally, whether it be mourning over death of loved ones, mourning over sins and transgressions, or mourning what might have been, the source of comfort and consolation is always to come unto Christ and to follow him and obey his commandments. Then, we are assured we shall receive peace in our hearts, the Holy Ghost as our companion, and consolation to our soul.

Our Heavenly Father is not an absentee God, nor is Jesus dead. They are relevant today as never before, and if we find them more during times of sorrow than ever before, we are blessed. In modern-day revelation we have been given this assurance:

"Whosoever among you are sick, and have not faith to be healed, but believe, shall be nourished with all tenderness, with herbs and mild food, and that not by the hand of an enemy.

"And the elders of the church, two or more, shall be called, and shall pray for and lay their hands upon them in my name; and if they die they shall die unto me, and if they live they shall live unto me.

"Thou shalt live together in love, insomuch that thou shalt weep for the loss of them that die, and more especially for those that have not hope of a glorious resurrection.

"And it shall come to pass that those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them; and they that die not in me, wo unto them, for their death is bitter.

"And again, it shall come to pass that he that hath faith in me to be healed, and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed. He who hath faith to see shall see. He who hath faith to hear shall hear. The lame who hath faith to leap shall leap. And they who have not faith to do these things, but believe in me, have power to become my sons; and inasmuch as they break not my laws thou shalt bear their infirmities." (D&C 42:43-52.)

And to those who qualify through their righteousness and compliance with certain required ordinances, these promises are given: "Ye shall come forth in the first resurrection . . . and shall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths . . . ; and [ye] shall pass by the angels, and the gods, which are set there, to [your] exaltation and glory in all things. . . . This is eternal lives—to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent." (D&C 132:19, 24.)
