Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

3

Blessed Are the Meek

Book of Mormon: "Blessed are the meek [who come unto Christ], for they shall inherit the earth." (3 Nephi 12:5.)

King James Version: "Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth." (Matthew 5:5.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Happy the gentle; they shall have the earth for their heritage."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Happy are those who claim nothing, for the whole earth will belong to them!"

In our modern, materialistic world, we do not usually think of successful leaders or outstanding, gifted individuals as meek. Nor can we accept in our minds the image of a meek, successful quarterback of our favorite football team. In fact, success in any endeavor, be it business, sports, professions, entertainment, or any other area where a leader surfaces, seems to require attributes that are the opposite of meekness.

The usual description of a meek person is one who is compliant, timid, nonassertive, weak, submissive, cowardly; one who seeks nothing, accomplishes nothing, and contributes nothing to society. The world looks down on the meek and the quality of meekness with lofty disdain. But God's ways are not man's ways. And even if the world does not count meekness high on its list of desirable qualities, this should not deter us from seeking to develop every quality that the Savior recommended and exemplified.

Perhaps our modern interpretation of meek is not what the Savior had in mind two thousand years ago. The Spanish language has a common usage of the expression meek in the word manso. It gives us a completely different meaning, which is illustrated in a personal experience.

In the lush pampas of Argentina I once visited a 100,000-acre ranch where the owner raised choice grass-fed beef. His hobby was raising and training thoroughbred horses to be used for racing, polo, and for use on the ranch by the gauchos (cowboys). The ranch had over one thousand of these beautiful animals, each with its pedigree, each well trained or in the process. The ranch's reputation was such that there was a demand for its horses all over the world at premium prices.

I asked the owner if we would be able to see a rodeo, similar to the rodeos held in the western part of the United States, in which the gauchos would break horses. He was aghast. "Not on this ranch you won't!" was his emphatic response. "Since our horses, and especially the polo ponies, have to be lightning fast, fearless, and courageous on the playing field, instantly obedient to every hint of a command and superbly maneuverable, we would never 'break' a horse—we do not want to break his spirit. We love our horses and we work patiently with them until they are manso." Manso means meek, but here was a new meaning for the word. He explained, "Our manso horses are full of fire and spirit, but they are obedient and well trained."

So meek can mean obedient and well trained, an added spiritual application to the words of the Savior. The Savior did not mean for us to be doormats—he certainly was not one. Rather, I think he meant that we should be obedient and well-trained. We can be strong, enthusiastic, talented, spirited, zealous, and bold, and still be meek—obedient and well trained—and able to coexist in the success-oriented world in which we live.

The Argentine horse trainer who used the word manso for meek also uses that word to mean tame. The Spanish dictionary shows both interpretations. Tame could also be what the Savior had in mind when speaking of meekness. An illustration of this is found in a classic story, The Little Prince. The little prince visits several different planets, and on his visit to the earth he meets a fox.

"Come and play with me," proposes the little prince. "I am so unhappy."

"I cannot play with you," the fox says. "I am not tamed."

"What does that mean . . . tamed?"

"It is an act too often neglected," explains the fox. "It means to establish ties."

"To establish ties?"

"Just that," says the fox. "To me you are still nothing more than a boy who is just like a hundred thousand other little boys. And I have no need of you. And you, on your part, have no need of me. To you, I am nothing more than a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But, if you tame me, then we shall need each other. To me, you will be unique in all the world. To you, I shall be unique in all the world." (Antoine de Saint-ExupÃ©ry, The Little Prince, pp. 65-66.)

Perhaps the Savior had in mind that he could tame us or that we should tame each other. To tame an animal usually involves giving lots of patience, love, affection, rewards, and reinforcement. Don't we need those same qualities in our development of a more Christlike character? Don't we all need to show a lot more patience, love, and affection, to offer more rewards, to feel more concern, and to be more caring toward all the human beings around us? Would not both we and they then be more tame? Is not Christ our example?

In the large cities I have lived in, such as New York, Buenos Aires, Sao Paulo, and Mexico City, people often live next to each other but do not really know each other. There is an aloofness bordering on wildness—because they do not need each other—and they are often not tamed in their interrelationships. But if we would treat each other as the Savior would have us treat each other—as sons and daughters of God and therefore as brothers and sisters—we would come to need each other, and each friendship would be unique. The greatest tragedy is that there are families in which blood brothers and sisters treat each other without consideration and as if neither had been tamed. Manso, tamed, and meek are all good expressions to reflect the tender feelings, qualities, and interrelationships the Savior wants us to have toward each other.

After reading about meekness in the Beatitudes, a humorist once quipped, "The meek are so meek that the only way they might get some of this earth is to inherit it—they won't get it any other way." Elder Bruce R. McConkie met this frivolous attitude with a more spiritual thought. He wrote, "As things are now constituted, the meek do not inherit the earth; even He who said of himself, 'I am meek and lowly of heart' (Matt. 11:29) had in fact no place of his own to lay his head. This world's goods were of little moment to him, and he had neither gold nor silver nor houses nor lands nor kingdoms. Peter was even directed to catch a fish in whose mouth a coin was lodged, that a levied tax might be paid for the two of them. The meek—those who are the God-fearing and the righteous—seldom hold title to much of that which appertains to this present world. But there will be a day when the Lord shall come to make up his jewels; there will be a day when Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the faithful of ancient Israel shall dwell again in old Canaan; and there will be also an eventual celestial day when 'the poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it.' (D&C 88:17.)" (The Mortal Messiah 2:122.)

Sooner or later we shall see all of the words of the prophets fulfilled. The time will come, as Elder McConkie declared, when eternal values will prevail and that which the world demeans today will yet be recognized for an eternal value or attribute that we must develop in ourselves if we are to truly come unto Christ. Those who are meek submit themselves to the will of God and therein find new strength and new power.

Submissiveness to God is not a weakness; it represents the learning of an eternal principle. In his great temple sermon, King Benjamin says that the person who is submissive to God "yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19.)

In his sermon on the priesthood, Alma gives a summary of things we should do in order to "be lifted up [unto Christ] at the last day and enter into his rest." We should—

1.Cast off our sins.

2.Not procrastinate our repentance.

3.Humble ourselves before God, and call on his holy name.

4.Watch and pray continually, so that we are not tempted above that which we can bear.

5.Follow the Holy Spirit, becoming humble, meek, submissive, patient, full of love and all long-suffering.

6.Have faith in the Lord.

7.Have a hope that we shall receive eternal life.

8.Have the love of God always in our hearts. (See Alma 13:27-29.)

The quality of meekness is usually associated with a number of other desirable qualities, such as those listed above, and all are related to humility. Alma, in speaking to his son Helaman, gives a short list that includes both meekness and humility: "Preach . . . repentance, and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ; teach [the people] to humble themselves and to be meek and lowly in heart." (Alma 37:33.)

President Spencer W. Kimball related humility and meekness in a talk at Brigham Young University on January 16, 1963: "[The Savior] gave in his Beatitudes, 'Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.' . . . He was saying that only those who are humble enough to forgo the vain glories of the world and to follow the paths of righteousness—paths which may be hard and unpopular—will possess the earth. When the earth is renewed and receives its paradisiacal glory only those will possess the real estate of this celestialized orb who have been meek enough to follow the lowly Nazarene and bravely meet all the problems of life and surmount them. 'Blessed are the meek.' If the Lord was meek and lowly and humble, then to become humble one must do what he did in boldly denouncing evil, bravely advancing righteous work, courageously meeting every problem, becoming the master of himself and the situations about him and being . . . oblivious to personal credit.

"Humility is not pretentious, presumptuous, or proud. It is not weak, vacillating, or servile. . . . Humble and meek properly suggest virtues, not weaknesses. They suggest a consistent mildness of temper and an absence of wrath and passion. Humility suggests no affectation, no bombastic actions. It is not turbid or grandiloquent. It is not servile submissiveness. It is not cowed or frightened. No shadow or the shaking of a leaf terrorizes it.

"How does one get humble? To me, one must constantly be reminded of his dependence. On whom dependent? On the Lord. How remind one's self? By real, constant, worshipful, grateful prayer.

" 'How can I remain humble?' the brilliant missionary asks. By reminding one's self frequently of his own weaknesses and limitations, not to the point of depreciation, but an evaluation guided by an honest desire to give credit where credit is due.

"Humility is teachableness . . . an ability to realize that all virtues and abilities are not concentrated in one's self. . . . Humility is never accusing nor contentious. It is not boastful, because when one becomes conscious of his great humility, he has already lost it. When one begins boasting of his humility, it has already become pride, the antithesis of humility." (Improvement Era, August 1963, pp. 656-57, 704.)

President Kimball closed that great address with a statement that came from his own deep wisdom and meditation on this subject:

Humility is royalty without a crown, Greatness in plain clothes, Erudition without decoration, Wealth without display, Power without scepter or force, Position demanding no preferential rights, Greatness sitting in the congregation, Prayer in closets and not in corners of the street, Fasting in secret without publication, Stalwartness without a label, Supplication upon its knees, Divinity riding an ass.

President Kimball was that kind of a prophet, and in his humility and meekness there was true greatness.

One of the outstanding qualities of a meek person is the desire to learn the will of God concerning oneself and then to obey that will, be it from a vision, a revelation, the words of a prophet, the still small voice, or an authorized leader—whatever manner God chooses to reveal his will. Christ, as always, is the supreme example. In Gethsemane he prayed: "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt." (Matthew 26:39.) When we ask or knock and the Lord opens the door, we must be willing to walk through it. When we pray for inspiration, we should listen and heed and follow the answer.

To submit to the will of God requires a great deal of trust and faith. Those who are meek trust God and his plan of salvation and the meaning and purpose of this world in which we find ourselves. They trust the account of the premortal existence, the Creation, and the Fall; the need for a Savior and this life of testing and a day of judgment. They trust the need for a Redeemer and understand the Redeemer's place in God's plan.

The development of a healthy personality in today's complex world requires a sense of trust in the God-created universe, a universe with meaning and destiny and eternal absolutes. When we trust in God and obey his will, we can be free from many of the fears that weaken us. In this sense, meekness is a source of strength and power because it leads us to God and teaches us his will for us. When we know truly that God has a plan for us, everything seems to fit into place.

In the life of each Church leader, there are instances in which that individual desires to know the will of the Lord and, after seeking faithfully, is given the answer. But trust and faith are needed if the person is to do the Lord's will. That is the sign of meekness. Sometimes it is a strong impression, such as, "Go on your mission now." Those who heed the prompting and go are much blessed. At times, it is a soft inner voice saying, "Study this career instead of the one you planned on." Door after door is opened to those who are faithful, trusting, and obedient. My own career came about as a fortuitous combination of circumstances, none of which would have been possible had I not followed the whisperings of the Spirit as to my mission and my studies. Likewise, the choosing of an eternal companion is one of the greatest decisions any of us can ever make; and I feel that had I not placed total trust in the whisperings of the Spirit, I would not have been led to my companion, Helen.

I believe that the Lord will prove us thoroughly until he is determined that we will serve him faithfully, no matter what the hazard or the sacrifice. He declared, "We will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abraham 3:25.) The person who has learned meekness learns how to submit to the will of God even if doing so means inconvenience, sacrifice, change, and much patience, all of which require a supreme act of faith and trust in the will of God.

President Harold B. Lee taught that "a meek [person] is defined as one who is not easily provoked or irritated and is forbearing under injury or annoyance. The meek [person] is the strong, the mighty, the [person] of complete self-mastery. He is the one who has the courage of his moral convictions, despite the pressure of the gang or the club. In controversy his judgment is the court of last resort and his sobered counsel quells the rashness of the mob. He is humble-minded; he does not bluster. 'He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty. . . .' (Proverbs 16:32.) He is a natural leader and is the chosen of army and navy, business and church, to lead where other men follow. He is the 'salt' of the earth and shall inherit it." (Stand Ye in Holy Places, p. 346.)

Those who are meek are mild-tempered, not easily provoked to anger or irritation. They are patient and forbearing under injuries, not proud or resentful or full of self-importance. They make effective leaders because they have genuine inner strength. They can reach out with love in dealing with people who are more aggressive.

Those who are meek submit to the will of God and thereby gain power and strength to face and solve the dilemmas of life. They accept the inevitable with exemplary resolve and can adjust to decrees of destiny that they cannot change.

Those who are meek will turn to God in order to learn his will, and they will follow the promptings of the Spirit. Christ, in the Garden of Gethsemane, is our prime example of this. Great strength came to him as he faced his supreme test in which he willingly submitted to the will of the Father. Wise parents try to instill in their children the kind of faith that will enable them to face life's uncertainties. Some child psychologists believe in order to have a healthy personality, children need to develop trust in God and in the order of the universe. This kind of trust will give them strength to banish fear.

Moses was meek. When Jethro intervened with advice on how to organize the kingdom better (see Exodus 18:21-24), Moses was meek enough to listen and put the plan into practice. Those who lack meekness find it difficult to accept advice and to follow suggestions of peers and subordinates, even when those suggestions are brilliant and inspired. In this sense, they also lack the strength that can come from friends, associates, relatives, and others.

Mahatma Gandhi, the great Indian leader, was an unusually meek but strong man. Through nonviolence and resistance without direct confrontation, he was able to unite his followers and obtain for them freedom from British domination. He fought with love and meekness rather than with violence, hatred, retribution, and revenge.

Job was meek, the epitome of strength. He taught that "the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord." (Job 1:21.)

The meekness of Mary, the mother of Jesus, has provided a source of strength to women through all generations. When the angel appeared to her and told her that the child she would bear would be called the Son of God, and that with God, nothing is impossible, she replied, "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word." (Luke 1:38.)

Paul was meek—and bold, fearless, and strong. When Jesus appeared to him on the road to Damascus, he said, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" (Acts 9:6.)

Returning to my account of the Argentine horses and the modern use in Spanish of the word manso, meaning a combination of being well trained and obedient, I would like to share two stories from my own experience or observations that emphasize the importance of obedience.

The pilot climbed down from the cockpit with his notes and commented, "As you observed, the plane got off in the minimum distance as marked by the flags." Everyone nodded; the distance represented the length of an aircraft carrier. Then he reported on the time it took to climb to 30,000 feet, explaining, "This ship climbs like a homesick angel. It is even better than the estimates and much better than the required minimums. At 30,000 feet, full throttle, second stage supercharger and water injection, she exceeded the projections by forty knots, a full 10 percent. She is like a bullet." Everyone smiled and nodded, looking very pleased. "In the power dive," he went on, referring to his notes, "I reached the red line of maximum design speed, inadvertently exceeded it slightly, and made an 8-G pullout. The wings, as you can see, did not bend nor break." By this time the people were ready to celebrate—but then the test pilot dropped the bad news. "But unfortunately she is not ready for combat. I tried the required combat maneuvers—a loop, a chandelle, a snap roll, a tight turn at high speed—but she just does not obey the controls. She will go fast and straight, she will climb, but she will not maneuver. The engineers will have to make bigger control surfaces—change the ailerons, rudder, and elevator—so she will crank around faster, so she will be obedient. She is like a mule that does not want to change direction."

Oh, how important is the principle of obedience, even when one is dealing with animals and machines!

Another example is found in the Old Testament, where we are told that Naaman, a Syrian general, came down with the dreaded disease of leprosy. A Jewish servant convinced him that the prophet Elisha could heal him, so Naaman took his entourage across deserts, mountains, and plains to the place where the prophet lived. He sent his servant in to see, and the prophet sent back instructions that the general should go to the River Jordan and bathe seven times.

Naaman apparently expected a major miracle, with thunder, lightning, and perhaps an earthquake thrown in for effect, for his disappointment and misunderstanding of the ways of God are reflected in his question as to whether the rivers in Damascus were not better than all the waters of Israel: "May I not wash in them, and be clean?" And then, we are told, "he turned and went away in a rage." Fortunately the servant prevailed upon him to reconsider, and Naaman finally followed Elisha's instruction. According to the biblical report, "Then went he down, and dipped himself seven times in Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God: and his flesh came again like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean." (See 2 Kings 5:1-14.)

How often do we want a particular blessing and expect it to happen in our preconceived way rather than proceeding in obedience and faith? We can learn from Naaman's experience: when he finally did as he was instructed, he was blessed. The old law taught that people should give "an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth." The Savior gave a new, much higher law with no retribution and no revenge. He said, "Resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloke also." (Matthew 5:38-42.)

The attitude of revenge is completely counterproductive. It creates a vicious cycle: If you break off my tooth, then, so help me, I will break off your tooth! If carried to the extreme, such retribution can escalate and stretch out to infinity and even lead to a spirit of destruction. This is apparently the attitude that the wicked reached in the time of Mormon's last battle. Only when someone is strong enough, through meekness, to break this chain can the spirit of retaliation stop. By refusing to seek revenge, those who are meek stimulate peace within themselves and in society in general, a peace that can lead to the survival of individuals and of nations.

Meekness means finding a way to resist with love, not fighting with hatred. The person who is meek does not respond to frustration with revenge; he senses that revenge is a poison to his own spirituality, a cancer which can destroy him. Revenge tends to keep the wounds open which will only enlarge. One philosopher has said that meekness is like water that, when it meets an obstacle, rises slowly and patiently and ultimately runs over the obstruction and wears it away and conquers in the end.

Only meek, Christlike love can heal and turn the tide so that self-control and self-discipline can conquer anger, hatred, and revenge. Meekness is self-mastery, and therein lies the strongest element of this virtue.
