Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

4

Blessed Are They Who Hunger and Thirst

Book of Mormon: "Blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness [who come unto Christ], for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost." (3 Nephi 12:6.)

King James Version: "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled." (Matthew 5:6.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Happy those who hunger and thirst for what is right: they shall be satisfied."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Happy are those who are hungry and thirsty for true goodness, for they will be fully satisfied!"

How many people strive for higher spiritual levels as though they truly hungered and thirsted after them? To hunger and thirst for something involves strife, struggles, work, sacrifice, and a host of other efforts.

As a young man, my father-in-law crossed a sixty-mile stretch of desert—with the temperature 118 degrees Fahrenheit in the shade!—on horseback with a limited supply of water. He had planned to meet a wagon train midway to replenish his water supply. Unbeknown to him, the wagon train had been unexpectedly delayed. When his water ran out, his dog died, his horse keeled over, and his tongue swelled horribly inside his mouth. He managed to survive, staggering out of the desert during the night. But as he told the story I could feel his intense, agonizing desperation for moisture. He truly thirsted.

Perhaps you have heard the story of the philosopher who held a young disciple's head under water until the latter gasped for air. The philosopher then told the disciple, "When you want knowledge as much as you wanted air while you were under water, you are ready to study with me."

The highest blessings of the gospel are not for the fainthearted, coolly rational, theoretical philosopher, nor for the person who is merely intellectually curious. Those great blessings are reserved for stouthearted souls who hunger and thirst for greater personal righteousness and who are willing to pay the price to achieve it.

One need not have reached spiritual perfection or sainthood to receive the blessings promised in this beatitude. If we sincerely hunger and thirst, the door to higher stairs will be opened, and we can climb them upward. The blessings are not so much in the arriving as in the constant seeking for perfection.

The blessings promised are immeasurable. Remember the woman of Samaria at the well? The Savior told her (and this applies to all of us), "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.

"He that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst." (John 4:14; 6:35.)

The pathway to perfection is long and narrow, but each step brings rewards and hope and surety of even greater satisfying of spiritual hunger and thirst in the future.

The King James translation of this parable ends with the phrase "for they shall be filled." The Book of Mormon and the Joseph Smith Translation end with a much more reassuring declaration: "for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost."

Filled with the Holy Ghost. What a marvelous promise! Just as a starving man craves food, and as my dehydrated father-in-law thirsted for water, so do the righteous yearn for the Holy Ghost as a constant companion. The Holy Ghost is a revelator, a testifier, a sanctifier; he reveals, and he cleanses men's souls. The Holy Ghost is the very spirit of truth, and his is the promised baptism by fire. The gift of the Holy Ghost is the greatest of all the gifts of God to man, as pertaining to this life; and those who merit that blessing here in mortality will inherit eternal life in the hereafter.

When we hunger and thirst to come unto the Savior, and hunger and thirst to achieve his righteousness, we are led to seek the companionship of the Saints, to gather on the Sabbath, and to enjoy worship, the sacrament, hymns of praise, and the brotherhood of our fellow members. This hunger and thirst of the spirit stimulates fervent and sincere prayers, fasting, good works, and sacrifice, and our desire to go to the temple increases. These lasting joys are more to be sought after than the fleeting pleasures of the world.

Why is it that some people seem to continue as spiritual children while others progress toward a noticeable spiritual maturity? Is it because of individual personalities? Is it because of some special spiritual experiences that one has been deprived of? Is it because of sin or lack of interest?

Why are some transformed and others not? Is it because the great change of heart or awakening out of a deep sleep spoken of by Alma (see Alma 5:7) is dependent upon our spiritual appetite, our spiritual desires? Is it because spiritual maturity is based upon our initiative? Should we seek and ask rather than waiting for something to happen?

Something seems to happen to those with voracious appetites for spiritual matters. They seem to receive greater fulfillment from reading the scriptures, attending gospel-oriented meetings, and serving others. Spiritual growth, spiritual maturity, and spiritual well-being are based upon and interdependent with spiritual appetite.

As a child, I was taught to read the scriptures, pray, and obey my parents. But I still remember the miracle of spiritual awakening prompted by the discovery of the book Articles of Faith by Elder James E. Talmage. It had long been in our modest library of Church books, but I had never noticed it. Then one day, looking for something to read, I pulled this book off the shelf. I must have been about twelve or thirteen at the time. As I skimmed through the chapters and noticed the marvelous depth of information assembled to support each one of the familiar and memorized Articles of Faith (memorized, thanks to a diligent Primary teacher), I felt a new, exciting spiritual appetite. I could not stop reading that fascinating book. I did not understand all the words, but that did not matter. I did not even stop to look up the unfamiliar words in a dictionary. What delighted me was the satisfying of my young mind for an organized, simple enlargement of the Articles of Faith, which I had committed to memory. I developed an appetite for reading about spiritual truths, an appetite that I have never lost.

Many prophets that we read about in the scriptures exhibit a great hunger and thirst for spiritual knowledge. They are curious and interested to the very core. Think of the appetite for spiritual knowledge that Nephi had, or Enos, or Jacob. Moses and Abraham wanted to know everything pertaining to God. Joseph Smith was blessed with an insatiable appetite for knowledge. David eloquently wrote: "As the hart [deer] panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God." Imagine the deer who is chased by the hunter until its thirst is excruciating, and it drinks quickly at the brook. David's psalm continues: "My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God?" (Psalm 42:1-2.)

Sadly, occasionally we meet a person who once thirsted and hungered for spiritual things and then lost that appetite and turned to other interests. The loss of spirituality is immediately noticeable. I have known of missionaries who became distracted with things of the world—obsessed with the opposite sex, with watching TV or sports events—and who subsequently lost their appetite for spiritual things in a very short time and almost lost the spirit of their mission. What a tragedy! We must keep our eye single to the glory of God and look toward spiritual truths, or we too will lose our hunger and thirst for Christ and his righteousness.

One of the most important facts about this spiritual appetite is that it must come from within—it must result from our initiative. The saying "You can lead a horse to water but you cannot make him drink" is valid indeed. You can expose people to all sorts of spiritual experiences or scriptures or situations, but unless they have a deep desire or appetite that needs to be satisfied within themselves, it is all to no avail. For this reason spirituality is always self-motivated. If the hunger and thirst are not there, no one else can help us much. Unless we want to come unto Christ, no one can push us there.

What a tremendous addition is found in this beatitude as it is recorded in the Book of Mormon: Those who hunger and thirst after righteousness shall not just be filled, but they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost!

Through the gift of the Holy Ghost, the believer or disciple can cast out devils, speak with tongues, take up serpents, lay hands on the sick and they shall recover, receive the gift of knowledge, receive the gift of wisdom, and work miracles.

President B. H. Roberts, that great student of the gospel, wrote, "Such are the effects of the operations of the Holy Ghost upon the nature of man. These fruits of the Spirit indicate the change that the Spirit of God may effect in human nature; by which that which is corrupted through sin may be conformed to that which is pure and holy, according to the working whereby the Spirit is able to subdue all things unto Himself, in them that give place for his indwelling in their souls. This effectual working of the Spirit in the souls of men, by which they were transformed from vileness to holiness, was the boast of the early saints. And upon reflection all will concede that the victories of the Spirit in reforming the lives of men and making them in their very nature conform to the likeness of Christ in righteousness, are more to be desired and more to be celebrated than those victories which are physical or intellectual merely in their nature. Indeed these latter fruits of the Spirit derive their chief value from the extent to which they contribute to the production of the former—that is, to the extent that they establish men in the faith, enable them to crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof, and help them to live in harmony with the sweet influence of the Spirit of God. When men live in harmony with that Spirit there will righteousness obtain; there will love abound; there will the Gospel of Christ appear triumphant. Where these fruits do not appear, there the Gospel of Christ is not; there the powers of darkness for the time being, are triumphant." (The Seventy's Course in Theology, p. 189.)

The following is a partial list of the functions of the Holy Ghost:

The Holy Ghost teaches. (Luke 12:12.)

The Holy Ghost comforts. (John 14:16-17, 26.)

The Holy Ghost witnesses. (Acts 5:32.)

The Holy Ghost guides. (John 16:13-14.)

The Holy Ghost directs the calling of new leaders. (Acts 13:2, 4.)

The Holy Ghost reveals. (1 Corinthians 12:3.)

The Holy Ghost gives joy. (1 Thessalonians 1:5-6.)

The Holy Ghost gives understanding of the scriptures. (2 Peter 1:20-21.)

The Holy Ghost is the source of love for all men. (Romans 5:5.)

The Holy Ghost gives hope. (Romans 15:13.)

The Holy Ghost helps us pray. (Romans 8:26-27.)

John the Baptist had the authority to baptize by immersion, but he did not have the additional authority to baptize by fire or give the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Jesus gave this gift to the Twelve and to the Seventy he sent out to preach. This fact of two needed authorities is demonstrated in the story in Acts 8:15-17 of Philip preaching in Samaria. After he had baptized many at Samaria, the apostles at Jerusalem heard about his missionary success and immediately sent the apostles Peter and John to complete the work. They prayed for the new converts, who had not yet received the Holy Ghost, and then laid their hands on them. At that point the converts received the Holy Ghost. Acts 19:1-6 tells a similar story of Paul at Ephesus conferring the Holy Ghost after some new converts had been baptized. At that time it was apparently common for missionaries to baptize and then for brethren with higher authority to come along later and bestow the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. Today we know that the ordinance of baptism can be performed by those who hold the office of priest in the Aaronic Priesthood and that the gift of the Holy Ghost can be conferred only by those who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood.

How can we determine if someone "hungers and thirsts after righteousness"? One very simple way for a leader to learn if a member of the Church has this quality is if the person has a sincere desire to go to the temple, the house of the Lord. The experience we can have there is the highest spiritual experience we can enjoy on this earth. It is a truly celestial experience.

In the temple we can set our course on the eternities and learn how close we are to the straight and narrow path. We can go through the process of repentance and recommitment and review our overall level of spirituality and our relationship with our Heavenly Father and our family. In the temple, we determine if we have drifted from the iron rod and how much we need to correct our course to get back to where we should be.

It is interesting to note that to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the temple ordinances were so important and essential that in all his life he neither planned nor built a chapel—he only planned and built temples. He did not build a chapel in Kirtland, Ohio, but he built a temple. He did not plan a chapel in Independence, Missouri, but he planned a temple. He did not build a chapel in Nauvoo, Illinois, but he built a temple. He would not be indifferent toward going frequently to the house of the Lord. He had a tremendous hunger and thirst and drive to provide temples for the worthy Saints of this dispensation.

A Latter-day Saint who is not interested in the temple, who is not willing to make sacrifices to become worthy to go to the temple, and who is not striving to return to the temple probably will not come forth in the morning of the first resurrection. The well-established qualifications for the morning of the first resurrection are to be endowed in the temple and to remain worthy of a temple recommend to the end.

This certainly does not mean that those who have been to the temple should feel that they are any better than anyone else. It just means that there are certain, specific requirements listed in the scriptures, and they include the temple ordinances.

Elder Dallin H. Oaks has said that we cannot come unto Christ and be perfected in him without the covenants and ordinances of the temple. Moreover, the blessings of the gospel cannot be extended to our departed ancestors without the ordinances and covenants of the temple. Elder Boyd K. Packer has said that if we have received our covenants and ordinances, it does not matter what we might have missed in life. We can be ill, we can be afflicted, we can be poor, we can be ignorant of much of everything; but if we have received our ordinances, made our temple covenants, and kept those covenants, we have lived well. However, if we do not have those, whatever else we may have achieved in mortality will be of little appreciable value eternally.

A person who truly hungers and thirsts after righteousness wants to go to the temple. A temple is "a mountain of the Lord." Moses went to the mountain to commune with God. The ancients thought mountains and temples were places where contact was made between the spirit world and the temporal world; they also thought that temples and mountains were places where the gods passed from time to time from their celestial habitations to earthly residences. Those who truly hunger and thirst after righteousness want to climb that holy mountain often and pass that sacred test to fill themselves as one fills an empty vessel. Let us fill our vessels in the house of the Lord.

Another important test is the degree of hunger and thirst a person has to serve a mission for the Lord, truly one of life's greatest spiritual experiences. Today there is a greater urgency than ever before for members of the Church to prepare themselves to serve missions.

One scripture seems to indicate that the Savior considers that serving a mission, bringing souls to him, is a greater blessing than being at his holy feet in heaven. In 1829 Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery asked the Lord whether John, the beloved disciple, had tarried in the flesh or had died. In response, they received a translated version of a record made by John himself: "The Lord said unto me: John, my beloved, what desirest thou? . . . And I said unto him: Lord, give unto me power over death, that I may live and bring souls unto thee. And the Lord said unto me: Verily, verily, I say unto thee, because thou desirest this thou shalt tarry until I come in my glory, and shalt prophesy before nations, kindreds, tongues and people."

Peter, who had asked that he might quickly go unto the Lord in his kingdom, apparently questioned John's request, for we read that the Lord told Peter, "My beloved has desired that he might do more, or a greater work yet among men than what he has before done. Yea, he has undertaken a greater work." (D&C 7:1-6.)

In addition to going to the temple regularly and serving a mission worthily, there are other tests that clearly indicate the degree to which an individual hungers and thirsts after righteousness. Each of us might ask ourselves: How much desire do I have to live the gospel? How intent am I to consecrate myself to the Lord and his commandments and covenants? How strong is my desire to enjoy that mighty change of heart of which Alma taught? How close am I to the straight and narrow path, and am I making daily position checks to see if I need to change course in order to arrive at the right destination?

This is, ultimately, a very personal, private matter, and this beatitude should provoke great introspection by each person desiring to put his life in order and with proper priorities.
