Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

5

Blessed Are the Merciful

Book of Mormon: "Blessed are the merciful [who come unto me], for they shall obtain mercy." (3 Nephi 12:7.)

King James Version: "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy." (Matthew 5:7.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Happy the merciful; they shall have mercy shown them."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Happy are the merciful, for they will have mercy shown to them!"

"Our salvation rests upon the mercy we show to others. Unkind and cruel words, or wanton acts of cruelty toward man or beast, even though in seeming retaliation, disqualify the perpetrator in his claims for mercy when he has need of mercy in the day of judgment before earthly or heavenly tribunals. Is there one who has never been wounded by the slander of another whom he thought to be his friend? Do you remember the struggle you had to refrain from retribution? Blessed are all you who are merciful, for you shall obtain mercy!" (Harold B. Lee, Stand Ye in Holy Places, p. 346.)

When we think of mercy, we usually think of the relationship between justice and mercy. We all want the Lord to judge us with mercy. The Old Testament is full of references to the mercy we hope God will show toward us, both now and at the Day of Judgment. In this beatitude, the Savior talks about our showing mercy in order to obtain mercy from God. The principle is that we will be judged with the same measure that we apply to others. This message is found in the parable of the unforgiving servant, where the king forgave the head servant who owed him ten thousand talents, but that same servant would not forgive his fellow servant who owed him only one hundred pence. The king, upon finding this out, declared: "O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me: shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellowservant, even as I had pity on thee?" (Matthew 18:32-33.)

The quality of mercy tempers the strict, severe sentence with compassion and an understanding of extenuating circumstances. The infinite mercy of God cancels any punishment if the sinner repents, asks for forgiveness, and promises to follow Christ. God's mercy comes from his unlimited and unconditional love for us. Likewise, we should show mercy to others through unlimited and unconditional love for them.

Our parents love us—not necessarily because we deserve it, but because they are our parents and we are their children. And because of their love, they sacrifice to provide for our welfare and security and happiness. Our Savior, Jesus Christ, loves us—not because we deserve it necessarily, but because we are his brothers and sisters. And because of his love, which is unconditional, the Savior willingly sacrificed his life for us. Sacrifice and service beget love.

The more we sacrifice for and serve others, the more we love them and forgive them their weaknesses, and the greater our tendency to extend mercy to them. When we don't love our family members or friends, we may think it is because they have not earned our love. But it is the other way around: if we do not love someone as much as we should, it is because we have not yet sacrificed enough for that person. That is why homes "blessed" with a parent suffering from an incurable disease or with a handicapped child are often so full of love.

Some years ago, while on a stake conference assignment in Idaho, I stayed in the home of a stake president who had a child afflicted with Down's syndrome. The child, who was about ten or twelve years old, was very full of unconditional love, and I was impressed with the relationship between that child and each one of the family members. On Sunday afternoon after the stake conference, I enjoyed a dinner with the families of the stake presidency and was surprised to note that each of those three families had a Down's syndrome child. I mentioned the coincidence to the stake president as he drove me to the airport to catch my plane home. He explained that the addition of their Down's syndrome child to his family had been a great blessing. Each member of the family had to make adjustments and sacrifices in order to take care of the handicapped one. To their surprise, the effect was that all of the children became softer and sweeter and more tender among themselves and toward parents and all others. He said, "That baby was a gift of God to our family, and we will never be the way we were before." Then he added, "When I was called as a stake president I looked around for the two most spiritual and loving men I could find. They, too, had Down's syndrome children. It seems that taking care of a child who needs more than the usual amount of attention increases love not only toward that child but toward everyone else as well. In our case it has not been a sacrifice but a great blessing."

"God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son." (John 3:16.) Jesus so loved the world that he gave his life for us and suffered for our sins. Oh, what love! What mercy! Can we not find the way to be merciful to all those about us?

Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote, "Mercy is for the merciful. In that great day of restoration and judgment, when every man is rewarded according to the deeds done in the flesh, those who have manifest mercy to their fellowmen here will be treated mercifully by the Merciful One. Those who have acquired the godly attribute of mercy here shall have mercy restored unto them again in that bright day." (The Mortal Messiah 2:122-23.)

In the Church we have a great army numbering in the hundreds of thousands or more of those we call "the less active members" or the "inactives," or those who are "careless about attending meetings." Bishops, stake presidencies, quorum leaders, and auxiliary leaders are exerting a major effort to try to reach out and invite them back. Some of those whom we are trying to bring into full activity have been offended. We can do little to correct the original wrongs, but if we can get the offended ones to forgive and forget and return, we will be blessed and they themselves will be blessed much more. The injunction by the First Presidency is that we encourage Church members to forgive those who may have wronged them. The Savior prayed, "Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors." Then he counseled, "If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." (Matthew 6:12, 14-15.)

Returning to the parable concerning the unforgiving servant, perhaps we should go into a little more detail. The king's servant owed the king a considerable sum, ten thousand talents, which debt the king forgave out of compassion. But the same servant did not forgive his companion the small amount of a hundred pence, which was virtually insignificant. In Jesus the Christ, Elder James E. Talmage suggests that ten thousand talents would have amounted to millions of dollars in U. S. currency, while a hundred pence amounted to just a few dollars. When the king became aware of the level of injustice practiced by his servant, he, of course, had the servant jailed, or as some translators say, "delivered unto his tormentors." The punishment was decreed not because of the debt but because of the lack of mercy after having received mercy. The scriptures are clear: there is no mercy for those who do not show mercy.

Even if we have been offended or hurt or caused to suffer in any way, we must still forgive if we expect or hope that the Lord will overlook our weaknesses and sins, for can we say that there is even one of us without sin except Jesus himself?

When we forgive others, great things happen to us. A heavy burden is lifted from our backs, which then frees us to soar to higher spiritual levels. Take mercy away and we become very self-centered and empty. A person wrapped up in himself makes a very small package indeed. Some people may think that they are self-sufficient and that their salvation depends entirely upon themselves and no one else. It would appear from the examples we have cited thus far that this is not the case. Unless we have stepped outside ourselves and shown mercy to others who may not even deserve it, we ourselves cannot expect any mercy at the judgment bar.

Christ appears to have gone about the countryside of Judea looking for circumstances where he could demonstrate mercy as an example for us today. His gospel is very pertinent to our day and circumstances. He sought out the sick and the sinful and healed them of their bodily illnesses and their illnesses of the spirit. Even a woman taken in the act of adultery brought forth an unusual demonstration of mercy as he turned away her persecutors and then told her, "Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more." (John 8:11.) In his love and healing, and through his association with the dreaded lepers, he showed mercy—even to the ones society had marked as untouchables or unacceptables.

In Shakespeare's The Merchant of Venice, Portia says to Shylock:

The quality of mercy is not strained, It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven Upon the place beneath. It is twice blest; It blesseth him that gives and him that takes. 'Tis mightiest in the mightiest. It becomes The throned monarch better than his crown. His scepter shows the force of temporal power, The attribute to awe and majesty Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings. But mercy is above this sceptered sway, It is enthroned in the hearts of kings, It is an attribute to God himself, And earthly power doth then show likest God's When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew, Though justice be thy plea, consider this, That in the course of justice none of us Should see salvation. We do pray for mercy, And that same prayer doth teach us all to render The deeds of mercy. —Act 4, scene 1

A touching story about mercy is told about President Abraham Lincoln. During the Civil War a young soldier fell asleep while on guard. The enemy took advantage of the weakness in the defense and attacked, killing many of the guard's fellow soldiers, and in the counterattack, more were killed. The guard, who survived and admitted his guilt, was court-martialed and, in keeping with wartime discipline, sentenced to death. He did not ask for mercy, but his mother did. She wrote a letter to President Lincoln and told him that at the beginning of the war she had a husband and four fine sons. Now her husband and three sons were all dead, due to the war. She pleaded not for her son but for compassion and mercy for herself because of all she had given. It is recorded that President Lincoln pardoned the young soldier and sent him home to take care of his mother—and no one criticized him for this act.

As a banker in South America, I had a personal experience that illustrates mercy and justice. I had made a loan to a man who exported lumber from the rain forests of Paraguay, transporting it downriver to Argentina. Then the river dropped to the lowest level in fifty years, making export impossible, so even though he had the logs, he could not ship and collect to pay off the loan. I renewed the loan for another six months and increased my security by taking a mortgage on all his property plus chattel mortgages on his tractors, trucks, and other logging equipment. When the loan came due the next time, the river was up but the market was low, and he didn't make enough profit to repay the loan. Again I agreed to renew the loan, since he had given me more than sufficient collateral. When the note came due this time, there was a revolution in Argentina and no buyers for his logs. But this time auditors were coming to the bank and, knowing that the loan would be classified (a black mark against me as a banker), I had to collect.

When I advised the man that I would have to legally take some of his property or equipment and sell it at forced sale to cover the loan, he pleaded for mercy. I explained justice. He demanded mercy. I demanded justice. It was a most tragic situation.

In the middle of this crisis my client's brother came to the bank to see me. He was also a client, with a large cattle ranch and a business in the capital city. He said, "If I pay my brother's loan, will you leave him alone?" I said that I would and that I would pass the mortgages to him. As for my part, justice had been satisfied with the payment, no matter where it came from.

In like manner, Christ has intervened between each of us and justice, paying with his sacrifice the debts that we owe. However, this is conditional upon our having faith in him, repenting of our sins, being baptized, receiving the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, and continuing faithful to the end, which means obeying all his commandments, especially preparing for the covenants of the temple. Then and only then can the full measure of his atonement be available to us. Therefore, we must understand that the atoning sacrifice of Christ is real, but it is conditional upon our love of and obedience to him.

The New Testament has a few illuminating verses about the atonement of Christ, but the clearest scriptures explaining how it truly works are in the Book of Mormon. Following are a few of the most significant scriptures; additional ones may be found in the Topical Guide in the LDS edition of the King James Version of the Bible under the headings "Blood," "Fall of Man," "Forgiveness," "Jesus Christ, Atonement through," "Jesus Christ, Mission of," "Jesus Christ, Redeemer," "Jesus Christ, Savior," "Reconciliation," "Redemption," and "Sacrifice."

Wherefore, redemption cometh in and through the Holy Messiah; for he is full of grace and truth. Behold he offereth himself a sacrifice for sin, to answer the ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit; and unto none else can the ends of the law be answered. Wherefore, how great the importance to make those things known unto the inhabitants of the earth, that they may know that there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah, who layeth down his life according to the flesh, and taketh it again by the power of the Spirit, that he may bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, being the first that should rise. Wherefore, he is the firstfruits unto God, inasmuch as he shall make intercession for all the children of men; and they that believe in him shall be saved. (2 Nephi 2:6-9.)

And he cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice; for behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam. . . . And he commandeth all men that they must repent, and be baptized in his name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God. . . . For the atonement satisfieth the demands of his justice upon all those who have not the law given to them, that they are delivered from that awful monster, death and hell, and the devil, and the lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment; and they are restored to that God who gave them breath, which is the Holy One of Israel. (2 Nephi 9:21, 23, 26.)

And thus God breaketh the bands of death, having gained the victory over death; giving the Son power to make intercession for the children of men—having ascended into heaven, having the bowels of mercy; being filled with compassion towards the children of men; standing betwixt them and justice; having broken the bands of death, taken upon himself their iniquity and their transgressions, having redeemed them, and satisfied the demands of justice. (Mosiah 15:8-9.)

And he shall come into the world to redeem his people; and he shall take upon him the transgressions of those who believe on his name; and these are they that shall have eternal life, and salvation cometh to none else. Therefore the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death; for behold, the day cometh that all shall rise from the dead and stand before God, and be judged according to their works. (Alma 11:40-41.)

Therefore, according to justice, the plan of redemption could not be brought about, only on conditions of repentance of men in this probationary state, yea, this preparatory state; for except it were for these conditions, mercy could not take effect except it should destroy the work of justice. Now the work of justice could not be destroyed; if so, God would cease to be God.

And thus we see that all mankind were fallen, and they were in the grasp of justice; yea, the justice of God, which consigned them forever to be cut off from his presence.

And now, the plan of mercy could not be brought about except an atonement should be made; therefore God himself atoneth for the sins of the world, to bring about the plan of mercy, to appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also. . . . And if there was no law given, if men sinned what could justice do, or mercy either, for they would have no claim upon the creature?

But there is a law given, and a punishment affixed, and a repentance granted; which repentance, mercy claimeth; otherwise, justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law, and the law inflicteth the punishment; if not so, the works of justice would be destroyed, and God would cease to be God.

But God ceaseth not to be God, and mercy claimeth the penitent, and mercy cometh because of the atonement; and the atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and the resurrection of the dead bringeth back men into the presence of God; and thus they are restored into his presence, to be judged according to their works, according to the law and justice.

For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved.

What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God. (Alma 42:13-15, 21-25.)

The heart and soul of all Christianity is the atonement of Christ and his sacrifice of his own free will to pay for our sins.

There are two ways to look at the mechanics of the atonement. Of course, they are both speculation, since even the most competent of scholars and the most spiritual of leaders confess that no one knows how the Lord performs this miracle of miracles of paying for our sins. One approach uses a mathematical equation, saying that the infinite greatness of the Savior's sacrifice is so overwhelmingly magnificent that it totals more than the sum of the sins of all mankind, with an infinite balance left over. The second explanation is that the Savior's sacrifice is such that it entitles him to intervene on our behalf and ask for compassion, just as the mother in the Civil War story intervened and asked for compassion because of her sacrifice. Pondering details of the atonement may be good for our spiritual maturity as long as we increase every day our personal gratitude, love, and appreciation of the Savior and our determination to be worthy of his intervention on our behalf.

The words of this great sacrament hymn are worthy of memorization and daily repetition:

I stand all amazed at the love Jesus offers me, Confused at the grace that so fully he proffers me. I tremble to know that for me he was crucified, That for me, a sinner, he suffered, he bled and died. I marvel that he would descend from his throne divine To rescue a soul so rebellious and proud as mine, That he should extend his great love unto such as I, Sufficient to own, to redeem, and to justify. I think of his hands pierced and bleeding to pay the debt! Such mercy, such love, and devotion can I forget? No, no, I will praise and adore at the mercy seat, Until at the glorified throne I kneel at his feet. Oh, it is wonderful that he should care for me Enough to die for me! Oh, it is wonderful, wonderful to me! —Hymns, no. 193

The greatest need for mercy is from God toward us. The next greatest need for mercy is from one human being toward his neighbor. The parable of the good Samaritan is the finest in the scriptures for demonstrating this principle. In fact, the Christian character or attitude is based upon generosity toward our fellowmen, leading us to make sacrifices for them just as Christ made an infinite sacrifice for us. The brotherly love and concern as demonstrated in that parable should be the guiding principle in our daily relationships with all those about us.

"A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead. And by chance there came down a certain priest that way: and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side.

"But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he had compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him. And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee.

"Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves? And he said, He that shewed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise." (Luke 10:30-37.)

Those who are merciful are full of the love of Christ, and show that Christlike love toward every person around them and with whom they have contact. Mercy, love, and charity are so interrelated that it is appropriate here to paraphrase that great declaration by Paul on charity, defined as the pure love of Christ, but substituting the word mercy for charity:

"Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not mercy, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not mercy, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not mercy, it profiteth me nothing. Mercy suffereth long, and is kind; mercy envieth not." (1 Corinthians 13:1-4.)

The mercy of God is referred to approximately 150 times in the Old Testament. Students of the translation of the Old Testament point out that sometimes the original word chesedh is translated "mercy," and sometimes it is translated "goodness." The most common interpretation relates it to reducing the severity of the justice one deserves. But the alternate interpretation relates it to something that we also look forward to: that is, that the Lord, in his goodness of heart, loves us and has special blessings for us even in our imperfections. Both interpretations point to what we should show to our fellowmen, mercy and goodness—or, as the angel said in announcing to the shepherds the birth of the Savior, "On earth peace, good will toward men." (Luke 2:14.)

In Old Testament references, the concept of mercy is not negative; it is the willingness to hold justice in abeyance, to reduce a punishment, to mitigate the severity of that which is just and deserved. It is another facet of the love of God the Father to his children and the love of our Savior, King, and Redeemer toward us whom he has saved if we follow him, take his name upon us, testify of him, and remember and obey him—the promises of the sacrament prayers.

The promise of Christ's mercy is certain and available to each one of us. He who turned water to wine, stilled the winds with his hand, walked on water, and performed myriad other miracles can also effect the miracle of personal peace for the sinner, the sufferer, the one who has erred and harmed others. His peace is made available to all of us because of his mercy toward us. He said, "Peace, be still," and also, "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." (John 16:33.)

Paul said it well: "Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need." (Hebrews 4:16.)
