Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

6

Blessed Are the Pure in Heart

Book of Mormon: "Blessed are all the pure in heart [who come unto Christ], for they shall see God." (3 Nephi 12:8.)

King James Version: "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God." (Matthew 5:8.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Happy the pure in heart: they shall see God."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Happy are the utterly sincere, for they will see God!"

To really understand this beatitude, we need to know what is meant by "pure in heart" and what is meant by seeing God. To be pure, a person's heart must be sincere and untainted by ulterior motives, conflicts of interest, or spiritually degrading influences.

Elsewhere in the scriptures we find promises similar to the statement "for they shall see God," and we believe that each of us can have our own dreams, visions, and manifestations in which we see God. Referring to this promise, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote the following:

"How glorious is the voice we hear from him! Man may see his Maker! Did not Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob see the Lord? Did not Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel see the God of Israel, under whose feet was a paved work of a sapphire stone? Was it not thus with Isaiah and Nephi, with Jacob and Moroni, and with mighty prophets without number in all ages? Is God a respecter of persons who will appear to one righteous person and withhold his face from another person of like spiritual stature? Is he not the same yesterday, today, and forever, dealing the same with all people, considering that all souls are equally precious in his sight? Did not Moses seek diligently to sanctify his people, while they were yet in the wilderness, that they might see the face of God and live? Does not the scripture say that the brother of Jared had such a perfect knowledge of God that he could not be kept from seeing within the veil? Why then should not the Lord Jesus invite all men to be as the prophets, to purify themselves so as to see the face of the Lord?

"It is written: 'Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am.' (D&C 93:1.) How glorious the concept is! What a wondrous reality! The pure in heart—all the pure in heart—shall see God!" (The Mortal Messiah 2:123.)

It makes little difference whether the seeing of God is physical or spiritual. The important part is that we commit ourselves to a course of purification and sanctification that will lead us to God, remembering always that after we have done all we can do, Christ is really the one who, through his atoning sacrifice, makes us clean before our Heavenly Father.

In the Spanish scriptures, the word pure is translated limpios, which means clean. It refers to ceremonial cleanliness, such as the emotions felt after baptism or performing the temple ordinances. Other interpretations refer to being clean of guilt, clean of bad habits, and clean of pollution.

In the original Greek text, the word katharos is used. The meaning is closer to clean than pure, and the word is used both to describe ceremonial purity or cleanliness and to describe moral and spiritual purity and cleanliness. The word katharos is close to catharsis, which means a purging of all impurity. (Another form of translation shows this Greek word being used to describe thoroughbred lineage or unmixed racial lineage, or a language free of slang, or a man free of debts.)

In English, we tend to use the words clean and pure somewhat interchangeably, as do the Greeks, with pure carrying a definite moral and spiritual tone that implies integrity, innocence, and righteousness. It behooves us to understand both of these uses. A spiritual discipline comes from obeying certain rituals, ordinances, and covenants that involve ceremony, but a spiritual awakening comes from the way of life we live, our conduct, our thoughts, and the intents of our heart.

While in ancient Israel ceremonial purity might come from washing one's hands with the fingers pointed upward till the water flowed down to the wrists—or from the high priest bathing his body in clean water five times and his hands and feet ten times—members of Christ's church today tend to think of being cleansed by the holy waters of baptism, which symbolically washes away our sins; by repenting so as to be worthy of taking the sacrament weekly; or by preparing ourselves to go to the temple to take part in ceremonies that purify and cleanse us. But these are still all a form of physical washings and anointings.

Jesus brought a new and higher law, adding to the old in some cases and replacing the old in others. He brought to us the concept of being pure and clean of heart, which is internal. This is by far a greater law. This seems to be a matter of one's heart, mind, and soul being free from impure thoughts and attitudes. As members of Christ's church, we might say that it is not enough to just be baptized or to have a temple recommend. A higher level of introspection is needed if we are to be truly free from impurities. We might ask if we have truly made that mighty change of heart spoken of by Alma:

"Have ye spiritually been born of God? . . . Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts? . . . Can ye imagine yourselves brought before the tribunal of God with your souls filled with guilt and remorse? . . . Can ye look up to God at that day with a pure heart and clean hands? . . . For there can no man be saved except his garments are washed white; yea, his garments must be purified until they are cleansed from all stain, through the blood of him of whom it has been spoken by our fathers, who should come to redeem his people from their sins." (Alma 5:12-21.)

In the Old Testament David asked similar questions: "Who shall ascend unto the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?" In the Church today, we might say: Who is worthy to go to the temple, which is the mountain of the Lord? Then David explained, "He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation." (Psalm 24:3-5.)

In order that we have clean hands and a pure heart, it is obvious that our actions, our words, and our thoughts must be clean. Alma warns that "our words will condemn us, yea, all our works will condemn us; . . . and our thoughts [negative thoughts, improper thoughts, impure thoughts] will also condemn us." (Alma 12:14.)

A tendency to not be completely pure and clean, or hypocrisy, will catch up with us. If we do some good deed to be seen of men rather than to help the needy, if we sacrifice something in order to receive personal satisfaction, if our motive to go on a mission is more to learn a language or to see far-away places rather than to serve the Lord, if we seek a church position in order to receive honors of men instead of to humbly serve the Lord, we may not be found to have the pure hearts and clean hands that are needed in order to receive the blessings. A penetrating self-review, then, is necessary to avoid being condemned for what may appear at first glance to be worthy deeds. For example, some may preach against sexual sin with such detail that they could be found guilty of voyeurism or vicarious pornography.

Every day, in all that we say, do, or think, we are either approaching closer to the standards of the Savior or we are departing from them. To seek daily to have ever cleaner hands and a purer heart should be our goal. This requires that our emotions, desires, ambitions, motives, and innermost feelings be focused on Christ. With his help, we can repent and try to make some progress every day.

One of the strongest interpretations for being "pure in heart" has to do with sexual virtue and purity. We are told to "let virtue garnish [our] thoughts unceasingly." (D&C 121:45.) Sexual impurity is rampant in today's world. It first attacks thoughts, then words, then actions. For this reason, the Lord and his servants warn us often and strenuously against pornographic material. No one who is involved with such staining, tarnishing, corrosive, degenerating influences can be clean and pure.

From the time of Adam and down through and after the time of Moses, we hear the God of Israel strictly prohibiting such moral sins as fornication, adultery, homosexuality, and incest. At one time anciently these sins were punished by death. When the Savior was on earth, he changed the severity of that punishment, telling the woman taken in adultery to "go, and sin no more." Nevertheless, the sin is still so serious in the sight of the Lord that the prophet Alma told his son Corianton that sexual sins were second only to the shedding of innocent blood.

Today The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints teaches that there is a single standard for both men and women: both should arrive at the sacred altar of marriage virgin and pure. We also teach that there should be no sexual relationship of any kind outside of marriage. Christ said, "Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery: but I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart." (Matthew 5:27-28.) Today the Lord would perhaps phrase this commandment a little differently. To include today's sins he would have to say, "Whatever man or woman looketh on the opposite sex—or whatever man or woman looketh on the same sex—with lust in his (or her) heart has committed adultery with them in his (or her) own heart." We are unequivocally against sexual sins, which seem to be increasingly prevalent in our society, and we place a large part of the blame on the pornography and other suggestive material in the media, including television, movies, advertising, magazines, and books.

In the Book of Mormon reference to this beatitude, "Blessed are the pure in heart," we might add the phrase "who come unto Christ" to support the thought that no one can truly come unto Christ without passing through the process of faith in Christ, repentance of sin, and baptism for the remission of sins, followed by the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Baptism is the key ordinance here, a requirement that cannot be changed or modified. Baptism by immersion is essential, and it must be performed by one who holds the legal authority to perform the ordinance, using the sacred prayer revealed by God in the beginning. The ordinance will then be binding both on earth and in heaven, and it must be recorded here and there. Just being pure in heart is not enough. We all must pass through the ceremonial purification process of becoming prepared for baptism and then going down into the water just as Christ did two thousand years ago as an example to us and to "fulfill all righteousness." He declared, "He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber." (John 10:1.)

This ordinance is essential for all who would seek entrance into the kingdom of God, including those who have died without having been baptized as well as those who were never baptized in an authorized manner. The provision for baptism by proxy, or baptism for and in behalf of those who are dead, existed in the ancient Christian church and it exists in the restored church of Jesus Christ today. Of course, the earthly ordinance is not valid unless those on the other side of the veil are prepared for and accept the ordinance done for them here. Nevertheless, we have the sacred duty to research our ancestors and do these required Christian ordinances for them. Paul, in his epistle to the saints at Corinth, asked, "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" (1 Corinthians 15:29.)

While we do not have a full or detailed explanation of baptism for the dead in ancient times, it is evident that members of the early church did perform the ordinance. Many references to this practice in ancient literature, in addition to those found in the Bible, have been discovered in recent times. Professor Hugh Nibley of Brigham Young University, one of the Church's finest authorities on this subject, has studied an impressive number of ancient documents and sources that support the concept that while Christ did not say anything on the subject during his earthly ministry, he taught the doctrine of baptism for the dead and other temple ordinances during the forty days he spent with the apostles after his resurrection and before his ascension. After his ascension, the apostles taught the doctrine to selected leaders but were careful not to leave written instructions. Just as today we consider the temple ordinances and covenants for the dead to be so sacred that we do not talk about them in detail, so in their day the apostles had the same instructions. Dr. Nibley writes: "In 1895 there was found in Egypt a Coptic papyrus purporting to contain an account of the teaching of Christ to his apostles after the resurrection. The most learned church historian of modern times, Adolf von Harnack, was prompted to point out that this document was neither 'a provincial production of the Egyptian Church' nor a brainchild of the Gnostics, but an authentic statement of certain important doctrines of salvation and resurrection common to the whole Christian church at a very early date." (Mormonism and Early Christianity, volume 4 in the Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, p. 100.)

An analogy about being pure in heart can be learned from an experience our family had when we lived in South America. A storm with high velocity winds struck a wooded area near our home, blowing down an unusually large number of trees. Upon inspection, it was found that a new species of worm had attacked the hearts of the trees, weakening them. From the outside they appeared to be healthy with bark intact, but at the center they were rotten. In order to withstand the winds of adversity, one needs to be pure in heart (having the core free from rotting), which requires obedience to the laws, ordinances, covenants, doctrines, and policies of the kingdom of God on earth.

The Savior used strong language in an allegory to teach this principle: "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity." (Matthew 23:27-28.)

In Isaiah and in the Doctrine and Covenants, we find the same command: "Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord." (Isaiah 52:11; see also D&C 38:42.)

Paul wrote to the saints at Corinth: "What? know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's." (1 Corinthians 6:19-20.)

In Alma we read: "He [God] doth not dwell in unholy temples; neither can filthiness or anything which is unclean be received into the kingdom of God; therefore I say unto you the time shall come, yea, and it shall be at the last day, that he who is filthy shall remain in his filthiness." (Alma 7:21.)

Moroni counseled, "Be wise in the days of your probation; strip yourselves of all uncleanness; ask not, that ye may consume it on your lusts, but ask with a firmness unshaken, that ye will yield to no temptation, but that ye will serve the true and living God." (Mormon 9:28.)

The Lord, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, commanded us: "I give unto you, who are the first laborers in this last kingdom, a commandment that you assemble yourselves together, and organize yourselves, and prepare yourselves, and sanctify yourselves; yea, purify your hearts, and cleanse your hands . . . before me, that I may make you clean." (D&C 88:74.)

The promise attached to this impressive beatitude is that the pure in heart will see God. President Harold B. Lee declared: "If you would see God, you must be pure. There is in Jewish writings the story of a man who saw an object in the distance, an object that he thought was a beast. As it drew nearer he could perceive it was a man; as it came still closer he saw it was his friend. You can see only that which you have eyes to see. Some of the associates of Jesus saw Him only as a son of Joseph the carpenter. Others thought Him to be a winebibber or a drunkard because of His words. Still others thought He was possessed of devils. Only the righteous saw Him as the Son of God. Only if you are the pure in heart will you see God, and also in a lesser degree will you be able to see the 'God' or good in man and love him because of the goodness you see in him. Mark well that person who criticizes and maligns the man of God or the Lord's anointed leaders in His Church. Such a one speaks from an impure heart." (Stand Ye in Holy Places, p. 345.)

President Marion G. Romney said: "Jesus spoke of specific rewards for different virtues but reserved the greatest, so it seems to me, for the pure in heart, 'for they,' said he, 'shall see God' (Matt. 5:8). And not only shall they see the Lord, but they shall feel at home in his presence. Here is his promise—the Savior's promise: 'Let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God' (D&C 121:45).

"The rewards for virtue . . . are dramatically portrayed in the [life] of Joseph. . . . Joseph, though a slave in Egypt, stood true under pressure of the greatest temptation [when Potiphar's wife tried to seduce him]. As a reward [for resisting] he received the choicest blessings of all the sons of Jacob: he became the progenitor of the two favored tribes of Israel. Most of us take pride in being numbered among his posterity." (Conference Report, April 1979, p. 60.)

Whether or not we see God depends upon our spiritual level of maturity. When the Savior appeared at the temple in the land Bountiful, a group of twenty-five hundred men, women, and children had gathered, people who because of their righteousness had survived the destruction. Yet some did not understand when the Father spoke the first time, nor did they understand when he spoke the second time. We read: "The third time they did hear the voice, and did open their ears to hear it; and their eyes were towards the sound thereof; and they did look steadfastly towards heaven, from whence the sound came. . . . The third time they did understand the voice which they heard; . . . and behold, they saw a Man [Christ] descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe; and he came down and stood in the midst of them." (See 3 Nephi 11:3-8.)

A parallel event in the Gospel of John illustrates the same point, although it has to do with hearing God instead of seeing him. When Jesus prayed to his Heavenly Father, "Father, [I] glorify thy name," the Father answered from heaven. Some of those who stood nearby said that it thundered, but others more tuned to the Spirit said, "An angel spake to him." (See John 12:28-29.)

The concept of actually seeing God in this life is a basic part of the doctrine of the Church. The Doctrine and Covenants has several references to this principle.

In section 88 the Lord tells us: "Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will." (D&C 88:68.) In other words, no amount of our effort alone will bring about this miracle. It is a blessing bestowed upon the pure of heart after the trial of their faith. We cannot be seekers only; we must be doers and leave the timing of the miracle up to God.

In section 93 we read: "Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am." (D&C 93:1.) This is apparently not just a promise for the next life but an offering to the truly faithful while they are yet in mortality.

It must be admitted that there are two legitimate meanings to this matter—that of seeing God here in mortality and that of entering heaven and seeing him. Both include the same requirements of our becoming as nearly perfect as we can and then, through the process Jesus offers us, of his lifting us the rest of the way to perfection. His atonement paid the price for our imperfections, and we may be made perfect through him. He has told us: "These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood." (D&C 76:69.)

Some individuals have been allowed to see the face of God in this life. In Doctrine and Covenants 84 we read what is required for this to happen: "This greater priesthood [the Melchizedek Priesthood] administereth the gospel and holdeth the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest. And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh; for without this [priesthood] no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live." (D&C 84:19-22.)

Adam, Moses, and other ancient prophets were blessed to see the face of God. We know that in our present dispensation, Joseph Smith saw both the Father and the Son; this is recorded in the story of the First Vision. (See Joseph Smith-History 1:17.) The Savior also appeared to the Prophet and to Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple. Joseph described this glorious vision:

"The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened. We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber. His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying: I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father." (D&C 110:1-4.)

In the second epistle of Peter, three concepts are introduced that relate to our discussion: (1) seeing the Son and/or the Father; (2) receiving the Second Comforter; and (3) making one's calling and election sure. The Prophet Joseph Smith put these things in perspective. After discussing the Holy Ghost, or first Comforter, he explained:

"The other Comforter spoken of is a subject of great interest, and perhaps understood by few of this generation. After a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins, and is baptized for the remission of his sins and receives the Holy Ghost, (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him, Son, thou shalt be exalted. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and his election made sure, then it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter, which the Lord hath promised the Saints, as is recorded in the testimony of St. John, in the 14th chapter, from the 12th to the 27th verses. . . .

"Now what is this other Comforter? It is no more nor less than the Lord Jesus Christ Himself; and this is the sum and substance of the whole matter; that when any man obtains this last Comforter, he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him, and the visions of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face, and he may have a perfect knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; and this is the state and place the ancient Saints arrived at when they had such glorious visions—Isaiah, Ezekiel, John upon the Isle of Patmos, St. Paul in the three heavens, and all the Saints who held communion with the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 150-51.)As we strive to become true followers of Christ—inwardly as well as outwardly—we soon learn that the critical element is progress, not longevity. At the end of this life, the question will be how well we have lived and what progress we made toward perfection, not how long we lived.

Elder Dallin H. Oaks has said, "The issue is not what we have done but what we have become. And what we have become is the result of more than our actions. It is also the result of our attitudes, our motives, and our desires. Each of these is an ingredient of the pure heart. . . . To become pure in heart—to achieve exaltation—we must alter our attitudes and priorities to a condition of spirituality, we must control our thoughts, we must reform our motives, and we must perfect our desires." (Pure in Heart, pp. 139-40.)

Our ultimate reward will be as the Savior promised: "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God."
