Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

7

Blessed Are the Peacemakers

Book of Mormon: "And blessed are all the peacemakers [who come unto Christ], for they shall be called the children of God." (3 Nephi 12:9.)

King James Version: "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God." (Matthew 5:9.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Happy the peacemakers: they shall be called the sons of God."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Happy are those who make peace, for they will be known as sons of God!"

In this beatitude, those who are blessed are not particularly those who love peace, but those who make peace. The blessed ones are those who are the "doers of the word," not just passive listeners. (See James 1:22.) Whether we say "those who make peace" or "peacemakers," it is the verb make that brings such power to this beatitude. In order to bring down the blessings of heaven, we must be actively making peace in the home, the office, the social groups we move in, the Church, the classroom, the neighborhood, the community, the world.

Two of our daughters studied in Israel with Brigham Young University's study-abroad program. In almost every letter they wrote home, they used the word shalom. We understood from them that shalom means peace and that it is used most often in two senses. The first is a greeting in which one wishes for the person addressed happiness and tranquillity. The second is as a term describing friendship and goodwill between two people.

The word peace appears almost a hundred times in the New Testament and seems always to be closely identified with Christ as the Prince of Peace. The Savior had no material wealth to give to others, but he frequently gave blessings of peace.

We long for peace as we look upon this war-torn world with its open strife, terrorism, and tension between nations. We honor statesmen and diplomats who are peacemakers. But the Savior was not talking about peace between nations achieved after a military victory, or through bilateral agreements worked out by the leaders of two nations, or through resolving strikes or disturbances within nations. Rather, he referred to the peace that comes to the heart of a person who lives the commandments; comes unto Christ with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, repenting and exercising faith; enters into the waters of baptism; and receives the peaceful, comforting Spirit of the Holy Ghost.

May I share with you a story I heard from an eyewitness to significant events that occurred during the Vietnam War. At the time the president and the congress of the United States were convinced that the U.S. was involved in a noble and justifiable war against communism. However, opposition among individuals in the media and in the public was escalating, with many arguing that the U.S. should pull out of the war. Those who favored continued fighting were called hawks, and those who opposed the war were called doves. In the midst of this divisive controversy, President Harold B. Lee became the president and prophet of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Shortly after he was set apart, he went to Mexico City for an area conference of the Church, and there the international press corps asked for interviews with him.

A press conference can always include questions intended to trap the person being interviewed, in order to provoke that person to give unexpected responses. The trap question newsmen planned to ask President Lee was "What is your position on the Vietnam War?" If he answered "We are against it," they could write "How strange—a Mormon leader who is against the position of the president and congress of his country." If he answered "We are in favor of it," they could print "How unusual—a Mormon leader who is in favor of war!" Either way, the answer could result in serious problems regarding public opinion, both inside and outside the Church.

When the question was posed to him, President Lee, with great inspiration and wisdom, answered as a true prophet would: "We, together with the whole Christian world, abhor war. The Savior said, 'In me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation.' " And then he quoted that comforting scripture from John 14:27: " 'Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.' " He explained, "The Savior was not talking about the peace that can be achieved between nations by military force or by negotiation in the halls of congress. Rather he was speaking of the peace we can each have in our own hearts when we live the commandments and come unto Christ with a broken heart and contrite spirit."

The members of the press were impressed with that undisputable response, and the resulting coverage of the interview was more accurate and favorable than almost any other similar interview members of the press had conducted.

Too many homes are torn by strife and tension between husband and wife, between parents and children, and between siblings. The home is the first and most important place to establish peace. Blessed is that person who makes peace happen in the home. This sought-for peace can come from different avenues, including praying for guidance, seeking professional counseling, listening to priesthood leaders, reading books written by accepted experts on family relationships and communication, being willing to change oneself, and making sacrifices for the sake of peace.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote the following: "The gospel of peace makes men children of God! Christ came to bring peace—peace on earth and good will to men. His gospel gives peace in this world and eternal life in the world to come. He is the Prince of peace. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of them who preach the gospel of peace, who say unto Zion: Thy God reigneth! Let there be peace on earth, and let it begin with his saints. By this shall all men know the Lord's disciples: they are peacemakers; they seek to compose difficulties; they hate war and love peace; they invite all men to forsake evil, overcome the world, flee from avarice and greed, stand in holy places, and receive for themselves that peace which passeth understanding, that peace which comes only by the power of the Spirit. And these are they who are adopted into the family of God." (The Mortal Messiah 2:123-24.)

If peacemakers are going to be adopted into the inner family of God and be called the children of God, then it might follow that troublemakers, lawbreakers, those who disturb peace and order, leaders of ruthless mobs, and any who are prompted by evil intent or total selfishness, to the destroying of peace, will be known as children of Satan. Those who spread confusion, those who attack or criticize sacred things, and those who quarrel or argue or are of a contentious spirit all violate the spirit of this beatitude and are not creating peace and goodwill among men.

Can we imagine that in the heavens above and the life to come there will be anger, hate, jealousy, fighting, discord, shouting, egotism, selfishness, and so forth? Not at all! That would be a hell, not a heaven. This life is the place to learn how to get rid of every negative passion, every ornery ten- dency, that leads individuals to destroy peace in their environment. In this life we must learn how to turn to Christ and his ways and reject any temptation to follow Satan's ways of discord. Here we must learn how to create and to live in peace and harmony so we can be ready to live in the presence of Heavenly Father, his Son, Jesus Christ, and the prophets.

When the Savior came here to the American continent and found contention among the people, he warned them, "There shall be no disputations among you, as there have hitherto been. . . . He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who . . . stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another." (3 Nephi 11:28-29.)

Later, repeating the sermon he had given on the mount in the Holy Land, he said that we should not ever become angry. That means that we should never raise our voices except to warn someone of impending danger, nor show any other negative, satanic passion. We are to develop and exhibit self-control—control of our voice, words, gestures, actions, and body language. Anger and lack of control are destructive to the spirit. The Spirit of Christ is reflected in the smile, warm tone of voice, happy expression, and peace in the demeanor of the true follower of the Prince of Peace.

Peace means unity and harmony. It is interesting that the Lord told members of the first quorums of leadership in the Church in this dispensation that every decision made by either quorum "must be by the unanimous voice of the same; that is, every member in each quorum must be agreed to its decisions," and that decisions were to be made "in all righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long suffering, and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity." (D&C 107:27, 30.) With all these spiritual qualities, there is an abundance of peace.

Zacharias, the father of John the Baptist, spoke regarding the role that the Savior would have. He said that Christ would "give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace." (Luke 1:79.) The righteous always long for peace and tranquillity and look forward to that day when peace will cover the entire earth as a blanket. Until that day comes, the best hope we have is to create peace in our own hearts and in our own surroundings, no matter what is going on in the world.

The Savior said that in the world we would have tribulation, but in him we might have peace. He is our only solution. He is the only way and the only life. Everything always comes back to following Christ.

In 1947 the First Presidency issued the following statement: "Faith in God is the first essential to peace. It is folly for the United Nations now seeking ways and means to permanent peace to exclude the idea of God from their deliberations. Only through an acknowledgement of the Divine Being as Father can the sense of human brotherhood have potency. Only thus can life have purpose and humanity as a whole live in peace." (Improvement Era, January 1947, p. 13.)

In the Sermon on the Mount, when the Savior gave higher laws to replace the old laws, he replaced the custom of retribution with this new law: "Resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also." (Matthew 5:39.) The peacemaker learns that a soft answer turns away wrath (see Proverbs 15:1), and that the ways of love and peace can and do produce miracles when the hearts of others are softened.

The Savior faced many trials and tribulations, but as an example to us he met every situation with peace. He declared: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I [peace] unto you." (John 14:27.) We are told that if we will follow the strait and narrow path and come unto Christ, he will give us peace in the midst of difficulties. No matter the buffetings, the fiery darts, the mockings, the discouragements; if we will follow Christ, we will become the adopted children of Christ in a family of peace. (See Mosiah 5:7.)

One of the most excruciating and disturbing effects of sin is the absence of peace in the lives of those who sin. Sinners are tormented by their conscience. They suffer in agony, knowing how disappointed their Heavenly Father is with them. Alma, in telling his son Helaman about his own sins, confessed, "I went about with the sons of Mosiah, seeking to destroy the church of God." (Alma 36:6.) Then, Alma said, an angel visited him and reminded him of his sins. "I was struck with such great fear and amazement lest perhaps I should be destroyed," he explained. Then he really began to suffer. "I was racked with eternal torment, for my soul was harrowed up to the greatest degree. Yea, I did remember all my sins and iniquities, for which I was tormented with the pains of hell; yea, I saw that I had rebelled against my God, and that I had not kept his holy commandments. . . . And now, for three days and for three nights was I racked, even with the pains of a damned soul."

In the midst of his suffering, Alma remembered the teachings of his father about coming to Christ, and a miracle of peace occurred. He recounted this remarkable experience: "As my mind caught hold upon this thought, I cried within my heart: O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me. . . . And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my pains no more. Yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more. And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain!" (See Alma 36:6-20.) Through turning to Christ, Alma was given peace of mind and heart. That is the miracle of the Atonement. When we truly turn to our Savior, he gives us peace. When we repent of our sins, they torment us no more.

The peace of the repentant sinner is relief, like the balm of Gilead. The gospel song says, "There is a balm of Gilead that heals the sin-sick soul." We all need that peace. The Savior used the sheep of the fields and hills as symbols of peace. The pastoral environment is one of the most peaceful that one can imagine. Even the story of the shepherd going to look for the lost sheep is full of joy and peace as the lost one is returned to the fold.

Paul talked of Christ "having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself" (Colossians 1:20), by which we understand that the only way we can have true peace is also through his blood that was shed for us. If we come to him regularly through partaking of the sacrament, taking his name upon us, always remembering him, and always testifying of him, then we will have his peace with us.

Paul began each of his epistles with some reference to Christ's peace. He was sure that Christ was at peace with himself and with his Father, and that we each must be at peace with them also. In fact, missionary work is the work of bringing people to peace with Christ and God. Paul calls it reconciliation. In his second letter to the Corinthians he said, "God, who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, . . . hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation." (2 Corinthians 5:18.) He then declared that we are ambassadors for Christ and that we should bring all people to be reconciled to God. Through missionary work, we bring people to the waters of baptism, and through baptism they receive remission of their sins and peace in Christ. There is no peace quite like that of a sacred baptismal service. To make peace with God is to promise to obey him and to follow Christ. A missionary is a peacemaker.

One of the ways to peace is through forgiving those who have offended us. So long as we feel offended, there can be no peace in our hearts. Feeling offended is a type of anger and resentment that poisons the spirit of peace and forces it out of our hearts. In the scriptures, we are taught to treat this malady through the miracle of forgiveness. The miracle is first up to us: we must forgive those who have offended us. The Lord has commanded: "Ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin." (D&C 64:9.) When we truly forgive others, we can have peace. Furthermore, when we forgive others the Lord forgives us. What a magnificent promise! The source of peace is found through forgiving and forgetting.

In the beatitudes Christ promises that peacemakers will become "children of God." In the Book of Mormon King Benjamin makes a statement in his temple sermon that has confused a few students of the scriptures. He says: "Because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters; for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters." (Mosiah 5:7.)

The scriptures clearly state that we are all sons and daughters of our Heavenly Father. Christ is also a son of our Heavenly Father. He is our elder brother. We are all brothers and sisters of Christ and of each other. How then can we be sons and daughters of Christ?

Paul indicates that we are Christ's sons and daughters by adoption. Some kind of intimate bond, with a symbolic adoption by Christ, develops when we have made certain changes and certain covenants with him. Paul told the Ephesians that we have been "predestinated . . . unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself." (Ephesians 1:5.) To the Galatians Paul wrote that "God sent forth his Son . . . to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons." (Galatians 4:5.)

Truly, as we make peace in all the different facets of our lives, we can become the adopted children of Christ, our Lord, and come to enjoy his true peace, the peace of the Second Comforter.
