Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

8

Blessed Are the Persecuted

Book of Mormon: "Blessed are all they who are persecuted for my name's sake [who come unto me], for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." (3 Nephi 12:10.)

King James Version: "Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." (Matthew 5:10.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Happy those who are persecuted in the cause of right: theirs is the kingdom of heaven."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Happy are those who have suffered persecution for the cause of goodness, for the kingdom of Heaven is theirs!"

How can persecution be a blessing? Since many who are persecuted die for their beliefs and faith in Christ, these blessings obviously are received in the next life rather than here; therefore, this beatitude is often referred to as the blessing of the martyrs. In the days of the New Testament, the words witness and martyr were virtually synonymous. Witnessing, or bearing testimony, has always brought persecution and turned the faithful into martyrs. Christ warned his followers that they would be persecuted. "Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it." (Matthew 16:24-25.)

Few people have been persecuted more for their faith than was Paul, the apostle. He recounted some of his sufferings: "Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I am more; in labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep; in journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren; in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness." (2 Corinthians 11:23-27.)

Paul was well aware that one who suffers persecution and tribulation for the noble cause of Christ becomes stronger spiritually. In his epistle to the Romans he wrote: "We glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope." (Romans 5:3-4.)

Paul was not in jeopardy until he bore his testimony. He described his conversion: "As I made my journey, and was come nigh unto Damascus about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a great light round about me. And I fell unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And I answered, Who art thou, Lord? And he said unto me, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest." The audience listened only a little bit more, their anger rising at his bold testimony, and then they started to shout, "Away with such a fellow from the earth: for it is not fit that he should live. And as they cried out, and cast off their clothes, [they] threw dust into the air." (Acts 22:6-8; 22-23.) All of this was a little ceremony used to show extreme provocation, somewhat like a bull pawing the dirt before charging. They would have killed him on the spot had he not appealed to the chief captain and the centurion for protection by virtue of his Roman citizenship.

In his second epistle to the Corinthians, Paul made a kind of understatement concerning his sufferings, but at the same time a beautiful testimony of his willingness to give all to the Savior: "We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed; always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. For we which live are alway delivered unto death for Jesus' sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh. . . . For which cause we faint not; but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." (2 Corinthians 4:8-11, 16-17.)

Another dramatic example is Stephen, who could have continued preaching, as many pagans did, as a kind of entertainer in the central squares. Many philosophers, poets, and various religious fanatics did just that. But then Stephen looked up into heaven and saw a vision. "I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God," he testified. And the people "cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord, and cast him out of the city, and stoned him." (Acts 7:56-58.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith is a modern-day example of one who was persecuted for testifying that he had had a vision of the Father and the Son. He reported:

"Some few days after I had this vision, I happened to be in company with one of the Methodist preachers, who was very active in the before mentioned religious excitement; and, conversing with him on the subject of religion, I took occasion to give him an account of the vision which I had had. I was greatly surprised at his behavior; he treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt, saying it was all of the devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the apostles, and that there would never be any more of them.

"I soon found, however, that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen and fifteen years of age, and my circumstances in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me, and create a bitter persecution; and this was common among all the sects—all united to persecute me.

"It caused me serious reflection then, and often has since, how very strange it was that an obscure boy, of a little over fourteen years of age, and one, too, who was doomed to the necessity of obtaining a scanty maintenance by his daily labor, should be thought a character of sufficient importance to attract the attention of the great ones of the most popular sects of the day, and in a manner to create in them a spirit of the most bitter persecution and reviling. But strange or not, so it was, and it was often the cause of great sorrow to myself.

"However, it was nevertheless a fact that I had beheld a vision. I have thought since, that I felt much like Paul, when he made his defense before King Agrippa, and related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light, and heard a voice; but still there were but few who believed him; some said he was dishonest, others said he was mad; and he was ridiculed and reviled. But all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen a vision, he knew he had, and all the persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though they should persecute him unto death, yet he knew, and would know to his latest breath, that he had both seen a light and heard a voice speaking unto him, and all the world could not make him think or believe otherwise.

"So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation." (Joseph Smith—History 1:21-25.)

During his short life the Prophet was cast into prison thirty-eight times, but not once was he found guilty of the crime of which he was accused. He was chased from state to state and seldom given any peace. He was beaten, tarred and feathered, left for dead, and finally murdered. I feel that he was not murdered so much for political or economic reasons as for bearing powerful testimony that he had seen the Father and the Son, for declaring: "I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (JS-H 1:17.)

The Savior was not crucified for giving the Sermon on the Mount, for walking on water, for healing the sick, or for any other miracle that he performed. Ultimately, he was condemned to death for testifying that he was the Son of God, the Messiah for whom all Israel had been waiting. When the high priest asked him, "Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?" he responded, "I am: and ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. Then the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, What need we any further witnesses? Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death." (Mark 14:61-64.) Jesus was persecuted and crucified because he testified of the truth. He truly is the Son of God.

It is perhaps inevitable that members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints find themselves looked upon with suspicion by many. It was so in the early Christian dispensation. It was so in the early pioneer times of this dispensation. Today most people are well informed and look upon the Church and its members with respect, recognizing the good fruits of our unique way of life and the same Christian doctrines, covenants, and ordinances as existed in the days of Christ. However, the prophets have said that persecution will come again in the last days, although we do have the assurance that it will not destroy the Church. The righteous will be protected and the work will go forward, as Daniel of old prophesied.

The Prophet Joseph Smith gave us this promise: "The Standard of Truth has been erected; no unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing; persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done." (History of the Church 4:540.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote about the role of persecution. He first quoted the following verses of scripture:

"Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto the prophets." (Luke 6:22.)

"Blessed are all they who are persecuted for my name's sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake; for ye shall have great joy and be exceedingly glad, for great shall be your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets who were before you." (3 Nephi 12:10-12.)

Commenting on these scriptures, Elder McConkie wrote: "How could it be said better? Jesus is speaking to the members of his earthly kingdom. In our day that kingdom is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is composed of those who have taken upon them the name of Christ—covenanting in the waters of baptism to honor that name and to do nothing that will hold it up to contempt or ridicule. It is composed of those who have forsaken the world; who have crucified the old man of sin; who have become humble, meek, submissive, willing to conform to all that the Lord requires of them.

"And, of course, the world loves its own and hates the saints. The world is the carnal society created by evil men; it is made up of those who are carnal and sensual and devilish. Of course the world persecutes the saints; the very thing that makes them saints is their enmity toward the things of the world. Let the ungodly and the evildoers reproach the Lord's people; let them cry transgression against his saints; let persecution rage against those who bear the Lord's name; let true believers be reviled and evilly spoken of—all for his name's sake. So be it!

"Do they face trials of cruel mockings and scourgings? Are they stoned, sawn asunder, slain with the sword? Are they destitute, afflicted, tormented? Are they cast into dens of lions and furnaces of fire? Are they slain in gladiatorial arenas, lighted as torches on the walls of Rome, crucified head downward? Are they driven from Ohio to Missouri, and from Missouri to Illinois, and from Illinois to a desert wilderness—leaving their Prophet and Patriarch in martyrs' graves? No matter! They do not live for this life alone, and great shall be their reward in heaven." (The Mortal Messiah 2:124-25.)

President Harold B. Lee, speaking to the youth of the Church, made the following stirring comment: "May youth everywhere remember that warning when you are hissed and scoffed at because you refuse to compromise your standards of abstinence, honesty, and morality in order to win the applause of the crowd. If you stand firmly for the right, despite the jeers of the crowd or even physical violence, you shall be crowned with the blessedness of eternal joy. Who knows but that again in our day some of the saints or even apostles, as in former days, may be required to give their lives in defense of the truth. If that time should come, God grant they will not fail." (Stand Ye in Holy Places, pp. 347-48.)

Brother William E. Berrett wrote this about persecution: "Certainly the promise of membership in the kingdom has given courage to thousands who have faced persecution and death. Many did not seek persecution, they would have gladly escaped it. But faced with it—consumed by it—they rejoiced in the understanding that was given them by the Spirit because of baptism and the laying on of hands." (Blessed Are They Who Come unto Me, p. 90.)

The persecutions of the ancient Christians and of the early Saints of this dispensation might give us some idea why tomorrow's Saints might also be persecuted.

We are all familiar with the trials of today's converts who do not receive support from friends and family. Some are asked to leave home. Others are told they are not welcome at family gatherings because they are a source of embarrassment to other members of the family. Some are cut out of family wills and ostracized in many ways.

In business, members of the Church sometimes find that certain top positions are not open to them in spite of superior qualifications. In other, more severe cases the misguided employer severs them from the company when their religious nature is discovered. Such things are not the trend today, but they have happened.

Perhaps our future persecution will come from such things as our belief in the principles contained in the Word of Wisdom, or because of our stand against abortion. Maybe it will be due to a position that is taken to be political rather than spiritual, such as a position against gambling (including lotteries). Or perhaps persecution will come because men have always held the priesthood, according to the lineage of the fathers, and not women—although the Church has always been in favor of the full participation of women in church activities and ordinances. Or perhaps our missionaries will be persecuted and even murdered because the headquarters of the Church are in the United States.

As the world becomes more wicked, the polarization between God's ways and the world's ways will cause a gap that might lead to persecution of the followers of Christ.

It is easy to escape persecution: just follow popular opinion and the ways of the world; teach that salvation does not require strict adherence to Christ's commandments and covenants; make it easy to enter the celestial kingdom; make righteousness old-fashioned; downplay the importance of the scriptures and the teachings of the prophets.

The greatest defense against persecution, however, is to adhere to the principles of the gospel, to hold onto the iron rod. "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you." (Matthew 5:44.)

Joseph of Egypt was persecuted for being righteous and was thrown into a well. Miraculously, he was rescued from the well by the intervention of the Lord, and later he was freed from prison. By the hand of the Lord he ultimately became prime minister of Egypt. Daniel was thrown into the lions' den because he persisted in worshiping the God of Israel instead of worshiping King Darius. The Lord sent an angel to shut the lions' mouths, saving Daniel from harm, and he was restored to his former position of prominence—first leader under the king. The King James Version states that he was the first of three presidents set over a hundred and twenty princes, which position would be similar to that of prime minister.

All martyrs, and all who come unto Christ despite threats or realities of persecution, will find their due reward in the kingdom of heaven. Their treasure is where no one can steal or spoil it. Their salvation is assured.
