Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

9

The Salt of the Earth; Light of the World

Book of Mormon: "Be the salt of the earth. . . . Be the light of this people. . . . Let your light so shine before this people, that they may see your good works and glorify your Father who is in heaven." (3 Nephi 12:13.)

King James Version: "Ye are the salt of the earth. . . . Ye are the light of the world. . . Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 5:13-16.)

Jerusalem Bible: "You are the salt of the earth . . . you are the light of the world. . . . Your light must shine in the sight of men, so that, seeing your good works, they may give the praise to your Father in heaven."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "You are the earth's salt. ... You are the world's light. . . . Let your light shine . . . in the sight of men. Let them see the good things you do and praise your Father in Heaven."

This section of the Sermon on the Mount is a major missionary scriptural commandment. It is significant that it comes close to the beginning of the Savior's first full recorded sermon. Missionary work was destined to be a significant part of the early Christian church under the direct guidance of the Savior. This went very much contrary to the philosophy of Jewish leaders, even though Israel has had a missionary effort at times in her history.

While some authors believe that parts of the Sermon on the Mount were intended only for the apostles and that in a way this was their ordination sermon, it is also evident that the Savior intended for every follower of the Master to be a missionary and an example. Just as salt gives flavor to food to make it more palatable, so missionary success gives a new and better flavor to every church unit and to every town or city. Missionary effort and success are contagious and build spirituality and enthusiasm among individuals of every age and position in the Church. Nothing is quite so rewarding as missionary success. Likewise, stagnation, disappointment, and diminishing results in missionary efforts have the opposite result. The Lord reminds us that if the Saints "are not the saviors of men," or not doing missionary work up to their potential, "they are as salt that has lost its savor, and is thenceforth good for nothing." (D&C 103:10.) Woe be unto that leader or that unit or those members who have lost their missionary enthusiasm and have ceased to pray every day for missionary opportunities and have ceased to "open their mouths" at every chance.

In the same manner, the commandment to be a light to the world and not to hide one's light under a bushel is strong missionary counsel. To have "the right stuff' may be an overworked slogan in the flying and space world, but it is still something we have great need of in missionary work. We need the right missionary spirit, the right missionary zeal. We should be seeking at all times to be shining examples of the gospel, and in every aspect of life we should be living in righteousness, In keeping with the commandments of Jesus. We should be setting examples so that all who see us might be interested in what it is that brings such joy into our lives— the gospel of Jesus Christ. We live in a world full of temptations, with Satan's influence increasing. We must resist his enticings so that we can be examples of Christ and the Christian ethic in every circumstance. We need to be ready to stand up and be counted on the issues that matter.

In the Church News dated February 18, 1989, readers responded to an invitation to share comments on being good member missionaries. Here are some of the responses:

"Being 'missionary-minded' means to look for opportunities to tell others about the gospel. When the opportunity arises, we must be prepared to talk to others about the Church. 'Role playing' in an imaginary situation can help prepare you about what to say to an interested friend or acquaintance. Use your ward mission leader as a resource. Call him for assistance. Have him come to your home for a family home evening and share ideas for getting started in missionary work. Also keep copies of the Book of Mormon at home, in the car and at work and give them away to someone showing interest." (John Boyle.)

"Sometimes adults feel they are not ready to attend Church, but they would like their children to have religious training. We can help teach these children the gospel by taking them to Primary. This involves more than giving them a ride. It may mean calling them on Saturday to remind them to be ready, helping them feel comfortable in their classes and being their special friend at Church. We do not see immediate results, but they are there. One member of our ward told how neighbors began bringing her and her brothers and sisters to Primary, although her parents were not Church members. As a result, more than 30 people in her family are active Church members today. She never fails to express her gratitude to the kind neighbors who shared with her family the blessings of the gospel." (Kathleen Hedberg.)

"Many of our best friends . . . were nonmembers that we invited to our home. There, they met other members of the Church and saw the gospel in action. In our home, questions could be answered and information shared in a very natural way. When we felt the Spirit touch them, we would ask them to hear the missionary discussions. Most often they answered yes.' I recommend the following: cultivate nonmember friends; open your mouth and invite them to hear the discussions." (President and Sister V. Dallas Merrell.)

"Set a date, write it [down and put it] on your refrigerator and experience the joy of being a co-partner with God in bringing the gospel to nonmembers. In 1988 we rejoiced in four baptisms resulting in part from our set-a-date program. When we set a date, we tell the missionaries our date, pray earnestly on a daily basis and fast on fast day that Heavenly Father will lead us to someone, or someone will be led to us. Our answers always come. For example, a young couple asked us to discuss 'Mormonism' with them. A young man came to my husband's office and asked to be taught 'organized religion.' A student asked us about 'the young men who wear the black badges.' All were eventually baptized and are active." (June Christensen.)

President Harold B. Lee quoted many times the scripture in Doctrine and Covenants 88:67, both as written and in an Opposite way, in the following manner: "If your eye be single to my glory," and he added parenthetically that the glory of the Lord is missionary work — bringing the children of men to immortality and eternal life, "your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things." Then he emphasized the Opposite: "And if your eye not be single to my glory," and he repeated that missionary work is the glory of God, "then your whole bodies shall be filled with darkness, and there shall be no light in you; and that body which is filled with darkness does not comprehend anything." He added that those who are filled with darkness do not un derstand their leaders and frequently criticize them, moan and complain about things, and often disobey instructions and/or enter into apostasy.

There is a great division between those who really put their hearts and souls into missionary work and those who prefer to be uninvolved and leave it to someone else. They just never get the same light.

The scriptures are replete with missionary commandments. The following are a few examples that give an idea of the spirit of this noble work, carried out by commandment:

"Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them." (Matthew 28:19.)

"Repentance . . . should be preached in his name among all nations." (Luke 24:47.)

"Go and bring forth fruit." (John 15:16.)

"Preach . . . repentance, and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ." (Alma 37:33.)

"The voice of warning shall be unto all people." (D&C 1:4.)

"Ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect." (D&C 29:7.)

"Feed my sheep." (John 2 1:17.)

"It shall be given unto such to bring thousands of souls to repentance." (Alma 26:22.)

"Thousands ... do rejoice, and have been brought into the fold of God." (Alma 26:4.)

"The field was ripe, and . . . ye did thrust in the sickle, and did reap." (Alma 26:5.)

"How great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me!" (D&C 18:16.)

The whole core and intent of missionary work is to bring repentant souls unto Christ through faith, repentance, and baptism, and the other saving ordinances. The goal of being the salt of the earth and a light to the world is to bring souls to Christ, just as the scriptures declare.

A modern scripture, Doctrine and Covenants 7:1-7, has a unique missionary interpretation. As I understand the account, the Savior asked his apostles what was the desire of their hearts. Peter must have answered first, always eager and willing and perhaps somewhat impetuous, exclaiming that he desired that he might more speedily die and go unto Christ in His heavenly kingdom. By contrast, John the Beloved asked to be a missionary here on earth, saying, "Lord, give unto me power over death, that I may live and bring souls unto thee." The Savior, much impressed with John's response, turned to Peter and said, in effect: You want a good thing, but John has desired a greater thing. In other words, in the view of the Savior, it is greater to be a missionary on earth, bringing souls unto him, than to be in heaven worshiping at his feet. What a lesson for us!

The key to successful missionary work in Latin America, where my experience has been, is through working with the members. Full-time missionaries, when they work closely with members, produce remarkable results. I believe that the same techniques can be applied with minor adjustments anywhere in the world. The procedures are simple and time-tested —and very effective. Reduced to the simplest explanation, these are the procedures:

For each pair of full-time missionaries, members are asked to find about ten families who can be taught the gospel. Each pair of full-time missionaries should teach twenty or more discussions per week, with more than half of their investigators attending church every Sunday. Wherever possible, members would assist the missionaries as "junior companions," allowing the missionaries to "split" and thus meet more teaching appointments. Members are also asked, where possible, to bring the investigators to church services on Sundays. Members may also be asked to make regular visits to the investigators and provide other fellowshipping support.

Success comes when the full-time missionaries are so spiritually and mentally prepared that the members see them as veritable "angels." Moroni tells us that angels still minister to the children of men and that angels do the same things that missionaries do. (See Moroni 7:29-31.) Both angels and missionaries have an office of their ministry to (1) call people to repentance; (2) "do the work of the covenants of the Father," or bring people to the covenant of baptism; and (3) declare "the word of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord," or the elect who have been prepared by the Spirit. Since ministering angels and full-time missionaries have the same commission, we may assume that spiritually oriented people feel the presence of angels as they come unto Christ and that they feel the same way toward missionaries.

Members of the Church may also share in the inspiration and joy that comes from association with the full-time "angel" missionaries through learning how to form effective proselyting habits. While missionaries have been called to give full-time service to their work, they may, through short visits, help members to become better trained and motivated in ways to assist with the missionary efforts. The Saints who help in this way should do so because of their love for the Lord and his work and not because of feelings of obligation. They can seek guidance through daily prayer and scripture study. In their private and family prayers they can ask the Lord to lead them to individuals and families whom they might approach.

The "golden questions" are a highly effective means to approach people in order to discover those who might be ready to receive the gospel. Simply ask: "How much do you know about my church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints?" After listening carefully to their response, be it negative or positive, ask, with a prayer in your heart for the Lord's blessings, "Would you like to know more?" Then you might issue an invitation for them to come to your home to hear a presentation from representatives of the Church — the missionaries.We have found that it is more effective if the meeting with the missionaries is not combined with a dinner or other social activity for the investigators. A simple offer of juice and cookies after the missionaries leave following the discussion is more than enough social attention and will not detract from the discussion itself.

At one of my stake conference assignments, I learned about a member who had been successful in bringing three families into the Church that year. I asked how he found them. He told me of his family's daily prayers and custom of seeking for opportunities to ask the golden questions daily.

The first success was a family across the street. That husband left for work at exactly the same time as the member. In fact, they had to be careful that they did not back their cars into one another. One morning the neighbor's battery would not turn the motor over fast enough to start. Neither of the men had jumper cables. Since both were in a hurry to leave, the member offered the neighbor a ride to work and to pick him up to bring him home. During the drive, the member turned the conversation to his church meetings of the recent weekend. By the time he dropped the neighbor off at his office, he had asked the golden questions and set up a tentative appointment for him and his family to meet with the missionaries. On the way home that evening he was able to confirm the appointment. This neighbor family subsequently met with the missionaries, attended church services, and accepted baptism.

The second family lived a block or so away. The member did not have a telephone, so he would occasionally go to the neighbors' home to use theirs, and would always leave a Church tract or a small gift, such as homemade bread, cookies, or jam.

He also took occasion to ask the golden questions. One day the neighbors overheard a phone conversation in which the member was helping to make arrangements for a bereaved family. The next time the member asked the golden questions, the neighbor family, touched by the Spirit, responded in the affirmative. The member did not realize until much later that it was his example of church service that had impressed them. The neighbors were baptized.

The third family moved into a home over the back fence of the members. One evening before family home evening, the members' children were playing rather noisy games in their backyard and the neighbor children came out to watch. They were invited to join in the fun, which they did. When the parents came out to see what their children were doing, they were invited to join in the games. Then the members invited the neighbor family to stay for family home evening, which included scripture reading, musical numbers, a lesson, some refreshments, and a short parlor game. The neighbors were especially impressed by the closing prayer offered by one of the younger children while everyone knelt down. They wished that their children might be able to pray that well in the presence of guests. The member father asked the golden questions of his neighbor the next day and an appointment was set up. The discussions began in the members' home and were later moved to the neighbors' home. They were baptized.

Members who do not pray for missionary opportunities seldom have these kinds of experiences. It is a matter of changing habits and attitudes to fit the Lord's needs. If we do so, the Lord will bless us all.

Another simple way the members can do missionary work is through using and sharing the Book of Mormon. At a stake conference I felt prompted to call on a sister to bear her testimony. The stake president pointed out a woman in the audience whom he identified as the mother of a new bishop, and I asked for her to come forward. This is the story she told:

Her son and his family had joined the Church a few years before and then had tried to convert her. They gave her books, tracts, and magazines, and a couple of times they gave her copies of the Book of Mormon, which she did not read. Then just a few months before the stake conference, they gave her another copy of the Book of Mormon, this time gift-wrapped. She opened the gift and discovered a leather-bound, large-print book with gold edging and indexes and her name embossed in gold on the cover. Inside was a picture of her son and his family and a written testimony from them. She suspected that the book was expensive, so she decided to read just two pages SO she could make an intelligent comment when thanking them. First she read the introduction and the testimonies of the three witnesses, the eight witnesses, and Joseph Smith. Then she went on to read the first two pages of First Nephi. When she phoned her son and thanked him for the gift, she remarked, "I have been reading the Book of Mormon and have read the introduction and the first two pages. Son, it's true, isn't it?" "Yes, Mother," he replied, "it is true." "Well . . . "— she paused — "I give up. Send the missionaries!" I saw both laughter and tears in the audience as she closed her lovely testimony.

Members of the Church who are anxious to share the joy that has come into their lives because of the gospel of Jesus Christ are truly the salt of the earth, a light to the world. Missionary work is exciting, the greatest spiritual adventure of all time. We just need to get involved.

One mistake that is frequently made is for members to wait too long to bring friends to church, to believe that the investigators need to be prepared first for however long it takes. This is counterproductive In fact, a sacrament meeting service has great converting power itself. In one survey we found that as many as one-half of the friends brought to a sacrament meeting subsequently joined the Church. The key can be found in Doctrine and Covenants 84:20: "In the ordinances [of the gospel], the power of godliness is manifest." The most simple of services in the most humble of circumstances has converting power.

Forty years ago an elegant, sophisticated investigator went to church for the first time. Though the meeting was marked by some confusion and noise, she commented, "Don't apologize. It must have been like this at the time of Christ." She saw back through the centuries to a time when simple fishermen, probably smelling of fish, listened to the Savior in the open air by the shores of Galilee. It was the spirit of the meeting that had impressed her, and she was later baptized.

We need not hide that light which is the spirit of a sacrament meeting service. In time, every knee will bend and every tongue will confess that Jesus is the Christ, that this is his Church, and that they will want to come unto him.

Be that friend; be the salt that has its savor; be that light that will guide others to the light and eternal joy of the gospel.

Another aspect of this admonition of being the salt of the earth and a light to the world is that of simply, quietly living the principles of Christian service to others, apart from personal proselyting benefits. It means being an example of unselfish service like the good Samaritan.

The Latin American Lamanite people among whom we have lived are especially generous toward those in need. Whenever a friend, relative, or neighbor has a serious need, such as a place to sleep or food to eat, or in time of illness, they are given shelter, food, or are attended to, whatever the need is. It seems very natural for them to be "good Samaritans," taking people into their homes and sharing whatever of this world's possessions they have. It also seems that the less people have, the more willing they are to give to others. Some would say that this trait exists because they have so little and therefore it doesn't make much difference, but I have observed this for many years and have come to feel that it is more because those who are deep in poverty have suffered so much that the y are more compassionate toward anyone else who has lost their home, their job, their money, their hope.

During times of general crisis, this attribute readily becomes apparent. A case in point was the earthquake in Mexico City in 1985 that left thousands homeless and destitute. Quickly they were accommodated in the homes of people close by. Those who decided to stay in their own area, living in tents, did so because that seemed more familiar to them and not because no one offered help. The members of the Church took other members in if they had any space or food left. Story after story showed the generosity of these humble people, taking no thought of their own comfort, just caring for the welfare of those in need. Those who possibly could do so made major contributions in money, in time, and in goods. There was an outpouring of love at all levels. Sympathy for the sufferer is apparently deeper and easier to demonstrate among the Latin Lamanite. They empathize with others, cry with others, and share everything they have unhesitantly.

I was impressed during a visit to El Salvador with the manner in which the Saints had worked together in a period of intense civil war fighting. During a terrorist offensive the streets were full of armed men from both sides. Running gunfights in the neighborhoods were common. Heavier firepower Was brought in from time to time by both sides to push the enemy out of the area, so this meant wholesale destruction of homes from bazookas, helicopter-borne rockets fired at the ground targets, and artillery pieces. Complete rows of homes were destroyed. I have pictures of parked cars looking like colanders from the hundreds of bullet holes in them. Families ran for cover in safer neighborhoods. Neighbors took in friends and strangers alike, sharing the beans, rice, tortillas, and anything else they had with them. Afterward, they would return together to the war-ravaged communities to gather in whatever they could salvage from the destruction. These are the true Samaritans.

At one particular time, a bishop and a stake president were attempting to deliver sacks of beans and rice to a few stranded families in the battle zone. They had covered only a few blocks when a running gunfire between the two sides came around a corner toward them. These two brethren hit the dirt, lying face down side by side, while bullets zipped overhead. The bishop wondered if they should not go home as soon as the fighting moved away from them, but the stake president said, "No, hermano, those families desperately need this food. The Lord will bless us while we are trying to help someone else." They waited a few moments longer and then were able to complete their errand of mercy.

Elder Dallin H. Oaks has said, "Whenever we focus on ourselves, even in our service to others, we fall short of the example of our Savior, who gave himself as a total and unqualified sacrifice for all mankind. Those who seek to follow his example must lose themselves in their service to others." (Pure in Heart, p. 46.) We have witnessed a grand army of good Samaritans, following Christ's example in losing themselves in their service to others — truly being the salt of the earth and a light unto the world.
