Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

10

The Five Higher Laws of the Gospel

After Christ taught the multitude the blessed beatitudes, he then admonished them, "Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven." (Matthew 5:19.)

The Savior then compared "big" sins, such as committing murder and adultery, to "insignificant" ones—the ones we are most likely to allow ourselves, such as becoming angry, lusting, judging, failing to forgive, savoring a little revenge, and nurturing the praise of men. He made it clear that these "unimportant" sins can make us turn away from his light and move toward the darkness of Satan without even being aware.

In each of the following, Christ compares the old law—the law of Moses—with the new: "Ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time. . . . But I say unto you. . . . " What he is doing is pointing out a basic fallacy of conduct that all of Israel—the Jews and their Pharisees in particular—had fallen into. The Old Testament teaches that God desires internal purity, but the teachings of that day were mostly an external observance of the laws. The Savior brought a new and more complete way of coming unto him, and in order to enter his kingdom and be with him eternally, a much higher and more strict observance would be required.

Anger

Book of Mormon: "Ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time . . . that thou shalt not kill. . . . But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of [God's] judgment." (3 Nephi 12:21-22.)

King James Version: "Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill. . . . But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment." (Matthew 5:21-22.)

New Jerusalem Bible: "You have learned how it was said to our ancestors: You must not kill. . . . But I say this to you: anyone who is angry with his brother will answer for it before the court."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "You have heard that it was said to the people in the old days, 'Thou shalt not murder.' . . . But I say to you that anyone who is angry with his brother must stand his trial."

To the Jews, murder and any killing were prohibited; however, to Christ, a great deal of wickedness occurs long before that ultimate act, so he warns the people against any feelings or behavior that would lead up to it. Anger, hate, fury, hostility, extreme displeasure, exasperation, rage, violent feelings, and contention all fall into this category. Even feeling offended is a kind of anger that allows Satan to take over our thoughts and our actions, as much as if a poison had entered our system. Anger and its cousins are a poison and can lead to violence.

Many probably boasted that they had never killed, but with this new law they found themselves condemned for their hateful thoughts. God is a God of love, and uncontrolled negative passions are not part of his gospel; the person who has not learned to control them will not be welcomed in his presence—not in this life nor in the hereafter. The Holy Ghost is a peaceful influence and will also withdraw immediately from those who allow such emotions to take control of their minds, their hearts, their tongues, and their actions.

Any person still afflicted with such strong feelings has no claim on holiness or purity. Angry thoughts, expressions, and body language not only do damage to the individual, but when they exist they may also cause good people to shy away from that person's company. Even worse is that such rage or feelings of rage can also "murder" one's spirit. One's own personality and spirit is offended when he or she shows lack of maturity and control. Satan enjoys finding a person he can take over, and it is noticeable when he does. People who turn red in the face, shout, grimace, or gesture angrily are so ugly that they reflect the ugliness of Satan.

This scripture also includes the counsel that differences should be resolved quickly. Reconciliation is lauded—the sooner the better. In fact, the Lord says that we shouldn't even attempt to come unto him until we have resolved our differences with others. It is impossible for us to even worship him if anger is still in our hearts and minds. A visiting teaching message printed in the Ensign contains some everyday examples of times when anger is generated and some ideas on how to avoid it:

"One Sunday morning Betty got up late and had only forty-five minutes to get herself and her children ready for church. They would have been on time if it hadn't been for Susan's lost shoe and the jam on David's shirt. Betty felt angry with David and Susan, and she had difficulty feeling a spirit of reverence during the meetings.

"Nervous at the prospect of her first oral exam at the university, Dorothy waited in the hall for her professor for half an hour—which made her even more nervous. The first question he asked confused her, and her mind went blank. She stumbled through the rest of the exam, and he told her that she should reevaluate her ability to comprehend complex ideas. Dorothy felt frustrated and angry.

"At the supermarket, Helen watched the woman in front of her in line redeem forty-two dollars' worth of coupons. Everyone behind Helen moved to another line. When Helen joined them, she ended up behind five people, feeling angry and frustrated.

" 'Life is not fair,' said one woman after a hard day. 'The whole world provokes me!'

"Most of us feel frustrated or impatient at times. But when we express those feelings by becoming angry with someone, we offend the Spirit and invite bitterness into our hearts. As we strive to come unto Christ and to perfect ourselves, we should ask ourselves not 'What is fair?' but, humbly, 'What would Jesus have me do?' . . . Although most of us don't have to deal with persecution, we are often 'provoked' by small things. Rudeness, nagging, disobedience, waiting, disagreement, disappointments, and unfulfilled expectations can irritate us, particularly when we are tired, sick, or in a hurry. At such times, our first impulse may be to react with irritation, anger, or contention. But we can choose to react instead with charity and not be 'easily provoked.' . . .

"By learning to avoid contention and to control our anger, we stop evil from being passed along and become more like the Savior, whose sacrifice of self made eternal life possible for all who come unto him and emulate his example." ("Charity Is Not Easily Provoked," Ensign, July 1988, p. 47.)

Lust

Book of Mormon: "It is written by them of old time, that thou shalt not commit adultery; but I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman, to lust after her, hath committed adultery already in his heart." (3 Nephi 12:27-30.)

King James Version: "Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery: but I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart." (Matthew 5:27-30.)

Jerusalem Bible: "You have learned how it was said: You must not commit adultery. But I say this to you: If a man looks at a woman lustfully, he has already committed adultery with her in his heart."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "You have heard that it was said to the people in the old days, 'Thou shalt not commit adultery.' But I say to you that every man who looks at a woman lustfully has already committed adultery with her—in his heart."

Holy matrimony was declared and instituted by our Heavenly Father. In Genesis we read: "It is not good that the man should be alone. . . . Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh." (Genesis 2:18, 24.) In the first chapter of Genesis God instructs males and females, whom he has created in his own image, to "be fruitful, and multiply." (Genesis 1:28.)

Through Joseph Smith, the Lord declared with resounding power that "marriage is ordained of God unto man." (D&C 49:15.) We also read in the Doctrine and Covenants that "in the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees; and in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; and if he does not, he cannot obtain it." (D&C 131:1-3.) In other words, not just any civil marriage is sufficient, but only the temple marriage and sealing will bring forth this promise.

Other scriptures given in this dispensation add information and guidance on the Old Testament theme of sexual purity. I am grateful to my dear friends, authors Blaine and Brenton Yorgason, for pointing out in their book The Problem with Immorality that there is a scripture that indicates three punishments for committing adultery in one's heart and another that promises three rewards for virtuous thoughts. The three punishments for those who commit adultery in their heart are given in Doctrine and Covenants 63:16: (1) "they shall not have the Spirit"; (2) they "shall deny the faith"; and (3) they "shall fear" God's judgment.

The three rewards are listed in Doctrine and Covenants 121:45-46: (1) "then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God"; (2) "the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven"; and 3) "the Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth."

The Lord has also warned against looking at anyone lustfully. In today's world that means literally what it says; in addition, it means not looking at pornographic magazines, movies, or television programs, or reading any books or material that is sexually explicit. There are books and articles of high tone and basic morality on the subject of sexual intimacy and no one need refer to base, ugly material for sex education.

No matter how much Satan tries to sell the idea that promiscuous sex is acceptable, the concept of a permanent marriage with a family life based upon loving and personal commitment is still the ideal. It is still the commandment of the Lord.

The Lord, in order to assure the continuance of the human race, has given us basic sexual instincts, but he has also given us limits on how to use them. His counsel on using these God-given sexual and procreative powers is to use them only within the bounds of marriage, with love and continual respect for each other's needs. A healthy dose of self-control is essential for every successful marriage. Paul seems to have been aware of the needs of both the man and the woman when he said, "To avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband." (1 Corinthians 7:2.)

President Spencer W. Kimball wrote:

"I may not be able to eliminate pornographic trash, but my family and I need not buy or view it. . . . I may not be able to greatly reduce the divorces of the land or save all broken homes and frustrated children, but I can keep my own home a congenial one, my marriage happy, my home a heaven, and my children well adjusted. I may not be able to stop the growing claims to freedom from laws based on morals, or change all opinions regarding looseness in sex and growing perversions, but I can guarantee devotion to all high ideals and standards in my own home, and I can work toward giving my own family a happy, interdependent spiritual life." (Faith Precedes the Miracle, p. 247.)

In seeking for the way to "come unto Christ," we must search our own souls to discover if we are rising to higher levels of moral worthiness.

Oath-taking and Profanity

Book of Mormon: "It is written, thou shalt not forswear thyself, but . . . I say unto you, swear not at all; . . . but let your communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay." (3 Nephi 12:33-37.)

King James Version: "It hath been said by them of old time, thou shalt not forswear thyself, . . . but I say unto you, Swear not at all; . . . let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay." (Matthew 5:33-37.)

New Jerusalem Bible: "It was said to our ancestors: You must not break your oath, but must fulfill your oaths to the Lord. But I say this to you: do not swear at all. . . . All you need say is 'Yes' if you mean yes, 'No' if you mean no."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "People in the old days were told—'Thou shalt not forswear thyself,' . . . but I say to you, don't use an oath at all. . . . Let your 'yes' be a plain 'yes' and your 'no' be a plain 'no.' "

In the Old Testament, we learn that oath-taking was a normal and authorized procedure, somewhat like a legal contract today. The taking of oaths was apparently necessary because people did not live up to their word of honor. In fact, it appears that deceit, lying, falsehoods, and dishonesty were prevalent. Originally symbolic in nature, the taking of oaths became essential because of the lack of integrity in business matters, social relationships, and political matters. An individual's word could not be trusted, and in order to protect themselves, people came to assume that those with whom they did business were not completely honest and honorable in their dealings.

The dictionary defines the word forswear as to forsake, disavow, perjure, and swear falsely. This commandment is another way of saying, "Do not lie." It is possible that Christ was not only saying "Do not lie" but also, in effect, "Let your conduct be so pure, so above reproach, so honest and dependable that no one will think that they have to insist that you enter into a legal contract."

There was a time not too long ago when a person's word was his bond. My grandfather gave a verbal guarantee on a loan from a bank to a farmers' co-op whose project went sour. Since the bank had no legal recourse against the members, no one paid, so Grandfather Wells paid the whole debt at some sacrifice. Years later, another farmers' co-op from the same valley approached the same bank, but the employees in the bank were new, and no one remembered the old situation except one officer of the bank. He saw the name of Edwin Wells among the members of the co-op who were willing to guarantee the loan privately. He asked if Edwin was the son of Samuel Henry Wells, and was told that indeed he was. The banker responded, "We will make the loan. In fact, we would make the loan if that man were the only one giving his guarantee." All this came about because of the legacy of true honor and integrity that Grandfather Wells left.

Elder James E. Talmage told us that the Savior was saying we have no right to take wanton oaths, reserving that for a solemn covenant or contract between God and man. He reminded us that the Savior said it is a sin to swear by heaven, which is the abode of God, or by earth, which is God's creation and his footstool. Then Elder Talmage wrote that "moderation in speech, decision and simplicity were enjoined [by the Savior], to the exclusion of expletives, profanity and oaths." (Jesus the Christ, 1983, p. 220.)

The advice that our language be limited to "Yea, yea" or "Nay, nay" is wise. Today, in many public places and in movies and TV programs, one can hear vulgar and filthy words that demonstrate a deficiency of vocabulary, a disintegration of culture, and a loss of simple decency. We all need to take the Lord's words at face value: "Swear not at all." What a much cleaner world we would have if the air were not polluted with vulgar expletives!

In addition to the sin of vulgarity, there is the sin of profanity, which is the misuse of sacred names and terms, words, and expressions. The taking of the name of Deity, either the Father or the Son, in vain is blasphemy and removes the perpetrator far from the influence of divinity, which does not tolerate that offense. Included in this vile practice is the use of a shortened version of our Savior's name, Jesus, which has been shortened to the irreverent slang expression "Jeez and "gee." Just as vile is the shortened version of "Golly"—reduced to "Gol"—which is close to the title given to our Father in heaven and to his Son, Jesus Christ. How offensive this must be to those holy beings we worship! To come unto the Savior involves removing these habits from our tongues, mouths, thoughts, and minds.

President Gordon B. Hinckley gave a timely sermon on the subject of profanity in a general conference address in October 1987. He stated, "The habit . . . which some young people fall into, of using vulgarity and profanity . . . is not only offensive . . . but it is a gross sin in the sight of God and should not exist among the children of the Latter-day Saints." (Ensign, November 1987, p. 46.) President Hinckley's entire sermon deserves to be read and reread.

The Church News some time ago published the following suggestions from readers on "How to Rid Children's Speech of Profanity":

"When I returned from my mission, I brought my 15-year-old granddaughter home to live with me for a year or two. I soon realized that her speech was certainly not acceptable in polite society. However, I didn't know how to go about helping her stop. I prayed for a quick miracle. After much anguish and concern, the following solution came to my mind: I gave her a $50 bill and explained to her that it was a gift with a 'string' attached. The bill was hers to keep or spend, but for every unacceptable word she uttered, she had to forfeit $1. It really worked a miracle. Never once again did I hear a single vulgar word from her. I did get a chuckle, however, when she called me from school and all she said was, 'Grandma, I owe you $2.' The $50 was a small price to pay for an instant miracle." (Winifred Smith.)

"Nothing is more effective in halting the habit of using foul language than eliminating the use of any word that even resembles an expletive. This goes for such mild words as heck, darn, gee whiz, etc., and many others meant to be humorous. Replace these words with others describing how you feel. It would benefit all if everyone would learn to say precisely what they mean and no more. Properly explaining what is intended to be communicated becomes a talent much admired and should be constantly cultivated." (M.B. Hipwell.)

The suggestions concluded with a checklist:

"1. Teach your children to think before they speak.

"2. Set the example for children by using proper language.

"3. Explain what the words mean and why they're demeaning.

"4. Pray for ways to help youth clean up their speech." (Church News, December 26, 1987, p. 15.)

As we become examples of true believers, especially in word and deed, we can be instruments for the Lord in helping to lift others to a higher level. This is illustrated in the following experience:

A group of young people, with their advisor, were traveling on a chartered bus from the Midwest to attend the Hill Cumorah Pageant in New York. About midway along the journey the bus broke down, and the driver had to get out and try to fix it. As he lay under the big vehicle in the blistering heat, he was heard to utter expletives, including using the name of the Lord in vain. Soon the teenagers got off the bus, formed a circle around the man, and began singing "I Am a Child of God." The driver listened, stopped what he was doing, stood up, and, with tears in his eyes, apologized for his uncouth language. He was so impressed with these young people that when they arrived at their destination, he asked to learn more about "that religion that teaches people how to live better lives." This teachable man and his family were baptized.

Whether it be the issue of honor as opposed to lying, or clean language as opposed to vulgarity and profanity, it is clear that the way to draw closer to the Savior is to understand the power of the tongue and the things we say. Let us use this God-given power to praise and worship him, not to offend him and cause his Spirit to withdraw from us. This truly is a higher law—in every sense.

An Eye for An Eye

Book of Mormon: "It is written, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; but I say unto you, that ye shall not resist evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also; and if any man will sue thee at the law and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also; and whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain." (3 Nephi 12:38-42.)

King James Version: "It hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: but I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: But whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloke also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain." (Matthew 5:38-42.)

New Jerusalem Bible: "It was said: Eye for eye and tooth for tooth. But I say this to you: offer the wicked man no resistance. On the contrary, if anyone hits you on the right cheek, offer him the other as well; if a man takes you to law and would have your tunic, let him have your cloak as well. And if anyone orders you to go one mile, go two miles with him."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "It used to be said 'An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth', but I tell you, don't resist evil. If a man hits your right cheek, turn the other one to him as well. If a man wants to sue you for your coat, let him have it and your cloak as well. If anybody forces you to go a mile with him, do more—go two miles with him."

The law or principle of retribution is of ancient origin and was well-known to the Jews at the time of Jesus. The fact that the Master gave a new and higher law was not easily understood after so many generations of what the Jews thought was strict justice and fair compensation. Jesus himself was the supreme example of this principle when he stood submissively before the Jewish and Roman courts. Underlining his demeanor was the magnificence of pure Christian love. When you truly love another person, or the group that individual may represent, or the society of which he is a part, then you do not react to any one person's abuse but rather submit in peaceful dignity, as did the Savior to his persecutors. The way of the Lord is one of patience, understanding, and forgiveness.

Paul understood this principle, as did Mormon. Both received their inspiration from the Savior's example and from their Heavenly Father through the Holy Ghost. Each gave a major sermon on the importance of love; Paul, in 1 Corinthians 13, and Mormon, in the Book of Mormon, Moroni 7, say almost the same thing. Both sermons are so similar that they might have come from the same script. In fact, each of these prophets was guided by the same Holy Spirit from on high.

Paul and Mormon both define the way we should act if we are full of the pure love of Christ. Call it mercy, call it charity, call it the love of Christ: it still motivates us to react in the same way in the face of opposition, misunderstanding, abuse, and frustration. Paul says to bear all things and to endure all things. That is the pathway to Christ.

The Savior's statement "And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain" sometimes requires of the disciple of Christ great sacrifice, but by following his command, we are given opportunities to serve others.

The following story, quoted by Elder Vaughn J. Featherstone, points to this important counsel of the Master:

"In ancient . . . times, soldiers could force teenage boys in Roman provinces to carry their heavy backpacks for one mile, but no more. In a typical scene, we would see a soldier walk into a community. . . . The soldier [sees] the boy and motions for him to come and pick up the heavy backpack. Reluctantly, the boy shoulders the heavy load. The soldier motions toward the road leading out of town, and together they trudge toward the first mile marker.

"When the marker comes into sight, the soldier motions for the boy to put the pack down. The boy instead agrees to carry the pack another mile. The soldier reminds him that only one mile is required. However, the boy agrees to go 'the second mile.' As they continue down the road, the soldier begins to talk with the boy. He asks him if he has seen the mighty ocean. The boy replies 'no,' so the soldier gives descriptive accounts of his adventures on the high seas. The soldier then relates stories about military campaigns in distant countries and describes snow covered mountains, which the lad has never seen.

"The vivid accounts stir the imagination of the young lad as he hears the tales of the seas and of distant lands. The second mile goes quickly, and the boy discovers the secret of 'going the second mile.' You go the first mile and you discharge a duty; you go the second mile and you make a friend. The great men and women in history have been those willing to go the second mile. (Beverly Chiodo, 'Vital Speeches of the Day,' November 1987, p. 42.)"

We all have assignments and things we must do. The temptation is to just get them over with. Yet real joy and satisfaction—and greatness—come from going beyond the mere requirements. Elder Featherstone goes on to say: "History shows that there have been a number of people who have learned this great secret, that when service is freely given it becomes sweet. In going the second mile, these people honor our Heavenly Father by honoring themselves and honoring others. Those who go the second mile are often blessed with another rare and unique gift—they discover the divine in others. When we consider that every soul who walks the earth may become like our spiritual Father in heaven, it should humble us in the presence of any human soul." ("The Message: Secret of the Second Mile," New Era, May 1990, pp. 4-6.)

Hate Thine Enemy

Book of Mormon: "It is written also, that thou shalt love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy; but behold I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them who despitefully use you and persecute you." (3 Nephi 12:43-46.)

King James Version: "It hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you." (Matthew 5:43-46.)

New Jerusalem Bible: "It was said: You must love your neighbor and hate your enemy. But I say this to you: love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "It used to be said 'Thou shalt love thy neighbour and hate thine enemy', but I tell you, 'Love your enemies, and pray for those who persecute you.' "

As we consider the issue of the higher laws, we might ask ourselves, Just how good do I have to be to please the Lord? If we hunger and thirst after righteousness we will ask the question not to find out if we are good enough, but in order to keep seeking constantly to lift ourselves to a higher level. The scriptures in this section of the Sermon on the Mount give us a very strict standard to follow, but we must follow it if we are going to progress in coming to Christ.

The following is a story of a sister who turned hate to forgiveness and learned of the love of Christ:

"Christl Fechter, a Czechoslovakian refugee, faced this challenge [of overcoming hate] and, with the Lord's help, overcame it. As a young woman, she was forced by political upheaval to leave her homeland for Germany. There she learned about the Church and was baptized in 1958. A year later, she moved to the United States, settling in Bountiful, Utah. While living in Utah, she was terribly hurt emotionally by someone and, for the first time in her life, felt hatred.

" 'I had been through all the terrors of the invasion of my country, but I had never before experienced the feeling of hate,' she says. 'It changed my personality. Even my nonmember friends realized that I was not the same person any more.' . . .

"One day she read [the scripture about 'loving your enemies.'] . . . Christl felt that this passage was meant just for her. 'I could not imagine myself praying for this person, but I wanted to do what the Lord said, and I knew I had to get rid of the hatred,' she says. So she knelt that night and prayed, with reservations, that the Lord would bless the person who had hurt her.

"She felt a little better. The next night she prayed again, this time wholeheartedly, and she immediately felt the hatred lift from her, never to return. She discovered that the Lord could pour out his Spirit upon her and teach her to love as he does." ("Charity Seeketh Not Her Own," Ensign, June 1988, p. 53.)

Our daughter Elayne served in the Ecuador Guayaquil Mission. In one of her letters, she shared the following beautiful experience concerning loving those who have been responsible for hurt and emotional pain: "What a change has come over (Blanca) since we've been teaching her. In our second discussion, when we talked of repentance, I felt impressed to say that we need to forgive others in order to be forgiven. She said she could not forgive, that she had been hurt badly by many people, and that it would be impossible to forgive them. One could tell just in meeting her for the first time that she had been through a lot of pain and emotional trauma; her eyes were full of hurt, like a wounded puppy, and she would barely kiss us hello. . . . I read her some scriptures on forgiveness, and explained to her how prayer would give her strength to forgive. What a change since then! Light shines in her eyes, and she hugs us every time we come to visit, she's doing a lot of reading in the Book of Mormon, and most important, she told us that she has completely forgiven all the people who had hurt her, and feels completely content and full of peace."

In his Sermon on the Mount, this significant new doctrine was one of Jesus' most electrifying teachings. Never before had the people of Israel been required to love their enemies! In the scripture "an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth," he changed the old rule of retribution, but now he

added something: he told his listeners, "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you." The Master knew that this was one of the hardest of the new higher commandments; therefore, he added a promise to those who live it: "that ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven." Then he asked a question, perhaps to cause reflection: "For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?" (Matthew 5:46.)

Charlotte Bronte wrote: "Life appears to me to be too short to be spent in nursing animosity or in registering wrongs. We are, and must be, one and all, burdened with faults in this world; but the time will come when, I trust, we shall put them off in putting off our corruptible bodies; when debasement and sin will fall from us and only the spark will remain. . . . With this creed, revenge never worries my heart, degradation never too deeply disgusts me, injustice never crushes me too low." (Quoted in Lillian Eichler Watson, ed., Light from Many Lamps, pp. 201-2.)

Someone once said that people are spiritual beings. Something within them urges them to rise above themselves—to control themselves and their environment—to master the body, the mind, and the tongue, and to live in a more perfect and peaceful world. We are of divine origin—children of a supreme God. We must seek out those higher, celestial levels.
