Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

11

The Highest Law of All: Be Ye Perfect

Book of Mormon: "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect." (3 Nephi 12:48.)

King James Version: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matthew 5:48.)

New Jerusalem Bible: "You must therefore be perfect just as your heavenly Father is perfect."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "You will be perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect."

The Savior could have placed this commandment at the very beginning of the Sermon on the Mount, or he could have placed it at the very end of his sermon as a summary of what he has given to all mankind. Instead, he chose to place it immediately after the five higher laws of Christian conduct. He leads into it with a reminder that if we who try to follow him are only like other people, we do not have much claim on special blessings. He says, "If ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? . . . And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not even the publicans [do the same]?" (Matthew 5:46-47.) The publicans were especially despised by the Jews because they collected duties and taxes and were noticeably corrupt in taking bribes. Yet they loved their own and greeted their own. It is a strong lesson the Master is teaching here.

"Of him unto whom much is given much is required." (D&C 82:3.) Christ expects a great deal from those who follow him. It is not a path for the fainthearted or the weak, for there are many trials and tests to overcome along the way. The reward is great, but the Savior is giving a new and higher law than ever before imagined. Now the crowning jewel on that string of thoughts is the injunction to be perfect. In the New Testament version he says we should be perfect "even as your Father which is in heaven." In the Book of Mormon account, he says we should be perfect "even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect." We do not know if he includes himself as being perfect in the Book of Mormon record because he is a resurrected God when he speaks to those in the Americas or if the original statement from New Testament times has been lost. Unequivocally, we accept Christ as perfect both during his mortal life and after his resurrection.

In the closing pages of the Book of Mormon is Moroni's poignant and stirring farewell to the Lamanites, urging them, and all of us, to "come unto Christ, and be perfected in him." We are admonished, "Deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ; and if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise deny the power of God." (Moroni 10:32.) Jesus showed clearly that perfection is a gift to those who have partaken of the grace of God through their righteousness and obedience. By itself, our righteousness could never make us perfect as our Father in heaven is perfect. But through the atonement of Christ and the influence of the Holy Ghost, we can become sanctified and made perfect.

However, all this is conditional: we must first have faith in him, repent, be baptized by immersion for the remission of sins, and receive the Holy Ghost, that we may be guided constantly. Then, if we remain faithful until the end, his grace will pay the price for our imperfections. We will fall short of the perfection we seek in this life because we are mortal and are subject, because of the flesh, to myriad tests and struggles with sin and also to the influence of Satan. But we are promised that the Lord can give us his divine nature if we follow him. Peter tells us, "According as his divine power hath given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and virtue: whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises: that by these [we] might be partakers of the divine nature." (2 Peter 1:3-4.)

The original Greek word for perfect is teleios, which means whole or finished. When we have sincere hunger and thirst for righteousness and a burning desire to become more like the pure example of our Savior, then we make daily progress toward perfection until we become a "finished product." Although it is a sort of do-it-yourself project, the Lord will help us as we help ourselves. A good brother in a testimony meeting in Mexico recently stated, "The Lord is really helping me perfect myself. He magnifies my efforts. When I try to do something good he multiplies my efforts in a great way, but when I do nothing, the Lord with mathematical precision does exactly nothing also." As we try to become more perfect, our Father in heaven will help make us complete or whole.

Elder James E. Talmage gives a clear explanation of this concept of perfection. He says: "Our Lord's admonition to men to become perfect, even as the Father is perfect (Matt. 5:48) cannot rationally be construed otherwise than as implying the possibility of such achievement. Plainly, however, man cannot become perfect in mortality in the sense in which God is perfect as a supremely glorified Being. It is possible, though, for man to be perfect in his sphere in a sense analogous to that in which superior intelligences are perfect in their several spheres; yet the relative perfection of the lower is infinitely inferior to that of the higher. A college student in his freshman or sophomore year may be perfect as freshman or sophomore; his record may possibly be a hundred percent on the scale of efficiency and achievement; yet the honors of the upper classman are beyond him, and the attainment of graduation is to him remote, but of assured possibility, if he [does] but continue faithful and devoted to the end." (Jesus the Christ, 1983, p. 232.)

The commandment that we be perfect may seem difficult, but through the purifying influence of the Holy Ghost, it is a goal that is not only attainable, but necessary to our sal- vation. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has given comfort and en- couragement to those who try to become perfect in an imperfect world: "We have to become perfect to be saved in the celestial kingdom. But nobody becomes perfect in this life. Only the Lord Jesus attained that state, and he had an advantage that none of us has. He was the Son of God. . . . He lived a perfect life, and he set an ideal example. . . . As it is with being born again, and as it is with sanctifying our souls, so becoming perfect in Christ is a process.

"We begin to keep the commandments today, and we keep more of them tomorrow, and we go from grace to grace, up the steps of the ladder, and we thus improve and perfect our souls. We can become perfect in some minor things. We can be perfect in the payment of tithing. If we pay one-tenth of our interest annually into the tithing funds of the Church, if we do it year in and year out, and desire to do it, and have no intent to withhold, and if we would do it regardless of what arose in our lives, then in that thing we are perfect. . . .

"As members of the Church, if we chart a course leading to eternal life; if we begin the processes of spiritual rebirth, and are going in the right direction; if we chart a course of sanctifying our souls, and degree by degree are going in that direction; and if we chart a course of becoming perfect, and, step by step and phase by phase, are perfecting our souls by overcoming the world, then it is absolutely guaranteed—there is no question whatever about it—we shall gain eternal life. Even though we have spiritual rebirth ahead of us, perfection ahead of us, the full degree of sanctification ahead of us, if we chart a course and follow it to the best of our ability in this life, then when we go out of this life we'll continue in exactly that same course. . . .

"The Prophet [Joseph Smith] told us that there are many things that people have to do, even after the grave, to work out their salvation. We're not going to be perfect the minute we die. But if we've charted a course, if our desires are right, if our appetites are curtailed and bridled, and if we believe in the Lord and are doing to the very best of our abilities what we ought to do, we'll go on to everlasting salvation, which is the fulness of eternal reward in our Father's kingdom." (BYU Speeches of the Year, 1976, pp. 399-401.)

As Elder McConkie pointed out, we can be absolutely perfect in some things. We can and must be perfect in maintaining our virtue. It is possible to be chaste before marriage. It may be more difficult to follow the higher law of controlling our thoughts, but we can stay far away enough from danger and temptation that loss of chastity never happens. We can be perfect in abstinence from prohibited substances. We can be perfect in our home teaching and other church callings. We can be perfect in many other areas of our life, thus bringing comfort and peace into our lives while we are on this earth.

As we become renewed by the Spirit through striving for perfection and coming unto Christ, we will eventually see the promises fulfilled of enjoying immortal glory and exaltation with our Father in heaven and our Savior.
