Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

12

Three Rules Against Hypocrisy

The next three subjects in the Sermon on the Mount deal with the importance of performing sacred acts with sincerity of purpose rather than as hypocrites, with selfish, hidden motives, to be seen of men. Those who profess to be righteous but who do things to be seen of men will have their earthly reward from men. They will not be seen of God nor rewarded of God. The Savior would have his disciples follow his commandments motivated by sincere love and not for the server's riches, own recognition, or the honors and praises of others. Any time the giver acts with a hidden, selfish motive, performed under the guise of goodness, he or she does not have a pure heart.

The Savior was more concerned with internal feelings and intents of the heart than with external manifestations. He declared, "Woe unto you, . . . for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity." (Matthew 23:27-28.) In the Sermon on the Mount, the Lord gives only three illustrations that refer to common daily experiences, but we find many examples throughout the scriptures in which he denounced hypocrisy.

President David O. McKay stated: "Mere compliance with the word of the Lord, without a corresponding inward desire, will avail but little. Indeed, such outward actions and pretending phrases may disclose hypocrisy, a sin that Jesus most vehemently condemned." (Conference Report, October 1951, p. 6.)

Most of us, at some time or other, are guilty to some extent of desiring to be seen or recognized, and we need to control this self-serving attitude. Our good works and acts must be for the glorifying of our Father in heaven and his Son, Jesus Christ, or we will lose our own reward and be found guilty of hypocrisy, a sin exemplified by the Pharisees and scribes of old. Hypocrisy is related to pride and ego; all are stumbling blocks along our path to coming unto Christ.

Do Not Your Alms to Be Seen of Men

Book of Mormon: "I would that ye should do alms unto the poor; but take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen of them; otherwise ye have no reward of your Father who is in heaven. Therefore, when ye shall do your alms do not sound a trumpet before you, as will hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. But when thou doest alms let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth; that thine alms may be in secret; and thy Father who seeth in secret, himself shall reward thee openly." (3 Nephi 13:1-4.)

King James Version: "Do not your alms before men, to be seen of them: otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. Therefore when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. . . . They have their reward. But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth: that thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly." (Matthew 6:1-4.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Be careful not to parade your good deeds before men to attract their notice; by doing this you will lose all reward from your Father in heaven. So when you give alms, do not have it trumpeted before you; this is what the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets to win men's admiration. I tell you solemnly, they have had their reward."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Beware of doing your good deeds conspicuously to catch men's eyes or you will miss the reward of your Heavenly Father. So, when you do good to other people, don't hire a trumpeter to go in front of you—like those play-actors in the synagogues and streets who make sure that men admire them. Believe me, they have had all the reward they are going to get!"

This statement deals not only with giving donations to the Church, to any good cause, or directly to a needy person, but also with serving, as shown in both the Jerusalem and Phillips translations. The Book of Mormon account begins with a meaningful statement that is missing in the other three translations. Undoubtedly the Savior included this concept originally but it has been lost. The scripture in 3 Nephi says that the Lord wants us to give to the poor. The other three versions omit this phrase, giving an impression that the Lord may not be as interested in the doing as in the "how" of being generous. King Benjamin, in the Book of Mormon, declared in his temple sermon that in order to retain a remission of our sins (he uses the word retain, since we obtained remission when we were baptized), we must impart of our substance to the poor. (See Mosiah 4:26.)

I feel that the Phillips translation is the most clear of all the translations. We have heard that we should not "blow our own horn," but here the translator says that the Savior warned, "Don't hire a trumpeter to go in front of you like those play-actors in the synagogues." We know that ostentation and hypocritical display are misplaced motives for donating. In Christ's church, seldom do we find plaques honoring those who donated the organ or the pews or a piece of artwork, as is common in other churches. Frequently an organization will honor a major donor by naming a room or wing of a building, or sometimes an entire edifice, after him or her. If that is a condition of the gift, then the motive of giving is improperly placed; but if the gift is made unconditionally and the authorities afterwards decide to honor the donor by naming something after him or her, that act would be acceptable under Christ's law of giving.

We have heard of some businessmen who make donations in hopes of getting publicity that will lead to an increase in sales and allow them to recoup more than the donation in increased profits. We have heard of some who hope their generosity will result in free press coverage or an advantage with influential parties. The Savior said clearly that they have their reward from exactly that which they sought, but that they cannot expect any reward from our Heavenly Father. Unless motivated by pure, unselfish reasons, even the most generous gifts profit nothing. The Savior taught that almsgiving should be made in secret, and then the reward shall be given according to the will of the Lord, in secret or openly, in this life or in the eternities.

In his April 1990 general conference address, Elder Marvin J. Ashton spoke of the sin of boasting of mighty works. He quoted from the Sermon on the Mount, "let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth," and then said, "Whatever success we might have had as we have tried to help should usually not be discussed, let alone boasted about. Humble, quiet, compassionate service is so soul-rewarding; who would need to point out the subject or location of kindly deeds? 'For although a man may have many revelations, and have power to do many mighty works, yet if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon him.' (D&C 3:4.)" (Ensign, May 1990, p. 66.)

Elder J. Richard Clarke, then second counselor in the Presiding Bishopric, said in his October 1981 general conference address, "We demonstrate the depth of our love for the Savior when we care enough to seek out the suffering among us and attend to their needs. . . . We would all like to have the Savior's capacity to assuage the hungers of the world; but let us not forget that there are many simple ways by which we can walk in His steps. Let us remember that in giving of ourselves, it is less a question of giving a lot than of giving at the right moment." (Conference Report, October 1981, pp. 112-13.)

Two of our daughters had the privilege of visiting Israel and walking where Jesus walked. They learned in greater depth what it means to follow the Master. How do we follow the Master? "When we serve others—lift the weak, feed the hungry, comfort the bereaved, tend the sick, visit the prisoner—we are, in essence, following the Savior. In our own way, we are walking as he walked." ("In His Footsteps," Church News, February 10, 1990, p. 16.)

This message is beautifully expressed in a hymn we sing often in church:

Have I done any good in the world today? Have I helped anyone in need? Have I cheered up the sad and made someone feel glad? If not, I have failed indeed. Has anyone's burden been lighter today Because I was willing to share? Have the sick and the weary been helped on their way? When they needed my help was I there? Then wake up and do something more Than dream of your mansion above. Doing good is a pleasure, a joy beyond measure, A blessing of duty and love. ___—Hymns, no. 223

Pray Not as the Hypocrites

Book of Mormon: "When thou prayest thou shalt not do as the hypocrites, for they love to pray, standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen, for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not ye therefore like unto them, for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of before ye ask him. After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever. Amen." (3 Nephi 13:5-13.) King James Version: This translation of Matthew 6:5-13 is close enough to the version in the Book of Mormon that it does not need to be repeated.

Jerusalem Bible: "When you pray, do not imitate the hypocrites: they love to say their prayers standing up in the synagogues and at the street corners for people to see them. I tell you solemnly, they have had their reward. But when you pray, go to your private room and, when you have shut your door, pray to your Father who is in that secret place, and your Father who sees all that is done in secret, will reward you. In your prayers do not babble as the pagans do, for they think that by using many words they will make themselves heard. Do not be like them; your Father knows what you need before you ask him. So you should pray like this: Our father in heaven, may your name be held holy, your kingdom come, your will be done, on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread. And forgive us our debts, as we have forgiven those who are in debt to us. And do not put us to the test, but save us from the evil one."

Phillips Modern English Bible: This version of Matthew 6:5-13 is enough like the Jerusalem Bible version that it need not be repeated.

Frequent, daily prayer is a basic requirement of the faithful disciple of Christ. If we make a habit of sincere prayer, our lives will be noticeably and profoundly altered. Those prayers that come from the heart, recognizing our dependence upon our Heavenly Father, can change our actions and demeanor and bring us closer to Christ. The Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible provides one significant new insight on the Lord's Prayer. Both the Book of Mormon and the King James Version read, "Lead us not into temptation." The Joseph Smith Translation is more explicit. It does not seem right that the Lord would "lead" us into temptation—Satan has that distinction. The Joseph Smith Translation reads: "Suffer us not to be led into temptation." In the Phillips Modern Bible, the line reads "Keep us clear of temptation."

The Lord's Prayer is very short, perhaps only twenty seconds in length. Following the example given by Jesus, we should keep our prayers simple, direct, and sincere. When we pray in public, we should pray in the plural voice ("we," not "I"), and we have been counseled to use the respectful forms of "thee" and "thou" instead of the familiar form of "you." It is not appropriate to preach a sermon in a prayer. Also, public prayers to open and close meetings should be relatively short. For example, those who offer prayers in general conference sessions are instructed to limit their invocation or benediction to no more than two minutes; and sometimes when the person who is to give the prayer reaches the pulpit, a note indicates that time is short and a shorter prayer would be appreciated. We need to be flexible and sensitive to the desires of those who preside. Prayers in the Church of Jesus Christ are offered through the Spirit, with no memorized nor written script, although we can have in mind pertinent subjects that concern everyone and that we wish to remember in the prayer, such as recent events to be grateful for, special needs of the congregation (such as for rain during a time of drought), and the names of persons who are ill.

In our prayers, both private and public, the important thing to remember is that repetition and words without "real intent of heart," as Mormon preached, will bring no blessings, and God will not receive them. We should avoid exaggerated styles of speaking. Our words should be sweet and without affectation, artistry, distortions, or anything else that might call attention to us and detract from what we are saying. It is not necessary to use an impressive vocabulary, since the Lord does not need to be impressed, and it is wrong to try to impress anyone else. As the Savior said, if those who are praying want to impress anyone here on earth, they will have had their reward, but the reward of the Lord will not come to them.

When we speak of coming unto Christ, we do not mean that we should pray to Christ directly. He has commanded us to pray to the Father in his name. Elder Bruce R. McConkie clearly explained that some misguided members may "begin to pray directly to Christ because of some special friendship they feel has been developed [with him]. . . . This is . . . non- sense. Our prayers are addressed to the Father, and to him only. . . . [They are] answered in whatever way seems proper by him who [knows] the needs of his children." (BYU Speeches of the Year, 1981-82, p. 102.)

President Ezra Taft Benson has given us five ways to improve our communication with our Heavenly Father:

"1.We should pray frequently. We should be alone with our Heavenly Father at least two or three times each day. . . . In addition, we are told to pray always. This means that our hearts should be full, drawn out in prayer unto our Heavenly Father continually.

"2.We should find an appropriate place where we can meditate and pray. We are admonished that this should be 'in [our] closets, and [our] secret places, and in [our] wilderness.' (Alma 34:26.) That is, it should be free from distraction, in secret. . . .

"3.We should prepare ourselves for prayer. If we do not feel like praying, then we should pray until we do feel like praying. We should be humble. We should pray for forgiveness and mercy. We must forgive anyone against whom we have bad feelings. . . .

"4.Our prayers should be meaningful and pertinent. We should avoid using the same phrases in each prayer. Any of us would become offended if a friend said the same words to us each day, treated the conversation as a chore, and could hardly wait to finish in order to turn on the television and forget us. . . . We should pray about our work, against the power of our enemies and devil, for our welfare and the welfare of those around us. We should counsel with the Lord regarding all our decisions and activities. . . . We should be grateful enough to give thanks for all we have. . . .

"5.After making a request through prayer, we have a responsibility to assist in its being granted. We should listen. Perhaps while we are on our knees, the Lord wants to counsel us." ("Pray Always," Ensign, February 1990, pp. 2-4.)

Alexis Carrel, a physician, wrote: "Prayer is not only worship; it is also an invisible emanation of man's worshiping spirit—the most powerful form of energy that one can generate. . . . Only in prayer do we achieve that complete and harmonious assembly of body, mind, and spirit which gives the frail human reed its unshakable strength." (Lillian Eichler Watson, ed., Light from Many Lamps, pp. 66-67.)

It is significant to note that after giving his model prayer, the Master elaborated on the principle of forgiveness, as mentioned in the prayer, saying: "If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." (Matthew 6:14-15.) He later taught this principle through a parable about a king who had two servants. One of the servants owed a large sum of money to the king, but the king forgave him the debt. The second servant owed the first a small sum; however, the first servant would not forgive that debt. When the king learned of this, he severely chastised the first servant, saying, "O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt. . . . Shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellowservant, even as I had pity on thee?" And the king "delivered him to the tormentors." (Matthew 18:23-35.)

When Ye Fast Be Not as the Hypocrites

Book of Mormon: "When ye fast be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance, for they disfigure their faces that they may appear unto men to fast. . . . They have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, . . . appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly." (3 Nephi 13:16-18.)

King James Version: "When ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. . . . They have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, . . . appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret: and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly." (Matthew 6:16-18.)

Jerusalem Bible: "When you fast do not put on a gloomy look as the hypocrites do: they pull long faces to let men know they are fasting. . . . They have had their reward. . . . But when you fast . . . [let] no one know you are fasting except your Father who sees all that is done in secret: and your Father who sees all that is done in secret will reward you."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "When you fast, don't look like those miserable play-actors! For they deliberately disfigure their faces so that people may see that they are fasting. Believe me, they have had all their reward. No, when you fast, . . . [do it] so that nobody knows that you are fasting—let it be a secret between you and your Father. And your Father who knows all secrets will reward you."

Special blessings come from fasting when our fast is motivated by our love of the Savior. Fasting is a major part of the process of drawing us closer to Jesus Christ and our Father in heaven. The Church provides an inspired, organized way of responding to the needs of others. Members are asked to set aside a little from their abundance and donate it to the fast offering fund. Since no one knows how much the donation is, this remains anonymous—an example of "giving in secret."

Fasting and prayer go hand in hand. An old Islamic proverb states that "prayer gets us halfway to heaven, fasting gets us to the door of heaven, and generous alms open the door." Fasting for spiritual purposes goes together with charitable giving for the benefit of the poor. This is an inspired concept. It is designed as a system to take care of the poor and needy. Very few people today, aside from the Latter-day Saints, combine fasting with giving to the poor. We have our monthly fast of two meals (twenty-four hours), and we give to the poor the money that is saved by forgoing those meals. Then we add even more so we can do what President Spencer W. Kimball asked: Give generously several times more than the value of two meals—"much, much more—ten times more." (See Conference Report, April 1974, p. 184.)

Isaiah combines the idea of fasting and almsgiving and blessings. Responding to the rhetorical question "Wherefore have we fasted?" he says: "Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, . . . the poor . . . [and] the naked?" (Isaiah 58:3, 7.) We have the promises of our prophets that if the members of the Church will fast, pray, and donate what they save to the fast offering fund, no one in their unit or stake or area will go hungry, naked, or needy. The Lord will provide.

Many individual spiritual and physical blessings result from a monthly fast that is properly begun with a prayer dedicating that fast to the Lord, and ended with a prayer consecrating it to the Lord. Any important decision in one's life should be made after due fasting and prayer. When I have faced the biggest decisions of my life, such as choosing an eternal companion and selecting a discipline to study for my life's profession, I have postponed the making of those decisions until after I have prayed and fasted, and the Lord has blessed me most generously. Of course, I have presented my questions to the Lord, following the pattern outlined in Doctrine and Covenants 9, by studying them out in my mind, making my own decision, and then presenting my request to the Lord for his approval or rejection. Every time I have gone to him in this manner I have received either a quiet, peaceful assurance or a clearly defined no. I cannot say that I have had a "burning bosom" answer except on occasions when I have been sent out to stakes by the Quorum of the Twelve to call a stake president. During these special fasts, impressions are so intimate and personal that they are never presented to the public, and my studying things out through meditation and my making of these supremely important decisions are done in complete secrecy.

Sometimes well-meaning people involve too many other people in their private struggles. I am particularly concerned about young people who take too long to make up their minds about marriage, careers, or jobs and, in effect, discover too late that "the train has pulled out of the station," leaving them behind. Some go through such agony and such long, drawn-out procedures that the Lord may think they are purposely letting others know what they are doing, like the hypocrites—with sad countenances, gloomy looks, play-acting. It is appropriate to ask parents and leaders for guidance and suggestions, but I believe that after we have fasted, pondered the options in our minds, and formed a decision, the Lord wants us to then go to him in secret and our Heavenly Father will reward us in secret. No one need know just how we came to our decision. But I feel that the Lord is impatient with those who are chronically indecisive in deciding to go on a mission now, study for a career now, marry now, and so forth. Some wait too long for a miracle-type message from the Lord, and the opportunity passes them by.

Sister Barbara Winder, former general president of the Relief Society, told Relief Society leaders at an open house sponsored by the Relief Society in March 1990, "Sometimes when someone hears of a family in need or impoverished in a far distant place, that person wants to help—to send food or clothing, make a quilt, pack up books and even send money. One of the problems with this generous response is that while that one family may then be blessed, the neighbors on either side, who are likely in the same situation, will wish that they, too, knew someone who would send relief to them. However, when we respond 'in the Lord's own way,' [giving through the fast offering program], we provide a way for those who have, to give; those who need, to receive; those who receive, to work, if they are able; those who work, to have. It becomes a wonderful cycle that in turn helps people to become self-reliant and thereby able to help others."

The Lord has declared, "It is expedient that I, the Lord, should make every man accountable, as a steward over earthly blessings, which I have made and prepared for my creatures. . . . It is my purpose to provide for my saints, for all things are mine. But it must needs be done in mine own way; . . . this is the way that I, the Lord, have decreed to provide for my saints, that the poor shall be exalted, in that the rich are made low. For the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare; yea, I prepared all things, and have given unto the children of men to be agents unto themselves. Therefore, if any man shall take of the abundance which I have made, and impart not his portion, according to the law of my gospel, unto the poor and the needy, he shall, with the wicked, lift up his eyes in hell, being in torment." (D&C 104:13-18.)

Quoting from Isaiah again, we find an eloquent description of the blessings to be received by those who fast and give to the poor: "Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward.

"Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am. . . .

"And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noonday.

"And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, . . . and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not. . . .

"Thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt be called the repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in." (Isaiah 58:8-12.)

What a blessing!

Paul Anderson has penned the beautiful words of a heartfelt hymn that is a prayer concerning fasting:

In fasting we approach thee here, And pray thy Spirit from above Will cleanse our hearts, cast out our fear, And fill our hunger with thy love. . . . And may our fast fill us with care For all thy children now in need. May we from our abundance share, Thy sheep to bless, thy lambs to feed. This fast, dear Father, sanctify— Our faith and trust in thee increase. As we commune and testify, May we be filled with joy and peace. —Hymns, no. 139
