Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

13

Treasures, Serving Two Masters, Seeking the Kingdom of God

In the Sermon on the Mount, the Savior now explains that, although we live in a temporal and materialistic world, in order to come unto him we must put temporal things in proper perspective. He takes three concepts in succession. He talks of treasures, but implies that if we seek treasures on earth it will be difficult to follow him. He asks us to choose between God and mammon (defined as the things of this earth, riches, avarice, and worldly gain), for we cannot serve both. And he instructs us to seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness.

Treasures

Book of Mormon: "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and thieves break through and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt and where thieves do not break through nor steal. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also." (3 Nephi 13:19-21.)

King James Version: "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, . . . but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal: for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also." (Matthew 6:19-21.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Do not store up treasures for yourselves on earth, where moths and woodworms destroy them and thieves can break in and steal. But store up treasures for yourselves in heaven. . . . For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Don't pile up treasures on earth, where moth and rust can spoil them and thieves can break in and steal. But keep your treasure in Heaven where there is neither moth nor rust to spoil it and nobody can break in and steal. For wherever your treasure is, your heart will be there too!"

The treasures of the materialistic world—for example, money, property, and possessions such as boats, weekend cabins, trailers and motor homes, television sets, silks and silverware, artworks, and investments—are of only temporary nature, especially when compared to eternal riches that will last forever. When the Lord commanded us to not have any other gods before him, he meant that there should be no priority or obsession or interest for the things of this world over and above the eternal treasures of God.

Edward Bok has said, "Man cannot live by bread alone. The making of money, the accumulation of material power, is not all there is to living. Life is something more than these, and the man who misses this truth misses the greatest joy and satisfaction that can come into his life—service for others." (In Lillian Eichler Watson, ed., Light from Many Lamps, p. 19.)

When materialism—the acquisition of riches and earthly treasures—becomes our major priority in life, we will have little time and energy to use in the service to God and to our fellowman, and many will have little time left for their spouse and children. Of infinite value are the treasures of the next life, which mostly center in the eternal family and eternal friendships. If we have ignored those things in this life, we will surely be found wanting in the life to come. Where our treasure is, there will our hearts be also, and the treasures of our hearts should not be the temporary things of this world.

Most people have good intentions, believing that as soon as they have enough of this world's goods to be truly self-sufficient, they can spend more time with the family and in performing church work. But the pursuit of riches is addictive, and it is not easy to free oneself from its grasp. It is not necessarily the possession of riches but our attitude toward them that can put us in jeopardy in inheriting the greatest of all treasures, eternal life. We need to set eternal priorities.

There was a time in my life, when I was a young married man with a new job, working in South America for a prestigious banking firm, when I thought I was wise enough and competent enough to be able to handle the things of the world, as well as my church responsibilities and family obligations. I also justified any material possessions, saying the boat and the airplane were for the family, too. At one time or another, I have owned airplanes, boats, imported and antique cars, and horses. I confess that it took me longer than it should have to realize how much of my attention was being given to these things. The thought came to me that perhaps without realizing it, I could become obsessed with riches and possessions that were easily acquired, and that this obsession could canker and destroy my soul. My spirit reminded me of the Savior's admonition to "lay not up . . . treasures upon earth, . . . for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also." (Matthew 6:19, 21.) I also became aware that if I were so enamored with the material things of this world, the things of most importance in the eternal perspective, including my family and the work of the Lord, would suffer because of my lack of proper attention. I promised the Lord that I would dedicate my time, and everything I had, first to his work and to my family; then I sold those earthly "treasures" and discovered an increase of joy and happiness and contentment. And surprisingly, I learned that my family and I could still enjoy these same amenities, when time permitted, by borrowing planes, boats, horses, and cabins through the generosity of friends who offered! The Lord does not ask that we have no recreational activities, but that we place our priorities in their proper order, concentrating first on the things with paramount eternal importance. I am certain that had I not been willing to make these changes, I would not have been in a position, spiritually, to be useful to the Lord in whatever capacity he desired to use me, wherever or whenever he needed me.

A frequent theme of the Book of Mormon is that those who live the Lord's commandments and seek to follow him will prosper. Many have interpreted this to mean they will prosper as to the things of this world, which is not necessarily true. Couldn't the promise also refer to prospering as to the eternal treasures that we will acquire if our focus is upon doing what the Savior has commanded? However, there is nothing wrong with prosperity, or seeking for riches, as the prophet Jacob taught, if it is done for the right reasons and if we use this abundance to alleviate the sufferings and pain of those who are less fortunate. Jacob taught, "Before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God. And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good—to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted." (Jacob 2:18-19.)

Elder Dallin H. Oaks said, "Those who preach the gospel of success and the theology of prosperity are suffering from 'the deceitfulness of riches' (Matthew 13:22) and from supposing that 'gain is godliness' (1 Timothy 6:5). The possession of wealth or the acquisition of significant income is not a mark of heavenly favor, and their absence is not evidence of heavenly disfavor." (Pure in Heart, p. 75.) Interestingly, poverty seems to bring an increase of spirituality. In fact, one apostle, who was worrying about the lack of spirituality of some Saints, said, "What they need is a good dose of poverty!"

Elder Boyd K. Packer told us in his conference address in October 1980 that "it is the understanding of almost everyone that success, to be complete, must include a generous portion of both fame and fortune as essential ingredients. . . . We come into mortal life to receive a body and to be tested, to learn to choose. . . . The choice of life is not between fame and obscurity, nor is the choice between wealth and poverty. The choice is between good and evil, and that is a very different matter indeed." (Conference Report, October 1980, pp. 28-29.)

Seeking to build up treasures on earth is a form of covetousness. Paul warned that "the love of money is the root of all evil." (1 Timothy 6:10.) He did not say that money itself is evil—but the love of money is. We must be careful that accumulating worldly possessions is not interpreted as being self-reliant, thus excusing ourselves for a misplaced preoccupation with excessively acquiring them. Of course we need to earn a living and have enough skills and education that we can support those who depend upon us, and we need to become self-reliant, but that is far different from trying to get richer or acquire more and more possessions in order to get ahead of or to impress others. Those who covet the wealth or properties of others will certainly suffer spiritually. Greed and covetousness are tools that Satan uses very effectively in corrupting people and turning them from their path of coming unto Christ.

Moroni, in chastening the Nephites because they were "walking in the pride of their hearts," declared: "Ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine apparel, and the adorning of your churches, more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted. O ye pollutions, ye hypocrites, ye teachers, who sell yourselves for that which will canker, why have ye polluted the holy church of God? Why are ye ashamed to take upon you the name of Christ? Why do ye not think that greater is the value of an endless happiness than that misery which never dies—because of the praise of the world?" (Mormon 8:37-38.)

In the Church News editorial for May 19, 1990, we are told that "there are countless ways in which we 'sell' ourselves for money and its adornments and for the praise of the world. One way is by behaving in a manner accepted by the world but not by the Lord. When we are more concerned about what our neighbors or our colleagues or our friends think than by what the Lord might think of us, we sell ourselves 'for that which will canker.'

"Sometimes even what appear to be noble actions are, in the end, worldly pursuits. Fathers, for example, have responsibilities to provide for their families. Sometimes, the hours they must work to do so are long and hard, but the love they have for their families motivates them to continue.

"There are some, however, who work excessively long hours in order to earn more money so that they might provide for their families 'fine apparel' or luxuries of equal or greater value than those of their neighbors. Sometimes these fathers are caught in a vicious cycle: They earn more money so they can buy more things for their families, then their families begin to expect to have those things provided for them in never-ending supply.

"And some mothers are caught in a similar struggle as they walk a fine line between leaving young children in the care of others in order to work outside their home to provide necessities and working to provide what may be luxuries for their families.

"Still, some mothers who have exchanged careers outside their homes for full-time responsibilities in their homes often are entrapped by what they think others think of them. Undue concern for the praise the world heaps upon those who have careers and families jeopardizes the satisfaction and fulfillment that could come through the great work they do within the walls of their homes."

Naturally, we do need to work hard, as the Lord instructed Adam; to be very wise and prudent with our income; and, above all, to avoid the trap of going into debt just to satisfy our selfish desires, since debt brings with it the heavy burden of interest that never sleeps, never takes a vacation, never stops even at night or on weekends. Church leaders are in agreement that a person may need to go into debt to finance a modest home, to finance education and tools of the trade, but that is all—never for speculation and never just to acquire more. Financial burdens can become a cross that is too heavy to bear, and our lives can crumble into pieces—and sometimes we lose those things that matter the most, causing us to suffer spiritually.

"Treasures on earth" are some of the biggest impediments for couples who could be serving missions. They believe that they cannot afford to serve the Lord on a mission because they have to take care of the home they have built, or the cabin in the mountains that might get broken into by thieves, or the motor home they want to travel around in, or the cruise they want to take. After all, they have been working all their lives to acquire these things; they can't be expected to just drop them all to go serve the Lord, can they? That is exactly what the Lord has asked.

Joseph Smith taught that "a religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has power sufficient to produce the faith necessary unto life and salvation." (Lectures on Faith 6:7.) It is true that if your treasures are on earth you will be reluctant to do those things, such as serving the Lord as missionaries, that lead to earning celestial treasures. The apostle Paul taught, "Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth." (Colossians 3:2.) In other words, sell everything, buy a small condominium that can be left alone while you are serving, and go out to serve the Lord. And if everything goes up in smoke or downstream with a flood, the Lord will help you through it somehow. At least you have proven you will serve him, no matter what the cost or sacrifice.

John the Beloved admonished us to "love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, . . . the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passeth away, . . . but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever." (1 John 2:15-17.) Forsake the treasures of this world, seek after celestial treasures, and enjoy the fruits of godliness by coming unto Christ.

Serving Two Masters

Book of Mormon: "No man can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon." (3 Nephi 13:24.)

King James Version: "No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon." (Matthew 6:24.)

Jerusalem Bible: "No one can be the slave of two masters: he will either hate the first and love the second, or treat the first with respect and the second with scorn. You cannot be the slave both of God and of money."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "No one can fully serve two masters. He is bound to hate one and love the other, or be loyal to one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and the power of money."

We read in Jesus the Christ that "those whom the Master was addressing had received of the light of God; the degree of belief they had already professed was proof of that. Should they turn from the great [enterprise] on which they had embarked, the light would be lost, and the succeeding darkness would be denser than that from which they had been relieved. There was to be no indecision among the disciples. No one of them could serve two masters; if he professed so to do he would be an untrue servant to the one or the other. Then followed another profound generalization: 'Ye cannot serve God and mammon.' " (Jesus the Christ, 1983, p. 243.)

Being in the world and having to earn enough for our family's needs sometimes places us in a difficult position. Some would even justify their poverty, reasoning that they are more spiritual than those with more. Such comparisons are risky. The Lord expects us to be wise and provident providers. He expects us to be frugal and prudent and good managers. He expects us to work hard, to study well, to develop skills, and to use our gifts and talents. He wants us to be wise stewards over all that he gives to us in this world—to faithfully manage our worldly wealth—so that we can demonstrate to him what kind of stewards and managers we will be over his worlds in the eternities to come. Jesus told us: "If . . . ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon [worldly riches], who will commit to your trust the true riches?" (Luke 16:11.)

I have seen very wealthy Latter-day Saints who put the things of the kingdom first, yet they have been blessed materially because of their vision and skill. We should not be jealous of them nor judge them. I dare say that the ones I am aware of are totally dedicated to the Lord and spiritually oriented, and they certainly have their priorities in order. The moment the Lord wants all they have, they are ready to consecrate it to him. They are not serving mammon but God, and they are ready to make any sacrifice.

At one time in my life I had a difficult choice to make, and I have been much blessed because of the decision my wife and I made. It was a personal test more for my benefit, I think, than for the Lord's. I was finishing my assignment as mission president and had expected to return to international banking, where a good position had been held open for me. A few weeks before being released, however, I was asked to consider employment with the Church at a much lower income, with no significant benefits or future (one cannot be ambitious in Church employment), and to be engaged in a kind of work for which I would have to have additional training. I was not attracted by the offer, and things were not made any easier when I was told that it was not a priesthood call but only a job offer, and that the Church needed to be free to let me go at any time with or without cause, since the job was somewhat of a new experiment to the Church organization. We felt that here was a new test for us. Were we willing to give up the security, prestige, income, fringe benefits, and retirement program of what was then the largest bank in the world, in order to serve the Lord in an obscure and risky position?

After fasting and prayer, my wife and I decided to break ties with the bank and accept employment with the Church. We made our decision, which would change our lives drastically, presented it to the Lord, and received the assurance that we had passed an important test. We had placed serving God over serving our own interests. We have never regretted that decision, and our lives have been enriched in ways that living in a world-oriented environment and atmosphere could never equal. Blessings beyond measure have been showered down upon us and our children. Others may not have to face this kind of decision, but it was necessary for me in order to prove to myself that I could willingly give up a career and a life-style that I was thoroughly enjoying.

In his teachings, Christ said that we cannot love two masters (something that controls or dominates our thoughts and actions) for either we will love one and hate the other or we will begin to despise the one and love the other. Service is a powerful master. Elder Marvin J. Ashton has said that we learn to love that which we serve, and we serve that which we love. An example of this truth is the mother who serves her family with barely any thought for herself; the love she has for those whom she serves is beautiful to behold. Elder Ashton describes the effects of service on what we love: "If our top priorities are constantly directed toward the acquisition of more and better worldly goods, it will not take long to increase our love in those directions. . . . How can we decrease our love for things not for our best good? We must . . . stop the expenditure of time and effort in these directions. . . . We must constantly emphasize the truth that we love that to which we give time, whether it be the gospel, God, or gold." (Ye Are My Friends, pp. 13-14.)

If we truly want to serve God, we must practice serving him with all our might, mind, and strength. As we serve him, our love for him will increase until our greatest desire will be to focus on doing those things that will please him and our Savior; and, joyfully, we will find ourselves along the path of coming unto Christ, filled with his pure love and approbation.

In the Sermon on the Mount, just after the injunction to not serve two masters and before the commandment to seek first the kingdom, we find instructions from the Savior that have confused many Christians over the centuries. The Book of Mormon account of this instruction was given by the Master to his Twelve Apostles and not to the general membership of the Church. In 3 Nephi we learn more explicitly what the Savior taught: "Jesus . . . looked upon the twelve whom he had chosen, and said unto them: . . . Ye are they whom I have chosen to minister unto this people. Therefore I say unto you [to the twelve], take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink. . . . Take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? For your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things." (See 3 Nephi 13:25-32.)

Seeking the Kingdom of God

Book of Mormon: "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you." (3 Nephi 13:33.)

King James Version: "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." (Matthew 6:33.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Set your hearts on his kingdom first, and on his righteousness, and all these other things will be given you as well."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Set your heart first on his kingdom and his goodness, and all these things will come to you as a matter of course."

Here we have a glorious promise to all who sincerely change the direction of their lives and come unto Christ. Again it is the principle of choosing the proper priorities. When we have been tested in all things until the Lord is certain that we will serve him and seek his kingdom before all else, without regard to the risk or the hazard or sacrifice, then he can truly bless us. We must be motivated by the pure love of Christ in all that we do, however, or we shall surely become hypocrites.

When we experience that mighty change of heart that the prophet Alma speaks of, when we make that spiritual commitment of a broken heart and a contrite spirit, bending our will to our Father's, an eternal bonding takes place between us and the powers of eternity. Our seeking the kingdom of God and his righteousness overpowers any other desire.

The words of the Christian hymn "Come Thou Fount of Every Blessing" express well the attitude we must take:

Let thy goodness, as a fetter, Bind my wandering heart to thee. Prone to wander, Lord, I feel it, Prone to leave the God I love; Here's my heart, O take and seal it; Seal it for thy [kingdom] above.

The pioneers who were driven out of Illinois and went west for the gospel's sake gave up sturdy homes and productive farms. These great followers of Christ, their souls burning with the testimony of the truths of the gospel, were seeking first the kingdom of God. They did not seek prosperity in the mountain valleys, but they were blessed spiritually, and today their descendants are reaping those blessings, temporally and spiritually, that their ancestors provided through their obedience, faithfulness, and sacrifice.

As I travel around the stakes of Latin America, I am impressed with the lives and dedication of the Saints. Even in the midst of political and economic problems, those who put the kingdom first and who serve faithfully are prospering more than the people around them. In one country the amount of tithing contributions doubled recently, but with only a few more full-tithe payers than before. The gross national product per capita was decreasing, but the incomes of Saints who paid their tithing were doubling. They were placing the kingdom first, and the Lord was blessing them.

In our day the Lord admonished the Saints: "Seek not for riches but for wisdom, and behold, the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto you, and then shall you be made rich. Behold, he that hath eternal life is rich." (D&C 6:7.) When we commit ourselves wholly to following the Lord's counsel to seek his kingdom first and endure to the end in righteousness, then we shall be found worthy to hear our Savior declare: "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." (Matthew 25:34.)
