Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

14

Judge Not That Ye Be Not Judged

Book of Mormon: "Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy brother: Let me pull the mote out of thine eye—and behold, a beam is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brother's eye." (3 Nephi 14:1-5.)

King James Version: "Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye." (Matthew 7:1-5.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Do not judge, and you will not be judged; because the judgments you give are the judgments you will get, and the amount you measure out is the amount you will be given. Why do you observe the splinter in your brother's eye and never notice the plank in your own? How dare you say to your brother, 'Let me take the splinter out of your eye,' when all the time there is a plank in your own? Hypocrite! Take the plank out of your own eye first, and then you will see clearly enough to take the splinter out of your brother's eye." (Matthew 7:1-5.)

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Do not criticise people, and you will not be criticised. For you will be judged by the way you criticise others, and the measure you give will be the measure you receive. Why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother's eye and fail to notice the plank in your own? How can you say to your brother, 'Let me get the speck out of your eye', when there is a plank in your own? You hypocrite! Take the plank out of your own eye first, and then you can see clearly to remove your brother's speck of dust."

A favorite hymn of the Latter-day Saints, "Truth Reflects upon Our Senses," refers to the Savior's statement about not judging:

Truth reflects upon our senses; Gospel light reveals to some. If there still should be offenses, Woe to them by whom they come! Judge not, that ye be not judged, Was the counsel Jesus gave; Measure given, large or grudged, Just the same you must receive. Jesus said, "Be meek and lowly," For 'tis high to be a judge; If I would be pure and holy, I must love without a grudge. It requires a constant labor All his precepts to obey. If I truly love my neighbor, I am in the narrow way. Once I said unto another, "In thine eye there is a mote; If thou art a friend, a brother, Hold, and let me pull it out." But I could not see it fairly, For my sight was very dim. When I came to search more clearly, In mine eye there was a beam. If I love my brother dearer, And his mote I would erase, Then the light should shine the clearer, For the eye's a tender place. Others I have oft reproved, For an object like a mote, Now I wish this beam removed, Oh, that tears would wash it out! Charity and love are healing; These will give the clearest sight; When I saw my brother's failing, I was not exactly right. Now I'll take no further trouble; Jesus' love is all my theme; Little motes are but a bubble When I think upon the beam. —Hymns, no. 273

Paul made it very clear that God shall render to each of us according to how we treat others. He said, "Thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth against them which commit such things. And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God?" (Romans 2:1-3.)

At a regional conference in Mexico City in May 1988, my wife, Helen, spoke on this sin of criticizing others and judging unrighteously. Here are some of the things she said:

"In the Savi*or's parable of the unforgiving servant, one of the faults of the servant was that he demanded standards from others that he wasn't prepared to fulfill himself. We're often critical of others but easy on ourselves. We often see clearly the faults of others but find it difficult to see our own. We say we're frank and honest when we speak critically of someone else, but feel offended, claiming that they are unfair, not tolerant or understanding, when others do the same about us. If we fail in anything, we produce half a dozen valid reasons why, which in others would be feeble excuses.

"The important lesson we learn in the parable of the unforgiving servant is that unless and until we have shown forgiveness to our fellowman, we can't receive forgiveness of God.

"One of the major steps we need to take in achieving that goal of being a forgiving person is to first learn not to judge. To be able to keep from judging, there's one principle we need to understand: that each person lives in a 'separate reality,' which means that we all interpret things differently because we each have a different thought system made up of individually unique memories, interpretations, and beliefs.

"Paul taught the importance of accepting differences, without judging, on the occasion of writing to the Romans: 'For one believeth that he may eat all things: another, who is weak, eateth herbs. Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not; and let not him which eateth not judge him that eateth: for God hath received him. Who art thou that judgest another man's servant? . . . One man esteemeth one day above another: another esteemeth every day alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. . . . " 'Why dost thou judge thy brother? or why dost thou set at nought thy brother? for we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. . . . Every one of us shall give account of himself to God. Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this rather, that no man put a stumblingblock or an occasion to fall in his brother's way.' (Rom. 14:2-13.)

"Everyone does the best they can with what they know. We are much happier when we see the innocence in all behavior and feel compassion or show interest in their point of reference rather than judging. How often do we think, 'How could they possibly be like that, or do that? They would be happier if they would do it my way, like my kind of music, eat the foods I like, treat people the way I think is the right way, etc.' It seems so important to correct others when we think they are wrong, especially those we love.

"Can you imagine what kind of roommates, missionary companions, husbands and wives, parents, brothers and sisters, members of Christ's church we would be if we were more loving, compassionate, and understanding of each other's differences?

"A master gardener does not fret and fume because his roses are not growing into petunias. He simply nurtures all of his flowers with water, weeds them, and gives them fertilizer so they can reach their full potential as roses, petunias, begonias, or whatever they are. We also can simply enjoy and nurture who we and others are rather than destroying our natural capacity to enjoy a beautiful life that is not corrupted with 'shoulds' and 'oughts.' The key is not to judge, but to love and nurture.

"The words of the hymn 'Should You Feel Inclined to Censure' teach us an important lesson regarding finding fault:

Should you feel inclined to censure Faults you may in others view, Ask your own heart, ere you venture, If you have not failings, too. . . . Do not form opinions blindly; Hastiness to trouble tends; Those of whom we thought unkindly Oft become our warmest friends. __—Hymns, no. 235

"I have been guilty of judging—of trying to set right some wrong against me or others, as I perceived it. I then learned how much easier and more fulfilling life is when you let God do the judging. The Lord told us, 'Ye ought to say in your hearts—let God judge between me and thee.' (D&C 64:11.) I learned that a big load is removed from my shoulders when I don't make it my responsibility to be judgmental. So much time and energy is wasted that could be spent on developing tolerance and love for others.

"It is so dangerous to judge and criticize another. We never have all the facts about any situation that would allow us to judge another person righteously for any act or words. We don't have the right to draw our own conclusions based on our limited knowledge, because we really don't understand everything that has gone on to motivate that person's behavior. When we judge, we are looking for the mote in the eye of another, when the beam in our own eye distorts our view. And when we don't forgive, or think we cannot, we destroy that bridge over which we must cross to receive forgiveness.

"Let us have as a daily guide to our conduct the words of Christ when he said: 'Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven.' (Luke 6:37.)"

Our eleventh Article of Faith states: "We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience, and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may." One element of the commandment to not judge is the admonition to be tolerant and not criticize others for their religious beliefs. Religion is a matter of free agency, and each individual is responsible before God for his or her choice. If we are to follow Christ, we must not be fanatical, critical, or intolerant of others' beliefs. John, the beloved apostle, showed a bit of that tendency when he saw someone casting out devils in the name of Christ. John forbade that person to do works in the name of the Master and reported it to the Savior. Jesus was much more tolerant. He said, "Forbid him not: for there is no man which shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me. For he that is not against us is on our part." (Mark 9:39-40.)

Lack of tolerance, especially in matters of religion, leads some to want to force their opinions upon others. That was Satan's way, perhaps, because he wanted to forgo free agency and force all to be saved without losing anyone. But force is no solution—not in politics, not in business, and, most important, not in things of the Spirit. There should be only harmony and unity of purpose between those professing different religious beliefs. The pure love of Christ should lead us to love others, no matter what church they belong to, and to truly put into practice in our lives the uplifting principles of tolerance and love that Paul and Moroni taught in their great sermons on charity.

Some of my best friends are members of other churches. During World War II the navy sent me to study for a while at a Catholic university. All of the professors were Jesuit priests, wearing their traditional long black sotanas (habits), and classes began with "Hail Marys" and prayers. I wondered how a lone Mormon boy would fare amid such teachers, but I need not have been concerned. They were polite, kindly men, wise, spiritual, and full of Christian love. I developed a sincere fondness for them and great respect for their sacrifice and dedication. Never did I see an unkind act from any of them—they were living examples of the pure love of Christ.

Prejudice and ignorance lead to intolerance; biases and traditions are deep-seated and difficult to overcome. Nevertheless, anyone with the desire to come unto Christ must overcome these tendencies, not judge anyone in any way, and learn to love and accept each person as brother and sister truly, following the admonition of Paul: "Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us." (Romans 15:7.)

Who am I to judge another When I walk imperfectly? In the quiet heart is hidden Sorrow that the eye can't see. Who am I to judge another? Lord, I would follow thee. —Hymns, no. 220
