Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

Ask, Seek, Knock

Book of Mormon: "Ask, and it shall be given unto you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened. Or what man is there of you, who, if his son ask bread, will give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?" (3 Nephi 14:7-11.)

King James Version: "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: for every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?" (Matthew 7:7-11.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Ask and it will be given to you; search, and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened to you. For the one who asks always receives; the one who searches always finds; the one who knocks will always have the door opened to him. Is there a man among you who would hand his son a stone when he asked for bread? Or would hand him a snake when he asked for a fish? If you, then, who are evil, know how to give your children what is good, how much more will your Father in heaven give good things to those who ask him!"

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Ask and it will be given to you. Search and you will find. Knock and the door will be opened for you. The one who asks will always receive; the one who is searching will always find, and the door is opened to the man who knocks. If any of you were asked by his son for bread would you give him a stone, or if he asks for a fish would you give him a snake? If you then, for all your evil, quite naturally give good things to your children, how much more likely is it that your Heavenly Father will give good things to those who ask him?"

In chapter 12 we spoke of the danger of hypocrisy in prayer. In this chapter, we will discuss how to be effective in approaching our Heavenly Father in prayer—how and what we should ask for; how and what we should seek for; and the promises that await those who follow Christ in doing what he commands in this respect.

Prayer is a manifestation of our faith in our Creator. We pray to a God we believe in but cannot see, though we feel that he can hear us at any time of day or night. We believe in a glorious and loving Father in heaven who does not sleep, is not an absentee being, is not a disinterested being, and is not so far away that he cannot care about us or answer us. All of that declaration is a simple statement of faith.

One of my favorite stories in the scriptures is the story about the prophet Elijah and his prayer scene with the priests of Baal. Elijah, perceiving that the people couldn't decide which god to follow—the one and only true Lord God, or Baal—challenged the prophets of Baal to call down fire from heaven. He said, "Call ye on the name of your gods, and I will call on the name of the Lord: and the God that answereth by fire, let him be God." Each was to prepare an altar of stone and place upon it the carcass of an ox. Then they were to each pray to their respective god and ask him to send down fire from heaven to burn up the offering.

The priests of Baal went first. They prayed and prayed. They prayed all day long and nothing happened. Around midday, the prophet began to mock them. He suggested that they pray louder so their god could hear; then he scoffed at them, asking if their god was asleep, thinking that they might try to awaken him. He asked if their god had gone away to meditate or had perhaps gone someplace else to work. The pagan priests prayed harder and harder, louder and louder, without success. Then, to get their god's attention, they began to cut themselves with knives and sharp objects. They bled profusely, but all to no avail.

After a full day of watching the priests of a false god try all their techniques, Elijah took his turn. To show the power of his God, he poured water over the wood under the sacrifice to make the coming miracle even more difficult. Then he prayed, "Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all these things at thy word. Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou art the Lord God, and that thou hast turned their heart back again." To the amazement of the pagans, the fire came down and consumed the sacrifice, the wood, and the altar; in fact, it even licked up the water that was in the trench. Elijah was a man of faith. He knew the God to whom he prayed, and the hearts of the people were turned toward the Lord. (See 1 Kings 18.)

In Matthew 7:7-11 we get the impression that a one-time simple "asking" may not be enough. We are told that we should not only ask, but also seek and knock—and do so with faith and diligence. As I read these verses, I have the feeling that we are being told to ask and continue asking, seek and continue seeking, and knock and continue knocking.

A short and simple parable to this effect is told in Luke 11:5-8. Paraphrasing the story, it tells of a neighbor who had unexpected guests arrive late at night. The surprised host was found with no food for his hungry visitors. Even though it was midnight, he knew that his next-door neighbor would help him just as he would help out his neighbor in similar circumstances. He went over and knocked loudly at the door. He called out and told his friend what he needed. The neighbor, sound asleep in bed, with his family also all asleep, first answered, "Don't bother us." The desperate host called out again, insisting that he really needed some bread immediately. The Savior commented that even though the sleeping neighbor would not have arisen just for his friend, he did get up and provide the bread because of the friend's insistence. The Lord was teaching us that we must continue our importuning as long as necessary.

The Lord, who counseled us that "men ought always to pray, and not to faint," also demonstrated this principle in the case of the unjust judge who would not listen to the woman until she had insisted several times. (See Luke 18:1-8.) He wants us to be persistent and not be weary in asking for that which is right. It would be too easy if every prayer were answered the first time it occurred to us to ask. The test of our faith is in our diligence in crying "day and night unto him."

Prayer has been an essential part of the gospel ever since Adam was placed in the Garden of Eden. An angel visited him and declared: "Thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore." (Moses 5:8.) Many witnesses throughout the scriptures testify that it is a commandment to call upon the Lord. In modern revelation, given through Joseph Smith in 1831, the Lord declared: "Ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart, walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving, that ye may not be seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men." (D&C 46:7.)

To help us in fulfilling his commandments, the Lord has given us sufficient specific guidelines to follow so that we may learn how we should ask, what we should ask for, how we should seek, and what we should seek for.

How We Should Ask

Prophets in both ancient and modern times have given us guidance on how we should call upon the Lord:

What We Should (and Should Not) Ask For

We should ask only for that which is right and appropriate. We are warned that we should "seek not to counsel the Lord, but to take counsel from his hand." (Jacob 4:10.) "God . . . doth grant unto you whatsoever ye ask that is right, in faith, believing that ye shall receive." (Mosiah 4:21.) "Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name it shall be given unto you, that is expedient for you; [but] if ye ask anything that is not expedient for you, it shall turn unto your condemnation." (D&C 88:63-65.) "I know that God will give liberally to him that asketh. Yea, my God will give me, if I ask not amiss." (2 Nephi 4:35.)

Conversely, the scriptures warn us of things we should not ask the Lord for:

How We Should Seek

The scriptures teach us how we should approach the Lord:

What We Should Seek

The Lord has also told us what we should seek:

1.Wisdom. "Seek not for riches but for wisdom, and behold, the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto you." (D&C 6:7.)

2.The kingdom of God. "Seek the kingdom of God, and all things shall be added according to that which is just." (D&C 11:23.) "Before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God." (Jacob 2:18.) "Seek ye first to build up the kingdom of God, and to establish his righteousness." (JST Matthew 6:38.)

3.Gifts. "Seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given." (D&C 46:8.)

4.The face of the Lord. "Seek the face of the Lord always, that . . . ye shall have eternal life." (D&C 101:38.) "Thy face, Lord, will I seek." (Psalm 27:8.) "Seek the Lord, and his strength: seek his face evermore." (Psalm 105:4.) "Seek his face continually." (1 Chronicles 16:11.)

5.The gift of the Holy Ghost. "The Holy Ghost . . . is the gift of God unto all those who diligently seek him." (1 Nephi 10:17.)

6.To bring forth Zion. "Blessed are they who shall seek to bring forth my Zion." (1 Nephi 13:37.)

7.Counsel. "Counsel with the Lord in all thy doings, and he will direct thee for good." (Alma 37:37.)

8.Repentance. "A man sometimes, if he is compelled to be humble, seeketh repentance; and . . . shall find mercy." (Alma 32:13.)

9.Forgiveness. "As oft as they repented and sought forgiveness, with real intent, they were forgiven." (Moroni 6:8.)

10.Peace. "Seek peace, and pursue it." (Psalm 34:14.)

11.The scriptures. "Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read." (Isaiah 34:16.)

12.That which is good. "Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live." (Amos 5:14.)

13.To help others. "Let no man seek his own, but every man another's good." (JST 1 Cor. 10:24.)

14.Those who are less active in the Church. "If a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray, doth he not . . . [seek] that which is gone astray?" (Matthew 18:12.)

15.The will of the Father. "I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father." (John 5:30.)

16.Glory, honor, and immortality—eternal life. "[God] will render to every man according to his deeds: to them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, eternal life." (Romans 2:6-7.)

17.To edify the Church. "Seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the Church." (1 Corinthians 14:12.)

Authors Blaine and Brenton Yorgason have written that we must seek righteousness rather than manifestations, explaining: "We must not run faster than we are able, nor demand of the Lord things that, in his wisdom, we have thus far been denied. But does that mean that it is inappropriate to seek to grow spiritually? Of course not! . . . Joseph [Smith] said we are to seek to grow into the principle of revelation, and the Lord told us that we would grow from grace to grace as we kept the commandments. . . . Therefore, we do not seek manifestations, but rather we seek righteousness and closeness to the Spirit through obedience and regular repentance." (Receiving Answers to Prayers, p. 22.)

Some might ask, "But when I knock, how will I recognize it when he opens? What should I expect? Will he really hear me knock?" We must keep in mind that this promise of the Lord is conditional, just as every other promise is that he has given. Unless we are first obedient and worthy of the companionship of the Holy Ghost, the Lord cannot fulfill his part of the contract. But if we are seeking after righteousness and are counted among those who hunger and thirst to follow the Savior, then we will know for a surety, as Joseph learned in the Sacred Grove, that God truly hears and answers when we call upon him.

How do we recognize his answer? When the Lord spoke to Elijah, it was not in the wind, nor the earthquake, nor the fire, but in a still small voice. (See 1 Kings 19:11-12.) Joseph Smith said: "The Lord cannot always be known by the thunder of His voice, by the display of His glory or by the manifestation of His power. . . . We would say, . . . seek to know God in your closets, call upon him in the fields. Follow the directions of the Book of Mormon, and pray over . . . all things that you possess; ask the blessing of God upon all your labors, and everything that you engage in. . . . Keep the commandments of God; and then you will be able more perfectly to understand the difference between right and wrong—between the things of God and the things of men; and your path will be like that of the just, which shineth brighter and brighter unto the perfect day." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 247.)

President Harold B. Lee told the Saints: "The fundamental and soul-satisfying step in our eternal quest is to come in a day when each does know, for himself, that God answers his prayers. This will come only after 'our soul hungers,' and after mighty prayer and supplication." (Conference Report, April 1969, p. 133.)

This truth was borne upon the soul of Sister Esperanza Alvarez de Aguilar in a very sacred and spiritual manner during her second pregnancy. The doctor had informed Brother and Sister Aguilar that due to complications, her unborn child was at great risk. They, of course, were alarmed when the doctor gave them two alternatives: have an abortion or give birth to an incomplete and deformed child. "We didn't know what to do," recalled Sister Aguilar. "My husband and I cried, asking ourselves and Heavenly Father why this had happened to us."

One day Sister Aguilar's husband told her, "Heavenly Father knows what we need. If we have a deformed baby as the doctors predict, don't you think we'll love it as much as we would a healthy baby?" Sustained by her husband's faith, Esperanza agreed they should have the baby, but she was still very fearful.

Then one day, while serving at the Mexico City Temple as an ordinance worker, Esperanza decided to go to the celestial room. Alone in the room, she poured out her feelings in prayer, telling Heavenly Father that she wanted the courage and love necessary to have this child. Suddenly something happened. In her mind and heart these words came to her: "Why should we mourn or think our lot is hard? 'Tis not so; all is right. Why should we think to earn a great reward if we now shun the fight? Gird up your loins; fresh courage take. Our God will never us forsake; And soon we'll have this tale to tell—All is well! All is well!" (Hymns, no. 30.)

Sister Aguilar was overcome with a feeling of calm and peace. Turning again to prayer, she expressed gratitude for this immediate and divine response. Though the doctors continued to voice their concerns, the remaining months of the pregnancy passed without complication. Finally the delivery day arrived, and this faithful mother gave birth to a healthy baby girl. "When they showed me my daughter, tears flowed from my eyes," she said. "She was the most beautiful baby I had ever seen. Again I heard in my ears the sweet expression: 'All is well! All is well!' "

May we be counted worthy to receive the glorious promise of the Savior, as John the Beloved revealed to all of us: "And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight." (1 John 3:22.)
