Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

16

The Golden Rule

Book of Mormon: "All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the law and the prophets." (3 Nephi 14:12.)

King James Version: "All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets." (Matthew 7:12.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Always treat others as you would like them to treat you; that is the meaning of the Law and the Prophets."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Treat other people exactly as you would like to be treated by them—this is the meaning of the Law and the Prophets."

Elder David B. Haight has given us sound counsel concerning our relationship and behavior toward every other human being. He declared: "Someone said, 'We have committed the Golden Rule to memory. May we now commit it to life.' The Savior's teaching, 'Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them,' should be the basis for all human relationships.

"The Lord is very clear about the conduct He expects from the inhabitants of this earth. Nephi declared: 'And again, the Lord God hath commanded that men should not murder; . . . should not lie; . . . should not steal; . . . should not take the name of the Lord . . . in vain; . . . should not envy; . . . should not have malice; . . . should not contend one with another; . . . should not commit whoredoms; . . . for whoso doeth them shall perish. For none of these iniquities come of the Lord; for he doeth that which is good among the children of men; . . . and . . . inviteth . . . all to come unto him and partake of his goodness' (2 Nephi 26:32-33).

"The time is now to rededicate our lives to eternal ideals and values, to make those changes that we may need to make in our own lives and conduct to conform to the Savior's teachings. From the beginning to the end of His ministry, Jesus asked His followers to adopt new, higher standards in contrast to their former ways. As believers, they were to live by a spiritual and moral code that would separate them not only from the rest of the world but also even from some of their traditions. He asks nothing less of those who follow Him today." (Ensign, November 1987, p. 15.)

As Elder Haight explains, the Golden Rule is a summary of the basic philosophy of the Savior as spelled out in the magnificent and timeless Sermon on the Mount. We note that the Savior is trying to help us internalize the commandments so that they come from the intents of the heart and are not just external rules independent from personal righteousness.

In chapter 22 of Matthew we find another version of this all-encompassing law. Though it is expressed differently, it means virtually the same. In the Jerusalem Bible, a title—"the greatest commandment of all"—sets this verse apart. The words from the King James Version are perhaps the most familiar to us: "But when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence, they were gathered together. Then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question, tempting him, and saying, Master, which is the great commandment in the law? Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:34-40.)

The Golden Rule means that we should treat others as we want them to treat us; the second part of the "greatest commandment of all" is that we should love our neighbors as ourselves. The similarity between the two commandments is obvious and important. The lawyer, who was undoubtedly an expert in asking questions with hidden traps, was not asking the Savior in order to learn, but to try to embarrass the Lord. Jesus rose to the occasion with a wonderful response by referring to the first and greatest commandment: loving the Lord our God with all our heart, soul, and mind. Our love of God must take precedence over all else and must be the basis for our obedience to every other commandment. Without that love we would never want to make sacrifices or seek to obey to the extent necessary for our salvation. And without the second commandment of loving our fellowmen as we do ourselves, we would never treat our fellowmen as we would want them to treat us.

The Pharisees had listed all the laws and thought they could find some minor points of contradiction between them. The lawyer was hoping to trap Jesus, probably by remembering a law with some interpretation different than that given by the Master. But Jesus' answer was so correct and all- encompassing that there was no room for the lawyer to contradict him.

In his letter to the Romans, Paul tells us that the Golden Rule and the second greatest commandment go together. Paul counsels, "Love one another: for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law. For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Thou shalt not covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Romans 13:8-9.) In the Jerusalem Bible, the verse that follows these—"Love is the one thing that cannot hurt your neighbor; that is why it is the answer to every one of the commandments"—leaves no doubt as to how love can purify us.

The Golden Rule and the greatest commandments are based upon the principle of love. The Savior taught about love early in his ministry, yet at the Last Supper he returned to this all-important subject by saying, "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another." (John 13:34.) In today's vernacular, he might say, "I give unto you a new emphasis on an old commandment, Love one another." (See also John 15 for additional references on love.)

Some authors state that Confucius taught a form of the Golden Rule twenty-five centuries ago. It was the reversal from that of the Savior's. He purportedly said: "What you do not wish done to yourself, do not do to others." These same experts on ancient religious philosophy point out that Zoroaster taught the same concept in Persia several hundred years before Confucius. Five hundred years after Confucius, Christ taught the concept but used it in the positive form we find in the Bible and the Book of Mormon. Perhaps someday we will learn that it was also taught in the beginning by Adam and all the prophets down through the ages. It is a timeless and an uplifting concept. It is one of those eternal principles that we recognize as such from the first time we read it.

In a little-known book on developing a Christlike personality we read the following: "What are the important factors in getting along well with others? The Golden Rule is probably the basic secret of this art. If we try to give the same thoughtful consideration to others that we would wish others to give to us, we shall respect not only their rights but their personalities. We shall be considerate of their feelings and shall have a real interest in their welfare. We shall cooperate happily with others in both work and play. We shall love instead of hate. We can hate what injures or debases human life without hating the individuals who may be responsible.

"If we truly apply the Golden Rule, we shall try to see ourselves as others see us. We shall thereby become aware of ways in which we are likely to annoy, antagonize, or hurt others. We shall also discover ways in which we may attract others and add to their pleasure and happiness. To develop this ability, we need to learn how to interpret the evidences of others' real attitudes, emotions, and thoughts, as expressed in their behavior. This is more of an art than a science. It is a skill which grows through experience in living with others. Do you enter wholeheartedly into activities for which you make personal sacrifices?

"If we believe in following the Golden Rule we must also believe in the resulting rule or corollary: Sharing wholeheartedly in the experiences of others is the experience of all truly happy, effective personalities." (Bennet and Hand, Designs for Personality, pp. 149-51.)
