Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

17

The Straight and Narrow Way

Book of Mormon: "Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, which leadeth to destruction, and many there be who go in thereat; because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." (3 Nephi 14:13-14.)

King James Version: "Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." (Matthew 7:13-14.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Enter by the narrow gate, since the road that leads to perdition is wide and spacious, and many take it; but it is a narrow gate and a hard road that leads to life, and only a few find it."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Go in by the narrow gate. For the wide gate has a broad road which leads to disaster and there are many people going that way. The narrow gate and the hard road lead out into life and only a few are finding it."

There is no doubt that the pathway to come unto Christ is difficult. It is by nature closely defined with strict limits. We cannot waver very far. True, there is always the principle of repentance to aid us in returning to the path, but the path itself is not for the fainthearted.

I have had the experience of trying to pilot a high- performance aircraft down a very narrow electronic pathway through clouds and fog to a runway just barely visible, and only visible at the last moment before touchdown. The radio beam that leads to the runway must be aimed in the right direction so that as I let down through the clouds I will miss mountain peaks, tall buildings, TV antennas, and any other obstacles. I cannot see those obstacles, but I do have faith in the engineers who placed the beam and in the printed guidelines, which tell pilots that if they follow the instructions they will be on the instrument landing path. If I stray to one side or the other I can be in severe danger. If I am too high or too low I will not be able to land correctly and therefore will also be in danger. My speed must be just right at all times. The tolerance for error is very small.

In like manner, the pathway to perfection, which leads us back to the presence of our Heavenly Father and our Savior, is very narrow.

The limits that define the pathway are included in the Sermon on the Mount and in the Ten Commandments. They can also be found in many other places in the scriptures, both ancient and modern, and through the words of the prophets. One of the lists of guidelines that I find most illuminating is located in the table of contents of one of my favorite books, Christ's Ideals for Living, compiled by Obert C. Tanner and published by the Church as a Sunday School manual in 1955. To learn if you are close to the path or are straying a bit, just note these chapter topics and measure yourself: faith, humility, courage, purity, reverence, sincerity, temperance, balance, integrity, beauty, truth, serenity, adventure, prayer, self- regard, conviction, endurance, repentance, thanksgiving, joy, love, home, friendship, service, happiness, wealth, brotherhood, peace, justice, mercy, magnanimity, equality, freedom, loyalty, tolerance, progress, forgiveness, trust, worship, steadfastness, sacrifice, and eternal life.

We preach the principles of the restored gospel to all who will listen. They must decide whether they will follow Christ or not—free agency is an eternal principle that gives each person the right to make choices. President Ezra Taft Benson declared: "Freedom of choice is a God-given eternal principle. The great plan of liberty is the plan of the gospel. There is no coercion about it; no force, no intimidation. A man is free to accept the gospel or reject it. He may accept it and then refuse to live it, or he may accept it and live it fully. But God will never force us to live the gospel. He will use persuasion through His servants. He will call us and He will direct us and He will persuade us and encourage us and He will bless us when we respond, but He will never force the human mind." (The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, p. 82.) Part of the test of this life is to see whether or not we will seek to follow this straight and narrow path. It is meant to be a thoughtful decision and one that will require obedience and sacrifice. Anything worthwhile requires significant effort.

One path open to us is the pathway described by Christ. The other is the wide and easy road that looks attractive and enticing, but that will lead us carefully down to hell. "Others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil . . . leadeth them away carefully down to hell." (2 Nephi 28:21.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has differentiated for us the meaning of the words strait and straight. He writes, "The course leading to eternal life is both strait and straight. It is straight because it has an invariable direction—always it is the same. There are no diversions, crooked paths, or tangents leading to the kingdom of God. It is strait because it is narrow and restricted, a course where full obedience to the full law is required. Straightness has reference to direction, straitness to width. The gate is strait; the path is both strait and straight." (Mormon Doctrine, p. 769.)

The first requirements for embarking on the straight and strait path are to follow the principles of faith, repentance, and baptism; to receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands; and, for male members of the Church, to be ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood and then to the Melchizedek Priesthood. The pathway becomes even more narrow when we add the qualifications needed to participate in the saving ordinances of the temple endowment and the eternal sealing of husband and wife. But this is not all: after complying with all this, after experiencing the mighty change of heart that causes one to no longer do things that are displeasing to Heavenly Father, we must continue in obedience, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, enduring to the end, doing good for God and to all people, in order to be worthy to enter back into the presence of our Heavenly Father and his Son, Jesus Christ.

One of the best scriptural descriptions of the path—of both finding it and staying on it—is in Nephi's powerful sermon in chapter 31 of 2 Nephi. Early in this chapter the prophet repeats several times that we must follow Christ, come unto him, and take his name upon us. Then we read the following: "The gate by which ye should enter is repentance and baptism by water; and then cometh a remission of your sins by fire and by the Holy Ghost. And then are ye in this strait and narrow path which leads to eternal life; yea, ye have entered in by the gate; ye have done according to the commandments of the Father and the Son . . . unto the fulfilling of the promise which he hath made, that if ye entered in by the way ye should receive." (2 Nephi 31:17-18.)

Referring to Nephi's declaration, Larry Dahl, an LDS scholar, has written: "This is a sobering thought! With what it takes to get to that point, one might wish it were near the end of the path to eternal life, rather than the very beginning. But Nephi's point is clear: 'And then are ye in this strait and narrow path which leads to eternal life; yea, ye have entered in by the gate.' . . . Nephi asks then answers the next obvious question: 'And now, my beloved brethren, after ye have gotten into this strait and narrow path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for ye have not come thus far save it were by the word of Christ with unshaken faith in him, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save.' . . . The essence of this response seems to be that the credit for our getting through the gate and onto the strait and narrow path belongs to Christ, not us, but that now we must rely appropriately upon our own merit, and not depend 'wholly' upon the merit of Christ. We must demonstrate that our change of heart is permanent, that our commitment to obey is stronger than the enticements of the world and the devil, and we must do this day after day, year after year, . . . through good times and bad." (The Book of Mormon: Second Nephi, the Doctrinal Structure, pp. 368-69.)

Christ said, "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." (John 14:6.) In declaring this, he is also telling us that no other way, no other road, no other system, no other name will bring salvation. The old saying "All roads lead to Rome" is a statement that is not true when applied to the pathway to eternal life. Christ declared, "I am the door [or gate]: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved." (John 10:9.)

When the Savior says that he is the door, the gate, the path, he is not saying that he is a parallel route or that he is an alternate route. He is most emphatic when he states that he is the only way. Therein lies the major choice of this life. We must find Christ. We must come unto him in the way that he has commanded. There will always be those who say they need more freedom, or that commandments are old-fashioned, or that in this modern day of men on the moon and stations in space we should not be so strict with commandments and doctrines and ordinances or insist that they be performed exactly the same way as they were two thousand years ago. The Savior himself says, however, that his way is the only way—it is his way then and now. If we desire the blessings that are promised to the obedient, we must make the choice to follow him and not procrastinate or waver.

The straight and narrow way by which we can walk toward godliness is contrasted with the broad highway leading to destruction. The attractions of the world are many, the temptations of Satan to detour us are myriad, but if we are willing to make the decision to follow Christ, then he will walk with us and show us the way. And because of what the Lord has revealed through his prophets, we will be able to chart our course accurately. Whenever he calls and asks, as he asked Adam, "Where art thou?" (Genesis 3:9), we will be able to answer without difficulty or hesitation, "Here am I, Father, following the pathway to thee."

To do so, we must, as King Benjamin declared in his temple sermon, "[yield] to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, [put] off the natural man and . . . [become] as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon [us], even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19.)
