Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

18

Beware of False Prophets

Book of Mormon: "Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits. . . . Every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit." (3 Nephi 14:15-20.)

King James Version: "Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits. . . . Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit." (Matthew 7:15-20.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Beware of false prophets who come to you disguised as sheep but underneath are ravenous wolves. You will be able to tell them by their fruits. . . . A sound tree produces good fruit but a rotten tree bad fruit."

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Be on guard against false religious teachers, who come to you dressed up as sheep but are really greedy wolves. You can tell them by their fruits. . . . Every good tree produces sound fruit, but a rotten tree produces bad fruit."

We believe in the same organization that existed in the primitive church of Christ, and that includes the principle of being led by a living prophet accompanied and supported by counselors and apostles whom we sustain as prophets, seers, and revelators. Our message to the world is to "come unto Christ" by following a living prophet who speaks for God in these modern days just as in times of old. "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.)

The tribes of Israel believed in true prophets for many centuries, and even today the Jews continue to believe in the words of the ancient prophets of the Old Testament. But they stopped being led by prophets with the close of the Old Testament. The book of Malachi, which is the last book in the Old Testament, was probably written about the middle of the fifth century before Christ. Other accounts in the Old Testament may have been written after that—the books of Joel and Jonah, for example, usually being dated in the fourth century b.c.—but modern Judaism does not follow modern prophets as the people of Israel followed God's prophets in the days of old.

The Islamic religion accepts all Israelite and Christian prophets, including Christ, but only as a prophet and not as the very Son of God. They have their own prophet, Mohammed, who died in the year a.d. 632, and they believe that he was the last of God's prophets on earth.

The majority of Christians accept and preach the words of the prophets as found in both the Old and the New Testament, but have not been led by living prophets since that time, nor do they accept the possibility that there are prophets upon the earth again today. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only Christian religion that claims to be led by a living prophet. It is one of the unique and distinctive principles of our religion.

In this discussion, however, we will discuss how to identify false prophets. It is not easy to describe a false prophet because, by design, the false prophet is trying to deceive. The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote, "When a man goes about prophesying, and commands men to obey his teachings, he must either be a true or false prophet. False prophets always arise to oppose the true prophets and they will prophesy so very near the truth that they will deceive almost the very chosen ones." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 365.)

The Prophet also gave us this advice regarding false prophets: "If any person should ask me if I were a prophet, I should not deny it, as that would give me the lie; for, according to John, the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy; therefore, if I profess to be a witness or teacher, and have not the spirit of prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, I must be a false witness; but if I be a true teacher and witness, I must possess the spirit of prophecy, and that constitutes a prophet; and any man who says he is a teacher or preacher of righteousness, and denies the spirit of prophecy, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; and by this key false teachers and impostors may be detected." (Teachings, p. 269.)

One of the finest works I have ever read on the subject of false prophets and the distinctive qualities of true prophets is the masterpiece by Hugh Nibley, The World and the Prophets. He writes: "The regular scriptural term to describe the leaders of all unauthorized congregations is false prophets. The fatal defect of such congregations is that they are led by false prophets, and we are told that these would abound in the earth, all claiming to be followers of Christ.

"What is a false prophet? He is one who usurps the prerogatives and the authority which by right belong only to a prophet of God. The false prophet need not claim to be a prophet, indeed, most false prophets do not believe in prophecy or even in God, nor do they want anyone else to. Those who would lead the Russians into the promised land are plainly false prophets, but how much faith do they put in prophecy? The . . . term 'pseudo-prophet' designates one who is not a prophet, but who occupies the place that rightly belongs to a prophet, regardless of whether he has been put there by himself or by his followers. Fool's gold, the glittering yellow pyrites that one finds sometimes on the beach, is so called not because it pretends to be gold, but because fools take it for gold. A pseudo-prophet is one to whom foolish people accord the obedience and attention due only a true prophet, whether he or they actually take him for a prophet or not.

"Even good, devout, sincere men and women can be false prophets. We can illustrate this point by recalling the attitude of Socrates toward his friends Gorgias, Protagoras, and other great Sophists. He respected and admired them for their powerful minds, their moral fervor, and their sincere desire to improve the character and the minds of youth. Yet for all that, these men were, in Socrates' opinion, dangerous deceivers, all of them, for they were teachers of false doctrine. Socrates did not consider himself qualified to guide the lives of his fellows; all his life he sought for one so qualified—what he was looking for was a prophet, as Professor Jaeger has indicated in the case of his disciples—and when he insisted that he had never found such a man, and that those who thought themselves most qualified were even less worthy than he, his boldness cost him his life. His pupil Plato poked fun at the way the Sophists accepted the worshipful adulation of the multitude and of their disciples, for nothing disturbed him more than the incurable tendency of the schools to make false prophets out of good men. By his standard we still live in a world of false prophets. Anyone whose work competes with God's work, who makes claims on the time and energies of men which rightly belong to God, who puts the word of God in second place to the theories of men, or forces the teachings of true prophets to yield precedence to his own discourses—anyone, in a word, who puts his own knowledge above or on a level with revelation from heaven is a false prophet." (The World and the Prophets, vol. 3 of the Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, p. 254.)

Paul, in writing to the Corinthians, described some of the ruses used by Satan and his followers and warned that "such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ. And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to their works." (2 Corinthians 11:13-15.)

In defense of living prophets, Dr. Nibley said: "In the realm of the mind, in letters, the arts, and in most of the sciences, it was the ancient Greeks, most educated people will concede, who walked off with nearly all the first prizes. It is hard to say anything on any but the most specialized and technical of matters that some Greek many centuries ago did not say better. If any people ever knew and lived life well and fully, it was the chosen spirits among the Greeks. They explored every avenue of human experience; they inquired into every possibility of broadening and improving the mind; they sought the truth as persistently and as honestly as men can ever be expected to seek; and, sounding the depths and skirting the outmost bounds of man's wisdom, came to the unanimous conclusion that the wisdom of man is as nothing.

"The man to whom the Greeks themselves always gave first place among their wisest, Solon of Athens, sums up his own experience in unambiguous elegiacs:

" 'Like gaping fools we amuse ourselves with empty dreams. . . . Do not doubt it, insecurity follows all the works of men, and no one knows, when he begins an enterprise, how it will turn out. One man, trying his best to do the right thing, steps right into ruin and disaster, because he cannot see what is ahead; while another behaves like a rascal and not only escapes the penalty of his own folly but finds himself blessed with all kinds of success.'

"The greatest of their lyric poets told the Greeks in one of his greatest odes [that] 'the hopes of men are often exalted in one moment only to be dashed down in the next, as they roll helplessly in a sea of false expectations and miscalculations. For no mortal man ever got an absolute guarantee from the gods that his affairs would turn out as he thinks they would. There is always some unknown quantity that vitiates any attempt to predict the future.' . . .

"The early Christian apologists made use of this confessed limitation of the wisest pagans, this fatal obstacle not only to human perfection but even to the enjoyment of a few brief hours and weeks of unsullied happiness, to display what they regarded as the peculiar advantage of their own religion. 'Neither by nature nor by any human skill,' wrote Justin Martyr to the Greeks, 'is it possible for men to know such high and holy things; but only by a gift that descends from above upon holy men from time to time.' Justin explains elsewhere that these men are called prophets and are a type of human entirely unknown to the heathen world. 'They do not need training in speech or skill in controversy and argument,' he continues here, 'but only to keep themselves pure to receive the power of the Spirit of God, so that the divine plectrum can express itself through them as on the strings of a lyre, making use of righteous men and revealing to them the knowledge of sacred and heavenly things. Wherefore they all speak as with a single mouth and a single tongue . . . concerning all things which is needful for us to know. . . . The fact that they all agree, though speaking at widely separated times and places, is the proof of their divinity.'

"Note the interesting musical analogy of sympathetic vibrations. The holy men can receive God's revelations because they are in tune to the proper wave length, so to speak. God can play on them as a plectrum plucks the strings of a lyre because they are prepared to vibrate to his touch—not by virtue of any special training, and not whenever they choose to respond, but whenever it pleases God 'from time to time,' to move them from heaven. Such is the nature of the prophetic gift, says Justin. The early Christians felt that without this gift of direct revelation from heaven such as is received only by prophets, they would be no better than the heathen—well-meaning but bankrupt. . . .

"But must the church always have living prophets in its midst? Is it not enough that we have the words of the prophets of old preserved in holy writ? The answer to that is clear enough in the few passages we have cited. The true church must and will always have living prophets. But that is unwelcome news to the world. It has always been poison. It is the one teaching that has made the restored gospel unacceptable to the wisdom of men. A dead prophet the world dearly desires and warmly cherishes; he is a priceless tradition, a spiritual heritage, a beautiful memory. But woe to a living prophet! He shall be greeted with stones and catcalls even by pious people. The men who put the Apostles to death thought they were doing God a favor, and the Lord tells us with what reverence and devotion men adorn the tombs of the prophets whom they would kill if they were alive.

"Men can read the words of a dead prophet and apply his heavy charges to that dead generation to which the prophet spoke, piously shaking their heads the while and repeating, 'If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.' . . .

"Here we have something in the nature of a general principle. The rejection of living prophets and the veneration of dead ones is not a folly limited to one nation or to one generation. It meets us throughout the long history of Israel as a sort of standard procedure. Nor did it cease with the coming of Christ, who promised his disciples that they would be treated as badly and rejected as completely as he. . . .

"It was a test that few have ever passed: the humiliating test of recognizing a true prophet and taking instruction from the weak and humble things of the earth. Was the wondrous modern age of applied science that began in the nineteenth century to be excused from taking the same test of authority? Remember that the prophets of old came to generations that were very modern in their thinking, smart and sophisticated, advanced, liberated, intellectual; the Hellenistic world, if anything, surpassed our own in those qualities of social advancement. But to come to our own age, do you think the God of heaven is going to come unannounced by prophets? God's declared policy of testing the world by the sending of prophets from time to time was not abrogated two thousand years ago. Men have not so changed, and God has not so changed but that this sure touchstone of past ages can be employed with full effect in our own day. It is precisely those ages which think themselves beyond such things that are most eligible for the warning voice of the prophets. Our message is that God has called prophets again in these days and that the world might well heed their words." (The World and the Prophets, pp. 1-3, 5-7.)

In modern revelation we read, "The voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all that will hear may hear: . . . and the arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from the people." (D&C 1:11, 14.)
