Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

19

He That Doeth the Will of My Father

Book of Mormon: "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father who is in heaven. Many will say to me in that day: Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out devils, and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them: I never knew you; depart from me, ye that work iniquity." (3 Nephi 14:21-23.)

King James Version: "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity." (Matthew 7:21-23.)

Jerusalem Bible: "It is not those who say to me, 'Lord, Lord,' who will enter the kingdom of heaven, but the person who does the will of my Father in heaven. When the day comes many will say to me, 'Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name, cast out demons in your name, work many miracles in your name?' Then I shall tell them to their faces: I have never known you; away from me, you evil men!"

Phillips Modern English Bible: "It is not everyone who keeps saying to me 'Lord, Lord' who will enter the kingdom of Heaven, but the man who actually does my Heavenly Father's will. In 'that day' many will say to me, 'Lord, Lord, didn't we preach in your name, didn't we cast out devils in your name, and do many great things in your name?' Then I shall tell them plainly, 'I have never known you. Go away from me, you have worked on the side of evil!' "

Referring to the subject of doing the will of the Father, Elder James E. Talmage wrote: "Religion is more than the confession and profession of the lips. . . . Only by doing the will of the Father is the saving grace of the Son obtainable. To assume to speak and act in the name of the Lord without the bestowal of authority, such as the Lord alone can give, is to add sacrilege to hypocrisy. Even miracles wrought will be no vindication of the claims of those who pretend to minister in the ordinances of the gospel while devoid of the authority of the Holy Priesthood." (Jesus the Christ, 1983, p. 229.)

Since Elder Talmage affirms that this scripture is about authority, let us read what Elder Bruce R. McConkie said about this important principle. "As pertaining to eternity, priesthood is the eternal power and authority of Deity by which all things exist; by which they are created, governed, and controlled; by which the universe and worlds without number have come rolling into existence; by which the great plan of creation, redemption, and exaltation operates throughout immensity. It is the power of God.

"As pertaining to man's existence on this earth, priesthood is the power and authority of God delegated to man on earth to act in all things for the salvation of men. It is the power by which the gospel is preached; by which the ordinances of salvation are performed so that they will be binding on earth and in heaven." (Mormon Doctrine, p. 594.)

I had an interesting gospel conversation about priesthood authority with a client in my bank office many years ago. After discussing business matters, we turned to religion. We had enough confidence in our friendship that we could each discuss the other's religious beliefs and still maintain both our friendship and our business relationship. When I asked, "Where do you find your priesthood authority, since the Catholic church excommunicated the founders of your religion?" he responded that authority was not needed nor was it the issue—the issue was the saving grace of Christ.

I had previously heard how Elder Hugh B. Brown handled a similar discussion when he was in military service, so I used the same approach. I pulled from my drawer a form the bank used to advise the appropriate departments that credit had been approved and funds could then be deposited to a client's account. Showing my friend the form, I said, "You can write better than I can. Why don't you approve a million dollar loan to your company? Sign it there where my signature usually goes; then take it to the head teller. Do you think he will give you the funds?"

"Of course not," he replied.

"Why not?"

"Well, in the first place, your head teller would know that amount is way too large for my small company to merit, and he would then look at the signature and would know either that it was forged, or . . . " He paused.

I asked, "Yes . . . go on . . . or what?"

"I get the point. He would know that I did not have the authority that you have to approve a loan."

I smiled and said, "You're a hundred percent right! If authority is needed to approve a loan, then why is not authority needed to promise someone blessings in this life and in the life to come?"

The sacred authority of the priesthood of the Son of God is not given to those who merely ask for it. Paul taught that "no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Hebrews 5:4.) Any ordinances performed without that authority are as invalid as a forged signature on a loan. Many baptisms and confirmations and other ordinances are performed by well-meaning people, but if those people lack the proper authority, they have no promise that the ordinance will be validated in this or the next life. Many, we fear, will be disillusioned when they arrive on the other side and find that the ordinances performed for them were invalid and the authority those who performed the ordinances thought they had is nonexistent. Sincerity or faith alone is not enough.

Elder James E. Talmage taught the following concerning authority: "We claim that the authority to administer in the name of God is operative in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today; and that this power or commission was conferred upon the first officers of the Church by ordination under the hands of those who had held the same power in earlier dispensations. That the authority of the holy priesthood was to be taken from the earth as the apostles of old were slain, and that of necessity it would have to be restored from heaven before the Church could be reestablished, may be shown by scripture. On May 15, 1829, while Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were engaged in earnest prayer for instruction concerning baptism for the remission of sins, mention of which Joseph Smith had found in the plates from which he was then engaged in translating the Book of Mormon, a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light. He announced himself as John, called of old the Baptist, and said he had come under the direction of Peter, James, and John, who held the keys of the higher Priesthood. The angel laid his hands upon the two young men and ordained them to authority, saying: 'Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness.' [D&C 13.]

"A short time after this event, Peter, James, and John appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, and ordained the two to the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood, bestowing upon them the keys of the apostleship, which these heavenly messengers had held and exercised in the former Gospel dispensation. This order of Priesthood holds authority over all the offices in the Church, and includes power to administer in spiritual things; consequently all the authorities and powers necessary to the establishment and development of the Church were by this visitation restored to earth." (Articles of Faith, 1985, pp. 170-71.)

Rote ceremonies, mechanical worshiping, and vain repetition do not produce personal salvation. The case of the Pharisee, a man who did everything according to the laws of the Jews and who was greatly honored by the community, and the publican, who collected customs duties and taxes and had a reputation for accepting bribes, illustrates this principle: "Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee and the other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess. And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner."

Then, we are told, Christ said, "I tell you, this [second] man went down to his house justified [blessed by God] rather than the other; for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." (Luke 18:10-14.)

One of the main requirements of this lesson of the Savior's is that we put our religion into practice by performing righteous acts and by obeying his commandments faithfully—we should be participants and not spectators. James taught, "Lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls. But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: for he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was." (James 1:21-24.)

James also explained, "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him? . . . Faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone. . . . Shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works. . . . Faith without works is dead." (James 2:14, 17-18, 26.)

Some tend to think that just because a few ordinances have been performed, or just because they have repented, they can relax and think they "have it made." This life is not one of arrival; rather it is a journey, where we are continually being given the opportunity to prove ourselves worthy of the rewards promised to those whose efforts have been characterized with steadfastness, hope, faith, and love throughout life to the very last moment of this existence.

Nephi said, "And now, my beloved brethren, after ye have gotten into this strait and narrow path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for ye have not come thus far save it were by the word of Christ with unshaken faith in him, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save.

"Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ [total commitment], having a perfect brightness of hope [faith and hope cannot be separated], and a love of God and of all men [always seeking to serve and help others]. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ [studying the scriptures and other words of the prophets—past and present], and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life.

"And now, behold, my beloved brethren, this is the way; and there is none other way nor name given under heaven whereby man can be saved in the kingdom of God. And now, behold, this is the doctrine of Christ, and the only and true doctrine of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." (2 Nephi 31:19-21.)

The Lord also will declare "I never knew you" to those who, even after many "good" deeds, are found wanting as the scribes and Pharisees were. Elder Dallin H. Oaks of the Council of the Twelve has written concerning motives for righteous acts: "Jesus looked beyond the actions of the scribes and Pharisees and condemned them because of their motives. He likened them to 'whited sepulchres,' which appear beautiful outside but are unclean inside. Although their actions he referred to were appropriate, they were acting for the wrong reasons. 'Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men,' he told them, 'but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity' (Matthew 23:27-28). In contrast, in choosing his disciples Jesus praised Nathanael as 'an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile' (John 1:47)." (Pure in Heart, p. 4.)

If we are like the hypocrites, professing to do righteous deeds such as giving to the poor, serving our fellowmen, taking care of the sick, and so on, but doing them to impress others instead of because we really want to do the Lord's will, the Savior will not accept our works. There is ample scriptural evidence that teaches us that in order to obtain blessings by these good acts, we must have the proper motive for doing them. Mormon taught: "God hath said a man being evil cannot do that which is good; for if he offereth a gift, or prayeth unto God, except he shall do it with real intent it profiteth him nothing. For behold, it is not counted unto him for righteousness." (Moroni 7:6-7.)

In our day the Lord has declared: "Although a man [even someone who has been given proper authority to act in God's name] may have many revelations, and have power to do many mighty works, yet if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon him." (D&C 3:4.)

Our greatest desire should be to obey the Lord's commands, follow after him, and want to make his will our will—and then to act according to this desire. The prophet Alma's advice to his son Corianton is explicit: "It is requisite with the justice of God that men should be judged according to their works; and if their works were good in this life, and the desires of their hearts were good, . . . they should also, at the last day, be restored unto that which is good." (Alma 41:3.)
