Robert E. Wells, Mount and the Master (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1991)

20

Build upon the Rock

Book of Mormon: "Therefore, whoso heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, who built his house upon a rock—and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not, for it was founded upon a rock. And every one that heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them not shall be likened unto a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand—and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell, and great was the fall of it." (3 Nephi 14:24-27.)

King James Version: "Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock: and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock. And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand: and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall of it." (Matthew 7:24-27.)

Jerusalem Bible: "Therefore, everyone who listens to these words of mine and acts on them will be like a sensible man who built his house on rock. Rain came down, floods rose, gales blew and hurled themselves against that house, and it did not fall: it was founded on rock. But everyone who listens to these words of mine and does not act on them will be like a stupid man who built his house on sand. Rain came down, floods rose, gales blew and struck that house, and it fell; and what a fall it had!"

Phillips Modern English Bible: "Everyone then who hears these words of mine and puts them into practice is like a sensible man who builds his house on rock. Down came the rain and up came the floods, while the winds blew and roared upon that house—and it did not fall because its foundations were on rock. And everyone who hears these words of mine and does not follow them can be compared with a foolish man who built his house on sand. Down came the rain and up came the floods, while the winds blew and battered that house till it collapsed, and fell with a great crash."

Elder James E. Talmage, in his closing comments on the Sermon on the Mount in Jesus the Christ, wrote: "The Sermon on the Mount has stood through all the years since its delivery without another to be compared with it. No mortal man has ever since preached a discourse of its kind. The spirit of the address is throughout that of sincerity and action, as opposed to empty profession and neglect. In the closing sentences the Lord showed the uselessness of hearing alone, as contrasted with the efficacy of doing. The man who hears and acts is likened unto the wise builder who set the foundation of his house upon a rock; and in spite of rain and hurricane and flood, the house stood. He that hears and obeys not is likened unto the foolish man who built his house upon the sand; and when rain fell, or winds blew, or floods came, behold it fell, and great was the fall thereof." (Jesus the Christ, 1983, pp. 229-30.)

Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin of the Council of the Twelve wrote on the subject of building upon the rock for an article in the New Era. He began by recounting the story of a wealthy benefactor who told a builder, saying, "Build me a home. Don't skimp on anything. Forget the cost." The builder did not live up to the trust. He cut corners, plastered over shoddy work, and sought to enrich himself by unethical means. When the home was finished, the builder presented the bills, which were paid without question, and then was overwhelmed and chagrined when the wealthy client gave back the keys, saying, "The home you have just built, my boy, is my present to you." Elder Wirthlin then went on to tell us how to build our lives right—how to build upon the real rock:

"The key to building a good life is to center that life on Christ and his teachings, to '[hear] these sayings of mine, and [do] them.' If we live the principles of the gospel, we are the fulfillment of the Savior's pronouncement: 'Ye are the light of the world' (Matt. 5:14). We can shine among our fellowmen, influencing them to glorify our Father in Heaven. . . . If we build our lives on service to others and to the Lord, we are promised the help of the master builder. . . . As you are building your life, your belief in Christ and his gospel will guide you the same way that it guides those of us who are still finishing our building."

After referring to the Ten Commandments and the Golden Rule, Elder Wirthlin continued, "What a magnificent blueprint for life at its best! These commandments and all that they encompass constitute a glorious challenge and an unassailable fortress against evil. They involve the use of time in the best and highest sense and will certainly safeguard our integrity and morality and help us be a good example. This is the kind of life building that is possible for Latter-day Saints. . . .

"If we build our life with and for our Savior, we will build it from the best materials and with the best effort we can give. We won't skimp on study or training or diligence or obedience. We won't misrepresent what we're trying to build. . . . We will wish to build something noble and solid, something worthy of the trust we have been given." ("Build It Right," New Era, March 1990, pp. 65-66.)

When we focus on Christ, we truly are building our life upon an eternal rock. President Thomas S. Monson once said in a talk in Buenos Aires, a talk for which I was his translator, that spirituality comes from focusing on Christ every day. He listed three things we should do in order to draw nearer to the Savior and to grow in spirituality:

Christ, who learned the trade of carpentry while he was preparing for his ministry, often referred to home building during his mission as he taught the higher laws of living. He spoke of foundations and of the body being "the temple of God." He declared that every house "divided against itself shall not stand" (Matthew 12:25); and, in the Sermon on the Mount, he likened a person's conduct to home building.

The Savior commanded us to "build upon [his] rock, which is [his] gospel." (D&C 11:24), and when he visited the people of Israel in the Americas after his resurrection, he was consistent in using the same imagery of building, declaring: "This is my doctrine, and whoso buildeth upon this buildeth upon my rock, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against them. And whoso shall declare more or less than this, and establish it for my doctrine, the same cometh of evil, and is not built upon my rock; but he buildeth upon a sandy foundation, and the gates of hell stand open to receive such when the floods come and the winds beat upon them." (3 Nephi 11:39-40.)

Helaman, the grandson of Alma, spoke these eternal words to his sons, Nephi and Lehi: "My sons, remember . . . that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind, yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo, because of the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall." (Helaman 5:12.)

If we build something that we want to last forever, it is imperative to have a firm foundation. To make it secure, we must excavate down to bedrock. This takes time and effort, perseverance, and exactness, but it is requisite to permanency. Thus it is with building our lives upon the rock of Christ. We must follow him, for he has taught us how to build. We cannot take the easy path, hoping to short-circuit laws, and expect to achieve anything permanent and eternal. Building our Christlike life requires active faith, diligence, heed, and endurance.

The Lord declared: "And now, behold, whosoever is of my church, and endureth of my church to the end, him will I establish upon my rock, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against them." (D&C 10:69.) "And, if you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God." (D&C 14:7.)

In a revelation given to Joseph Smith in 1832, the Savior said: "Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God." (D&C 88:119.) We each can use this pattern in building our own personal "home"—our thoughts, our words, our actions can be "built" after the pattern of this revelation of God. And to make our home with our family more celestial, we also can follow the Master Architect's blueprint that he has provided in this revelation.

President Thomas S. Monson has referred to this revelation from the Lord: "Where could any of us locate a more suitable blueprint whereby he could wisely and properly build? Such a house would meet the building code outlined in Matthew, even a house built 'upon a rock,' . . . a house capable of withstanding the rains of adversity, the floods of opposition, and the winds of doubt everywhere present in our challenging world. . . . Let the Lord be the General Contractor for the family—even the home—we build. Then each of us can be subcontractors responsible for a vital segment of the whole project. All of us are thereby builders." (Live the Good Life, p. 124.)

The great prophet of the Restoration, Joseph Smith, summarized his positive attitude about the future of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which is built upon the rock of Christ, in these ringing words: "Our missionaries are going forth to different nations. . . . The Standard of Truth has been erected; no unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing; persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done." (History of the Church 4:540.)

The personal testimony of every Latter-day Saints is also the rock upon which we stand. The introduction to the Book of Mormon, following the title page, refers to the divine witness, or testimony, that each member has and mentions three parts of that testimony:

The guidelines for daily living given to us by Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount are matchless in helping us to become perfect. These words came from our Savior—from him who has made it possible for every human being to come back into the presence of God and partake of life eternal.

President Howard W. Hunter, in his April 1990 conference address, provides a fitting summary to this book of the Savior's sermon on the mount:

"If we can pattern our life after the Master, and take his teaching and example as the supreme pattern for our own, we will not find it difficult to be consistent and loyal in every walk of life, for we will be committed to a single, sacred standard of conduct and belief. Whether at home or in the marketplace, whether at school or long after school is behind us, whether we are acting totally alone or in concert with a host of other people, our course will be clear and our standards will be obvious. We will have determined, as the prophet Alma said, 'to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that [we] may be in, even until death.' (Mosiah 18:9.) . . . [Ultimately,] righteous Christian life requires something more than a contribution. . . . It requires commitment—whole-souled, deeply held, eternally cherished commitment to the...commandments God has given." (Ensign, May 1990, p. 62.)
