Have you ever been so happy you clapped your hands for joy? The Book of Mormon tells about people who did just that!

Because King Noah and his priests did not keep the commandments, the Lord sent Abinadi to warn them that they must repent. Abinadi also taught them about Jesus Christ. King Noah put Abinadi to death. But one of King Noah’s priests, Alma, believed everything Abinadi taught.

Alma “repented of his sins and iniquities, and went about privately among the people, and began to teach the words of Abinadi” (Mosiah 18:1). Alma knew this would make King Noah angry, so Alma’s people hid.

Alma taught the people that they could be baptized and that if they kept the commandments, God would give them His Spirit. “When the people had heard these words, they clapped their hands for joy” (Mosiah 18:11).

Baptism is the first covenant we make. We renew our covenant each week when we take the sacrament. When we keep our baptismal covenant, the Lord promises us “that [we] may have eternal life” (Mosiah 18:9).

1.  Remove page F4 from the magazine, and mount it on heavy paper. Cut out the large rectangle.

2.  Fold the rectangle along the broken lines, and cut slits in the nine solid lines.

3.  Cut out the figures. Insert the tab on the baptism figure into the slit in the baptism scene (see illustration).

4.  Glue the back of the sacrament figures to the tab that folds out of the sacrament scene (see illustration).

5.  Cut out the scripture boxes, and read the references. Insert the tabs into the remaining slits.

2 Ne. 9:23

Matt. 3:16–17

Mosiah 18:8–10

Matt. 26:26–28

3 Ne. 18:5–11

D&C 20:72–79

Note: If you do not wish to remove pages from the magazine, this activity may be copied, traced, or printed out from the Internet at www.lds.org. For English, click on “Gospel Library.” For other languages, click on the world map.

1.  Help the children memorize D&C 58:42. Then refer to the steps of repentance found in Primary 3, lesson 10: (1) feel sorry, (2) ask forgiveness, (3) right the wrong, (4) don’t repeat the wrong. Draw a large circle, and divide it into four sections. Write one step in each section. Place the circle on the floor. Prepare case studies with situations that require repentance. For example: “You see a new girl, but you don’t ask her to join you.” Invite a child to toss a small object onto one of the four sections, read a case study, and tell what he or she would do for that step of repentance. Continue the game with other children. Read 3 Ne. 9:22. Bear testimony of the role of the Savior’s Atonement in repentance.

2.  Talk about Christ’s baptism (see Matt. 3:13–17) and that we follow His example (see 2 Ne. 31:4–13). Explain the following: (1) You must be at least eight. Sing a song or hymn about baptism. (2) You will have an interview with the bishop or branch president. Invite a member of the bishopric or branch presidency to talk about the interview. (3) You will wear white clothing. If possible, show some baptismal clothing. (4) The baptism must be performed by a worthy priest or Melchizedek Priesthood holder. See activity for no. 5. (5) Baptism is by immersion, so you will be completely covered with water. Invite a priest or returned missionary to explain how a baptism is performed. (6) You will also be confirmed a member of the Church. Invite children to tell about when they were baptized and confirmed (some people are confirmed immediately following baptism; others are confirmed in sacrament meeting). (7) You will receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Then you can receive a remission of sins. Sing a song or hymn about the Holy Ghost.
