Regardless of the preparation they were undoubtedly given and the reassurances they tried to remember, it must have been a stunning shock to Adam and Eve to leave their paradisiacal Garden of Eden and step into a fallen world.

With solemn awareness, they realized what it meant to trade their tranquil, carefree life for a world of opposition and sweat, thorns and sorrow—followed eventually by something called death. They could not have known at the beginning what all of this meant, but they soon learned that each day could bring new pain. Indeed, the most painful of all was the realization that they would face all this separated from their Father in Heaven—“shut out from his presence,” Moses would later record.

Given this separation and loneliness in a cold, dreary world, how comforting it must have been for Adam and Eve to remember one thing: that promises had been made—something sacred and eternal called covenants. They had promised they would obey Father all the days of their life, and He had promised to provide a Savior, who would relieve their pain and sorrow, atone for their mistakes, and bring them safely back into His presence.

But how would these mortals remember what they had promised? How would they remain aware of their perilous situation—aware all the time, day and night?!

For such a reminder He gave them “coats of skins.” What a gift this was and how timely. After partaking of the forbidden fruit, Adam and Eve were almost instantly aware that they were naked. First, they tried to cover their nakedness with fig leaves. Then, fearing that to be inadequate, they tried to hide from the Lord. (Such a foolish endeavor was evidence mortality was settling in!) From that moment to the present, a loving Father has invited His children to come, out of hiding, unto Him. And as with the coats of skins then and various items of clothing since, He in His mercy has not left us naked but has clothed the obedient in a “robe of righteousness,” a reminder of our promises and covenants. These “garments of salvation” symbolize the greatest gift of all, the Atonement of Jesus Christ.

Well, all this thinking about Adam and Eve and covenants and clothing is, of course, more than just a mental exercise. It’s not hard to imagine how Adam and Eve felt, because we too face troubles in this fallen world. We too have been separated from the presence of God, and we further distance ourselves every time we transgress. Like Adam and Eve, we have been given that same Savior, Jesus Christ of Nazareth, Alpha and Omega, the Son of the living God. Like Adam and Eve, we have made covenants with God. And, as part of the temple endowment, we have been given a sacred physical reminder of those covenants—a symbol of the Savior Himself. In our dispensation it is called the garment of the holy priesthood.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="161862962" id="aside2_p1">The garment of the holy priesthood reminds us of the veil in the temple, and that veil is symbolic of Jesus Christ. When you put on your garment, you put on a sacred symbol of Jesus Christ.</p> <p data-aid="161862963" id="aside2_p2">Wearing it is an outward expression of your inner commitment to follow Him. The garment is also a reminder of your temple covenants. You should wear the garment day and night throughout your life. When it must be removed for activities that cannot reasonably be done while wearing the garment, seek to restore it as soon as possible. As you keep your covenants, including the sacred privilege to wear the garment as instructed in the initiatory ordinances, you will have greater access to the Savior’s mercy, protection, strength, and power.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

We wear this garment beneath our outer clothing. Whatever responsibilities I have, whatever roles I play in life, whatever the duties of daily living require, beneath it all are my covenants—always and forever. Beneath it all are those sacred promises to which I desperately cling. The garment isn’t flaunted or shown off before the world, and neither are my covenants. But I do keep both close to me—as close as I possibly can. They are intensely personal and supremely sacred.

In remembering those covenants, those two-way promises, we wear the garment throughout our lives. This practice reflects our desire for the Savior to be a constant influence in our lives. Other beloved symbols are periodic. We are baptized once in our lives. We partake of the sacrament once a week. We attend the temple as circumstances permit. But the garment of the holy priesthood is different: this symbol we honor every day and night.

And that’s the way covenants are—not set aside out of convenience or carelessness and not modified to fit the styles and fashions of society. In the life of a disciple of Jesus Christ, the ways of the world must be modified to align with our covenants, not the other way around.

When we put on the garment, we are, as the First Presidency has taught, putting on a sacred symbol of Jesus Christ. That being the case, why would we ever look for an excuse to take that symbol off? Why would we deprive ourselves of the promise of power, protection, and mercy the garment represents? On the contrary, whenever we do have to temporarily remove the garment, we should be eager to put it back on, as soon as possible, because we remember both the promises and the perils that give meaning to our covenants. Above all, we remember the cross and empty tomb of Christ.

Some might say, “I have other ways to remember Jesus.” And I would respond, that’s wonderful. The more the better. Let’s all think of as many ways as we can to keep our commitment to “always remember him.” But in so doing, it would be disingenuous to intentionally neglect the reminder the Lord Himself gave to the endowed, the garment of the holy priesthood.

Jesus Christ and His gospel mean everything to me. All my eternal hopes and aspirations, everything I hold dear, hang on Him. He is “the rock of my salvation,” my way of access to my Heavenly Father, my only way back to what I once had and now want to have again, along with so very much more. His gift to us is the most generous I have ever received, the most generous ever given—purchased as it was with infinite suffering, extended to an infinite number, bestowed with infinite love. The thorns and thistles, the pain and anguish, the sorrow and sin of this fallen world are all “swallowed up in Christ.”

So I have worn the garment of the holy priesthood—every day and night as appropriate since I was endowed 64 years ago, at age 19—because I love Him and because I need the promises it represents.

Some of you may be reading this article hoping I will answer a particular question about the garment. You might hope for a “Thus saith the Lord”—or even a “Thus saith His servants”—on a matter close to your heart. Your question might stem from a personal circumstance related to employment, exercise, hygiene, climate, modesty, sanitary facilities, or even a medical condition.

Some answers to these kinds of questions can be found at temples.ChurchofJesusChrist.org and in section 38.5 of the General Handbook. Trusted family members and leaders might be consulted about a personal matter. There is, however, very clear direction given in the initiatory ordinances, and there is forever and ever your Father in Heaven, who knows you and loves you and understands everything about your circumstances. He would be thrilled to have you ask Him these questions personally.

Please don’t misunderstand. As you reach out for divine guidance, the Spirit will not inspire you to do less than follow the instruction received in the temple and the prophetic counsel shared by the First Presidency in their recent statement. A loving Father will not help you rationalize doing less than you can to align with His standards of devotion and modesty that will bless you now and forever. But does He understand your questions, and will He help you receive the blessings of respecting the garment and keeping your covenants? Yes! Should you also consult with competent medical and health professionals when needed? Of course! Should you disregard common sense or look beyond the mark? I pray that you won’t.

I can’t answer every question you have. I can’t even answer every question I have. But I can, as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, promise you the help of a loving God, who seeks your every success and blessing, in ways you can’t now fathom or foresee, as you keep the covenants you have made with Him.
