One day I was having lunch in the Church Administration Building cafeteria with three of my colleagues in the Seventy. While we were eating, President Russell M. Nelson came to our table with his bowl of soup and said, “May I join you?”

“Of course, President!” we all said. Who wouldn’t want to have lunch with the prophet?

While we ate, President Nelson shared a few experiences he has had in the many countries he has visited and talked about people who have inspired him. He was so kind, wise, and generous.

As we finished lunch, I turned to President Nelson and said, “President, I don’t know if I will sit at the same table with you anytime soon. But this evening, I am going to see my wife and children and tell them that I ate lunch with the prophet. I know they will ask me, ‘What did he tell you to tell us?’ President, what would you want me to tell my wife and children?”

President Nelson looked at me for a moment. I was so eager to hear what he had to say! “I have only three words for you,” he said. “Tell your family that I said, ‘Keep the commandments.’”

We have all heard this counsel from President Nelson before, but in that moment, I felt a personal, strong witness that President Nelson is truly the prophet. I thanked him, and later that day I told my family what had happened. Our children later made “Keep the Commandments” stickers and placed them on our refrigerator and mirrors to remind us of what President Nelson said.

Since then, I have pondered President Nelson’s counsel. When we keep the commandments, we show our love for Heavenly Father and the Savior. We draw closer to Them and abide in Their love. (See John 14:21; 15:10.)

This experience with the prophet has confirmed to me a profound and spiritually significant truth. In Primary we sing, “Follow the prophet; he knows the way.” He does know the way! The prophet knows the way because he knows the Savior, who is “the way, the truth, and the life” (John 14:6). When we follow the prophet, we are being led to Jesus Christ.

The Lord has given a significant and sacred role to prophets both anciently and in our day. We read in the scriptures that “surely the Lord God will do nothing, until he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets” (Joseph Smith Translation, Amos 3:7 [in Amos 3:7, footnote a]).

In the book of Ezekiel, we learn more about what is required of prophets. The Lord said to the prophet Ezekiel, “I have set thee [as] a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me” (Ezekiel 33:7).

Prophets, like watchmen on a tower, have the special mandate to be the Lord’s mouthpiece and declare what He has revealed to them. The Lord requires His prophets to be men of faith, men of integrity, and men who are fearless.

Samuel the Lamanite, for example, showed his complete commitment to Jesus Christ when he stood upon a wall and declared to the Nephites the things the Lord had put into his heart (see Helaman 13:4).

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="161863877" id="aside1_p1">Samuel the Lamanite showed his complete commitment to Jesus Christ when he stood upon a wall and declared to the Nephites the things the Lord had put into his heart.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

“And behold, an angel of the Lord hath declared it unto me,” Samuel said, “and he did bring glad tidings to my soul. And behold, I was sent unto you to declare it unto you also, that ye might have glad tidings; but behold ye would not receive me” (Helaman 13:7).

It is remarkable to me that Samuel boldly testified of truth—even when the Nephites “cast stones at him … and … shot arrows at him as he stood upon the wall” (Helaman 16:2). We see this boldness in prophets, seers, and revelators today.

Not long ago, I met a couple during a stake conference in Nashville, Tennessee, USA. The wife had been a member of the Church all her life. The husband was not a member.

They came up to me, and the husband said, “I am ready to be baptized.”

I was happy to hear that! I asked him, “What has changed?”

He told me, “When I heard President Nelson’s message in general conference, it touched me so much. I knew then that he was a prophet. I gained a testimony, and now I’m ready to be baptized.”

I also know a woman in Cape Coast, Ghana, who somehow tuned into general conference. She had never heard of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but she became glued to what she saw and heard from prophets, seers, and revelators. Afterward, she looked for the Church. She found a chapel and met the missionaries. Eventually she was baptized. Recently, she sent me pictures of herself at the temple to receive her endowment.

These two instances show how powerful the prophet’s message is to the world! If all would heed his message, the world would be so peaceful. We would all focus on what matters most, including developing a relationship with Heavenly Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, and building strong, eternal families. We would also be our best selves because we would keep the two great commandments: loving God and loving our neighbor (see Matthew 22:37–39). We would bring forth Zion, a society where love, righteousness, and harmony prevail, reflecting the spirit of discipleship (see Doctrine and Covenants 82:14).

When we follow the prophet, we can be confident that we are doing what God would have us do because the prophet follows—and helps us follow—Jesus Christ. Because of Jesus Christ, everything in life becomes meaningful. “We can feel joy regardless of what is happening—or not happening—in our lives.” By following the prophet, we can truly make the world a better place.

When the Saints were driven from Kirtland, Ohio, the First Presidency entrusted Oliver Granger to sell the Saints’ properties and settle the debts of the Church. Oliver, an ordinary man mostly blind due to exposure to the cold, accepted this challenging task because the Prophet Joseph Smith and other leaders had asked him. Oliver persevered through many difficulties, and the Lord valued his sacrifice and efforts.

“I remember my servant Oliver Granger,” the Lord stated. “Behold, verily I say unto him that his name shall be had in sacred remembrance from generation to generation, forever and ever. …

“… And when he falls he shall rise again, for his sacrifice shall be more sacred unto me than his increase” (Doctrine and Covenants 117:12–13).

Oliver and his wife, Lydia, sustained the prophet, and the Lord recognized that Oliver had done his best even if he was not always successful. The Lord highlighted the value of his efforts over his achievements.

As a missionary and even now, I do not recall hearing much about Oliver Granger, but his name is mentioned in scripture because he obeyed the prophet’s direction and received promised blessings—his name is had in sacred remembrance. We learn from Oliver Granger that even though direction comes from a divine source (through prophets), it does not guarantee a smooth path devoid of challenges, but the promises are sure (see Alma 37:17).

What would our lives be like without prophets? The living prophet and President of the Church represents a direct line of communication from God to His people and is the only person on earth who receives revelation to guide the entire Church. He also provides ongoing revelation from God to help us navigate the challenges of our time. By heeding the prophet’s counsel, we can find peace, joy, and direction in our lives as we strive to become more like Jesus Christ. (See Doctrine and Covenants 21:4–6.)

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="161863929" id="aside2_p1">By heeding the prophet’s counsel, we can find peace, joy, and direction in our lives as we strive to become more like Jesus Christ.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

Let us embrace the teachings and example of modern-day prophets, knowing that they are instruments in God’s hands and lead us toward eternal blessings. I love them and pray for them. I am grateful to know that they are inspired and help lead us and our families to our Savior, Jesus Christ.
