When was the last time you were truly happy?

Was that question hard to answer?

During challenging times, we might get so entrenched in our trials that we can’t really recall what joy feels like. As Sister Reyna I. Aburto, former Second Counselor in the Relief Society General Presidency, described it: “Black clouds may … form in our lives, which can blind us to God’s light and even cause us to question if that light exists for us anymore.”

For many of us young adults, life can sometimes feel like something to just endure—something to struggle through until we finally receive those blessings we’re promised.

What we sometimes forget is that it’s also something to enjoy. The blessing of eternal happiness can start now.

Here are a few ways we can reignite light and joy in our lives.

Instead of training our eyes to see in the darkness, we can search for the rays of light that the gospel of Jesus Christ brings to our life.

President Russell M. Nelson has reminded us that “joy comes from and because of [Jesus Christ]. He is the source of all joy.” When you are struggling to find light in your life, turning to Jesus Christ should always be the first step.

You can also ask Heavenly Father to help you remember the significance of your divine identity.

Elder Gary B. Sabin of the Seventy taught, “It is crucial to our happiness that we remember that we are sons and daughters of a loving Heavenly Father.” Truly knowing that God is aware of you and wants the best for you can light up your life.

Despite the challenges you face, remembering these basic principles of the gospel can help you invite the Savior’s light into your life.

Sometimes it can be hard to remember that our happiness doesn’t always look the same as everyone else’s. In fact, as young adults, it’s hard not to compare our lives to those around us. But remember that you have control over your own happiness.

Ask yourself: what makes you happy?

What makes you smile?

As then-President Dieter F. Uchtdorf suggested when he was Second Counselor in the First Presidency, “Reduce the rush and take a little extra time to get to know yourself better.” Look for the beauty in the little things: Take a walk. Visit the temple. Sign up for a service project. Find a new hobby or pick up where you left off on an old one.

Elder Richard G. Scott (1928–2015) of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles once spoke of how creativity can illuminate our lives: “Select something like music, dance, sculpture, or poetry. Being creative will help you enjoy life. It engenders a spirit of gratitude. It develops latent talent, sharpens your capacity to reason, to act, and to find purpose in life. It dispels loneliness and heartache. It gives a renewal, a spark of enthusiasm, and zest for life.”

Finding what fills your heart with happiness can help reignite the light in your life when you’re in a rut.

If life gets too overwhelming and you feel like it’s taking all your energy to just get through each day, take a moment of stillness to focus on what matters most.

To do so, President Uchtdorf suggested that we “simplify our lives a little.” Refocus your life on Heavenly Father’s love and the beautiful gift of Christ’s Atonement. Prioritize your relationships with your family, friends, and yourself.

Fight the negative with positive, the darkness with the light of Jesus Christ and His gospel.

As President Nelson encouraged us: “Let us not just endure this current season. Let us embrace the future with faith!” While enduring the hardships of life, learn to enjoy the beauty of it as well. The eternal happiness that the gospel promises does not start sometime in the future—it starts now.
