The Nephites needed to prepare themselves to receive the Savior physically into their presence. What can we learn from their example to help us receive the Savior spiritually into our lives?

Then: When the prophet Nephi was feeling “cast down,” he pondered “upon the things which the Lord had shown unto him” (Helaman 10:2–3).

Now: Remembering what God has done for us, in both good times and bad, will give us strength and courage to stay close to Him and face the future with faith.

President Henry B. Eyring, Second Counselor in the First Presidency, suggested we reflect daily and record our impressions. He said: “You might pray and ponder, asking the questions: Did God send a message that was just for me? Did I see His hand in my life or the lives of my children?”

How have you seen God’s love, inspiration, or blessings in your life today?

Then: Mormon was bold in declaring that he was “a disciple of Jesus Christ” (3 Nephi 5:13).

Now: Elder Jonathan S. Schmitt of the Seventy has suggested that we can focus on Jesus Christ by taking upon us different titles of His. For example, Jesus is “the same yesterday, today, and forever” (1 Nephi 10:18). Elder Schmitt suggests that we can take upon us this title by being consistent in living the gospel.

What other names or titles of Jesus Christ can you think of and apply to yourself?

Then: In 3 Nephi 10:4–6, Jesus Christ likens Himself to a hen gathering her chicks. This is beautiful imagery because He is always beckoning us to come to Him so He can protect and nourish us. But we must choose to come unto Him. He said, “How oft would I have gathered you as a hen gathereth her chickens, and ye would not” (verse 5).

Now: Jesus continues to gather us today, but we have to let ourselves be gathered to Him. Are you allowing yourself to be gathered to the Savior and find protection with Him, or are you refusing and staying exposed to danger?

What invitation is the Savior extending to you, and what do you need to do to accept it?

Then: It took the Nephites three tries to hear the voice of God. “The third time they did hear the voice, and did open their ears to hear it; and their eyes were towards the sound thereof; and they did look steadfastly towards heaven” (3 Nephi 11:5).

Now: One way we can “look steadfastly towards heaven” is by, in President Russell M. Nelson’s phrase, “thinking celestial.” He explains that one aspect of thinking celestial is “being spiritually minded.”

What can you do to be more spiritually minded and “look steadfastly towards heaven”?
