Although we will each undoubtedly face many challenges in mortality, the Savior’s promise of healing can provide us with the comfort, peace, and joy we need to overcome those challenges. We can be healed from our spiritual, mental, emotional, and physical wounds as we accept Jesus Christ’s invitation to come unto Him.

President Nelson has taught:

“Study again the account of the Savior’s appearance to the Nephites in the Americas, as recorded in 3 Nephi. Not long before that appearance, His voice was heard among the people, including these words of supplication:

“‘Will ye not now return unto me, and repent of your sins, and be converted, that I may heal you?

“‘… Behold, mine arm of mercy is extended towards you, and whosoever will come, him will I receive’ [3 Nephi 9:13–14].

“Dear brothers and sisters, Jesus Christ extends that same invitation to you today. I plead with you to come unto Him so that He can heal you! He will heal you from sin as you repent. He will heal you from sadness and fear. He will heal you from the wounds of this world.”

Church leaders have spoken in general conference about healing. They also have shared messages about this topic on social media, including the following:

“During my recent meeting with some young members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, a young woman asked for advice about dealing with emotional challenges while being engaged in the Lord’s work.

“I am grateful to my new friend Carol, who shared how her understanding of the Atonement of Jesus Christ has given her comfort through her anxiety.”

Video:

President Oaks: “When my father died, my mother moved her three children … to live with our grandparents because she suffered a very serious mental breakdown and was unable to care for herself. Or, first of all, unable to continue a master’s degree program she had begun at that time. And she had to have medical assistance for almost two years to function. Now, that’s a pretty serious form of mental instability. And I grew up with that because my mother had a miraculous recovery from her nervous breakdown and became a person of extraordinary mental capacity, having a professional life in which she helped organize academic programs to care for people that had a mental instability and in which she was a leading professional in her life. And some people have greater gifts of mental stability than others. Some may struggle all their life. Some may have a serious episode and get over it, like my mother did. But what are some ways to promote mental stability?”

Carol: “I’ve experienced a lot of anxiety throughout my life. And so I feel like this has been a question that I’ve had on my mind a lot and I’ve struggled with a lot too. But these last few weeks in seminary, we’ve really been focusing on learning about the Atonement. And as I learned about Jesus Christ, and that he suffered every single thing I’ve felt, I felt so much comfort, knowing that any mental instability I may feel, for whatever reason, he’s felt that too. And I was able to find great comfort in that and just knowing that I’m not alone.”

President Oaks: “That’s a wonderful description of a part of the Atonement that many people overlook. He didn’t just suffer for our sins. He suffered for our pains, our inadequacies, including our depressions and anxieties. He’s felt it all.”

President Dallin H. Oaks, Facebook, Aug. 6, 2023, facebook.com/dallin.h.oaks.

“Because of health challenges of one of our dear family members, Harriet and I were reminded again of the need to always trust the Lord and the healing power that only Jesus Christ can provide.

“When we first heard the news about the illness, we were heartbroken—but hopeful. We were assured that health care personnel would do everything possible to cure the physical illness. And we knew that the Savior’s grace would be the power to bring divine healing to the soul.

“We all may take solace in knowing that God’s gift to all mankind, even His Son, Jesus Christ, is an active healing power throughout the year, not just at Christmas and Easter.

“Harriet and I are deeply grateful that the message of Christmas is a message of joy and healing. This Christmas season, and every season of the year, we can trust in Jesus Christ. He will bring hope and healing into our lives.

“Merry Christmas! May God bless you all.”

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Facebook, Dec. 20, 2023, facebook.com/dieterf.uchtdorf.

“Repentance requires the Redeemer. Turning away from evil does not bring spiritual healing without turning to Him.

“Ezra Taft Benson (1899–1994), president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, taught that repentance indeed produces changes in attitudes and behavior, but simply changing attitudes and behavior is not repentance.

“President Benson said, ‘Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is the foundation upon which sincere and meaningful repentance must be built. If we truly seek to put away sin, we must first look to Him who is the Author of our salvation.’”

Video:

“Recognizing and forsaking sin, feeling remorse and making restitution for sin, and confessing sins to God and, when needed, to our priesthood leaders are all necessary and important elements in the repentance process. However, these essential steps do not constitute a mere behavioral checklist we can mechanically, quickly, and casually complete. If we do these things and fail to recognize and depend upon the Redeemer and His atoning sacrifice, then even our best individual efforts are in vain. The results of sincere repentance are peace, comfort, spiritual healing and renewing, and joy.”

Elder David A. Bednar, Facebook, Sept. 8, 2023, facebook.com/davida.bednar.

“As we seek to develop Christlike attributes and adopt the pure love of Christ to guide our ambition, we should recognize that progress and refinement come over time and with divine help—grace to grace, and grace for grace.

“Certainly, we are all clumsy when compared to Jesus Christ. But He still deems us worthy of His attention, love, and help, and with that help, our competence grows. Christ’s interest in us is remarkably individual and personal, just as with His friends in the days of His mortal ministry.

“He is still with us though unseen. He can still weep with and comfort the Marys who have lost brothers, sisters, parents, spouses, or children. Virtue can still flow out of Him to heal women and men reaching out to touch the hem of His garment. Jesus is not afraid of close friendships.”

Elder D. Todd Christofferson, Facebook, Dec. 10, 2023, facebook.com/dtodd.christofferson.

“Our visit this week [in Brazil] with Pernambuco [State] Governor Raquel Lyra was a special experience that Kathy and I will not soon forget.

“Governor Lyra was as gracious and as kind as she could be. We were pleased that Elder and Sister Joni Koch from the Brazil area presidency also joined us.

“However, what started as a simple, cordial visit quickly became something much more meaningful for each of us.

“Tragically, Governor Lyra lost her husband just a few months ago following a massive heart attack in October 2022. As could be expected, her husband’s death has left Governor Lyra and her two young children with a tremendous sense of loss and sadness.

“As Governor Lyra shared her feelings of love and grief with us, we were able to reassure her about the eternal nature of our souls and that her husband is still alive.

“We shared a Book of Mormon with her, and she read Alma 40:11–12 that speaks beautifully about the life that follows those who believe in Jesus Christ and follow Him. I shared my personal witness of the Savior with her.

“In a show of mutual love and respect, following our meeting, Governor Lyra walked us down the beautiful stone stairway and told us good-bye at the front of the Governor’s Palace.

“The sense of loss we feel at death is very real and very personal—but so is the hope and healing that comes to us because of Jesus Christ.

“‘O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?’

“‘Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ’ (1 Corinthians 15:55, 57).”

Elder Neil L. Andersen, Facebook, Mar. 9, 2023, facebook.com/neill.andersen.

“My wife, Rosana, and I were thrilled to be with students at BYU–Hawaii recently. We discussed having faith in Jesus Christ, the greatest power available to us in this life.

“Choosing to believe and develop faith in Jesus Christ increases our access to godly power, regardless of the disappointments and uncertainties of life. It is the source of living with divine purpose and eternal perspective.

“As we focus our lives on the Savior, we will find answers to our souls’ deep and essential concerns. I assure you that our confidence and faith in our Savior, Jesus Christ, will strengthen us to continue moving forward despite our challenges. It gives us reason for firm hope and provides a solid anchor to our souls, giving us a lasting inner peace that we need to live in these days and find rest in Him.

“Through the Savior Jesus Christ and His healing atoning sacrifice, we are enabled to stand tall and strong, even in the face of adversity. The Savior’s healing power fills our souls with peace, light, understanding, joy, and love.”

Elder Ulisses Soares, Facebook, Mar. 21, 2023, facebook.com/soares.u.

“Last month our presidency had the opportunity to speak at BYU Women’s Conference on the topic ‘Jesus Christ Is Relief.’ I focused on the emotional relief the Savior provides as the Master Healer. I shared my youngest daughter’s experience with emotional health challenges that began when she was a very young girl. Over the past five years of her healing journey, she has come to understand how the Savior has been with her throughout her whole life, even during the times she felt utterly abandoned by Him and unable to feel the Spirit. She came to recognize that Jesus Christ was there in every good thing that came into her life and in every good person who offered a helping hand.

“Millions struggle with mental and emotional health challenges. One of the very difficult parts of these challenges is the stigma surrounding them and the harsh judgment by some that they are a character flaw or a sign of weakness or laziness. The effects of mental and emotional illness are just as real and just as devastating as a physical illness or injury, but the effects can be less outwardly apparent than a broken leg or cancer. The effects of mental and emotional illness can often make it hard for a person to function or find joy. Some tell those with mental health challenges to just ‘get over it’ and ‘try harder’ or ‘be more faithful.’ We wouldn’t say that to someone with cancer or a broken leg.

“Our Savior, Jesus Christ, is our greatest source of relief. What a blessing it is that we can partner with Him to help bring emotional, spiritual, and physical relief to those around us. Let us be instruments of relief in His hands for those around us, including our own family members. There are so many who need the Savior’s relief!”

Sister J. Annette Dennis, Facebook, June 20, 2023, https://www.facebook.com/RS1stCounselor.

“President Nelson has said, ‘There is no medication or operation that can fix the many spiritual woes and maladies that we face.

“‘There is, however, a remedy—one that may seem surprising—because it flies in the face of our natural intuitions. Nevertheless, its effects have been validated by scientists as well as men and women of faith. 

“‘I am referring to the healing power of gratitude. …

“‘Counting our blessings is far better than recounting our problems. No matter our situation, showing gratitude for our privileges is a fast-acting and long-lasting spiritual prescription. …

“‘Does gratitude spare us from sorrow, sadness, grief, and pain? No, but it does soothe our feelings. It provides us with a greater perspective on the very purpose and joy of life’ (The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, “President Russell M. Nelson on the Healing Power of Gratitude,” Nov. 20, 2020, YouTube video).

“As President Nelson said, science backs up his words. The Mayo Clinic website states: ‘Expressing gratitude is associated with a host of mental and physical benefits. Studies have shown that feeling thankful can improve sleep, mood and immunity. Gratitude can decrease depression, anxiety, difficulties with chronic pain and risk of disease’ (“Can Expressing Gratitude Improve Your Mental, Physical Health?,” Mayo Clinic Health System, Dec. 6, 2022).

“And BYU research suggests gratitude to God, and indebtedness to Him, is far more meaningful and impactful than simply gratitude alone. In other words, counting your blessings and recognizing the source they come from can be even more powerful in our lives.

“President James E. Faust called gratitude ‘an expression of faith’ and ‘a saving principle’ (general conference, Apr. 1990).

“I love this verse in Doctrine and Covenants 78:19: ‘And he who receiveth all things with thankfulness shall be made glorious; and the things of this earth shall be added unto him, even an hundred fold, yea, more.’

“‘All things’ include even the difficult things.

“Let us recognize the source from which all our blessings flow. Let’s cultivate an ‘attitude of gratitude,’ as President Thomas S. Monson would say. It really is life-changing!”

Sister J. Annette Dennis, Facebook, Nov. 23, 2023, http://facebook.com/RS1stCounselor.

“How has knowing you are a child of God rescued you?

“Recently, we (President Camille N. Johnson, Sister Tracy Y. Browning, and Sister Andrea Veronica Muñoz Spannaus) had the opportunity to visit Nashville, Tennessee. While we were there, we had the privilege to visit Thistle Farms, a place that provides a sanctuary of healing and redemption. The mission of Thistle Farms reflects the profound understanding that our eternal truth goes beyond the circumstances that may have defined us.

“The words of President Russell M. Nelson came to our mind during our visit: ‘My dear friends, you are literally spirit children of God. You have sung this truth since you learned the words to ‘I Am a Child of God.’ But is that eternal truth imprinted upon your heart? Has this truth rescued you when confronted with temptation?’ (“Choices for Eternity” [worldwide devotional for young adults, May 15, 2022], Gospel Library).

“At Thistle Farms, individuals are not just survivors but are embraced as worthy and valued contributors to a community that understands, as their mantra goes, that ‘love heals.’ This love, rooted in the understanding that we are loved by God, becomes the catalyst for profound personal restoration.”

Sister Tracy Y. Browning, Facebook, Dec. 3, 2023, http://facebook.com/Primary2ndCounselor.
