Mary Galuak, a refugee from South Sudan and mother of four children, soon to be five, learned tailoring through self-reliance classes held in late 2023 by the Eldoret Kenya District of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. At successful completion of the training, she and other tailoring participants were each provided a Butterfly pedal-powered sewing machine, starter fabric, and thread. Participants were encouraged to start with small projects, such as pillows, to earn immediate revenue.

In early 2024, through her marketing efforts, Mary was invited to submit sample uniforms to a school in South Sudan. She recruited three other self-reliance class participants to assist in the work. Sample uniforms were designed, sewn, and shipped in early February.

Roughly 10 days after submitting the samples, Mary was notified that she had won the contract. The time frame to complete the uniforms was two weeks. Together with her three associates, Mary began earnestly sewing to meet the contract requirements.

Mary explained the significant behind-the-scenes challenges. “Starting a business is the most difficult process, but with perseverance and consistency, it is possible. Marketing to get customers has been so hard. I know God answers every prayer. Without Almighty Father’s help, I would have not won this contract. It has given me a lot of experience in patience and hope for something better. I have had unsuccessful attempts to get some contracts for sewing school uniforms, but I didn’t give up.”

The contract is sufficient to cover costs and pay participants, with monies left over to purchase additional supplies. It is not as lucrative as she would have hoped, but Mary bid the job low to get it.

Mary had other concerns amidst this project. Her fifth child was due in early April and she and her family had been patiently waiting for the green light from the Church’s Temple Patron Assistance Fund to travel to Accra, Ghana to be sealed in the temple. They hoped to complete their temple work before the airlines restricted her travel because of her pregnancy. Despite numerous delays before and after embarking, the Galuak family was sealed on 1 March 2024. Her tailoring team covered for her absence.

Due undoubtedly to the stress of the uniforms contract and traveling challenges, Mary delivered their fifth child, Blessing, in the early morning hours of March 12, three weeks early and just 8 days after returning from Accra and the temple. Blessing’s name honors Mary’s grandmother, who died just before Mary learned she was expecting her fifth child.

Mary said she was so happy to be part of the member-focused self-reliance program. She said, “Self-reliance has blessed me and my family with a lot of opportunity and experiences that allow us to focus on the gospel of Jesus Christ. I know the talent and skill and knowledge I have received from tailoring classes will bless the lives of my relatives, friends, and family members in the future. I am so grateful for all the blessings I am receiving from the self-reliance program.”
