One day, as Jesus was moving through a crowd of people, he suddenly turned and asked, “Who touched me?” His disciples were confused by the question. Anyone in the throng could have accidently bumped against him. Then Jesus said, “Somebody hath touched me: for I perceive that virtue [power] is gone out of me.”

The touch was, in fact, an act of faith. A woman with an “issue of blood” had touched his garment, believing that by doing so she would be healed. And she was. When Jesus saw her, he said, “Daughter, be of good comfort: thy faith hath made thee whole” (Luke 8:43–48; see Matt. 9:20–22).

That same gift of healing, through faith in Jesus Christ and according to our Heavenly Father’s will, is available to us today as we struggle with afflictions of body, mind, and spirit.

James instructs the sick to “call for the elders of the church” to anoint them “with oil in the name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save the sick” (James 5:14–15).

Those receiving the blessing join their faith with the faith of loved ones and of the priesthood holders performing the ordinance. The Lord promises that “he that hath faith in me to be healed, and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed” (D&C 42:48).

Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ includes trusting him completely. A young sister who was struggling with cancer expressed this faith to Elder M. Russell Ballard of the Quorum of the Twelve. “I am not afraid to die,” she said. “I would like to live. There are things I would still like to accomplish in this life, but I know that Jesus is my Savior. During these past few years He has become my best friend. I trust Him. Whatever He wants for me, I am prepared.”

Elder Ballard gave her a blessing but left the matter with Heavenly Father, as she had requested. She died soon after, “with the peace of the Lord attending her and her faithful family” (Ensign, May 1996, 81).

At times, faithful Saints come to understand that perhaps the greatest healing miracles take place in their hearts as they live with—and learn from—adversity. For example, President Spencer W. Kimball dealt nobly and patiently with affliction. While serving as an Apostle, most of his vocal cords had to be removed because of cancer. Yet for many years afterward, he served as a spokesman and prophet for the Lord, lifting his voice in testimony heard throughout the world.

“If our faith is anchored securely in our testimonies of Christ,” said Elder Ballard, “we will be able to cope with whatever adversity comes our way, and we will be able to do so in a positive, faith-promoting manner. If we keep the eye of faith focused on Christ, we gain a broader view and an eternal perspective, and with that we can understand adversity from within the context of Heavenly Father’s eternal plan for all of His children. And we can find comfort in this life in the eternal safety, peace, joy and security that He promises” (Ensign, December 1996, 61).

- How may we obtain peace and acceptance of the Lord’s will for us in our adversities?

- How may we offer faith toward the healing of family members, neighbors, and friends?
