No specific author, I Know That My Redeemer Lives: Latter-day Prophets Testify of the Savior ( 1990)

Publisher's Preface

All thirteen latter-day prophets have proclaimed that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God. All have shared their witness of the Lord and Savior with the world. While all have testified of his greatness and glory, all have also contrasted his majesty with the individual attention he showers on each of his Father's children. All have emphasized that Christlike acts, constant living of his commandments, and emphasis on service and sincerity are what convince the soul that Jesus Christ lives.

Though today's latter-day prophets have no need for signs, they have received them. As they have prepared themselves for life eternal, the Lord has prepared them for final service at the head of this church—under his direction. Hence prophets have been schooled in the ways of the Lord through their own living. They have had disappointments and disasters beyond the scope of many; they have had to reach for an understanding of principles; and they have had to build their commitment to God's plan, precept upon precept. Their testimonies are poignant and to the point.

In one general conference, Elder Boyd K. Packer explained the responsibility of being a special witness of Jesus Christ: "We do not talk of those sacred interviews that qualify the servants of the Lord to bear a special witness of Him, for we have been commanded not to do so.

"But we are free, indeed, we are obliged, to bear that special witness." (In Conference Report, April 1980, p. 86.)

Often, such witness comes not of fire and thunder but of the still, small voice speaking softly to the soul. The prophets tell of those quiet moments when they alone wrestled with the weight of their role and found new comfort in the Redeemer, who suffered for all mankind. From the witnesses of these prophets, it is clear that testimonies are determined not by what we say but by how we live.

Preparation of this book involved reviewing all the conference talks given by those who became presidents of the Church, the Journal of Discourses, and many talks from funeral sermons to seminary graduation addresses to letters to family members. Messages in the church magazines, printed compilations of addresses and thoughts, newspapers, biographies, and journals were consistent source material for each prophet. Citations follow the excerpts selected for publication. Except where otherwise indicated, the author of the source is the prophet of the chapter.

These sources do not exhaust all that the prophets have said in testifying of the divinity of Jesus Christ. Rather they highlight significant passages either testifying of the Savior or teaching about some aspect of the Savior and his eternal ministry. Some of the longer passages have been condensed because of space limitations. Deletions between sections are indicated by ellipses.

The testimonies of the prophets are not loaded with expansive terms and flowery phrases. Instead, their references to and sermons about the Savior are intimate and reverent. One prophet's statement capsulizes the relationship of the Lord to his prophets: "He is my friend, my Savior, my Lord, my God." This compilation reflects that relationship.
