No specific author, I Know That My Redeemer Lives: Latter-day Prophets Testify of the Savior ( 1990)

Chapter 5

LORENZO SNOW

Born: 3 April 1814

Ordained an Apostle: 12 February 1849

Ordained President: 13 September 1898

Died: 10 October 1901

We Are Dependent upon Jesus Christ.

Now it is so ordered and so arranged, that we are dependent, in a great measure, one upon another. For instance, take us as a people, we are dependent upon a being that is above us to secure our peace, our happiness, our glory, and exaltation; we are individually dependent upon the exertions of an individual who is above ourselves.

For instance, we are all dependent upon Jesus Christ, upon his coming into the world to open the way whereby we might secure peace, happiness, and exaltation. And had he not made these exertions, we never could have been secured in these blessings and privileges which are guaranteed unto us in the Gospel, through the mediation of Jesus Christ, for he made the necessary exertions.

In order to accomplish the gathering of Israel out of Egyptian bondage, there had to be something done to liberate them from their thraldom, and this something had to be done by a higher power, by an individual that had more wisdom, more intelligence, more understanding, and more power and means within his hands for the purpose of securing those blessings which they needed. They never could have got out from their difficulties nor from their bondage, unless this power had been exerted by one who had more intelligence, more knowledge, more information in relation to the means of their deliverance.

It is just so in a thousand other cases, there has to be a power exercised for the benefit of the people, there has to be exertions made, and they never can receive the blessings and privileges that are for them, unless those exertions were made by an individual possessing more knowledge, more wisdom, and greater power than themselves.

Jesus, on a certain occasion, speaking to Peter, said to him, "Simon Peter, lovest thou me?" he answered that he did. Well, then, replied Jesus, "feed my sheep." Jesus interrogated him again, saying, "Simon Peter, lovest thou me?" Peter answered, "I do, Lord." Jesus said unto him, "Feed my lambs." In this case we perceive there was an exertion to be made for the benefit of those that had not that power and information, but this alone is not sufficient.

Had Moses, for instance, having done all that he did, had he delivered Israel from Egyptian bondage, and having done all that he could and all that mortal man could do for their redemption, having done all in his power, and been willing to lay down his life and to sacrifice everything that he had to accomplish that work, would he have secured the people to himself, and have brought about that union which was so necessary, without any exertion on their part? No, most assuredly it would not have been accomplished, for there had to be a return, an exertion on their part, in order to secure that union and that love, and to secure that fellowship between them and him, which it was necessary should exist, and so it is in reference to Jesus Christ, though he has sacrificed himself and laid the plan for the redemption of the people, yet unless the people labour to obtain that union between him and them, their salvation never will be accomplished. Thus we see that some thing has to be done by each party, in order to secure each other's friendship, and to bind us together as a community.

—1 March 1857, Journal of Discourses, 4:239-40.

Jesus Sought to Honor the Father.

Jesus, while travelling here on earth, fulfilling his mission, told the people he did not perform the miracles he wrought in their midst by his own power, nor by his own wisdom; but he was there in order to accomplish the will of his Father. He came not to seek the glory of men, and the honor of men; but to seek the honor and glory of his Father that sent him. Said he, "I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not, if another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive."

Now, the peculiarity of his mission, and that which distinguished it from other missions, was this: he came not to seek the honor and glory of men, but to seek the honor and glory of his Father, and to accomplish the work of his Father who sent him. Herein lay the secret of his prosperity; and herein lies the secret of the prosperity of every individual who works upon the same principle.

—9 October 1869, Journal of Discourses, 13:254.

State of Perfection.

The Latter-day Saints expect to arrive at this state of perfection; we expect to become as our Father and God, fit and worthy children to dwell in his presence; we expect that when the Son of God shall appear, we shall receive our bodies renewed and glorified, and that "these vile bodies will be changed and become like unto his glorious body."

—7 April 1879, Journal of Discourses, 20:189.

How I Gained a Testimony.

I have been over fifty years . . . actively engaged in bearing witness of my knowledge respecting the divine authenticity of what is called Mormonism, and have declared the principles of my religion and borne my testimony of them through various portions of my own country, also in Great Britain, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, France, Italy, Switzerland, Austria, Germany, Turkey, Land of Palestine, and on the islands of the sea. These arduous and sacred responsibilities would never have been ventured by me without first knowing this religion, this gospel, and the authority to preach it had come direct from God to Joseph Smith, pure and unadulterated; not simply a belief but a knowledge direct to me from God himself. . . .

In speaking of knowledge I employ the term in its literal sense. I mean a physical demonstration, not belief alone, a feeling arising merely from mental enlightenment, as you mention, but a physical knowledge, through the organ of the senses, of a nature which could never be questioned or doubted by its possessor while life and memory exist. . . .

Being at that time a young man, full of worldly aspirations, with bright prospects, and means to gratify my ambition in acquiring a liberal collegiate education; also having a host of wealthy, proud, aristocratic friends and relatives watching eagerly for my achieving high honors in life, of course you can easily understand that it was a great trial, and required the strongest effort to form a resolution to abandon those prospects, disappoint expectations, join the poor, ignorant despised Mormons, and follow Old Joe Smith, the money digger, as he and they were regarded.

Had I then understood, as I now know, the ultimate results of obedience to the gospel, a life of purity, and after its close an exaltation to the fullness of the Godhead, I should then have been ashamed to have called it a sacrifice. But in my ignorance, at that time, of its blessings and glories, it proved the fiercest struggle of heart and will I ever experienced before or since. But through the help of the Lord, for I feel certain that He must have helped me, I laid my pride, worldly ambition and aspirations upon the altar, and as humble as a child went to the waters of baptism, received the ordinance administered by an Apostle, and afterwards the laying on of hands.

One evening, a few days after this, when alone, engaged in earnest prayer, the heavens were opened, the veil was rent from my mind, and then and there I received the most wonderful manifestations, grand and sublime, I believe as man was ever permitted to receive, and beyond the power of language fully to describe. It was shown me in that vision that there truly existed a Son of God, that Joseph Smith was really a prophet of God.

The first intimation of the approach of that marvelous vision was a sound just above my head like the rustling of silken robes, when immediately the Holy Spirit descended upon me, enveloping my whole person, filling me from the crown of my head to the so[le]s of my feet, which was a complete baptism, as tangible an immersion in a heavenly principle or element—the Holy Ghost—infinitely more real, physical in its effects upon every part of my system than was the immersion when I was baptized in water. That night after retiring to rest the same wonderful manifestations were repeated, and continued to be for several successive nights. From that time till the present on numerous occasions miraculous manifestations of the divine power have followed me and my administrations of the gospel ordinances. . . . I profess to have, and actually do have, the right and authority from God to administer this gospel, and promise the Holy Ghost and divine knowledge to follow all who accept it with sincerity and purity of heart.

—"How I Gained My Testimony of the Truth," The Young Woman's Journal, 4 (9 October 1886): 215-17.

For the Salvation of the World.

In the days of Noah very few indeed received the truth which God revealed. In the days of the Son of God very few would receive His testimony. In these days very few receive the testimony that God has revealed His Gospel and has required His servants to declare it to the world. It is strange indeed—and yet perhaps not so strange, when we consider the circumstances. When Jesus lay in the manger, a helpless infant, He knew not that He was the Son of God, and that formerly He created the earth. When the edict of Herod was issued, He knew nothing of it; He had not power to save Himself; and His father and mother had to take Him and fly into Egypt to preserve Him from the effects of that edict. Well, He grew up to manhood, and during His progress it was revealed unto Him who He was, and for what purpose He was in the world. The glory and power He possessed before He came into the world was made known unto Him. It was not a very pleasurable thing to be placed upon the cross and to suffer the excruciating torture that He bore for hours, in order to accomplish the work for which He had come upon the earth. It has not been with the Latter-day Saints the most delightful thing that could be imagined to suffer as they have suffered—and what for? For the same as Jesus suffered, to a certain extent—for the salvation of the world.

—In Conference Report, 6 April 1901, p. 3.

His Father Had Educated Him.

As we move forward in eternity and along the line of our existence, we shall be placed in certain conditions that require very great sacrifice in the interests of humanity, in the interests of the Spirit of God, in the interest of His children and our own children, in generations to come, in eternity. Jesus Christ the Son of God was once placed in a condition that it required the highest effort in order to accomplish what was necessary for the salvation of millions of the children of God. It required the highest effort and determination that had to be exercised before the Son of God could pass through the ordeal, the sacrifice that was necessary.

I believe that his Father had educated him, had passed him through scenes that were of a very serious character, of great trials, and he knew just what he could depend upon from the facts that were illustrated and shown by his experience. . . .

That is just the way the Lord intends to do with you or me exactly. We will be judged according to what we have done or what we have failed to have done all along the line of our experiences. When Jesus was placed in a condition where acting in propriety or otherwise confronted him; when he saw before Him the cross and the immediate prospects of being placed upon it and of his undergoing those excruciating tortures that he had seen others experiencing, then his nature failed as it were and he said: Father if it be possible that this experience or this cup pass from me, let it pass.

That is the way he told the Lord. But notwithstanding, he said: If this cannot be done, Thy will be done, and not mine. So he was placed upon the cross and suffered that excruciating torture. Supposing that he had failed, the nations of the earth and the people of the Lord, his sons and daughters, would have failed to be put into the position of having the opportunity that you and I have today. They would have failed for a long time, to say the least. Of course the provisions would have been made and the work of the Almighty would have been proceeded with, but there would have been a halt there. But the Lord knew just what he could depend upon, and therefore, he selected that son of His, our Savior, Jesus Christ, and he has wrought out that great work of redemption for the human family, the living and the dead.

—In Conference Report, 5 October 1900, pp. 2-3.

Divine Manifestations to Lorenzo Snow, Related by His Son Le Roi C. Snow.

In 1836, when Lorenzo Snow was twenty-two years of age, and two weeks before he joined the Church, he says: "It was at my sister's (Eliza R. Snow's) invitation that I attended a patriarchal blessing meeting conducted by Father Smith, in the Kirtland temple. I listened with astonishment to him telling the brethren and sisters their parentage, their lineage, and other things which I could not help but believe he knew nothing about, save as the Spirit manifested them unto him." . . .

Six months later Lorenzo Snow, himself, received a patriarchal blessing from Father Smith. Among many other miraculous statements and promises were these: "Thou hast a great work to perform. Thou shalt become a mighty man. There shall not be a mightier man on the earth than thou. Thou shalt have long life; the vigor of thy mind shall not be abated and the vigor of thy body shall be preserved. Thou shalt have power to stand in the flesh and see Jesus."

For some time President Woodruff's health had been failing. Nearly every evening President Lorenzo Snow visited him at his home on South 5th East Street. This particular evening the doctors said President Woodruff was failing rapidly and they feared he would not live much longer.

Lorenzo Snow was then President of the Council of the Twelve and was greatly worried over the possibility of succeeding President Woodruff, especially because of the terrible financial condition of the Church. Referring to this condition President Heber J. Grant has said: "The Church was in a financial slough of despond, so to speak, almost financially bankrupt—its credit was hardly good for a thousand dollars without security."

My father went to his room in the Salt Lake Temple where he was residing at the time. He dressed in his robes of the Priesthood, went into the Holy of Holies, there in the House of the Lord and knelt at the sacred altar. He plead with the Lord to spare President Woodruff's life, that President Woodruff might outlive him and that the great responsibility of Church leadership would never fall upon his shoulders. Yet he promised the Lord that he would devotedly perform any duty required at his hands. At this time he was in his eighty-sixth year.

Soon after this President Woodruff was taken to California where he died Friday morning at 6:40 o'clock September 2nd, 1898. President George Q. Cannon at once wired the sad information to the President's office in Salt Lake City. Word was forwarded to President Snow who was in Brigham City. The telegram was delivered to him on the street in Brigham. He read it to President Rudger Clawson, then president of Box Elder Stake, who was with him, went to the telegraph office and replied that he would leave on the train about 5:30 that evening. He reached Salt Lake City about 7:15, proceeded to the President's office, gave some instructions and then went to his private room in the Salt Lake Temple.

President Snow put on his holy temple robes, repaired again to the same sacred altar, offered up the signs of the Priesthood and poured out his heart to the Lord. He reminded the Lord how he had plead for President Woodruff's life and that his days might be lengthened beyond his own; that he might never be called upon to bear the heavy burdens and responsibilities of Church leadership. "Nevertheless," he said, "Thy will be done. I have not sought this responsibility but if it be Thy will, I now present myself before Thee for Thy guidance and instruction. I ask that Thou show me what thou wouldst have me do."

After finishing his prayer, he expected a reply, some special manifestation from the Lord. So he waited—and waited—and waited. There was no reply, no voice, no visitation, no manifestation. He left the altar and the room in great disappointment. He passed through the Celestial room and out into the large corridor leading to his own room where a most glorious manifestation was given President Snow. One of the most beautiful accounts of this experience is told by his granddaughter, Allie Young Pond.

"One evening when I was visiting Grandpa Snow in his room in the Salt Lake Temple, I remained until the doorkeepers had gone and the night-watchman had not yet come in, so grandpa said he would take me to the main, front entrance and let me out that way. He got his bunch of keys from his dresser.

"After we left his room and while we were still in the large corridor, leading into the celestial room, I was walking several steps ahead of grandpa when he stopped me saying: 'Wait a moment Allie, I want to tell you something. It was right here that the Lord Jesus Christ appeared to me at the time of the death of President Woodruff. He instructed me to go right ahead and reorganize the First Presidency of the Church at once and not wait as had been done after the death of the previous presidents, and that I was to succeed President Woodruff.'

"Then grandpa came a step nearer and held out his left hand and said 'He stood right here, about three feet above the floor. It looked as though He stood on a plate of solid gold.'

"Grandpa told me what a glorious personage the Savior is and described His hands, feet, countenance and beautiful, white robes, all of which were of such a glory of whiteness and brightness that he could hardly gaze upon Him.

"Then grandpa came another step nearer me and put his right hand on my head and said: 'Now, granddaughter, I want you to remember that this is the testimony of your grandfather, that he told you with his own lips that he actually saw the Savior here in the Temple, and talked with Him face to face.'

"Then we went on and grandpa let me out of the main, front door of the Temple."

During the M.I.A. June conference in 1919 at the officers' testimony meeting in the Assembly Hall I [Le Roi Snow] related Allie Young Pond's experience and testimony. President Heber J. Grant immediately arose and said:

"In confirmation of the testimony given by Brother LeRoi C. Snow quoting the granddaughter of Lorenzo Snow, I want to call attention to the fact that several years elapsed after the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith before President Young was sustained as the president of the Church; after the death of President Young, several years elapsed again before President Taylor was sustained, and again when he died several years elapsed before President Woodruff was sustained.

"After the funeral of President Wilford Woodruff the Apostles met in the office of the First Presidency and Brother Francis M. Lyman said: 'I feel impressed although one of the younger members of the quorum, to say that I believe it would be pleasing in the sight of the Lord if the First Presidency of the Church was reorganized right here and right now. If I am in error regarding this impression, President Snow and the senior members of the council can correct me.

"President Snow said that he would be pleased to hear from all the brethren upon this question, and each and all of us expressed ourselves as believing it would be pleasing to the Lord and that it would be the proper thing to have the Presidency organized at once.

"When we had finished, then and not till then, did Brother Snow tell us that he was instructed of the Lord in the Temple the night after President Woodruff died, to organize the Presidency of the Church at once. President Anthon H. Lund and myself are the only men now living who were present at that meeting.

"May the Lord bless and guide us by his spirit continually and may the testimony that we possess of the divinity of the work ever abide with us and may our faithfulness be an inspiration to lead others to a knowledge of the Gospel, is my prayer and I ask it in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen."

A few days later after the M.I.A. conference, in an interview with President Lund in his office he told the incident to me as given by President Grant regarding the meeting in the office of the First Presidency, which was held Tuesday morning, September 13, 1898, at which time Lorenzo Snow was chosen President of the Church. President Lund also told me that he heard my father tell a number of times, of the Savior's appearance to him, after he had dressed in his Temple robes, presented himself before the Lord and offered up the signs of the Priesthood.

I related this experience in the Eighteenth Ward Sacramental service. After the meeting Elder Arthur Winter told me he also had heard my father tell of the Savior's appearance to him in the Temple instructing him not only to reorganize the First Presidency at once but also to select the same counselors who had served with President Woodruff, Presidents George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith.

Tuesday, September 13, 1898, eleven days after President Woodruff's death and five days after his funeral the Council of the Apostles met at 10 o'clock A.M. in the President's Office.

The special object of this meeting was to discuss the matter of borrowing for the Church, $1,500,000 in the East, because of its terrible financial condition. It was evident to the Council that nothing could be done legally in negotiating this loan until a new Trustee-in-trust had been sustained.

During the discussion Elder Lyman said: "If the Lord should manifest to you, President Snow, that it is the proper thing to do now, I am prepared not only to vote for a Trustee-in-trust, but for the President of the Church also, giving the President time, if he desires it, in which to choose his counselors." He remarked that after the death of Joseph Smith, three years elapsed before the First Presidency was organized; after the death of President Young, it also took three years to organize the First Presidency; after the death of President Taylor, eighteen months elapsed.

Elder Heber J. Grant remarked that the present time was just as opportune as any other, and that he could sustain President Snow with all his heart as President of the Church. Elder Young remarked that Brother Grant had expressed his feelings exactly.

Elder Teasdale said that he was in perfect harmony and accord with the feelings of these brethren.

Joseph F. Smith then said: "I move that this be the sense of this meeting."

The motion being seconded, Present Snow asked if there were any further remarks, whereupon several of the brethren called for the question. Then President Snow asked Elder Joseph F. Smith to put the motion. This being done it was carried unanimously, and Lorenzo Snow was thus sustained by the Council of the Apostles, as President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

President Snow then arose and said: There was no use in his making excuses as to inability, etc., in assuming the vast responsibilities involved in the position to which he had been elected. He felt that it was for him to do the very best he could and to depend upon the Lord. He knew the action taken by the Council was according to the mind and will of the Lord, who had shown and revealed to him, several days ago, that the First Presidency should be organized before the next conference. He had been feeling a little gloomy, and perhaps a little discouraged at the prospect, and the vast responsibility that would naturally fall upon him as president of the Twelve Apostles, and with this feeling he went before the Lord, offered up the signs of the Holy Priesthood and called upon Him to let light come to his mind. His prayer was answered, the Lord manifested unto him clearly what he should do; also in regard to the counselors he should select when he became president of the Church, "And," said he, "in accordance with the light given me, I now present to you the name of Geo. Q. Cannon as my first counselor, and that of Joseph F. Smith as my second counselor."

Several of the brethren, speaking at the same time, seconded the choice of counselors, and the brethren named expressed themselves upon the subject—Brother Cannon to the effect that he was willing to act in this capacity, or any other, if he could have the love and confidence of his brethren, and Brother Smith to the effect that since the Lord had manifested His will in this matter, he had nothing to say, except that he was perfectly willing to act in this or any other position, and would do all he could to sustain the hands of the president in righteousness before the Lord.

President Snow, before calling for the vote, said: "I have not mentioned this matter to any person, either man or woman. I wanted to see what the feelings of the brethren were. I wanted to see if the same spirit which the Lord manifested to me was in you. I had confidence in you that the Lord would indicate to you that this was proper and according to His mind and will.

"I do not feel that I should be over-anxious in regard to anything pertaining to the work of the Lord. I had one revelation in my early career which became my guiding star, so to speak, and which I have always had before my mind, expressed in the following couplet: 'As man now is, God once was; As God now is, man may be.' That was revealed to me with power; the Holy Ghost was upon me for a long time, and I knew it was my privilege to become like Him whom I afterwards knew was my Father and God. As John the Apostle says, 'We are now the sons of God; when He shall appear we shall be like Him,' etc. We must act, as far as we possibly can, like God, while we are in the flesh, and I know we can reach that degree of perfection.

"Now brethren, I shall do the best I can, as God shall give me wisdom and power. I sense keenly my own weakness and inability, but I appreciate the fact that God can make strong. If I know my own heart, the administration about to be ushered in shall not be known as Lorenzo Snow's, but as God's, in and through Lorenzo Snow. It will become us as servants of the Lord to go to work and meet the difficulties before us, as the Lord shall aid and assist us. I feel to say in my heart, God bless you, and I invoke the blessing of the Lord upon myself in the discharge of the obligations resting upon me."

The vote was then taken approving unanimously the president's choice of counselors.

Lorenzo Snow was then sustained as trustee-in-trust for the Church. . . .

Sun, Sept. 18, 1898, five days after he was sustained by the Council of the Apostles as president of the Church, Pres. Snow said in the Salt Lake Tabernacle:

"I can assure you, brethren and sisters, that I had no ambition to assume the responsibility which now rests upon me. If I could have escaped it honorably I should never have been found in my present position, but the Lord revealed to me that this was His will."

—Le Roi C. Snow, Deseret News/Church Department, 2 April 1938, pp. 3, 8.

Following a Call for Tithing.

We have had a glorious time, and the Lord has been with us. The Lord has been with us greatly and manifested His holy will. We have had a revelation from the Lord since we left Salt Lake City, as you all understand. This manifestation that the Lord has given to me, and that you have received and borne testimony to, can never be forgotten. I know it just as well as I know anything that I ever did know.

There are different ways in which persons may receive revelations. One way is to receive it powerfully by the Holy Ghost falling upon us. Then there is another way that comes to us just as clearly and just as fully as the way in which the Lord bestowed upon us this revelation, when the Spirit of the Lord rests upon us and fills us as from the crowns of our heads to the soles of our feet. Now, this which I have received was not with the power of God resting upon me from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, as it was when He gave me a knowledge of this Gospel, or when He gave me a knowledge of this principle, "As man now is, God once was; as God now is, man may be." That came to me powerfully and suddenly, and I saw it just as clearly as I see this bench or see your faces. This revelation that was given to me, in regard to this matter of tithing that we have talked about in the different settlements, was given to me just as fully, and I know it just as clearly, as any manifestation the Lord ever gave me.

And this has got to go through all the Stakes of Zion; and you brethren and sisters will be called upon from time to time, perhaps, to bear testimony to this manifestation. This will be a matter of record that will go down to generations to come; it will be eternal and everlasting. Every one of you that has been a member of this company will have this matter renewed to you, and you will see it clearly; and you will see one of the greatest revolutions that has ever been made since this Church was organized, in this matter. There are things connected with it that I can see in the future. God bless the members of this company, every one of you, that we may never forget what the Lord has manifested to us, and that which we shall see clearly.

—26 May 1899 address at Nephi to the members of the company who accompanied Lorenzo Snow on his trip to St. George and through the settlements from 15 to 27 May 1899, LDS Church Archives. Spelling and punctuation have been standardized.
