No specific author, I Know That My Redeemer Lives: Latter-day Prophets Testify of the Savior ( 1990)

Chapter 6

JOSEPH F. SMITH

Born: 13 November 1838

Ordained an Apostle: 1 July 1866

Sustained as President: 10 November 1901

Died: 19 November 1918

Receive the Witness.

I want to say as a servant of God, independent of the testimonies of all men and of every book that has been written, that I have received the witness of the Spirit in my own heart, and I testify before God, angels and men, without fear of the consequences that I know that my Redeemer lives, and I shall see him face to face, and stand with Him in my resurrected body upon this earth, if I am faithful; for God has revealed this unto me. I have received the witness, and I bear my testimony, and my testimony is true.

—2 February 1883, Journal of Discourses, 24:81.

The Power of Christ and His Spirit.

It is by the power of God that all things are made that have been made. It is by the power of Christ that all things are governed and kept in place that are governed and kept in place in the universe. It is the power which proceeds from the presence of the Son of God throughout all the works of his hands, that giveth light, energy, understanding, knowledge, and a degree of intelligence to all the children of men, strictly in accordance with the words in the Book of Job, "There is a spirit in man; and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." . . .

Even Christ himself was not perfect at first; he received not a fulness at first, but he received grace for grace, and he continued to receive more and more until he received a fulness. Is not this to be so with the children of men? Is any man perfect? Has any man received a fulness at once? Have we reached a point wherein we may receive the fulness of God, of his glory and his intelligence? No; and yet if Jesus, the Son of God, and the Father of the heavens and the earth in which we dwell, received not a fulness at the first, but increased in faith, knowledge, understanding and grace until he received a fulness, is it not possible for all men that are born of women to receive little by little, line upon line, precept upon precept, until they shall receive a fulness, as he has received a fulness, and be exalted with him in the presence of the Father? . . .

The question is often asked, is there any difference between the Spirit of the Lord and the Holy Ghost? The terms are frequently used synonymously. We often say the Spirit of God when we mean the Holy Ghost; we likewise say the Holy Ghost when we mean the Spirit of God. The Holy Ghost is a personage in the Godhead, and is not that which lighteth every man that comes into the world. It is the Spirit of God which proceeds through Christ to the world, that enlightens every man that comes into the world, and that strives with the children of men, and will continue to strive with them, until it brings them to a knowledge of the truth and the possession of the greater light and testimony of the Holy Ghost. If, however, he receive that greater light, and then sin against it, the Spirit of God will cease to strive with him, and the Holy Ghost will wholly depart from him. . . .

The Lord bless you, and help us all to live our religion and to keep the commandments of God, that we may look upon his face, and that we may see the Redeemer when he shall come to the earth again; for he will come, and when he does come again he will not come as the meek and lowly Nazarene, without "where to lay his head," and without respect and honor, but he will come as God out of heaven, clothed with power, glory, justice, judgment and truth. He will come with the hosts of heaven, and he will receive those who have kept his commandments in the earth as the church prepared for the Bridegroom, while he will take vengeance upon the ungodly.

—16 March 1902 Tabernacle address, Improvement Era, 11 (1907-8): 380-83, 387.

The Lord Speaks to Man's Immortal Soul.

Whenever the Lord speaks to man, he speaks to his immortal soul, and satisfaction and unsurpassing peace and joy come to all who listen.

Happy is the man, indeed, who can receive this soul-satisfying testimony, and be at rest, and seek for no other road to peace than by the doctrines of Jesus Christ. . . . His perfected philosophy teaches also that it is better to suffer wrong than to do wrong, and to pray for our enemies and for those who despitefully use us. . . . No other philosopher has ever said as Jesus said, "Come unto me."

—Improvement Era, 7 (1903-4): 717.

Who Would Welcome Christ's Rule?

I believe in God's law. I believe that it is his right to rule in the world. I believe that no man has or should have any valid objection in his mind to the government of God, and the rule of Jesus Christ, in the earth. Let us suppose, for a moment, that Christ were here and that he was bearing rule in the world. Who would come under his condemnation? Who would be subject to his chastening word? Who would be in disharmony or unfellowship with God? Would the righteous man? Would the virtuous man? the pure and virtuous woman? the pure and honest in heart? the upright? the straightforward? those who do the will of heaven? Would they be in rebellion to Christ's rule if He were to come here to rule? No. They would welcome the rule and reign of Jesus Christ in the earth. They would welcome His law and acknowledge His sovereignty, they would hasten to rally to His standard and to uphold the purpose and the perfection of His laws and of His righteousness. Who would, then, be recreant to the rule of Christ? The whoremonger, the adulterer, the liar, the sorcerer, he who bears false witness against his neighbor, he who seeks to take advantage of his brother and who would overcome and destroy him for his own worldly gain or profit; the murderer, the despiser of that which is good, the unbeliever in the eternities that lie before us, the atheist, perhaps, although I think that he would not be so far from Christ as some that profess to be teachers of His doctrines and advocates of His laws. . . . Such as these would be the people who would not welcome the reign of Jesus Christ. Are there any who profess to be Latter-day Saints in this class, and would fear to have Christ reign and rule?

—In Conference Report, April 1904, p. 4.

Christ Was Rich.

A wise provision of the early Christians [was] to set apart a time when they should celebrate the natal day of Christ. It has had the effect of turning men's thoughts to him and to his doctrines and works. We are apt to forget the character of the structure which he built; and some are even prone to consider that his ideals are impracticable. Men have said that the theories which he taught are beautiful, but that under modern arrangements, these cannot be put into practice.

In our day, there is a tendency to count men of little value who are not rich in worldly means and influence; who can not on this day bestow presents upon family and friends, and extend such acts of charity as find their way to the newspapers. But Christ, the ideal, the model, declared of himself: "The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head." Yet now he is of all value, and exercises all influence, for only through him are we saved. But it was not the influence of wealth, nor the lavish gifts of gold that made him rich and gave him power. It was the spirit of his Father, the wealth of his inner soul.

Who that can not build a great house, or control vast interests, in our day, is looked upon by those who can, as of only small consequence and little use among men; but with all his poverty, Christ was rich in help, for when the tempest arose, and his disciples came to him in their anguish, calling, "Lord, save us; we perish," he arose and rebuked the wind and the sea, and there was a great calm, causing the men to marvel at his power, that even the winds and the sea obey him!

—Improvement Era, 8 (1904-5): 146.

Doing the Will of Christ.

I do not believe in the ideas that we hear sometimes advanced in the world, that it matters but little what men do in this time, if they will but confess Christ at the end of their journey in life, that that is all-sufficient, and that by so doing they will receive their passport into heaven. I denounce this doctrine. It is unscriptural, it is unreasonable, it is untrue, and it will not avail any man, no matter by whom this idea may be advocated; it will prove an utter failure unto men. As reasonable beings, as men and women of intelligence, we cannot help but admire and honor the doctrine of Jesus Christ, which is the doctrine of God, and which requires of every man and woman righteousness in their lives, purity in their thoughts, uprightness in their daily walk and conversation, devotion to the Lord, love of truth, love of their fellow-man, and above all things in the world the love of God. These were the precepts that were inculcated by the Son of God when He walked among His brethren in the meridian of time. He taught these precepts; He exemplified them in His life, and advocated continually the doing of the will of Him that sent Him. . . .

I testify to you that Joseph Smith was instrumental in the hand of the Lord in restoring God's truth to the world, and also the holy Priesthood, which is His authority delegated unto man. I know this is true, and I testify of it to you. To me it is all-in-all; it is my life, it is my light; it is my hope, and my joy; it gives me the only assurance that I have for exaltation, for my resurrection from death, with those whom I have loved and cherished in this life, and with those with whom my lot has been cast in this world. . . . I know that my Redeemer lives, and that He shall stand upon the earth in the latter day, and, as Job has expressed it, "Though worms shall destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God."

—In Conference Report, October 1907, p. 3-5.

God's Rest.

I want to bear my testimony . . . that as I believe in my own existence, I believe in the divinity of this latter-day work; as I know, and as I have reason to know, that I am here and that I live, so I believe and I have reason to know that God, my Father, lives, that Jesus lives and that Joseph Smith was raised up of God to lay the foundations of this work. My whole hope of life, my all is staked upon this proposition, and I accept it, with all my soul. . . .

I pray that we may all enter into God's rest—rest from doubt, from fear, from apprehension of danger, rest from the religious turmoil of the world; from the cry that is going forth, here and there—lo, here is Christ; lo, there is Christ; lo, He is in the desert, come ye out to meet Him. The man who has found God's rest will not be disturbed by these vagaries of men, for the Lord has told him, and does tell us: "Go not out to seek them. Go not out to hunt them, for when Christ shall come, He will come with the army of heaven with Him in the clouds of glory, and all eyes shall see Him." We do not need to be hunting for Christ here, or Christ there, or prophets here and prophets there. . . .

To the faithful Latter-day Saint is given the right to know the truth, as God knows it; and no power beneath the celestial kingdom can lead him astray, darken his understanding, becloud his mind or dim his faith or his knowledge of the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. It can't be done, for the light of God shines brighter than the illumination of falsehood and error, therefore, those who possess the light of Christ, the spirit of revelation and the knowledge of God, rise above all these vagaries in the world; they know of this doctrine, that it is of God and not of man.

—In Conference Report, October 1909, pp. 3, 8-9.

The Witness of the Spirit of God.

I want to bear my testimony to you Latter-day Saints. I know that my Redeemer lives. We have all the testimony and all the evidence of this great and glorious truth, that the world has, that is, all that the so-called Christian world possesses; and, in addition to all that they have, we have the testimony of the inhabitants of this western continent, to whom the Savior appeared, and delivered His gospel, the same as He delivered it to the Jews. In addition to all this new testimony and the testimony of the holy scriptures from the Jews, we have the testimony of the modern Prophet, Joseph Smith, who saw the Father and the Son, and who has borne record of them to the world; whose testimony was sealed with his blood, and is in force upon the world today. We have the testimony of others who witnessed the presence of the Son of God, in the Kirtland temple, when He appeared to them there, and the testimony of Joseph and Sidney Rigdon, who declared that they were the last witnesses of Jesus Christ. Therefore, I say again, I know that my Redeemer lives; for in the mouths of these witnesses this truth has been established in my mind.

Beside these testimonies, I have received the witness of the Spirit of God in my own heart, which exceeds all other evidences, for it bears record to me, to my very soul, of the existence of my Redeemer, Jesus Christ. I know that He lives, and that in the last day He shall stand upon the earth, and that He shall come to the people who shall be prepared for Him, as a bride is prepared for the bridegroom, when He shall come. I believe in the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and I have every evidence that I need—at least enough to convince me of the divinity of his mission.

—In Conference Report, October 1910, p. 4.

Christ Revealed Himself to Joseph.

What did Joseph reveal? He revealed, or has been the instrument in the hands of God of revealing to the world Jesus, the Son of God, in His own person. He has been the instrument in the hands of the Lord of bringing the light to the inhabitants of the world that God lives, that Christ lives, whom to know is life eternal, and whom the world have ignorantly worshiped as a myth, as something that fills the immensity of space, but is indescribable; a something that is almighty and all-powerful and all-present, but without personal existence. Joseph has revealed to the world that Jesus Christ who was crucified and rose again from the dead, is a personal Being, in whose likeness and image man is made, or is begotten in the world, and that the Father is a person in exact similitude to the Son. We have the history of the Son, given us by His disciples who sojourned with Him while He was in the mortal flesh; . . . that when He rose and identified Himself beyond the possibility of any doubt to the minds of those who witnessed and saw Him, and knew Him, and afterwards testified of Him to the world, that He was the same that was crucified, bearing the marks of the nails and of the spear in His body; that He was not a spirit; that He was flesh and bone as tangible as man, and that a spirit had not this flesh and bone as He had. He declared this to the world: This same physical, tangible entity called Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Mary and the Son of God, in His resurrected body, came to Joseph Smith, revealed Himself to Joseph Smith, the same God, the same Christ, the same Redeemed of the world that was crucified on Calvary; and, that God, the Father, is like His Son; that it would be inconsistent and impossible for a spirit to beget a man like Christ, and therefore the Father and the Son are the exact resemblance of each other.

—In Conference Report, October 1911, pp. 4-5.

What Christ Has Done.

I am converted to the Gospel of Christ; I believe in Jesus with all my soul. I cannot doubt the evidences of more than sixty years of my experience in the Church in preaching the Gospel. Everything has contributed to the confirmation of my faith in the divine mission of the prophet Joseph Smith, and in the glorious plan of life and salvation taught by the Son of God, both for the living and for the dead. . . .

Jesus Christ . . . came into the world with power to lay down His life and take it up again, the only Being sent from God to earth who possessed the power to lay down His life and take it up again. To no other soul under heaven has this power been given, and He demonstrated the resurrection from death to life by His own example, and has freely offered the same deliverance to all the sons and daughters of God that ever lived on earth or that will ever live from henceforth.

Christ has opened up to the world, through faith and obedience, this hope of everlasting life and exaltation in His glorious kingdom. Who else has taught such doctrines as this? Who else has exemplified this power and has done the deed? . . .

Joseph the Prophet comes to us in this dispensation and declares that the heavens were opened to him and to his associates, and he saw and heard, and he declares as the last witness, who has seen and heard and knows, that Jesus is the Christ and the Redeemer of the world, even He who was born of Mary, crucified and rose again from the dead, and visited the inhabitants of this continent, as well as the inhabitants of the old continent as we call it, who also bear witness of Him.

—In Conference Report, October 1913, pp. 8-9.

The Spirit of His Influence in Our Souls.

There is no community in the earth, go where you will, that lives so near to the doctrine of Jesus Christ as do the Latter-day Saints; and they do it because they have received Christ's gospel, and the spirit of Christ in their hearts, and the testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of prophecy. . . .

We speak of the Savior, of Jesus, the Son of God. We feel safe and solid in Him, that our feet have rested on the very foundation of eternal truth, when the spirit of Christ is in our hearts.

I want to say to my brethren and sisters, that if there is a man in all the world that has received more deeply and more keenly in his soul the love of Christ than I have, I would love to see him. I would love to be associated with such a man. Christ is, indeed, the Savior of my soul, the Savior of mankind. He has sacrificed His life for us that we might be saved; He has broken the bands of death, and has bid defiance to the grave, and bids us follow Him. He has come forth from death unto life again. He has declared Himself to be the way of salvation, the light and the life of the world, and I believe it with all my heart. I not only believe it, but as I know that the sun shines, so I know that belief in Him inspires to good and not to evil; and as I know that His spirit prompts to purity of life, to honor, to uprightness, to honesty and to righteousness, and not to evil, so I know by all the proofs that it is possible for me to grasp that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God, the Savior of mankind. . . .

What will this knowledge alone avail? It will avail this, that having received that testimony in my heart, having received in my soul the witness of the Spirit of the living God, that Jesus is the Christ, and I stop there and go no further, that very witness in my soul will add to my eternal damnation. Why? Because it is not only our duty to know that Jesus is the Christ but to keep the influence of His spirit in our souls. It is not only necessary to have His testimony in our hearts but it is necessary that we should do the things that He has commanded, and the works of righteousness that He did, in order that we may attain to the exaltation that is in store for His children who do as well as believe. . . .

We believe in the Lord Jesus, and in His divine saving mission in the world, and in the redemption, the marvelous, glorious redemption that He has wrought for the salvation of the children of men. We believe in Him and this constitutes the foundation of our faith. He is the foundation and chief corner stone of our religion. We are His by adoption, by being buried with Christ in baptism, by being born of the water and the spirit anew into the world, through the ordinances of the Gospel of Christ, and we are thereby God's children, heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, through our adoption and faith. . . .

The love of your fellowmen, the spirit of forgiveness, and mercy for your fellow beings is required of you, as was exemplified in the prayer of the Savior upon the cross—"O, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." So let us think of our enemies, so let us pray for them. . . .

No man will lead God's people nor His work. God may choose men, and make them instruments in His hands for accomplishing His purposes, but the glory and honor and power will be due to the Father in whom rests the wisdom and the might to lead His people and take care of His Zion. I am not leading The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and I want this distinctly understood. No man did. Joseph did not do it; Brigham did not do it; neither did John Taylor, nor Wilford Woodruff, nor Lorenzo Snow; and Joseph F. Smith, least of them all, is not leading The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and will not lead it. They were instruments in God's hands in accomplishing what they did. God did it through them. The honor and the glory is due to the Lord and not to them. We are only instruments whom God may choose and use to do His work. . . .

We do honor Joseph Smith. We do not worship him, we worship God, and we call upon His holy name as we have been directed in the gospel in the name of His Son. We call for mercy in the name of Jesus; we ask for blessings in the name of Jesus. We are baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. We are initiated into the church and kingdom of God in the name of the Father and the Son and of the Holy Ghost, and we worship the Father. . . .

Let us follow Christ as He followed the Father, and do the things that He said for us to do, and all will be well with us.

—Young Women's Journal, 17 (1906): 340-45.

A Sure Foundation.

From my boyhood I have desired to learn the principles of the gospel in such a way and to such an extent that it would matter not to me who might fall from the truth, who might make a mistake, who might fail to continue to follow the example of the Master, my foundation would be sure and certain in the truths that I have learned though all men else go astray and fail of obedience to them. We all have heard of people who have pinned their faith to the arm of flesh, who have felt that their belief, their confidence and their love for the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ would be shattered if their ideals—those possibly who first taught them the principles of the Gospel—should make a mistake, falter or fall.

I know of but one in all the world who can be taken as the first and only perfect standard for us to follow, and He is the Only Begotten Son of God. I would feel sorry, indeed, if I had friend or an associate in this life who would turn away from the plan of life and salvation because I might stumble or make a failure of my life. I want no man to lean upon me nor to follow me, only so far as I am a consistent follower in the footsteps of the Master.

—Juvenile Instructor, 50 (1915-16): 738-39.

Vision of the Redemption of the Dead.

The eyes of my understanding were opened, and the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me, and I saw the hosts of the dead, both small and great. And there were gathered together in one place an innumerable company of the spirits of the just, who had been faithful in the testimony of Jesus while they lived in mortality; and who had offered sacrifice in the similitude of the great sacrifice of the Son of God, and had suffered tribulation in their Redeemer's name. All these had departed the mortal life, firm in the hope of a glorious resurrection, through the grace of God the Father and his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ. . . .

While this vast multitude waited and conversed, rejoicing in the hour of their deliverance from the chains of death, the Son of God appeared, declaring liberty to the captives who had been faithful; and there he preached to them the everlasting gospel, the doctrine of the resurrection and the redemption of mankind from the fall, and from individual sins on conditions of repentance. But unto the wicked he did not go, and among the ungodly and the unrepentant who had defiled themselves while in the flesh, his voice was not raised; neither did the rebellious who rejected the testimonies and the warnings of the ancient prophets behold his presence, nor look upon his face.

Where these were, darkness reigned, but among the righteous there was peace; and the saints rejoiced in their redemption, and bowed the knee and acknowledged the Son of God as their Redeemer and Deliverer from death and the chains of hell. Their countenances shone, and the radiance from the presence of the Lord rested upon them, and they sang praises unto his holy name.

I marveled, for I understood that the Savior spent about three years in his ministry among the Jews and those of the house of Israel, endeavoring to teach them the everlasting gospel and call them unto repentance; and yet, notwithstanding his mighty works and miracles, and proclamation of the truth, in great power and authority, there were but few who hearkened to his voice, and rejoiced in his presence, and received salvation at his hands. But his ministry among those who were dead was limited to the brief time intervening between the crucifixion and his resurrection; and I wondered at the words of Peter—wherein he said that the Son of God preached unto the spirits in prison, who sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah—and how it was possible for him to preach to those spirits and perform the necessary labor among them in so short a time.

And as I wondered, my eyes were opened, and my understanding quickened, and I perceived that the Lord went not in person among the wicked and the disobedient who had rejected the truth, to teach them; but behold, from among the righteous, he organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to the dead. . . .

Thus was it made known that our Redeemer spent his time during his sojourn in the world of spirits, instructing and preparing the faithful spirits of the prophets who had testified of him in the flesh; that they might carry the message of redemption unto all the dead, unto whom he could not go personally, because of their rebellion and transgression, that they through the ministration of his servants might also hear his words. . . .

I beheld that the faithful elders of this dispensation, when they depart from mortal life, continue their labors in the preaching of the gospel of repentance and redemption, through the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son of God, among those who are in darkness and under the bondage of sin in the great world of the spirits of the dead. . . .

Thus was the vision of the redemption of the dead revealed to me, and I bear record, and I know that this record is true, through the blessing of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, even so. Amen.

—Doctrine and Covenants 138:11-14, 18-20, 22-30, 36-37, 57, 60.
