No specific author, I Know That My Redeemer Lives: Latter-day Prophets Testify of the Savior ( 1990)

Chapter 7

HEBER J. GRANT

Born: 22 November 1856

Ordained an Apostle: 16 October 1882

Ordained President: 23 November 1918

Died: 14 May 1945

On the Right Hand.

Every human being except those that have a knowledge of Jesus Christ and who sin against that knowledge, shall be saved; and in this revelation the wonderful testimony has been borne to us by the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon:

"For we saw him, even on the right hand of God, and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the only begotten of the Father—

"That by him and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God."

I bear witness to you, although I have not seen the Savior sitting upon the right hand of God, I know that He lives; that I know that Jesus is the Christ; that I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God; I know that the signs follow the believer; I know that hands are laid upon the sick and that the sick do recover; I know that we have the gift of tongues among the Latter-day Saints; I know that we have visions, dreams, and revelations.

—In Conference Report, April 1899, pp. 28-29.

Light of the World.

I cannot understand how people with a knowledge of the Gospel and the testimony that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of the true and living God, and that he has established on the earth, under the direction of our heavenly Father and his Son Jesus, the Gospel of everlasting life, and that it is in very deed the pearl of great price to each and every one of us—[and] that men, holding the holy Priesthood and possessing this knowledge, should, year after year, neglect the duties and the obligations that rest upon them. The Savior told His followers that they were the salt of the earth, but that if the salt lost its savor, it was thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under the feet of men. He told them also that they were the light of the world, a city set upon a hill which could not be hid; he told them that men did not light a candle and put it under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, that it might give light to all that were in the room, and he admonished them to let their light so shine that men seeing their good deeds might glorify God.

This admonition applies to us. We are the light of the world. We have received the inspiration of Almighty God. We have received a testimony of the Gospel, and we do know that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God, and that Brigham Young, John Taylor, and Wilford Woodruff were prophets of God, as is Lorenzo Snow. Every true Latter-day Saint has this testimony burning within his or her heart. Now, are we so living that the good deeds we perform bring credit to the work of God? Are our examples worthy of the imitation of all men? Do we by our examples show that we have faith in the Gospel? We are told that faith without works is dead; that as the body without the spirit is dead, so also is faith without works dead, and I am sorry to say that there are many professed Latter-day Saints who are spiritually dead. We many times ask ourselves the question, why does this man progress in the plan of life and salvation, while his neighbor, of equal intelligence and ability, of apparently the same testimony and power, and perchance greater power, stands still? I will tell you why. One keeps the commandments of our Heavenly Father, and the other fails to keep them. The Savior says that he that keeps his commandments is the man that loves him, and he that keeps the commandments of God shall be loved of the Father, and the Savior says he will love him and he will manifest himself unto him. The Lord also tells us that those who hear His sayings and doeth them shall be likened unto the wise man who built his house upon the rock, and when the rains descended and the floods came and the winds blew and beat upon that house, it fell not, because it was founded upon a rock. . . .

I have met many young men who have said to me, "I do not know that the Gospel is true. I believe it, but I do not know it." I have invariably replied to them that our Lord and Master has said that he who will do the will of the Father shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether he spoke of himself, and if they would do the will of the Father, they should eventually have a knowledge of the Gospel. Some of them have said: "Oh, if I could only see an angel; if I could only hear speaking in tongues; if I could only see some great manifestation, then I would believe." I wish to say to all within the sound of my voice that the seeing of angels and great manifestations do not make great men in the Church and kingdom of God. Think of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon. What is their testimony? It is that an angel showed them the plates, and that they knew they had been translated by the gift and power of God. How did they claim to know this? Because "His voice hath declared it unto us . . . an angel of God came down from heaven . . . we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon . . . the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it. . . ." Yet these men fell by the wayside, though they remained true and steadfast to their testimony of the Book of Mormon. . . .

Think of it, beholding the glory of the Son and receiving a fullness of that glory, and hearing the voice declare that he is the only Begotten of the Father, and yet this man, Sidney Rigdon, proved a traitor to the Prophet and fell by the wayside! . . .

So it has been in all ages of the world, and so it will be with those who do not keep the commandments of God. Angels may visit them, they may see visions, they may have dreams, they may even see the Son of God, and yet the Spirit of God will not burn in their hearts. But those who do the will of God, and live God-like lives, they will grow and increase in the testimony of the Gospel and in power and ability to do God's will.

—In Conference Report, April 1900, pp. 21-23.

Testifying Brings Joy.

To me, one of the greatest testimonies of the divinity of the mission of our Savior is the joy and happiness that we all experience whenever we testify that He was in very deed the Son of God and the Redeemer of the world. I know of nothing that brings greater joy, except testifying regarding the divinity of the mission of the Savior than to testify regarding the divinity of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The three years that I presided over the European mission were in very deed the most pleasurable, the most happy, the most satisfactory years of all my life. When instructing the Elders I told them whenever they seemed to be closed up in their spirits, whenever they seemed to lack ideas to express to the people, if they would only testify that they knew that Jesus was the Redeemer, and then testify regarding the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, that the Lord would open their mouths and bless them in speaking to the people. . . .

There is but one path of safety to the Latter-day Saints, and that is the path of duty. It is not a testimony, it is not marvelous manifestations, it is not knowing that the Gospel of Jesus Christ is true, that it is the plan of salvation, it is not actually knowing that the Savior is the Redeemer, and that Joseph Smith was His prophet, that will save you and me, but it is the keeping of the commandments of God, the living the life of a Latter-day Saint.

I have been profoundly impressed upon many occasions, as I have studied the history of the early men in this church, with the fact that one-half of the first quorum of Apostles fell by the wayside; that all of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon, who saw the angel, who heard the voice of God, who heard the Lord testify to them that this work had been translated by the gift and power of God, that the Lord Himself, by His voice from heaven, had told these men to bear witness of this fact—should also fall by the wayside. The same with a majority of the eight witnesses. Oliver Cowdery, who heard the Savior's voice, and beheld a heavenly messenger before the Church was organized, gave a description, which is recorded in the Pearl of Great Price, of his ordination, in connection with the Prophet, to the Aaronic Priesthood, stating it was beyond the language of man to paint the joy and the grandeur that surrounded them upon that occasion. He also had the Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, who lived upon the earth in the days of our Savior, lay their hands upon his head and ordain him to the Melchizedek, or the Higher Priesthood. In the Kirtland Temple, with the Prophet Joseph Smith, he saw the Savior, also Moses, Elias, and Elijah. He had given to him, in connection with the Prophet, every key and every authority of all the dispensations of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, from the earliest time down to the present, and yet by failing to do his duty by failing to keep the commandments of God, this man lost his standing in the Church of Christ. True, he repented and came back. The same is true of Martin Harris. . . .

There is not a Latter-day Saint living who is keeping the commandments of the Lord, who would not regard it as one of the greatest joys imaginable if he could testify that he had heard the voice of God, and that the Lord had given him a commandment; and that, in fulfillment of the requirement of the Lord, he had recorded in this testimony: "we bear witness of these things." How we all would rejoice to be able to bear such a testimony; provided we had the Spirit of God; provided we were so living that it was not a dead letter with us.

—In Conference Report, April 1915, pp. 82-83.

I Had Been Inspired of the Lord.

I remember what to me was the greatest of all the great incidents in my life, in this tabernacle. I saw for the first time, in the audience, my brother who had been careless, indifferent and wayward, who had evinced no interest in the gospel of Jesus Christ, and, as I saw him for the first time in this building, and as I realized that he was seeking God for light and knowledge regarding the divinity of this work, I bowed my head and I prayed God that if I were requested to address the audience, that the Lord would inspire me by the revelations of his Spirit, by that Holy Spirit in whom every true Latter-day Saint believes, that my brother would have to acknowledge to me that I had spoken beyond my natural ability, that I had been inspired of the Lord. I realized that if he made that confession, then I should be able to point out to him that God had given him a testimony of the divinity of this work. Brother Milton Bennion was sitting on the stand that day, and he had been asked to address the congregation. President Angus M. Cannon came to me and said, "Before you entered the building, Brother Grant, I had invited Brother Milton Bennion to speak, but he can come some other day."

I said, "Let him speak." Brother Cannon said, "Well, I will ask him to speak briefly, and you will please follow him."

Brother Bennion told of his visit around the world; among other things, of visiting the sepulchre of Jesus.

I took out of my pocket a book that I always carried, called a Ready Reference, and I laid it down on the stand in front of me, when I stood up to speak. It was opened at the passages that tell of the vicarious work for the dead, of the announcement that Jesus went and preached to the spirits in prison, and proclaimed the gospel of Jesus Christ to them. . . .

I remember standing here feeling that was perhaps the greatest of all the great themes that we as Latter-day Saints had to proclaim to the world. I laid the book down, opened at that page; I prayed for the inspiration of the Lord, and the faith of the Latter-day Saints, and I never thought of the book from that minute until I sat down, at the end of a thirty-minute address. I closed my remarks . . . expecting that President George Q. Cannon would follow me. . . .

He arose and said in substance: "There are times when the Lord Almighty inspires some speaker by the revelations of his Spirit, and he is so abundantly blessed by the inspiration of the living God that it is a mistake for anybody else to speak following him, and one of those occasions has been today, and I desire that this meeting be dismissed without further remarks," and he sat down.

I devoted the thirty minutes of my speech almost exclusively to a testimony of my knowledge that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, and to the wonderful and marvelous labors of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and bearing witness to the knowledge God had given me that Joseph was in very deed a prophet of the true and living God.

The next morning my brother came into my office and said, "Heber, I was at meeting yesterday and heard you preach."

I said, "The first time you ever heard your brother preach, I guess?"

"Oh, no," he said, "I have heard you lots of times."

I said, "I never saw you in meeting before."

"No," he said, "I generally come in late and go into the gallery. I often go out before the meeting is over. But you never spoke as you did yesterday. You spoke beyond your natural ability. You were inspired of the Lord." The identical words I had uttered the day before, in my prayer to the Lord. . . .

I answered, "And I was inspired beyond my natural ability; and I never spoke before—at any time you have heard me, as I spoke yesterday. Do you expect the Lord to get a club and knock you down? What more testimony do you want of the gospel of Jesus Christ than that a man speaks beyond his natural ability and under the inspiration of God, when he testifies of the divine mission of the prophet Joseph?" The next Sabbath he applied to me for baptism.

—In Conference Report, October 1922, pp. 188-90.

Absolute Faith in Jesus Christ.

As I travel I find a lack of belief in God, and in the divinity of Jesus Christ, even among the ministers of the gospel, I rejoice in the fact that every man and woman in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has an absolute faith in God, in his individuality, and an absolute faith that Christ is the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world; that he came to the earth with a divinely appointed mission to die for the sins of the world, and that he is in very deed the head of the Church of Christ. . . .

I cut from a newspaper a clipping. . . . It was a recommendation by an English lord that people discard the "absurdity" of Jesus Christ as a God on earth and a Redeemer of the world, and that they accept the Mohammedan philosophy; suggesting that they could believe in all of the ethical teachings of the religion of Christ and Mohammed, but that they should get away from the absurdities of Christianity, and settle the various disputes and troubles that they were having in the Christian religion.

Wherever I read that statement . . . I took the trouble to state to the people in the various places where I preached, the position of the Latter-day Saints as to the gospel in which we believe. I quoted the vision of Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, as follows:

"And this is the gospel, the glad tidings, which the voice out of the heavens bore record unto us—

"That he came unto the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness;

"That through him all might be saved whom the Father had put into his power and made by him;

"Who glorifies the Father, and saves all the works of his hands, except those sons of perdition who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him."

I announced to the people that in the Church of Jesus Christ no man or woman would be admitted into the Church, or be permitted to retain fellowship who is not willing to accept this statement absolutely without mental reservation. . . .

I announced in those meetings, in some of which the majority of the audience were non-members of the Church, that every Latter-day Saint must subscribe to the doctrine that God himself visited the boy Joseph Smith, and that God himself introduced Jesus Christ to the boy as his well-beloved Son. I announced to these audiences that among the Latter-day Saints there is no evidence of "modernism" so-called, and that no man or woman will be fellowshiped in this Church who denies the individuality, the personality of God, or that Jesus Christ is in very deed the Son of the living God, the Redeemer of the world.

—In Conference Report, April 1925, pp. 7-8.

Power of Christ.

When I was a young unmarried man, another young man who had received a doctor's degree ridiculed me for believing in the Book of Mormon. [A] . . . statement that this doctor made was this: that the voice of man can only carry a few hundred feet, and yet the Book of Mormon teaches that when Jesus Christ was resurrected and came to this country he spoke to the people and his voice was heard all over the land, not alone by the people that were near, but all over the land. "That is a lie," said he, "and you know it." I said, "That is no lie at all. Jesus Christ, under God, was the Creator of this earth, and if he had the power and ability to create the earth I believe that he could arrange for his voice to carry all over the world at one and the same time."

—In Conference Report, April 1929, pp. 129-30.

Prove to the Lord by Our Lives.

God help you and me and every Latter-day Saint to prove to the Lord by our lives, that our testimony of the divinity of this work is not merely lip service. . . . God bless every man that believes in Jesus Christ and is working for the uplift of mankind, and God defeat every man who ridicules the Savior of the world, the Redeemer of mankind.

—In Conference Report, October 1934, p. 132.

The Father of Christ.

When we say that we believe in God we mean that we believe in him as an individuality, as actually the Father of Jesus Christ—not a congeries of laws floating through the universe without form and void, but we believe him to be the Father of Jesus Christ. He is the God whom we as Latter-day Saints worship; and we believe Jesus Christ to be, not only one of the great moral teachers, the greatest the world has ever known, but the Son of God, the Redeemer of mankind, that he came to earth with a divinely appointed mission, to die on the cross, in order that you and I and all eventually may have part in the resurrection.

—In Conference Report, April 1935, p. 10.

God and Jesus Christ Did Come.

I have met hundreds of men who have said, "If it were not for Joseph Smith I could accept your religion." Any man who does not believe in Joseph Smith as a prophet of the true and the living God has no right to be in this Church. That revelation to Joseph Smith is the foundation stone. If Joseph Smith did not have that interview with God and Jesus Christ the whole Mormon fabric is a failure and a fraud. It is not worth anything on earth. But God did come, God did introduce his Son, God did inspire that man to organize the Church of Jesus Christ, and all the opposition of the world is not able to withstand the truth. It is flourishing, it is growing, and it will grow more.

—In Conference Report, October 1939, p. 128.

We Believe in God.

A gentleman sent out several hundred letters to representative ministers, and asked them the question: "Do you believe in God, a personal God, a definite and tangible intelligence, not a congeries of laws floating like a fog in the universe, but God a person, in whose image you were made?" Not a minister answered, "yes." They said they could not be certain about a thing of that kind. . . .

We declare to all the world that God lives, that He is the Father of our spirits, that He is absolutely the Father of Jesus Christ, that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of the world. Men say we lack liberality and breadth, because we say we are the only true Church. We are not lacking in liberality or breadth; the Redeemer of the world, Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior, said it, and we are repeating what He said.

—In Conference Report, April 1922, pp. 11-12.

The Lord Makes No Mistakes.

It has never ceased to be a wonder to me that I do represent the Lord here upon the earth. My association from childhood with the remarkable and wonderful men that have preceded me has made it almost overwhelming to think of being in the same class with them.

The last words uttered by President Joseph F. Smith were to the effect, when he shook hands with me—he died that night—"The Lord bless you, my boy, the Lord bless you; you have got a great responsibility. Always remember this is the Lord's work and not man's. The Lord is greater than any man. He knows whom he wants to lead His Church, and never makes any mistake. The Lord bless you."

I have felt my own lack of ability. In fact when I was called as one of the Apostles I arose to my feet to say it was beyond anything I was worthy of, and as I was rising the thought came to me, "You know as you know that you live that John Taylor is a prophet of God, and to decline this office when he had received a revelation is equivalent to repudiating the Prophet." I said, "I will accept the office and do my best." I remember that it was with difficulty that I took my seat without fainting.

There are two spirits striving with us always, one telling us to continue our labor for good, and one telling us that with the faults and failings of our nature we are unworthy. I can truthfully say that from October, 1882, until February, 1883, that spirit followed me day and night telling me that I was unworthy to be an Apostle of the Church, and that I ought to resign. When I would testify of my knowledge that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God, the Redeemer of mankind, it seemed as though a voice would say to me: "You lie! You lie! You have never seen Him."

While on the Navajo Indian reservation with Brigham Young, Jr., and a number of others, six or eight, on horse back, and several others in "white tops"—riding along with Lot Smith at the rear of that procession, suddenly the road veered to the left almost straight, but there was a well beaten path leading ahead. I said: "Stop, Lot, stop. Where does this trail lead? There are plenty of foot marks and plenty of horses' hoof marks here." He said, "It leads to an immense gully just a short distance ahead, that is impossible to cross with a wagon. We have made a regular 'Muleshoe' of miles here to get on the other side of the gully."

I had visited the day before the spot where a Navajo Indian had asked George A. Smith, Jr., to let him look at his pistol. George A. handed it to him, and the Navajo shot him.

I said, "Lot, is there any danger from Indians?"

"None at all."

"I want to be all alone. Go ahead and follow the crowd." I first asked him if I allowed the animal I was riding to walk if I would reach the road on the other side of the gully before the horsemen and the wagons, and he said, "Yes."

As I was riding along to meet them on the other side I seemed to see, and I seemed to hear, what to me is one of the most real things in all my life, I seemed to see a Council in Heaven. I seemed to hear the words that were spoken. I listened to the discussion with a great deal of interest. The First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles had not been able to agree on two men to fill the vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve. There had been a vacancy of one for two years, a vacancy of two for one year, and the Conference had adjourned without the vacancies being filled. In this Council the Savior was present, my father was there, and the Prophet Joseph Smith was there. They discussed the question that a mistake had been made in not filling those two vacancies and that in all probability it would be another six months before the Quorum would be completed, and they discussed as to whom they wanted to occupy those positions, and decided that the way to remedy the mistake that had been made in not filling these vacancies was to send a revelation. It was given to me that the Prophet Joseph Smith and my father mentioned me and requested that I be called to that position. I sat there and wept for joy. It was given to me that I had done nothing to entitle me to that exalted position, except that I had lived a clean, sweet life. It was given to me that because of my father having practically sacrificed his life in what was known as the great Reformation, so to speak, of the people in early days, having been practically a martyr, that the Prophet Joseph and my father desired me to have that position, and it was because of their faithful labors that I was called, and not because of anything I had done of myself or any great thing that I had accomplished. It was also given to me that that was all these men, the Prophet and my father, could do for me; from that day it depended upon me and upon me alone as to whether I made a success of my life or a failure. . . .

I have been happy during the twenty-two years that it has fallen my lot to stand at the head of this Church. I have felt the inspiration of the Living God directing me in my labors. From the day that I chose a comparative stranger to be one of the Apostles, instead of my lifelong and dearest living friend, I have known as I know that I live, that I am entitled to the light and the inspiration and the guidance of God in directing His work here upon this earth; and I know, as I know that I live, that it is God's work, and that Jesus Christ is the Son of the Living God, the Redeemer of the world and that He came to this earth with a divine mission to die upon the cross as the Redeemer of mankind, atoning for the sins of the world.

—In Conference Report, April 1941, pp. 4-6.

Greater the Joy.

It is a remarkable fact that we can never read of the labors which [Jesus Christ] performed, or listen to others speaking of the great work which he accomplished, without taking pleasure in it, while on the other hand, there is nothing so interesting in the life and history of any other individual but what by hearing and reading it time and time again we become tired of it. I can bear testimony, from my own experience, that the oftener I read of the life and labors of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ the greater are the joy, the peace, the happiness, the satisfaction that fill my soul in contemplating what he did.

—In Conference Report, April 1944, p. 7.
