No specific author, I Know That My Redeemer Lives: Latter-day Prophets Testify of the Savior ( 1990)

Chapter 8

GEORGE ALBERT SMITH

Born: 4 April 1870

Ordained an Apostle: 8 October 1903

Ordained President: 21 May 1945

Died: 4 April 1951

A Parallel between Jesus Christ and Joseph Smith.

When our Savior in humility came upon earth, the people said, "Who are you, that you should claim to be the Son of God? We know your father; he is Joseph, the carpenter. We know your mother; she is Mary. We have Moses and Abraham for our prophets, and we have no need of a man like you to come and speak to us in the name of the Lord." He went among them and ministered to the sick, healed the afflicted, unstopped the ears of the deaf, restored the blind to sight, cleansed the leper by His magic touch, raised the dead to life. Then they said He performed these wondrous works by the power of Beelzebub. Yet He was indeed the Son of God. He labored among them in love and kindness; but they cast His name out as evil. They even cast reproach upon the city from which He came, and said, "Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?" But He was the Son of God, and He did have the right to speak in the name of the Father. The truths He brought to the earth came from the Father; and though they nailed Him to the cross, though they placed upon His head the plaited crown of thorns, and put the mock scepter in His hands, though they spilled His blood with the cruel spear, yet the word that He delivered to them was the word of the Lord, and He was indeed the Son of God.

The same feeling that was entertained, to some extent, against the Savior has continued in the earth. People who do not understand the things of God because they have not the Spirit of God, reviled and cast them out as evil, when in fact the evil is in themselves. . . .

Our Heavenly Father . . . chose and commissioned Joseph Smith, as He had done other prophets, to go forth among the people and speak in the name of the Lord. Through this humble instrument, the Gospel was restored to the earth again and he preached the same doctrines that our Savior taught while He was upon the earth. Under the Lord's direction, he organized the Church of Christ, with apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, etc., as the Church should be organized, to continue thus until all should come to a unity of the faith. He ministered unto the people, he healed the sick; he loved the souls of the children of men. But, as had been the case with prophets whom the Lord had raised up before, it seemed necessary in this case that the testimony of His servant should be sealed with his life's blood. . . . You remember when he was first raised up how the people of this country said, "We have no need of you. You are Joseph, the son of Joseph, and we know where you come from. You are not a strong and mighty man, and you do not come from an influential family. We have no need of new revelation. We have the Bible, and that is all that is necessary for the salvation of the children of men." . . . The people of the world, as before, judge this work by the spirit of man. They do not have the Spirit of God, which would enable them to understand that it came from our Father in heaven.

—In Conference Report, April 1904, pp. 63-64.

Jesus Christ, Our Savior.

I rejoice this day in a testimony of the divinity of the mission of Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of the world. I know, as I know that I live, that He is what we believe Him to be. I know that there is no other name under heaven whereby we may hope to gain exaltation, but the name of Jesus Christ, our Savior. There is no other Gospel of salvation, and we, my brethren who bear the holy priesthood, have the responsibility of carrying that message, not only to the nations of the earth, but of exemplifying it in our lives and teaching it to those who are our neighbors, not of our faith. I warn you this day that the Lord holds us responsible to call His children to repentance and for the promulgation of His truth. If we fail to take advantage of our opportunities to teach the sons and daughters of God, who are not of our faith, who dwell in our midst, this Gospel of our Lord, He will require at our hands on the other side of the veil what we have failed to do, so let us not be recreant.

—In Conference Report, April 1916, p. 48.

Your School Master.

You have had the greatest instructor that the world knows anything about. You have had for your school master the King of kings, the Lord of lords, the Creator of the heavens and the earth; who in his wonderful tenderness and consideration for us in this day, has sent his prophet into the world to explain to us, and to make clear to our minds the things that he gave to the world hundreds of years ago that have been misunderstood and have been misinterpreted very much to the detriment of our Father's children. But in our day he has renewed to us the truth, has given to us the blessed teachings that should qualify us to be men and women after his own heart, has held out to us the promise that if we will do the things that he advises our lives will be pure and holy, peace will be our portion here, and we shall dwell with him throughout the ages of eternity. What more could he give unto us, or, . . . "What more can he say than to you he has said, you who unto Jesus for refuge have fled?"

—In Conference Report, October 1923, p. 73.

To Be Taught by the Lord.

How grateful we ought to be that there has been removed from us the doubt that exists in the minds of so many of our Father's splendid sons and daughters, that there has come to us that abiding assurance that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that he is our elder brother, and that if we are faithful, in his own due time he will cleanse and purify this earth on which we dwell, and it will be celestialized, and those who have prepared themselves for the celestial kingdom will have the joy of dwelling hereon, to be directed, to be counseled, to be taught, and advised by the Lord of lords and King of kings, throughout the ages of eternity. What a wonderful promise . . . has been given to the children of men, and oh, how I pray that there may come into the souls of the thousands and millions of God's children a knowledge of the purpose of their being, that they may prepare, while there is yet time before their final summons, for the time when we will be classified and placed in whatever kingdom we have earned the right to dwell in, when we go to the other side.

—In Conference Report, October 1925, pp. 33-34.

No Other Name in Heaven.

Above all, I thank him for the knowledge that has been burned into my soul; I know that my heavenly Father lives, I know that Jesus Christ is the Savior of mankind, and that there is no other name under heaven whereby men and women may be exalted, but the name of Jesus Christ, our Lord. I do know that he came into the world in this latter day, that he bestowed divine authority upon a humble boy who was seeking the truth, and the result of that has been the organization of the Church with which we are identified; and there is with it the power of God unto salvation to all those who believe.

—In Conference Report, October 1927, p. 50.

True Portrait of Christ.

Christ, the ideal, has been falsely portrayed so much by word and brush that he is thought of as being weak, and effeminate; whereas, he was vigorous, active, and courageous. The basis of his doctrine was individual responsibility, which calls forth the best and most virile attributes of man.

—Improvement Era, 31 (1927-28): 689.

The Lord Speaks through Prophets.

One of the prophets told us that the Lord God would do nothing but He would reveal His secrets to His servants the prophets. In other words, the world would not be taken by surprise if they paid attention to the leadership that the Lord provided. So we look down over the vista of time, to the days of Noah when the Lord warned the people of what would occur, and they apparently paid no attention, for out of the seeming multitudes that dwelt upon the earth, only eight souls were saved from destruction, yet all had been told how they might be preserved.

The Lord warned Tyre and Nineveh and Jerusalem and Babylon, and other cities, that unless they repented and turned to him they would be destroyed, and of those cities, Nineveh was the only one that turned immediately to the Lord. . . .

The Lord told Abraham that his seed should go into a strange land, that after four hundred years they would return with great possessions. . . .

Think how anxious the Lord was to save the cities of the plains, Sodom and Gomorrah. Abraham pleaded repeatedly with the Lord, asking that they be spared for the sake of the righteous. He kept reducing the number until he came down from fifty to ten righteous people. The Lord said that if in these cities ten righteous could be found, the cities would be saved. But not ten righteous persons could be found and the cities were destroyed. . . .

It was a strange thing that in the days of Isaiah the Lord revealed to him that the greatest of all the nations in the earth should be humbled. . . .

It was not very long after that until the Jews who would not repent were punished because they would not listen to the Lord. And then again, after the coming of our Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, they would not receive His Gospel and they would not repent. This time Jerusalem was not only overthrown but was destroyed and her temple was razed until not one stone was left upon another.

All these things were revealed to the prophets of God. And so we might go on now speaking of Babylon, and how the Lord told of the establishment of the various kingdoms that should succeed, by giving the king, Nebuchadnezzar, a dream, and then by using Daniel, who was there as a captive to interpret the dream of the king. The prediction had been made that certain things would occur, and one kingdom should follow after another, and it was so fulfilled. It took hundreds of years to fulfil the prediction. . . .

In the year 1830 he established His Church here upon the earth. That did not come by accident—it did not come by surprise. It had all been predicted—all these things that are contained in the Old and New Testaments. . . . I am trying to call your attention to the fact that when the Lord speaks, what He promises has always been fulfilled.

Well, now, has He promised us anything today? Read your scriptures. Not only the Old and New Testaments, but turn to your Book of Mormon. See how the Lord has fulfilled His promises—how the Nephites, because they refused to accept the teachings of God— refused to sustain those who presided over them by authority—were wiped from the face of the earth. That was not done without a warning; they knew it would come, and they were told, across the mighty ocean, of the coming of the Savior, what would occur when He came, and what would happen when He was crucified. . . .

You may follow the record, and you will discover that such things have never happened to a people who were keeping the commandments of God. The destruction has come to those who were failing to pay attention to what the Lord desired. This nation was raised up in order that men might worship God according to the dictates of their conscience—this nation of which we are a part. God raised up the very men who prepared the Constitution to declare to us our privileges and our liberties. It was not an accident. Those things were recorded beforehand. In the Book of Mormon He announced the coming of Columbus, and of the Pilgrim fathers, from the old world, those who came here to worship God.

All these things had been made known beforehand, and then, in the case of the Latter-day Saints when they were in distress in Nauvoo and were being harassed by their enemies, the Prophet of God told them that they would be driven from their homes—and that they would come to the tops of the Rocky Mountains where they would become a mighty people. What did they know about the Rocky Mountains? What was there in the Rocky Mountains that they should come to? Not anything but what God had prepared. That prophecy was fulfilled, and you are my witnesses that it was fulfilled in that the Latter-day Saints today are a mighty people in the midst of these great mountain valleys.

Another prediction of our times that was fulfilled, was when the Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith that there would be a civil war in this country and told him exactly where it would begin, at the rebellion of South Carolina. How did the Prophet Joseph know, nearly thirty years before it occurred, that it would start in South Carolina? He knew because the Lord knew and told him so. So from the beginning, through Noah, and all down through the line of prophets the power to communicate with the heavens has been with those whom God has raised up and prepared. The people have been taught, and they have been warned, and most of them have been recreant to the warning, the result being that great destruction has come upon the children of men.

—In Conference Report, October 1943, pp. 43-44.

The Church of Jesus Christ.

We have the peculiar distinction of belonging to a Church that does not have the name of any man, because it was not organized by the wisdom of any man. It was named by the Father of us all in honor of his Beloved Son, Jesus Christ.

I would like to suggest to you . . . that we honor the name of the Church. It is not the Church of James and John, it is not the church of Moroni, nor is it the church of Mormon. It is the Church of Jesus Christ. And while all these men were wonderful and notable characters, we have been directed to worship God in a church that bears the name of his Beloved Son. . . .

When Christ came to instruct the people, he told them that there must be faith in God and righteousness in life or they would not please our Heavenly Father. And so the Savior of the world came with kindness and love. He went among the people healing the sick, unstopping the ears of the deaf, and restoring sight to those who were blind. They saw these things done by the power of God. Comparatively few of them could understand or believe that he was the Son of God. . . .

His only Begotten Son in the flesh had to call the attention of his associates to the fact that with all his majesty and his royalty, he still must live like other men. And when the time came for him to die, and be hung upon the cross, and cruelly tortured by those of his own people, his own race, he did not become angry, he did not resent the unkindness.

When the one thief on the cross railed against him, the other thief called attention to the fact that they were only receiving their just desserts, while here was a righteous man being unjustly punished. The one thief prayed, as best he knew how to pray, and the Savior of the World said to this man who was suspended alongside him on another cross:

" . . . To day shalt thou be with me in paradise." (Luke 23:43.)

The people of the world do not understand some of these things, and particularly, many men cannot understand how the Savior felt when in the agony of his soul, he cried to his Heavenly Father, not to condemn and destroy these who were taking his mortal life, but he said:

" . . . Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.)

That should be the attitude of all the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That should be the attitude of all the sons and daughters of God and would be, it seems to me, if they fully understood the plan of salvation. . . . So it is our privilege, possessing divine authority that has been conferred again in our day, to go into the world and teach men the message of the Savior that would have redeemed the world if people had accepted it.

—In Conference Report, October 1945, pp. 167-69.

Live the Teachings of Jesus.

If we will live the teachings of Jesus of Nazareth, if we will observe the advice and counsel of the prophets of God, if we will carry out the program that the Lord has given to the Church with which we are identified, we will lead all the world in knowledge and intelligence and in power, because we may have all that the world has, plus the inspiration of the Almighty.

—In Conference Report, April 1946, p. 124.

Knowledge of God.

This poor old world today would not be in the condition it is in if the people who live on it believed in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost. People talk about believing, but two-thirds of those who live on this earth know practically nothing at all about the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Of the other one-third, the so-called Christians, about fifty per cent know very little about the personality of God, and know very little about being here for any particular reason; they are just here. They are something like Topsy. When they asked her where she came from, she said she didn't know,—she just growed. It is a wonderful thing to have the privilege that all other people of the world have, every opportunity to obtain education and culture, and besides, that which is more important than all the rest, to have a knowledge that God is our Father, that we are His children, and that Jesus Christ is His Son, our elder Brother. The world does not understand what it all means. . . .

I know that God lives, I know that Jesus is the Christ, I know that Joseph Smith was and is a prophet of the living God, that the Gospel of our Lord is here on earth and we have the opportunity to conform our lives to its principles and be blessed thereby.

I realize that there are some who say, "I can't believe," but that does not change my knowledge of the truth. I know it just the same. I know another thing, that if I were not telling the truth in testifying as I do, I would have to account to my Heavenly Father for seeking to deceive. I am taking into account what it all means. I realize the seriousness of my testimony and here in the presence of all of you I leave that witness.

—28 April 1946 address at graduation exercises, Wasatch LDS Seminary, Heber City, Utah, LDS Church Archives.

Seriousness of Testimony.

We are not out of the woods. This world is in for a housecleaning unless the sons and daughters of our Heavenly Father repent of their sins and turn to him. And that means the Latter-day Saints, or members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, along with all the rest, but we, first of all, ought to be setting the example. . . . I know that God lives. I know that Jesus is the Christ. I know that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of the Living God, and had restored to him the true gospel of Jesus Christ in these latter days.

That might sound like boasting if it were not so serious. It is serious, and I know that I will have to answer for that testimony as I leave it with you. . . . It will not be long until this man who is talking will have finished his work and passed to the other side, and when I go, I want to be worthy to join my grandparents and my parents, my brothers and sisters who have passed on. I know they have earned a place that is worth while. I want to go where they have gone, and I know that if I were not to tell you the truth in regard to this matter, I might lose that opportunity.

So, realizing the seriousness of a testimony like that, realizing what it means, and with love unfeigned and a desire to be a blessing to all our Father's children, I leave this witness with you that this is the gospel of Jesus Christ, the only power of God unto salvation in preparation for the celestial kingdom, into which kingdom we may all go if we will, but it will be on his terms.

—In Conference Report, October 1946, p. 153.

Blessings of Righteousness.

Every blessing we enjoy is the result of keeping the commandments of God. Every blessing we desire we must obtain on those same terms. So today I witness to you that we have a Heavenly Father—I know that he lives. I know that Jesus was the Christ, his Beloved Son, who gave his mortal life that we might have eternal life. He came to this country twice, once to the Nephites, and later in the days of Joseph Smith. The Father and the Son came in that latter instance to see that the way was opened for the dissemination of his gospel. He has called us to bear the priesthood and carry the gospel message as missionaries to the various parts of the world, and in return for that he has promised us eternal life in his celestial kingdom.

—In Conference Report, April 1947, p. 166.

Part of the Lord's Work.

We are thankful to him who is the Author of our being, and grateful that he came down to earth and brought with him his Beloved Son to begin a new dispensation—the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times. This is not the Church of Joseph Smith or of any other leader who followed him. This is the Church of Jesus Christ, and it was our Heavenly Father who gave it its name.

I wonder sometimes if we realize what an honor it is to have membership in this great organization. Even in our business affairs and in our social affairs we should carry with us the feeling, "I am a part of the work of the Lord, and I desire to be worthy of the blessings that have come to me." . . .

Some people have worshiped the sun; some have worshiped other luminaries; and some have worshiped mountains and other things, with the thought that it was worship. But the worship in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a devoted life, a desire to be worthy of him in whose image we have been created and who has given us all that the world has that is worth while—the gospel of Jesus Christ.

—In Conference Report, April 1949, pp. 7-8.

Resurrection of the Redeemer.

When we think of the resurrection of our Redeemer, I am reminded that the purpose of his life was to prepare us all, to make a path that we could all walk, that would bring us eternal happiness in his presence as well as in the presence of one another. He gave his life and testified by the shedding of his blood that he was a Son of God, and then . . . his appearance since that time has demonstrated beyond any possible doubt that he was what he claimed to be.

—In Conference Report, April 1950, p. 168.

Our Belief and Witnesses of Christ.

I know of no people in the world who believe as firmly in the divine mission of Jesus Christ as do the membership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I remember I have had many people say to me, "Why, you people do not even believe in Jesus Christ."

I have said, "What is the matter with you? If we do not believe in Jesus Christ, why do we call the Church, the Church of Jesus Christ?"

"Oh, I didn't know you called it that, I thought it was called the Mormon Church," they have replied. . . .

When people say or think that we do not believe in the divine mission of Jesus Christ, let them know that we believe all that the Bible teaches in reference to him. We believe the story of how he organized his people and taught them, and how eventually, at the insistence of his own people, he was crucified by the representatives of the Roman government; not for any wrong he had done, but because he was too good to live among that people. . . .

We have all the information that our Christian brothers and sisters do with regard to the life of the Savior in the Bible, and in addition to that, we have the story of his coming to the people on this western hemisphere, as recorded in the Book of Mormon. And when he came among them, he talked to them as he had to those in the old world. When he was ready to leave them, he blessed them, he healed their sick and took their children up in his arms and wept over them. And after being with them two or three days, coming and going, they saw him ascend into heaven. . . .

We not only have all that the world has with regard to the divinity of the mission of Jesus Christ as recorded in the Bible, but also we have the story of another book, known as the Book of Mormon, and the account of his appearing in this western hemisphere . . . ; and we also have the story of another man who gave his life as a witness that he knew that God lives and Jesus is the Christ. I refer to the Prophet Joseph Smith. . . .

If men and women, with all the truth that they have, would retain all the wonderful things that have been passed on through the prophets of God, and then let us share with them the additional information the Lord has revealed since the Holy Bible was made accessible to the world, what a difference it would make.

—In Conference Report, October 1950, pp. 156-58.

Enjoyed His Companionship.

I have been buoyed up and, as it were, lifted out of myself and given power not my own to teach the glorious truths proclaimed by the Redeemer of the world. I have not seen Him face to face but have enjoyed the companionship of His Spirit and felt His presence in a way not to be mistaken. I know that my Redeemer lives and gladly yield my humble efforts to establish his teachings. The philosophies of men can never take the place of truth as revealed to us by the Eternal Father. Individual happiness and world-wide peace will not be permanent until those who dwell in the earth accept the Gospel and conform their lives to its precepts. . . . Every fibre of my being vibrates with the knowledge that He lives and some day all men will know it.

The Savior died that we might live. He overcame death and the grave and holds out to all who obey His teachings the hope of the glorious resurrection.

—Forace Green, comp., Testimonies of Our Leaders (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1958), 53.
