No specific author, I Know That My Redeemer Lives: Latter-day Prophets Testify of the Savior ( 1990)

Chapter 9

DAVID O. McKAY

Born: 8 September 1873

Ordained an Apostle: 9 April 1906

Sustained as President: 9 April 1951

Died: 18 January 1970

Resisting Satan's Temptations.

Latter-day Saints are members of the Church . . . for the developing of the religious sentiment, the true religious spirit. This may be done in two ways: first, by seeking the truth, and living in harmony with it; and second, by resisting every influence, every power that tends to destroy or to dwarf in any way the religious sentiment. . . .

Take as an example the Savior. After He passed through that ordinance to fulfill all righteousness, after He had received the commendation of the Father and the testimony from on high that He was the Son of God, the "Beloved Son" in whom the Father was well pleased, Satan was there ready to thwart His mission. Jesus went forth in fasting and prayer, preparatory for the great mission resting upon Him; and when in His weakest moment—as Satan thought—when His body was weak and exhausted by long fasting, the evil one presented himself in temptation; and what was the temptation? An appeal to His bodily weakness: "If thou be the Son of God—(note the taunt—the very testimony on the bank of the Jordan was, "This is my beloved Son; ") "If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread." In a moment of weakness and hunger, that temptation would be strongest, other things being equal. There was the moment of resistance on Jesus' part. His seeking had been manifested in prayer and fasting; His resistance came, at the moment of bodily weakness. Though the body was weak the Spirit was strong and Christ answered: "It is written, man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." Then Satan tried Him on another point. Failing in that, the tempter tried Him still on the third, tempted Him first on His love for physical comfort; second, tempted Him on vanity, and third, tempted Him on love for worldly wealth, and the power to rule the world. But all these temptations Christ resisted; and the final resistance was: "Get thee behind me Satan, for it is written: Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God and Him only shalt thou serve." . . . This element of resistance in regard to our bodily longings—satisfying the passions, applies to every member of the Church of Christ. In some way the evil one will attack us. In some way he can weaken us; in some way he will bring before us that which will weaken our souls, and will tend to thwart that true development of religious sentiment; and what I mean by that is this: the development of the spirit within, the strengthening of the inner man, the strengthening and growth of the spirit, that time cannot kill, but which is enduring and lasting as the eternal Father of that spirit. And the things that will tend to dwarf this spirit or to hinder its growth are things that the Latter-day Saints are called upon to resist.

—In Conference Report, April 1907, pp. 11-12.

Vision of Those Who Have Overcome the World.

I then fell asleep, and beheld in vision something infinitely sublime. In the distance I beheld a beautiful white city. Though far away, yet I seemed to realize that trees with luscious fruit, shrubbery with gorgeously tinted leaves, and flowers in perfect bloom abounded everywhere. The clear sky above seemed to reflect these beautiful shades of color. I then saw a great concourse of people approaching the city. Each one wore a white flowing robe and a white headdress. Instantly my attention seemed centered upon their leader, and though I could see only the profile of his features and his body, I recognized him at once as my Savior. The tint and radiance of his countenance were glorious to behold. There was a peace about him which seemed sublime—it was divine!

The city, I understood, was his. It was the City Eternal; and the people following him were to abide there in peace and eternal happiness.

But who were they?

As if the Savior read my thoughts, he answered by pointing to a semicircle that then appeared above them, and on which were written in gold the words:

These Are They Who Have Overcome The World— Who Have Truly Been Born Again!

—Experienced on ship while nearing Samoa, recorded in 10 May 1921 entry in David O. McKay's world tour diary, in Cherished Experiences from the Writings of David O. McKay, comp. Clare Middlemiss (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1976), 59-60.

The Church Founded upon the Reality of Christ.

As the Christian church in the meridian of time was founded upon the reality of the living Christ—not merely upon the teachings of the Great Teacher—so the Church of Jesus Christ in this age was founded upon the reality of Christ's existence and upon the reality of his appearance in this dispensation to the earnest seeking boy, Joseph Smith.

—In Conference Report, April 1926, p. 39.

Keep the Faith.

What does it mean to keep the faith? It means first, that we accept Jesus Christ, not merely as a great teacher, a powerful leader, but as the Savior, the Redeemer of the world. . . . Many students are reading comments from reputably great educators who say that in order to be a christian it is not necessary to accept Christ as the literal Son of God, it is not necessary to believe in the immaculate conception, it is not necessary to believe in the literal resurrection from the grave. But he who keeps the faith will accept Jesus Christ as the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world. . . . A young man who keeps that faith may not in his heart know that all things which Jesus said are true, but if he holds to the truth of Christ's divinity he will keep in harmony with the Savior's teachings by the spirit of faith. And we walk by faith in this world. We are as the little boy who holds his father's hand in the midst of a great city: the little boy is confused by the din and bustle of the crowd, and realizes that if he breaks away he will be lost and may not be able to get back to his father. While he holds that father's hand, however, he is safe. He has an assurance that his father will lead him back to his home. So it is with the young man who keeps his faith in this latter-day work. There may be confusion around him, his thoughts may be distracted, but he has his hand in that of his Redeemer, and with faith in that spiritual inspiration he will be led into truth, his conscience will be awakened to that great spiritual reality which is around us.

—In Conference Report, October 1928, pp. 36-37.

Always Remember Him.

The sacrament is a memorial of Christ's life and death. When we think of his life we think of sacrifice. Not a moment of his existence on earth did Christ think more of himself than he did of his brethren and the people whom he came to save, always losing himself for the good of others, and finally giving his life for the redemption of mankind. When we partake of the sacrament in his presence we remember him, his life of sacrifice, and service; and we are inspired by that thought and memory. There is nothing won in this life without sacrifice. . . .

The partaking of the sacrament indicates also how communion with Christ may be secured. It cannot be obtained by Sunday righteousness and week-day indulgence. It implies that we will remember Christ always.

—In Conference Report, October 1929, pp. 11-13.

Mark Testified of Christ.

We have no evidence that Mark joined the Church while the Savior was on the earth. Undoubtedly the Savior was in Mark's home. Mark was probably the youth who rushed into the garden of Gethsemane and warned Jesus that the soldiers were coming. At any rate we are justified in assuming that he was acquainted with the Master.

Mark does not himself recount any appearance of the risen Lord; but he testifies that the angel at the tomb announced the resurrection, and promised that the Lord would meet his disciples. From Mark we hear the glorious proclamation of the first empty tomb in all the world. For the first time in the history of man the words "Here lies" were supplanted by the divine message "He is risen." No one can doubt that Mark was not convinced in his soul of the reality of the empty tomb. To him the resurrection was not questionable—it was real; and the appearance of his Lord and Master among men was a fact established in his mind beyond the shadow of a doubt. To the proclaiming of this truth he devoted his life, and if tradition can be relied upon, he sealed his testimony with his blood.

—In Conference Report, April 1939, p. 113.

New Prophet Speaks.

When the Savior was about to leave his Apostles, he gave them a great example of service. You remember he girded himself with a towel and washed his disciples' feet. . . .

Returning the basin to the side of the door, ungirding himself, and putting on his robe, he returned to his position with the Twelve, and said:

"Ye call me Master and Lord: and . . . so I am."

What an example of service to those great servants, followers of the Christ! He that is greatest among you, let him be least. So we sense the obligation to be of greater service to the membership of the Church, to devote our lives to the advancement of the kingdom of God on earth.

—In Conference Report, April 1951, pp. 158-59.

The Great High Priest.

The Priesthood came direct from our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, who is the great High Priest, and he authorized Peter, James and John, on whom he bestowed that Priesthood, to bestow it upon the Prophet Joseph Smith; and John the Baptist, who held the Aaronic Priesthood to bestow the Aaronic Priesthood upon Joseph Smith. Joseph Smith did not take it; it came direct, and you brethren . . . can trace your ordination, probably within five steps, right back to the Savior himself.

—In Conference Report, October 1955, p. 91.

Witness That He Lives.

I wish to emphasize . . . that God lives and furthermore, that Jesus is his Beloved Son, the Savior of the world, and those who have seen Jesus, who walked with him, who testify of him, as I have narrated, heard him say, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father."

—In Conference Report, October 1959, p. 123.

Reality of Christ.

The reality of Jesus the Christ must be sensed by you and by me, and the reality of his message must be mine and yours if we hope to advance spiritually and rise above the earth and things which are akin to it. A mere belief in Jesus as a great teacher or even as the greatest man that ever lived has proved inadequate in combating the ills of the world. . . .

The whole philosophy of the progress of man is associated with his divine coming. He is the Son of God, who took upon himself mortality even as you and I, yet divine, even as you and I may become. In the march of this spiritual progress there are certain necessary and definite steps . . .

A consciousness of freedom. This is the principle which began when Christ accepted the appointment of his earthly mission. . . .

A sense of self-mastery. Before Jesus began his ministry, he proved himself capable of withstanding the tempter. He was tempted yet never once did he yield, and finally declared: " . . . be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." (John 16:33) . . .

A sense of obligation. . . . Jesus Christ, as always, is the supreme example. Truly he gave his life for others. "The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head." (Matt. 8:20.) . . .

Consecration to Christ and the right.

When Jesus met the supreme crisis in the Garden of Gethsemane, he said: "Father, . . . not my will, but thine, be done." (Luke 22:42.) This is an example of entire submission of self to the will of God. . . . Man's highest spiritual achievement is to speak and act for the good of his fellow man to the glory of God, and thus make of life a consecrated possession. . . .

The mortal life of Jesus Christ was real. He was born of God: the Babe of Bethlehem, the one perfect Gentleman who ever lived—the Ideal Man whose character was supreme; our Brother, our Savior, the "Anointed One." God help us to make him real in our lives.

—Improvement Era, 64 (1961): 798-99

Happiness in a Kinship with Christ.

Too many men and women have other gods to which they give more thought than to the resurrected Lord—the god of pleasure, the god of wealth, the god of indulgence, the god of political power, the god of popularity, the god of race superiority—as varied and numerous as were the gods of ancient Athens and Rome. . . .

It is therefore a blessing to the world that there are occasions . . . which, as warning semaphores, say to mankind: In your mad rush for pleasure, wealth, and fame, pause and think what is of most value in life.

No man can sincerely resolve to apply to his daily life the teachings of Jesus of Nazareth without sensing a change in his own nature. The phrase, "born again," has a deeper significance than many people attach to it. This changed feeling may be indescribable, but it is real. Happy [is] the person who has truly sensed the uplifting, transforming power that comes from this nearness to the Savior, this kinship to the Living Christ.

—Improvement Era, 65 (1962): 404-5.

The Shepherds Were Prepared.

In Micah, the fifth chapter, Bethlehem, the City of David, is mentioned by that prophet as the birthplace of the Messiah. I wonder if the shepherds, to whom the revelation of Christ's birth was given, had not that prophecy in mind as they kept watch over their flocks by night.

A revelation of God does not come to man unless he prepares himself for it and lives worthy of it. Evil influences will thrust themselves upon men, but God will be sought. Evil is always crowding and tempting and promising. God asks us to put forth effort and seek: " . . . Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you." (Matthew 7:7.) But we must seek, we must knock; and I think the humble shepherds were treasuring in their hearts the hope, as all Judea was treasuring it, that the Messiah would soon come. Those humble men had opened to them the vision of God.

"And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into heaven, the shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us." (Luke 2:15.)

The shepherds did not say, "I wonder if this be true?" They did not say, "Let us go and see if this thing be true." They said, "Let us . . . go . . . and see this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us"—an assurance that God had revealed His Son; that the angels had given to the world the message that He who would be King of kings, and Lord of lords, had come as a mere babe in the humblest part of that little Judean town. . . .

How can we get that peace of which the angels sang, and which the shepherds found in that little limestone grotto with Mary lying there in a stable; not a stable as we picture it, but a cave in the limestone rock where the animals were kept, near where their keepers slept?

To get that peace is one of the greatest blessings that can come to mortal man. It comes not by lethargy, nor inactivity, but by doing the Will of God—that peace which Christ had in mind when after His resurrection He appeared to the Twelve and said ". . . Peace be unto you: . . . " (John 20:21.)

This is the message anticipated by the angels who sang: "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men." (Luke 2:14.)

—Instructor, 97 (1962): 397-98.

Evidences Stronger Than Sight.

On May 5, 1961, Mr. John Cook, a newspaper feature writer, was granted an interview with President McKay. Towards the close of the interview he said that he hoped the President wouldn't mind if he asked a question, and said that the President wouldn't need to answer the question if he felt that he shouldn't, but for his own information, not for publication, he would like to know if President McKay had ever seen the Savior.

President McKay answered that he had not, but that he had heard his voice, many times, and that he had felt his presence and his influence. He then told about Peter (saying that he was his favorite among the apostles, even more so than Paul with all his education and learning—that Peter was a rough, simple man, but sincere) and he told how Peter had spoken of being partakers of the divine spirit, of a divine nature, and explained what he felt that to mean.

Then he told how some evidences were stronger even than that of sight, and recalled the occasion when the Savior appeared to his disciples and told Thomas who had doubted, "Reach hither thy finger and behold my hands: and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless but believing." And then President McKay said that he liked to believe Thomas did not actually look up, but knelt at the Savior's feet and said unto him, "My Lord and my God." And then President McKay repeated the words of the Master, "Because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed." President McKay then smiled and said, "That is quite a testimony I have given you. I do not know when I have given this before."

—Ted Cannon, in "Tributes to President David O. McKay," Improvement Era, 66 (1963): 785-86.

Healing in His Wings.

The rising sun can dispel the darkness of night, but it cannot banish the blackness of malice, hatred, bigotry, and selfishness from the hearts of humanity. Happiness and peace will come to earth only as the light of love and human compassion enter the souls of men.

It was for this purpose that Christ, the Son of righteousness, "with healing in his wings," came in the Meridian of Time. Through him wickedness shall be overcome, hatred, enmity, strife, poverty, and war abolished. . . .

Men may yearn for peace, cry for peace, and work for peace, but there will be no peace until they follow the path pointed out by the Living Christ.

—Improvement Era, 67 (1964): 1041-42.

He Who Radiates.

The Savior set us the example, always calm, always controlled, radiating something that the people could feel as they passed—the woman who touched his garment is an example. He felt something go from him, that radiation which is divine.

Every man and every person who lives in this world wields an influence, whether for good or for evil. It is not alone what he says, it is not alone what he does—it is what he is. Every man, every person radiates what he or she is.

Every person is a recipient of radiation. The Savior was conscious of that. Whenever he came into the presence of an individual, he sensed that radiation—whether it was the woman of Samaria with her past life; whether it was the woman who was to be stoned, or the men who were to stone her; whether it was the statesman Nicodemus, or one of the lepers. He was conscious of the radiation from the individual. And to a degree so are you, and so am I. It is what we are and what we radiate that affects the people around us.

—Improvement Era, 69 (1966): 270-71.

Meditation.

Meditation is one of the most secret, most sacred doors through which we pass into the presence of the Lord. Jesus set the example for us. As soon as he was baptized and received the Father's approval—"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" (Matt. 3:17)—Jesus repaired to what is now known as the Mount of Temptation where, during forty days of fasting, he communed with himself and his Father and contemplated the responsibility of his own great mission. One result of this spiritual communion was such strength as enabled him to say to the tempter: "Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." (Matt. 4:10.)

Before he gave the beautiful Sermon on the Mount, he was in solitude, in communion. He did the same thing after that busy Sabbath day, when he arose early in the morning after having been the guest of Peter. Peter undoubtedly found the guest chamber empty, and when he and others sought Jesus, they found him alone. It was on that morning that they said: "All men seek for thee." (Mark 1:37.)

Again, after Jesus had fed the 5,000 he told the Twelve to dismiss the multitude. Then Jesus, the historian says, went to the mountain for solitude and "when the evening was come, he was there alone." (Matt. 14:23.) Meditation! Prayer!

—Improvement Era, June 1967, p. 80.

The Center of Our Thoughts and Being.

Consider the First Article [of Faith]: "We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost." If this belief has "ripened" into an absolute trust and faith, then intelligence, even what we term "common sense," prompts that we have but one aim or purpose in life; and that is to make Him the center of our thoughts and being—to establish spiritual communion with Him. Material possessions, physical pleasures, become secondary. Our chief goal is to surrender to the Author of our being, our inner life, and to subordinate and to hold in subjection the selfish, sordid pull of nature. Thus, though "having not seen," we can say with equal assurance like Thomas, "My Lord and my God." It then becomes easy to " . . . seek . . . first the kingdom of God and his righteousness." (Matt. 6:33.)

—Author unlisted, Our Prophets and Principles (Salt Lake City: The Instructor, nd), 4.

What You Think of Christ.

What you sincerely think in your heart of Christ will determine what you are, will largely determine what your acts will be. No person can study His divine personality, can accept His teachings, or follow His example, without becoming conscious of an uplifting and refining influence within himself.

—Instructor, 102 (1967): 99.

Reverence, Peace, and Goodwill.

As Jesus Christ, our Elder Brother, was born at Bethlehem, "suddenly there was . . . a multitude of heavenly host praising God, and saying:

"Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men." (Luke 2:13-14.) . . .

Let us consider three principles enunciated at his birth that have marked his mission here upon the earth: first, reverence for God; second, peace; and third, goodwill toward all men—or expressing it another way, godliness, happiness, brotherly kindness.

The first principle, godliness, Jesus exemplified every hour of his earthly existence. On the banks of the Jordan as he was seeking baptism at the beginning of his ministry, we hear him say to John, the forerunner: "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." (Matt. 3:15.)

On the mountain where he was tempted with earthly power and the riches of the world thrown at his feet, we hear him say in sublime majesty, "Get thee behind me, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." (Luke 4:8.) . . . In the Garden of Gethsemane Jesus prayed: "Father, . . . not my will, but thine, be done." (Luke 22:42.) . . .

The second principle, peace, has been defined as the happy, natural state of man, the "first of human blessings." Without it there can be no happiness. The Prophet Joseph Smith said: "Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God." (Documentary History of the Church, Vol. 5, p. 134.)

Jesus said in his Sermon on the Mount: "Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God." (Matt. 5:9.) . . . Toward the closing scenes of his mortal life, he said to his disciples: "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." (John 16:33.)

On the same occasion he said: "Peace I leave with you, . . . not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.)

All through his life peace was on his lips and in his heart, and when he came forth from the tomb and appeared unto his disciples, his first greeting was "Peace be unto you." (John 20:19.)

Peace as taught by the Savior is exemption from individual troubles, from family quarrels, from national difficulties. Such peace refers to the person just as much as it does to the community. That man is not at peace who is untrue to the whisperings of Christ, the promptings of his conscience. He cannot be at peace when he is untrue to his better self, when he transgresses the law of righteousness, either in dealing with himself, in indulging in passion or appetites, in yielding to the temptations of the flesh, in being untrue to trust, or in transgressing the law of righteousness in dealing with his fellowmen.

The third principle, goodwill, may also be expressed as brotherliness.

Though Jesus gave his message particularly to the chosen house of Israel, he knew no nationality; neither was he a respecter of persons. When the Syro-Phoenician woman came to him in faith, pleading for a blessing for her daughter, he answered, "O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt." (Matt. 15:28.) He healed the helpless at the pool of Bethesda. The woman taken in sin was told to go her way and sin no more. . . .

Jesus defeated the lawyer in argument, healed the sick where medicine failed, inspired the greatest music ever written, inspired hundreds of thousands of books, inspired missionaries to go to all the world; yet, in none of the realms in which men and women ordinarily win their laurels do you find historians referring to Christ as having succeeded. But in the realm of character he was supreme!

Jesus the Christ is our Savior, our Mediator with the Father. As the Apostle Paul preached, "Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.)

—Improvement Era, March 1968, pp. 2-3.

The Resurrection and the Life.

If a miracle is a supernatural event whose antecedent forces are beyond man's finite wisdom, then the resurrection of Jesus Christ is the most stupendous miracle of all time. In it stand revealed the omnipotence of God and the immortality of man.

The resurrection is a miracle, however, only in the sense that it is beyond man's comprehension and understanding. To all who accept it as a fact, it is but a manifestation of a uniform law of life. Because man does not understand the law, he calls it a miracle. . . .

That the literal resurrection from the grave was a reality to the disciples who knew Christ intimately is a certainty. In their minds there was absolutely no doubt. They were witnesses of the fact. They knew, because their eyes beheld, their ears heard, their hands felt the corporeal presence of the risen Redeemer. . . .

The direct evidence that the tomb did not hold Jesus is threefold: (1) the marvelous transformation in the spirit and work of his disciples; (2) the practically universal belief of the early Church, as recorded in the Gospels; and (3) the direct testimony of Paul, the earliest New Testament writer. . . .

"How can we know the way?" asked Thomas, as he sat with his fellow apostles and their Lord at the table after the supper on the memorable night of the betrayal; and Christ's divine answer was: "I am the way, the truth, and the life. . . . " (John 14:5-6.) And so he is! He is the source of our comfort, the inspiration of our life, the author of our salvation. If we want to know our relationship to God, we go to Jesus Christ. If we would know the truth of the immortality of the soul, we have it exemplified in the Savior's resurrection.

If we desire to learn the ideal life to lead among our fellowmen, we can find a perfect example in the life of Jesus. Whatsoever our noble desires, our lofty aspirations, our ideals in any phase of life, we can look to Christ and find perfection. So, in seeking a standard for moral manhood, we need only to go to the Man of Nazareth and in him find embodied all virtues that go to make the perfect man.

The virtues that combined to make this perfect character are truth, justice, wisdom, benevolence, and self-control. His every thought, word, and deed were in harmony with divine law and, therefore, true. The channel of communication between him and the Father was constantly open, so that truth, which rests upon revelation, was always known to him. . . .

I have cherished from childhood the truth that God is a personal being and is, indeed, our Father whom we can approach in prayer and receive answers thereto. My testimony of the risen Lord is just as real as Thomas', who said to the resurrected Christ when he appeared to his disciples: "My Lord and my God." (John 20:28.) I know that he lives. He is God made manifest in the flesh; and I know that "there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.)

I know that he will confer with his servants who seek him in humility and in righteousness. I know because I have heard his voice, and I have received his guidance in matters pertaining to his kingdom here on earth.

I know that his Father, our Creator, lives. I know that they appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith and revealed to him the revelations which we now have recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants and in other Church works. This knowledge is as real to me as that which occurs in our daily lives. When we lay our bodies down at night, we know—we have an assurance—that the sun will rise in the morning and shed its glory over all the earth. So near to me is the knowledge of Christ's existence and divinity of this restored Church.

—Improvement Era, June 1968, pp. 2-3, 5.

Fellowship with Christ.

The Savior, the Son of God, is at the head of this Church . . . —Jesus Christ is our head! I know that the former Presidents of the Church knew that, and declared it. Joseph Smith, the Prophet, knew it. This is Christ's Church, and we are his messengers, his representatives, and it is our duty to keep in touch with him and know what his wishes are. . . . If we keep in tune with Christ and his teachings, we are entitled to fellowship with him. He does not love sin, he does not love lying, nor stealing, misjudging one another, nor condemning others. We have to keep our hearts pure and clean to be worthy of his fellowship.

—Improvement Era, December 1968, p. 109.

Testimony of the Resurrection.

I bear my testimony to you and to all the world that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accepts the resurrection not only as being real, but as the consummation of Christ's divine mission on earth.

I know with my whole soul that as Christ lives after death, so shall all men, each taking his place in the next world for which he has best fitted himself.

—In Conference Report, April 1969, p. 152.
