No specific author, I Know That My Redeemer Lives: Latter-day Prophets Testify of the Savior ( 1990)

Chapter 10

JOSEPH FIELDING SMITH

Born: 19 July 1876

Ordained an Apostle: 7 April 1910

Ordained President: 23 January 1970

Died: 2 July 1972

The Resurrection of the Physical Body.

I have a firm testimony of the mission of our Redeemer, and it is my duty, so far as I have the power, to raise my voice and to declare unto the people, not only of the Latter-day Saints, but in all the world, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God. . . .

I believe, and you believe, all Latter-day Saints believe, in the literal resurrection of the body and its reuniting with the spirit, thus becoming, as the scriptures inform us, the soul of man. The resurrection of the Son of God was typical. We are informed that his body did not see corruption, although it was placed in the tomb and remained there for the three days. . . . That body was taken up and spirit and body again united inseparably, and in that form he appeared unto his disciples who were unconvinced when he appeared to them and "were terrified and affrighted," the scriptures say, thinking they had seen a spirit. He manifested to them that it was himself, and called upon them, in order to convince them that it was the body that was laid in the tomb, to come and handle him and see for themselves that it was his body that had been pierced and they thrust their hands into the wounds in his hands, his feet and his side.

As he arose from the dead, so shall all men rise; both the just and the unjust shall come forth from the grave. The sea shall give up its dead; the grave shall give up its dead; all shall come forth and stand before the judgment seat of God to be judged according to their works. They shall not all come forth at the same time. Those who are Christ's shall come forth at his coming. . . .

After the resurrection from the dead our bodies will be spiritual bodies, but they will be bodies that are tangible, bodies that have been purified, but they will nevertheless be bodies of flesh and bones, but they will not be blood bodies, they will no longer be quickened by blood but quickened by the spirit which is eternal and they shall become immortal and shall never die. . . .

Paul declared that the body that would be raised would be a spiritual body. You read in the Book of Genesis, where the Lord said to Noah after the flood, that the blood was the life of the body. . . . Therefore, whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, because blood is the life of the mortal body, but with the body brought forth in the resurrection, which is the immortal body, that is not the case, in it blood does not exist, but the spirit is the life-giving power and hence they are no longer bodies quickened by blood but bodies quickened by spirit and hence they are spiritual bodies, but tangible bodies of flesh and bones, just as was the body of the Son of God. Now this is the doctrine of the Lord and Savior of the world.

—In Conference Report, April 1917, pp. 58, 62-63.

Redemption through Christ.

I know that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of the world, that he came into the world to take upon him the transgression of every soul who would repent; and that we, through our repentance and our faith and our acceptance of the principles of the gospel, shall receive full salvation through the shedding of his blood and through the atonement which he brought to pass that we might receive these blessings. Moreover, I know that all men shall be redeemed from death, because men are not responsible for death, therefore Jesus Christ has redeemed them from death through the shedding of his blood. They shall rise in the resurrection, every man to receive his reward according to his works. We who have received the truth of the everlasting gospel ought not to be satisfied with anything short of the best, and the best is the fulness of the Father's kingdom; and for that I hope and pray we shall live and set examples in righteousness to all men that none may stumble, that none may falter, that none may turn from the path of righteousness, due to anything that we may do or say.

—In Conference Report, April 1923, p. 139.

Truth about Jesus Christ Shall Endure.

If there is any one thing that brings joy and peace and satisfaction to the heart of man, beyond anything else that I know, it is the abiding testimony which I have, and which you have, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. That is a truth that cannot be changed. Men may attack it; they may ridicule it; they may declare that he is not the Redeemer of the world, that his mission was not true, or that its purpose, through the shedding of his blood, was not to grant unto all men the remission of sins on condition of their repentance. They may refuse to believe in the resurrection from the dead, or even that Christ himself came forth, as the Scriptures declare, after he had been put to death by his enemies; nevertheless the truth remains. He did die for the sins of the world, he did bring to pass redemption from death, he did grant unto men the opportunity of repentance, and remission of sins through their belief and acceptance of the principles of the gospel, and of his mission. These truths are fundamental, they shall endure; they cannot be destroyed no matter what men may say or think.

—In Conference Report, October 1924, pp. 100-101.

Honor the Father through the Son.

The Savior taught that no man can testify of God and reject his Son; and that no man can deny that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of the world and believe in the Father who sent him. We must honor the Father through the Son, and he who rejects the Son and denies the power of the resurrection knows not God. Again the Savior said:

"He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life, and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him."

This does not mean that those who reject the Son shall not come forth in the resurrection, for all shall be raised from the dead, but the unbeliever shall not partake of eternal life in the kingdom of God where dwell the Father and the Son. It is, however, the purpose of the Father to extend the power of the resurrection to all men, through the atonement of the Son, and thus give immortality to all his children.

—In Conference Report, April 1926, pp. 40-41.

To Know Them in the Fullness.

I know . . . God lives; that Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh, and the Redeemer of the world. But I have not learned all that there is to know about him and our Father, neither have you, for in this mortal life it is impossible for us fully to comprehend the mission of our Lord and Redeemer, to know him and just who and what he is, and the extent of the great work he accomplished. But if we shall be worthy to enter into the presence of God the Father and Jesus Christ his Son and there be crowned with exaltation, it will be necessary for us to know them in the fullness. However, until we do enter into their presence and receive this great blessing, we will not fully know the only true God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. . . .

When the Savior stood at the well in conversation with the woman of Samaria, he gave her some very important instruction regarding eternal life. There he also declared himself to be the Son of God. He asked her for water to drink, and in turn promised her and all who would believe on him and keep his sayings, that to them he would give water which if they would drink of it they would never thirst. . . .

On another occasion when teaching the Jews, they asked Jesus what sign he could show, or what great work he had accomplished, to prove his ministry. They referred to Moses and to the manna that the Lord had sent to the children of Israel when they were in the wilderness. The Lord answered them thus:

"Verily, verily, I say unto you Moses gave you not that bread from heaven, but my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven.

"For the bread of God is he that cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world."

So he declared himself to be the water of life and the bread of life, and made the promise that those who would receive this water and this bread should never thirst, and never hunger, their souls would be satisfied. They misunderstood him; the woman thought he spoke of water which quenches thirst. The Jews thought he spoke of bread which sustains the body, but he was speaking of the principles of the gospel, these principles of eternal life which, if the people would live them, would bring them back into the presence of the Father. . . .

Those who do not dwell there shall not know them, for they shall not be blessed with eternal life, which is God's life, although they may be in possession of immortality, for all men will receive the gift of the resurrection through the atonement of Jesus Christ. We must have faith in Jesus Christ as the Son of God. We must believe in the Father, in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, as three separate and distinct personages, the Father and the Son having bodies of flesh and bones, not blood.

—In Conference Report, October 1925, pp. 112, 114-15.

Redemption to Every Living Thing.

I believe in Jesus Christ as the Son of God and the only begotten Son of the Father in the flesh; that he came into the world as the Redeemer, as the Savior; and through his death, through his ministry, the shedding of his blood, he has brought to pass redemption from death to all men, to all creatures—not alone to man, but to every living thing, and even to this earth itself, upon which we stand, for we are informed through the revelations that it too shall receive the resurrection and come forth to be crowned as a celestial body, and to be the abode of celestial beings eternally.

—In Conference Report, October 1934, pp. 64-65.

The Lord's Method of Establishing Truth.

I recall the remark of one minister who said: "If the plates of such curious workmanship made of gold had been placed in a museum where they could be examined by archaeologists and scientists who could have endorsed them to be what you claim them to be, then all the world would have believed in Joseph Smith. You cannot expect us to accept the story as you tell it to the world."

The answer to all such criticisms is a simple one based on evidence in the Bible. . . . You are all familiar with the story of Lazarus and the rich man as recorded in the sixteenth chapter of Luke. The rich man, after he died, found himself in torment. He plead with Abraham to send Lazarus to his five brothers to check them in their evil course so that they might not come to the place of torment where he was. Abraham said to him: "They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them." The man replied: "Nay, father Abraham; but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent." Abraham answered: "If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead." . . .

After our Redeemer appeared to the people on this western hemisphere, Mormon records the following:

"And now there cannot be written in this book even a hundredth part of the things which Jesus did truly teach unto the people. . . .

"And these things have I written, which are a lesser part of the things which he taught the people; and I have written them to the intent that they may be brought again unto this people, from the Gentiles, according to the words which Jesus hath spoken.

"And when they shall have received this, which is expedient that they should have, first, to try their faith, and if it shall so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater things be made manifest unto them.

"And if it so be that they will not believe these things, then shall the greater things be withheld from them, unto their condemnation."

This is the manner in which the Lord deals with mankind, for he says: "I work not among the children of men save it be according to their faith." It seems very strange that this criticism should be raised so frequently against the Book of Mormon, and yet these same critics never seem to realize that the same procedure always has been followed by the Lord according to the history in the Bible. It is sufficient for our purpose to mention one or two incidents on this point.

When the Savior ministered among men, he said: "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel," and after his resurrection he did not appear to the high priest and the members of the Sanhedrin, and say to them: "I told you I was the Son of God, and that I would rise from the dead, and you did not believe me." He did not appear to Pilate and say to him: "When you asked me if I am the King of the Jews, I said to you, 'Thou sayest?' and now you will be convinced for I am risen from the dead." He did not appear to any of his enemies; but he did appear to his disciples and commissioned them and sent them forth to declare to the world that he had risen from the dead. It was Peter, James and John and the other apostles who declared to the Jews, after his resurrection: "We are his witnesses," and they were sent to testify to all the world.

To all who offer their criticisms against Joseph Smith for the manner in which the Book of Mormon came forth, we might say in the same sort of criticism: Why did not our Lord appear to the scribes and rulers of the Jews after his resurrection and convince them that he was in very deed the Son of God? Why did he not go to Pilate and set him right and bring him into his fold? What a wonderful thing this would have been. Then all the enemies would have been convinced and his great work would have spread more rapidly, for all men would have believed. This is, as the story of Lazarus proves, foolish reasoning. That is not the way the Lord performs his great work. From the beginning of time he has always presented his message to the world through chosen witnesses. The course followed by Joseph Smith is consistent. He did that which he was commanded. It was the plan before the foundation of the world that in this mortal life men should walk by faith, not by sight, but withal, aided by the sacred word which the Lord would reveal to his servants the prophets.

—13 August 1944 radio address, in The Restoration of All Things (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1945?), 103-6.

The Great Suffering.

We cannot comprehend the great suffering that the Lord had to take upon himself to bring to pass this redemption from death and from sin. He spent a few years upon the earth, and during that short sojourn he suffered the abuse of men. They stoned him; they spat upon him; they cursed him; they ridiculed him; they accused him of almost every crime they could think of, and finally they took him and crucified him upon a cross.

We get into the habit of thinking, I suppose, that his great suffering was when he was nailed to the cross by his hands and his feet and was left there to suffer until he died. As excruciating as that pain was, that was not the greatest suffering that he had to undergo, for in some way which I cannot understand, but which I accept on faith, and which you must accept on faith, he carried on his back the burden of the sins of the whole world. It is hard enough for me to carry my own sins. How is it with you? And yet he had to carry the sins of the whole world, as our Savior and the Redeemer of a fallen world, and so great was his suffering before he ever went to the cross, we are informed, that blood oozed from the pores of his body, and he prayed to his Father that the cup might pass if it were possible, but not being possible he was willing to drink.

—In Conference Report, October 1947, pp. 147-48.

Gifts of the Atonement.

There are two great gifts that come through the atonement of Jesus Christ. The resurrection of the dead—the defeat of Satan and death, and the restoration of every creature born into this world to life. That is a gift that comes without their asking for it. It is one they cannot refuse to receive. It is not one that they receive by merit. It is a free gift. It comes to both good and bad alike, not one soul will fail of the resurrection. If one did, Christ would not gain the victory and so he redeems every soul from a condition for which they were not responsible. On the other hand, He died to redeem only those who are willing to obey His commandments and walk humbly in the light of truth from their own sins. Every man will pay a price for his own sins who will not repent and accept Jesus Christ and keep his commandments, the gospel of Jesus Christ.

—"The Atonement of Jesus Christ," typescript of 25 January 1955 address at Brigham Young University, p. 6.

The First Vision.

For some fifteen hundred years or more, perhaps, the world had lost the truth in relation to the Father and the Son. . . . In the year 325, at a conclave that was held, they adopted a new idea entirely in regard to God and confused the Father and the Son, and the Christian world, from that day down until now, has looked upon the Father and the Son as being mysterious—I cannot say individuals, nor can I say substance, but some sort of spirit without separation[.] And the idea of the separate individuals, Father and Son, from that day on ceased to exist.

Now, if the Prophet was telling a falsehood when he went into the woods to pray, he never would have come out and said that he had seen a vision of the Father and the Son and that they were separate Personages, and that the Father introduced the Son and then told the Prophet to address his question to the Son, who would give him the answer. The Prophet never would have thought of such a thing as that, had it been a fraud.

If he had come out of the woods saying he had seen a vision, had it been untrue never would he have thought of separating Father and Son, nor would he have ever thought of having the Father introduce the Son and for him to put his question to the Son to receive his answer. He never could have thought of it; for that was the farthest thing from the ideas existing in the world in the year 1820.

The very fact that the Prophet made that statement that he saw the Father and the Son and they were glorious Personages, and that the Father spoke to him and introduced the Son, but did not ask him what he wanted, is one of the most significant things that ever occurred in the history of this world. The Prophet, if he had been telling an untruth, even if he had thought that the Father and the Son were separate Personages, would have made another very serious error, if he had lied about it. More than likely he would have said he saw the Father and the Son and the Father asked him what he wanted, and the Father gave him the answer. It would have been fatal to his story. He did not make a mistake. It was Jesus who answered his question, and the Father introduced his Son, just as he did at the baptism of the Savior, and just as he did to the three, Peter, James, and John, on the Mount, and the Savior gave the answer, as all answers have come from our Father in heaven from the beginning, since Adam was driven out of the garden of Eden down to this day. They have all come through the Son. . . .

Do I believe that the Prophet saw the Father and the Son? I certainly do. I know it. I do not need a vision. Reason teaches that to me. And then I have that knowledge also by the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord. The Lord has made it known to me.

—In Conference Report, April 1960, pp. 71-72.

Christ the Mediator.

When Adam was in the Garden of Eden, he was in the presence of his Father and received instruction from Him. He knew our Father as we know our fathers in mortal life. When Adam transgressed the law under which he was living, he together with his wife, Eve, was banished from the presence of God. From that day until the last enemy—death—is overcome, Christ stands as the Mediator between man and God, and He is the Advocate for man with the Father. As our Mediator, He labors to bring us into agreement with our Eternal Father.

All revelations, manifestations and commandments, which are received by prophets for the benefit of all people, come though Jesus Christ [Jehovah]. He stands between God the Father and man, and He pleads for man, representing the Father in all commandments given to man and representing man in pleadings to the Father. . . .

Our departed ancestors are not in a position to intercede for us. Christ alone has this right. . . .

We know that the Eternal Father of all has rarely made an appearance, or has seldom been seen or heard by man. In the rare manifestations of the Father, He merely introduced or acknowledged His Son. At no time since the fall of Adam has the Father given commandments directly to the prophets. The deliverance of messages is the office and calling of Jesus Christ as the Messenger, Advocate, and Mediator of the Father. . . .

There is evidence, however, that Christ frequently spoke in the first person, on behalf of the Father, as if the Father himself were speaking. This He did by divine investiture of authority. This right He received from His Father.

—Instructor, 96 (1961): 178.

Christ Chosen as Our Redeemer.

By long and careful observation our Father was able to judge a righteous and unerring judgment in relation to his children. Because of this perfect judgment in that far distant day before the earth on which we now live was formed, the Father chose men according to their ability and talents to be rulers on the earth. Christ, who is the firstborn in the Spirit of the children of God, was elevated to Godhood, and in the vision Abraham saw he describes him as being like unto God. He was chosen, as our scriptures say, as the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the earth. When the plan of salvation and the mortal existence were discussed, he was chosen to be the Only Begotten Son of God on the earth. This was his divine right by birth and appointment of the Father.

—The Progress of Man (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1964), 74.

The Second Coming of Christ.

The Savior taught his disciples that he would come to earth again in the last days in power and great glory to set up his kingdom and bring to pass the end of the world. By end of the world is not meant the end of the earth, but the end of the reign of Satan, or of wickedness. Isaiah by the spirit of prophecy speaks of the second coming, and declares that at that day Christ will come in the clouds of heaven with dyed garments, glorious in his apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength. And when the inhabitants of the earth ask, "Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the wine vat?" He will answer: "I have trodden the wine press alone: and of the people there was none with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come."—Isaiah 63:1-4. Compare D. and C. 133:46-52.

Since the fall of Adam and his ejection from the Garden of Eden, Satan has usurped authority and dominion upon the earth. This he could not have done if the children of Adam had not hearkened to him and followed him in his wickedness. In the wisdom of the Almighty, this domination by the forces of evil with Lucifer at their head has been permitted that men might be tried and proved according to the plan declared before the foundation of the earth was laid. The time is near, even at our doors, when this unrighteous domination of the earth and its inhabitants, governments, kingdoms, and peoples, by Satan shall come to an end. . . . The whole earth is filled with violence which will increase until Christ comes as the Prince of Peace to set all things in order. Shortly after the restoration of the Church, the Lord said:

"For I am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion.

"And also the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their midst, and shall come down in judgment upon Idumea, or the world."

The time has now come when peace has been taken from the earth, and the devil has, today, power over his own dominion. That dominion will soon cease to be. The other part of this prophecy is about to be fulfilled. The scourge of the Lord is now passing over the nations, as he promised it should in the day of wickedness, "and the report thereof" is vexing all people, but we have been told that "it shall not be stayed until the Lord come." . . .

We have been informed that the place where the Ancient of Days shall sit is Adam-ondi-Ahman, in Missouri. At this place Adam dwelt after he was driven from the Garden of Eden. Here, three years before his death, he called his posterity together, those who were righteous, and blessed them. "And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel. In fulfillment of this scene in Daniel's vision, here, once again, Adam—the Ancient of Days—shall come to visit his people at a time when the judgment shall sit, and Christ shall come and receive dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, which shall not pass away, and "all people, nations, and languages, shall serve him." . . .

This gathering of the children of Adam, where the thousands, and the tens of thousands are assembled in the judgment, will be one of the greatest events this troubled earth has ever seen. At this conference, or council, all who have held keys of dispensations will render a report of their stewardship. Adam will do likewise, and then he will surrender to Christ all authority. Then Adam will be confirmed in his calling as the prince over his posterity and will be officially installed and crowned eternally in this presiding calling. Then Christ will be received as King of kings, and Lord of lords. . . .

Following this grand council there shall come upon the earth great changes. In the restoration, spoken by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world began, the earth is to be renewed and cleansed from all unrighteousness. . . .

The day and the hour of [the Lord's] coming no man knows, neither the angels in heaven, but he will come when the vast majority of mankind are the least prepared for it, and when they are denying his power, saying that he delayeth his coming. It will be a time similar in all respects to the days of Noah, when the great flood swept over the earth. We are informed that it will be in a day when knowledge is increased (Daniel), but also a day when men will be "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth" (Paul).

When Christ took his departure from his disciples and ascended into heaven, two witnesses stood by in white apparel, who said to the disciples: "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven."

John was informed that when Christ should come again it would be to reign upon the earth for one thousand years. . . .

Malachi speaks of the day of the coming of the Lord and declares that it shall burn as an oven and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: "and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch." In this manner have all the prophets spoken. Wickedness must come to an end, for it would be inconsistent to have Satan loose seeking to regain his lost power and contending with men, as he has done for six thousand years.

During the earth's Sabbath, the seventh thousand years, which is set apart as the reign of peace and righteousness, Christ will rule undisturbed by any wicked element or influence from the adversary of truth and righteousness. Not only will the earth be cleansed from all wickedness during this reign of peace, but the Church, or kingdom of God now known as the Church, will be cleansed also. The Lord declared it in the following words. "The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity."

—The Progress of Man, 476-85.

He Is at the Head.

I desire to say that no man of himself can lead this church. It is the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ; he is at the head. The Church bears his name, has his priesthood, administers his gospel, preaches his doctrine, and does his work.

He chooses men and calls them to be instruments in his hands to accomplish his purposes, and he guides and directs them in their labors. But men are only instruments in the Lord's hands, and the honor and glory for all that his servants accomplish is and should be ascribed unto him forever.

If this were the work of man, it would fail, but it is the work of the Lord, and he does not fail. And we have the assurance that if we keep the commandments and are valiant in the testimony of Jesus and are true to every trust, the Lord will guide and direct us and his church in the paths of righteousness, for the accomplishment of all his purposes.

Our faith is centered in the Lord Jesus Christ, and through him in the Father.

—In Conference Report, April 1970, p. 113.

To Be Tried and Tested.

The Savior came to earth, not alone to redeem men, but to overcome the world, to gain mortal experiences, to be tried and tested, as is the case with all of us. . . .

Christ did not study chemistry, or physics or sociology in the colleges of his day. Indeed, as we know them, these subjects were neither devised nor taught in his day.

But he did so live as to receive knowledge by revelation from the Holy Ghost, thus setting the pattern for all of us. We are commanded to seek learning, even by study and also by faith. I think we should do all we can during our student years to learn those things which will benefit us during our mortal probations and enable us to have the means and talents to further the Lord's work on earth.

—Quoted in J. M. Heslop, "USU Students Counseled to Put Spiritual Understanding First," Church News, 16 January 1971, pp. 3, 9.

Following in His Footsteps.

The supreme act of worship is to keep the commandments, to follow in the footsteps of the Son of God, to do ever those things that please him. It is one thing to give lip service to the Lord; it is quite another to respect and honor his will by following the example he has set for us. . . .

All my life I have studied and pondered the principles of the gospel and sought to live the laws of the Lord. As a result there has come into my heart a great love for him and for his work and for all those who seek to further his purposes in the earth.

I know that he lives, that he rules in the heavens above and in the earth beneath, and that his purposes shall prevail. He is our Lord and our God. As he himself said to Joseph Smith: "The Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior."

—In Conference Report, October 1971, pp. 6-7.

The Lord Directs Us.

I think there is one thing which we should have exceedingly clear in our minds. Neither the President of the Church, nor the First Presidency, nor the united voice of the First Presidency and the Twelve will ever lead the Saints astray or send forth counsel to the world that is contrary to the mind and will of the Lord. . . .

The Lord is with his people. The cause of righteousness shall prevail. Our cause is just, and the Lord will guide and direct us and bring us off triumphant in the end.

—In Conference Report, April 1972, p. 99.

They Are Christ's, and Christ Is God's.

The third and highest kingdom—the celestial—is where God and Christ dwell. There are, even in this kingdom, different degrees of glory, but it is the privilege of every member of the Church, who will receive and be true to every covenant and obligation, to gain the exaltation. All who gain the highest exaltation, the Lord has said, are made "equal in power, and in might, and in dominion." All power is given unto them, they become "gods, even the sons of God, wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's."

—"The Wisdom of President Joseph Fielding Smith," The New Era, July 1972, p. 22.

Twilight of Life.

As I stand now, in what I might call the twilight of life, with the realization that in a not-far-distant day I shall be called upon to give an account of my mortal stewardship, I bear testimony again of the truth and divinity of this great work.

I know that God lives and that he sent his beloved Son into the world to atone for our sins.

I know that the Father and the Son appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith to usher in this final gospel dispensation.

I know that Joseph Smith was and is a prophet; moreover, that this is the Lord's church, and that the gospel cause shall roll forward until the knowledge of the Lord covers the earth as the waters cover the sea.

I am sure that we all love the Lord. I know that he lives, and I look forward to that day when I shall see his face, and I hope to hear his voice say unto me: "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." (Matt. 25:34.)

—In Conference Report, October 1971, pp. 178-79.
