No specific author, I Know That My Redeemer Lives: Latter-day Prophets Testify of the Savior ( 1990)

Chapter 11

HAROLD B. LEE

Born: 28 March 1899

Ordained an Apostle: 10 April 1941

Ordained President: 7 July 1972

Died: 26 December 1973

Stand at the Door.

The Master said to John, "Behold, I stand at the door and knock and if any man will hear my voice and will open the door, I will come in to him and sup with him, and him with Me." He would bid us all to have in mind that He is not far away. It isn't the Master who keeps Himself from us, but rather we who keep ourselves from Him. Outside of the door of our own soul He is knocking, but we have to hear His voice and we have to open the door before He can come in to help us with our problems. No person ever heard His voice, or had impressions that came from Him, except he was humble in the keeping of the commandments of God, which humility and which obedience entitled him to the companionship of the spirit by which divine truth could be revealed.

—"Faith," speech given at Brigham Young University, 28 June 1955, microfilm, LDS Church Archives, p. 1.

My Mind Was Being Directed.

I was faced with a difficult, trying problem. I know what Enos means when he said, "My soul hungered, and I went out by myself where I could pray." I had a spiritual experience. I saw no light. I heard no voice to my physical senses, but I knew then as surely as I know now that I live, that on that night, when I was struggling, seeking, I had done everything in my power to prepare myself for the great responsibility that lay ahead. I knew in my own soul that that night my mind was being directed by an omnipotent power which pierced my very soul. And when I read the experience of Elijah the prophet, I knew what Elijah meant when he related his experience when the power of the Lord drew near to him.

"And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the Lord. And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake:

"And after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice.

"And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave. And, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou here, Elijah?" (1 Kings 19:11-13.) . . .

In all solemnity, and with all my soul, I bear you my testimony that I know that Jesus lives, that he is the Savior of the world. I know that he reveals himself and is revealing himself to his prophets. Week by week, day by day, we see the on-rolling of his works, guided and directed, and shepherded on every side, through the president of the Church, who has been set apart to preside as the mouthpiece of the Lord to His Church.

—" 'But Arise and Stand upon Thy Feet'—and I Will Speak with Thee," BYU Speeches of the Year, 7 February 1956, pp. 11-12.

Testimony at the Garden Tomb.

As we stood before the empty tomb in Jerusalem we, too, knew . . . [that] because of this sacrifice we, too, can have our sins remitted and be made worthy to stand in his holy presence in the days to come. . . .

I come away from some of these experiences never to feel the same again about the mission of our Lord and Savior and to have impressed upon me as I have never had it impressed before, what it means to be a special witness. I say to you with all the conviction of my soul, I know that Jesus lives. I know that he was the very Son of God.

—"I Walked Today Where Jesus Walked . . . ," BYU Speeches of the Year, 10 December 1958, p. 12.

Obedience to God's Will.

Many times I personally have wondered at the Master's cry of anguish in the Garden of Gethsemane. "And he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt." (Matt. 26:39.)

As I advance in years, I begin to understand in some small measure how the Master must have felt. In the loneliness of a distant hotel room 2,500 miles away, you, too, may one day cry out from the depths of your soul as was my experience: "O dear God, don't let her die! I need her; her family needs her."

Neither the Master's prayer nor my prayer was answered. The purpose of that personal suffering may be only explained in what the Lord said through the Apostle Paul:

"Though he were a Son yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered;

"And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him; " (Heb. 5:8-9.)

So it is in our day. God grant that you and I may learn obedience to God's will, if necessary by the things which we suffer. One of the things that characterizes us as Saints, as King Benjamin told us, was to be "submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19.)

—In Conference Report, October 1965, pp. 130-31.

Christ's Presence.

I have an interesting session with every missionary company in the temple on the fifth floor, in the big assembly room, where they are invited to ask any questions they may wish to ask about the temple ordinances.

In one of these sessions a missionary asked, "Can you tell us a place in this temple where the Lord has appeared?" I suppose he was referring to a testimony that some have borne about someone who had appeared in the temple.

I said, "Now don't look for a place. This is the House of the Lord. This is where the Lord comes when he comes to see us on the earth. I imagine he has walked all the halls and every room. He is looking at us; maybe he is here today. I can't imagine a place where he would rather be than right here. Here are 300 or so of you going out on missions to preach his gospel. Maybe he is here with you."

—L. Brent Goates, Harold B. Lee, Prophet and Seer (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985), pp. 391-92.

More Powerful Than Sight Is the Witness of the Holy Spirit.

When I came to this position as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, I was told that my chief responsibility now was to bear testimony of the divine mission of the Lord and Savior of the world. That was almost a crushing realization of what it meant to be a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. I was assigned to give the Easter talk the Sunday night following the general conference. As I locked myself in one of the rooms of the Church office building, I took out my Bible and read from the four Gospels the life of the Master, particularly leading down to his crucifixion and resurrection. And as I read, I became aware that something different was happening. It no longer was just a story of the doings of the Master, but I realized that I was having an awareness of something I had not had before. It seemed that I was reliving. I was feeling intently the actual experiences about which I was reading. And when I stood that Sunday night, after expressing myself as to the divine mission of the Lord, I said, "And now, as one of the least among you, I declare with all my soul that I know . . . " I knew with a certainty that I had never known before. Whether that was the more sure word of prophecy I had received, I don't know. But it was with such conviction! More powerful than sight is the witness of the Holy Spirit which bears testimony to your spirit that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that this is indeed the work of God. I knew it because I had felt it, and there had been a testimony borne to my soul that I could not deny.

—"Objectives of Church Education," 17 June 1970 address to seminary leaders, Brigham Young University, pp. 7-8, LDS Church Archives.

I Heard a Voice.

As a young boy I was out on a farm waiting for my father to finish his day's work, playing about and manufacturing things to wile away the time, when I saw over the fence in the neighbor's yard some broken-down buildings where the sheds were caving in and had rotting timbers. I imagined that that might be a castle that I should explore, so I went over to the fence and started to climb through; then I heard a voice as distinctly as you are hearing mine: "Harold, don't go over there." I looked in every direction to see where the speaker was. I wondered if it was my father, but he couldn't see me. There was no one in sight. I realized that someone was warning me of an unseen danger—whether a nest of rattlesnakes or whether the rotting timbers would fall on me and crush me, I don't know. But from that time on, I accepted without question the fact that there were processes not known to man by which we can hear voices from the unseen world, by which we can have brought to us the visitations of eternity.

On the day when I came to this call, which imposed a greater responsibility to be a witness of the mission of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ—I suppose no one ever came to such a position without a lot of soul-searching, realizing his own inadequacy, and without the help of the Almighty—after a long night of searching and days of spiritual preparation that followed, I came to know as a witness more powerful than sight, until I could testify with a surety that defied all doubt, that I knew with every fiber of my soul that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God, that he lived, he died, he was resurrected, and today he presides in the heavens, directing the affairs of this church, which bears his name because it preaches his doctrine. I bear that testimony humbly.

—In British Area General Conference Report, August 1971, pp. 141-42.

Guide Me, O Lord.

These last few weeks have been overwhelming weeks of experience. A number who have interviewed me have said, "You are the head of the Church, aren't you?" and I said, "No, I am not the head of the Church. The Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, is the head of this Church. I happen to be the one who has been called to preside over His Church at the present time here upon the earth; but the Master, our Lord and Savior, is the head of this Church." . . .

Someone asked a great surgeon, "How does it feel to have the power of life and death in your hands as you operate?" The surgeon answered, "I never feel that way. When I was a young, cocksure surgeon, I was proud of my ability and my record. Then one day I had to make a hair-breadth decision. I wasn't correct. For some time, I wouldn't operate. As I sat depressed, thinking of my failure, it suddenly came to me, in all humility, that God had given me these hands, had given me these brains, not to be wasted. I prayed to him then to let me have another chance. I still do. I pray each time I take a scalpel in hand, 'Guide my hands, O Lord, and give me of thy knowledge.' You see, he is the famous surgeon, I am only his servant."

He is also the famous architect. He is also the greatest of all teachers. Did you ever think that scientists have discovered anything that God didn't already know? Think of it. He has given you and me hands. He has given you and me brains, and he hasn't given them to us to waste. He expects us to lean on him and exercise to the best of our ability in order to use them righteously in righteous purposes. . . .

As I have sought to live as close as I know how, to know His mind and will concerning matters, and to take the first steps during this last change in the Presidency of the Church, I need your faith and prayers. . . . I plead with you to pray for me, and I promise you that I will try to so live that the Lord can answer your prayers through me. I'll try my best to be your servant.

—13 August 1972 M-Men and Gleaner fireside address, Salt Lake Tabernacle, microfilm, LDS Church Archives, pp. 1, 4.

Day by Day.

I bear you my solemn witness that it is true, that the Lord is in his heavens; he is closer to us than you have any idea. You ask when the Lord gave the last revelation to this Church. The Lord is giving revelations day by day, and you will witness and look back on this period and see some of the mighty revelations the Lord has given in your day and time. To that I bear you my witness.

—In Conference Report, October 1972, p. 131.

"Lord, What Wilt Thou Have Me Do?"

Perhaps even more important than trying to speculate as to what Jesus would do in a given situation is to endeavor to determine what Jesus would have you do. Of course in order to give intelligent answers to such questions, one must have intimate acquaintance with the life of the Master and the account of his ministry and an understanding of the applications he made to the lessons he taught. History, either religious or secular, is valuable to us; for by learning how others adjusted in the past to given situations, we ourselves form patterns of conduct that will guide us to act similarly under similar circumstances. . . .

Before we can feel our kinship to our Savior and be influenced by his teachings in all our thoughts and deeds, we must be impressed by the reality of his existence and the divinity of his mission. . . .

One of the most beautiful pictures of the Master has come down to us in the writings of John the Beloved who was speaking both from his memories of Jesus and from a vision given him wherein the Lord appeared:

"His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow. His eyes were as a flame of fire, and his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice was as the sound of many waters; . . . and his countenance was as the sun shineth in its strength. And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying, Fear not; . . . I am he that liveth and was dead." (Revelation 1:14-18.)

Suppose you try to put yourself in the place of one who had received such a visitation from a holy personage. Hardly had the sting of mourning been soothed after the death of Jesus when Mary, fearing that someone had stolen the Master's body from the tomb, was searching for him in the garden. She heard him speak her name and heard him say, "I ascend to my Father and to your Father, to my God and your God." Then she went and told Peter and the disciples as they mourned and wept, "And they, when they had heard that he was alive and had been seen of her believed it not." After that he appeared to two of them near Emmaus in a form that they failed to recognize at first, as they walked and went into the country. (Mark 16:10-12.) He accepted their invitation to "abide with them" when it was eventide and the day was far spent. He sat at meat and gave a blessing on the bread that they ate, and their eyes opened so that they knew him. (Luke 24:29-31.) When they told their experience to the disciples their story was treated as had been the story of Mary Magdalene. He thereafter appeared to the disciples without Thomas being present and again when he was present and quieted their fears with his blessing, "Peace be unto you." Here it was that he "upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen." (Mark 16:14.) He invited them to see the prints of the nails in his hands and feet and the wound in his side and to handle him to make them sure of his reality as a tangible resurrected being. (Luke 24:37-41.) He dined on broiled fish and honeycomb with seven of his disciples on the shores of the Sea of Tiberias. After forty days he gathered them together on Mt. Olivet near Jerusalem to witness his ascension and they saw him "taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight." (Acts 1:9.) But there remained with them the abiding memory of his last words to them, "Lo, I am with you alway, even to the end of the world." (Matt. 28:20.) They knew that he meant what he said.

Perhaps if you, too, were to have such a visitation you would ask as did Saul of Tarsus when the Lord appeared to him on the way to Damascus, "Lord, what wilt thou have me do?" His appearances to his disciples after his resurrection convinced them of his continued existence. Though they could not have him continually in sight after his ascension, there certainly was no confusion in their minds as to the reality of his existence. Never again would they leave their ministry to go fishing without hearing his accusing question, "Lovest thou me more than these?" Peter who shrank from the consequences of revealing his identity at the time of the crucifixion now went unafraid to his ordained responsibilities of leadership and later to a martyr's death without fear because he had seen in the Master the rewards of a just life through a glorious resurrection. Would not the partaking of the sacrament in remembrance of him take on new significance now? How could the two at Emmaus thereafter ask a blessing upon their food and give thanks to God for it without remembering that the resurrected Lord had sat across the table from them and who now though invisible might be very near! No longer could Peter walk alone on the shores of Galilee without a feeling that he was not alone, nor when imprisoned at Antioch by Herod was he greatly surprised when he heard the voice of the angel commanding him to arise quickly, although he was securely bound to two sleeping guards. He never doubted because he knew the power of the risen Lord.

As the Apostle Paul stood before King Agrippa he retold the story of his conversion and of the appearance of the Lord and declared with boldness that now in his ministry he could not be "disobedient unto the heavenly vision." With zeal unbounded and unmindful of personal safety, he labored unceasingly to carry the Gospel to the gentile nations.

And so it was with the Prophet Joseph Smith in our own day, as he declared in his own story to the world: "I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision, and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, nether dared I do it, at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation."

After the vision left him, do you think for one moment that although he no longer continued to see the Father and the Son that he was not constantly assured amidst his persecutions and imprisonment that his Heavenly Father was mindful of his every act? With that sublime knowledge, it was only natural that as new problems presented themselves to him in carrying out instructions in the translation of the gold plates and in the setting up of the Kingdom of God on the earth as he was commanded to do, that he turned to the Lord in mighty prayer, and like the brother of Jared spoken of in the Book of Mormon, "Having this perfect knowledge of God he could not be kept from within the veil; therefore he saw Jesus; and he did minister unto him." (Ether 3:20.) One who has such perfect knowledge would, as did the Prophet Joseph or Peter and Paul, walk daily in the company of angels and have conversation with them and receive from them such instructions and authority as are necessary to establish the great work he might be called to do.

Not many have seen the Savior face to face here in mortality, but there is no one of you who has been blessed to receive the gift of the Holy Ghost after baptism but that may have a perfect assurance of his existence as though you had seen. Indeed if you have faith in the reality of his existence even though you have not seen, as the Master implied in his statement to Thomas, that even greater is the blessing to you who "have not seen, and yet have believed" (John 20:29); for "we walk by faith not sight" (II Cor. 5:7), although not seeing, yet believing we rejoice with joy unspeakable in receiving the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls (I Peter 1:8-9). The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy (Revelation 19:10), and comes only by the power of the Holy Ghost, for "no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost" (I Cor. 12:3). If you have lived worthy of such a testimony you may have "a more sure word of prophecy" (II Peter 1:19), by asking God "nothing doubting," and "by the power of the Holy Ghost, ye may know the truth of all things" (Moroni 10:5).

—Decisions for Successful Living (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1973), 45-51.

Powerful Witness.

I bear you that sacred testimony, that I know with a witness that is more powerful than sight. Sometime, if the spirit prompts me, I may feel free to tell you more, but may I say to you that I know as though I had seen, that He lives, that He is real, that God the Father and his Son are living realities, personalities with bodies, parts, and passions—glorified beings. If you believe that, then you are safe. If you don't believe it, then struggle for that witness, and all will be well with you.

—"Be Loyal to the Royal within You," in Speeches of the Year: BYU Devotional and Ten-Stake Fireside Addresses 1973 (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1974), 103.

The Lord Is near Us.

In the closing moments of this conference, I have been moved as I think I have never been moved before in all my life. If it were not for the assurance that I have that the Lord is near to us, guiding, directing, the burden would be almost beyond my strength, but because I know that he is there, and that he can be appealed to, and if we have ears to hear attuned to him, we will never be left alone. . . .

Follow the Brethren; listen to the Brethren. I bear you my witness as one whom the Lord has brought to this place. . . . I thank the Lord that I may have passed some of the tests, but maybe there will have to be more before I shall have been polished to do all that the Lord would have me do.

Sometimes when the veil has been very thin, I have thought that if the struggle had been still greater that maybe then there would have been no veil. I stand by, not asking for anything more than the Lord wants to give me, but I know that he is up there and he is guiding and directing. . . .

Peace be with you, not the peace that comes from the legislation in the halls of congress, but the peace that comes in the way that the Master said, by overcoming all the things of the world. That God may help us so to understand and may you know that I know, with a certainty that defies all doubt that this is his work, that he is guiding us and directing us today, as he has done in every dispensation of the gospel, and I say that with all the humility of my soul, in the name of the Lord, Jesus Christ. Amen.

—In Conference Report, Oct. 1973, p. 170.

To Know Nothing Save Jesus Christ.

From the beginning of time duly appointed prophets of God have received, as did Moroni, things that were as if in the present; and yet they were not, for Jesus Christ has shown them unto holy men so that they knew of a certainty that which was to come. As the Prophet Amos declared, "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.)

No event in the history of the world was revealed in greater plainness to the prophets on both the eastern and western hemispheres than was the advent of Jesus the Christ into the world. His identity and his relationship to God, the Eternal Father, and as "the God of this earth," was clearly explained when he as the risen Lord, following his crucifixion and resurrection, appeared to his people in the land Bountiful on this continent.

This is the record:

"And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto them saying:

"Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world." (3 Ne. 11:13-14.)

In this, his divine announcement, he has given to the world the sure knowledge that he was a God before he came into the world, differing from the Father in that he did not in the premortal world have a body of flesh and bones as did the Father, until after his mortal life, and that subsequently he received his resurrected body.

As Elder James E. Talmage, one of our esteemed scholars, explained in his commentary Jesus the Christ, " . . . God the Eternal Father has manifested Himself to earthly prophets or revelators on very few occasions, and then principally to attest the divine authority of His Son, Jesus Christ." (Page 39.)

This the Father did on the occasion of the baptism of Jesus, when he introduced his Son at the time of his baptism by John the Baptist in these words: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." (Matt. 3:17.)

One has but to read again the prophetic words of the Lord to Adam, Jacob, Abraham, and Moses, and to many others, to know that the Lord has sent into the world in every dispensation and in preparation for his advent the sure knowledge of who he was and of his mission for the redemption of mankind through the plan of salvation, by which all may be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel.

By direct revelation to Isaiah, he told of his birth from the young virgin mother. . . .

That from the age of 12 years, the boy Jesus lived in the shadow of the Almighty, there could be little doubt. . . . "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" . . .

As the years of his ministry wore on, it became clear to the Jews, who had been seeking for a political leader to lead them from the political oppression that they suffered, that such was not his mission. His entire mission was to emphasize the spiritual side of life and to establish an eternal plan of salvation by which, through his atoning sacrifice, all mankind might be saved. . . . Beyond this, he came as a "Lamb slain from the foundation of the world." (Rev. 13:8.) He came to redeem us from the fall, that he might become the first fruits of the resurrection, that all who slept in their graves might come forth from the grave, "they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." (John 5:28-29.)

In fine, he came to demonstrate to the world that he was the Only Begotten of God in the flesh and to show by his supreme sacrifice that he was in very deed the Redeemer of the world.

In his farewell admonition to the saints on the Western hemisphere after his resurrection and his sojourn among them, the Master summarized to each individual who seeks for salvation the full meaning of his mission. These are the words of the resurrected Lord to the Nephites on this continent in his last recorded sermon:

"And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom, therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end.

"Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day.

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel. . . . " (3 Ne. 27:19-21.)

—Ensign, November 1973, pp. 3-4.
