No specific author, I Know That My Redeemer Lives: Latter-day Prophets Testify of the Savior ( 1990)

Chapter 12

SPENCER W. KIMBALL

Born: 28 March 1895

Ordained an Apostle: 7 October 1943

Ordained President: 30 December 1973

Died: 5 November 1985

And the Battle Raged On.

I recall two or three years ago, when Brother Lee was giving his maiden address as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ from this stand, he told us of his experience through the night after he had been notified of his call. I think I now know something about the experience he had. I have been going through it for twelve weeks. I believe the brethren were very kind to me in announcing my appointment when they did so that I might make the necessary adjustments in my business affairs, but perhaps they were more inspired to give me the time that I needed of a long period of purification, for in those long days and weeks I did a great deal of thinking and praying, and fasting and praying. There were conflicting thoughts that surged through my mind—seeming voices saying: "You can't do the work. You are not worthy. You have not the ability"—and always finally came the triumphant thought: "You must do the work assigned—you must make yourself able, worthy and qualified." And the battle raged on. . . .

When my feeling of incompetence wholly overwhelmed me, I remembered the words of Nephi when he said: " . . . I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." (I Nephi 3:7.) . . . I have seen the Lord qualify men. In my Church experience I have helped to make many bishops. I have seen them grow and prosper and become great and mighty men in the Church; men who were weak and men who were foolish, and they became strong and confounded the wise, and so I rely upon that promise of the Lord that he will strengthen and empower me that I may be able to do this work to which I have been called.

—In Conference Report, October 1943, pp. 15-16, 18.

The Savior of Mankind.

I read recently in a local paper of a pastor of a church in Illinois, who said that he felt the same reverence for Santa Claus that he did for Jesus Christ. He said:

"I consider both of them to be folk tales, but in different categories."

He finds one difference, however; he does not question the fact that "a man named Jesus" did exist, and he regards Santa Claus as a "figure of the imagination."

In the magazine, Time, in a recent issue, a noted professor emeritus in one of our largest universities, was quoted at length on his rationalizing. To Jesus of Nazareth he gives human warmth; a great capacity for love; unusual understanding. He calls him a great humanist, a great teacher, a great dramatist. As a typical rationalization, he explains that Lazarus was not dead, but was merely " . . . brought 'back to health' by Jesus, the power of mind and learning, and by the 'therapy of his own abundant vitality!' "

I want to bear testimony today that Jesus is not only a great teacher, a great humanist, and a great dramatist, but is in very deed, the Son of the Living God, the Creator, the Redeemer of the world, the Savior of mankind. I want to testify further that he not only lived in the Meridian of Time for approximately thirty-three years, but that he lived eternities before this, and will live eternities beyond it.

—In Conference Report, October 1946, pp. 55-56.

Follow Him.

The Lord is at the helm, . . . and he will continue to be there, and his work will go forward. The important question is whether we, as individuals, will be going in that same direction. It's up to us.

—In Conference Report, April 1951, p. 104.

Consider Your Heroes.

Think of the individual who impresses you most as perfection in chastity, cleanliness of mind and of heart and of body, in thought and in deed.

Now think of the one who is most unselfish, whose life is bound up in the lives of others, who thinks little of self and much of associates; one who has made great sacrifices and has suffered and been deprived to give to others.

Now let pass in review one who is your ideal in kindliness, who forgives with all the heart, who carries no bitterness, no envy, no jealousy.

Now . . . who is the individual whom you admire most as one who is obedient, tractable and accountable, who is not servile but humble and free from arrogance and rebellion, who fears God and obeys His laws and commandments, who is devout yet not fanatic, who prays with most sincerity and who follows righteous teachings most completely.

And now consider the person whom you most admire; who is alert of mind, who is keen in intellect, who is great in perception, whose wisdom and judgment are supreme, who knows much but is ever learning; and the individual who is most unselfish, who gives himself, his time, his talents generously for others, who gives and does not get.

And now, the one who exhibits the greatest degree of love—love for the Lord, love for his fellowmen, love for his associates, his family; the one who is gracious, personable, generous, loving; the ideal son, father, daughter, mother and friend.

And now . . . combine all these heroic people with all their monumental virtues into one composite figure and you still have an inferior to the Lord, Jesus Christ, who had all virtues at their best, than whom there is no peer except His Father, God.

—"An Address by Elder Spencer W. Kimball to the Jordan Seminary Graduation Class in the Jordan High School Auditorium on May 14, 1954," Sandy, Utah, pamphlet, pp. 9-10.

I Think He Smiles.

In my own office at home and at the Church Office Building I have rather large pictures of Jesus as he has been portrayed by artists. I appreciate them, but they do not give me the complete or acceptable picture of the Lord, and no picture I have ever seen is adequate. I can never see the Christ with my eyes open. I must close them to get my concepts of him. . . .

I think of the Lord as he walked through Galilee and Palestine. I realize that he must have become tired and hungry and weary and thirsty, but he was ever patient. He was loving; he was kind. It seems that though it was necessary at times to rebuke people, he did what he told us in the modern revelations to do, he reproved then showed forth afterwards an increase of love toward him he had reproved (see D&C 121:43)—he had his arm around them, too. O how I love him for his tenderness—so forgiving, so kind.

I think of him on the cross during his great agony. He was thinking of his sweet mother down beneath him. He was tender and kind as he said to John, "Behold thy mother," and to his mother, "Woman, behold thy son!" (See John 19:26-27.) And from that hour that disciple took her into his own home.

I think of his kindness when proud and loving mothers so wanted their children to have a sight of the Master, to touch the hem of his garment, and they were pushed away—(I think of that incident at the conclusion of nearly every session of conference as we go out the back door and people crowd around to just see and speak to Christ's modern prophet—) and he said, "Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God." (Mark 10:14.)

I think of the Christ who came in our own day to the Prophet Joseph Smith and his associate in the Kirtland Temple. . . .

"I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father." (D&C 110:4.)

Several have said no one ever saw Him laugh; however, I can imagine the Lord Jesus Christ smiling as he looked upon his people in their devotion. This great conference—with its thirty-one thousand men and boys holding the Holy Priesthood, in attendance at one meeting; with its tens of thousands who have come long distances to listen and to worship together, and to hear the word of the Lord Jesus Christ—must have pleased him greatly.

I think he smiles when he looks upon this his prophet, President David O. McKay, who gives such inspired leadership to his people, who is so close to him, who hears his word, and who receives his revelations. I think the Lord Jesus Christ is smiling when he looks into the homes of this people and sees them on their knees in family prayer night and morning, the children participating also. I think he smiles when he sees young husbands and wives, and older ones, with deep affection for each other, who continue their courtship as our prophet has said, who continue to love each other with all their souls until the day they die and then accentuate it through eternity. . . .

I think the Lord Jesus Christ is smiling when he looks down and sees more than four thousand men . . . with some of their wives and some of their children who were inactive a year ago, but today are happy in the kingdom, many of whom have been to the holy temple of God and had their endowments and their sealings, and who with tears of gratitude thank the Lord for his program.

I think I see tears of joy in his eyes and a smile on his lips as he sees the twenty-one thousand new souls who have come unto him this year, who have professed his name, who have gone into the waters of baptism, and I think he loves those who helped to convert them also.

I see him smile as he sees his numerous people on their knees in repentance, changing their lives, making them brighter and cleaner, and more like their Heavenly Father and their Brother, Jesus Christ.

I think he is pleased and smiles as he sees youth as they organize their lives and protect and fortify themselves against the errors of the day. I think he is first grieved, and then perhaps pleased, when he sees, as he must have done a few days ago in my office, a young couple who had made serious error and were now on their knees together with their hands tightly clasped together. There must have been joy in his smile when he saw into their souls and saw that they were making the adjustment, as their tears bathed my hand which I had tenderly placed on theirs.

Oh, I love the Lord Jesus Christ. I hope that I can show to him and manifest my sincerity and devotion. I want to live close to him. I want to be like him.

—In Conference Report, April 1956, pp. 119-20.

A Visit to the Holy Land.

To visit the places where such momentous happenings affected the eternities of us all was most interesting and intriguing and added color to our picture, but we did not need to walk through the Holy Land to know eternal truth.

We realized it is not so important to know whether Mt. Hermon or Mt. Tabor was the transfiguration place but to know that on the summit of a high mountain was held a great conference of mortal and immortal beings where unspeakable things were said and authoritative keys were delivered and approval was given of the life and works of his only Begotten Son, when the voice of the Father in the overshadowing cloud said: "This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." (Matt. 17:5.)

Not so important to know upon which great stone the Master leaned in agonizing decision-prayers in the Garden of Gethsemane, as to know that he did in that area conclude to accept voluntarily crucifixion for our sakes. Not so needful to know on which hill his cross was planted nor in what tomb his body lay nor in which garden he met Mary, but that he did hang in voluntary physical and mental agony; that his lifeless, bloodless body did lie in the tomb into the third day as prophesied, and above all that he did emerge a resurrected perfected one—the first fruits of all men in resurrection and the author of the gospel which could give eternal life to obedient man.

Not so important to know where he was born and died and resurrected but to know for a certainty that the Eternal, Living Father came to approve his Son in his baptism and later in his ministry, that the Son of God broke the bands of death and established the exaltation, the way of life, and that we may grow like him in knowledge and perfected eternal life. And this I know and give my solemn witness.

—In Conference Report, April 1961, p. 81.

In the Presence of God.

To know God, one must be aware of the person and attributes, power, and glory of God the Father and God the Christ. Moses declares he " . . . saw God face to face, and he talked with him . . . " (Moses 1:2.) This experience of Moses is in harmony with the scripture, which says:

"For no man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God. Neither can any natural man abide the presence of God, neither after the carnal mind." (D&C 67:11-12. Italics added.)

It must be obvious then that to endure the glory of the Father or of the glorified Christ, a mortal being must be translated or otherwise fortified. Moses, a prophet of God, held the protecting Holy Priesthood: " . . . and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence." (Moses 1:2.) . . .

A heavenly visitor identified himself to Abraham: "I am the Lord, thy God; I dwell in heaven. . . .

"My name is Jehovah. . . . " (Abraham 2:7-8.)

And Abraham: " . . . talked with the Lord, face to face, as one man talketh with another; . . .

"And he said unto me: My son, my son. . . . And he put his hand upon mine eyes, and I saw those things which his hands had made . . . and I could not see the end thereof." (Ibid., 3:11-12.) . . .

Saul of Tarsus saw Jehovah, the glorified Christ, and heard his voice and conversed with him. Even partially protected as he was, the brilliance of the light from heaven in which he centered— greater than the noonday sun—Paul collapsed to the earth, trembling, shocked. The voice said: "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. . . . " (Acts 9:5.) . . .

Joseph had had the same general experience of Abraham and Moses and Enoch who had seen the Lord and heard his voice. In addition, he heard the Father, bearing witness of the Son, as had Peter, James, and John on Transfiguration's Mount. He had seen the person of Elohim. He had fought a desperate battle with the powers of darkness as had Moses and Abraham. And like them all, he was protected by the glory of the Lord. This young man gave a new concept to the world. Now at least one person knew God without question, for he had seen and heard. . . .

Men who know God and love him and live his commandments and obey his true ordinances may yet in this life, or the life to come, see his face and know that he lives and will commune with them.

—Improvement Era, 67 (1964): 497-99.

Christ Cannot Forgive One in Sin.

Apparently the death penalty was still on the law books in the days of Christ, for the scribes and Pharisees brought to the Lord the woman taken in adultery, seeking to trap him. They said Moses had commanded that such a person should be stoned to death, and asked him what he had to say of the matter. With his usual sublime understanding he put the tempters to rout and sent the woman to repent of her sin. (See John 8:1-11.) . . .

Note that the Lord did not forgive the woman of her serious sin. He commanded quietly, but forcefully, "Go, and sin no more." Even Christ cannot forgive one in sin. The woman had neither time nor opportunity to repent totally. When her preparation and repentance were complete she could hope for forgiveness, but not before then. . . .

When we think of the great sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ and the sufferings he endured for us, we would be ingrates if we did not appreciate it so far as our power made it possible. He suffered and died for us, yet if we do not repent, all his anguish and pain on our account are futile. In his own words:

"For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

"But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I.

"Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit. . . . " (D&C 19:16-18.)

Abinadi expressed the danger of delaying repentance:

"But remember that he that persists in his own carnal nature, and goes on in the ways of sin and rebellion against God, remaineth in his fallen state and the devil hath all power over him. Therefore, he is as though there was no redemption made, being an enemy to God; and also is the devil an enemy to God." (Mos.16:5.)

This only underlines the vital importance of repenting in this life, of not dying in one's sins.

—The Miracle of Forgiveness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), 68, 145.

The Savior's Example in Resisting Temptation.

The importance of not accommodating temptation in the least degree is underlined by the Savior's example. Did not he recognize the danger when he was on the mountain with his fallen brother, Lucifer, being sorely tempted by that master tempter? He could have opened the door and flirted with danger by saying, "All right, Satan, I'll listen to your proposition. I need not succumb, I need not yield, I need not accept—but I'll listen."

Christ did not so rationalize. He positively and promptly closed the discussion, and commanded: "Get thee hence, Satan," meaning, likely, "Get out of my sight—get out of my presence—I will not listen—I will have nothing to do with you." Then, we read, "the devil leaveth him."

This is our proper pattern, if we would prevent sin rather than be faced with the much more difficult task of curing it. As I study the story of the Redeemer and his temptations, I am certain he spent his energies fortifying himself against temptation rather than battling with it to conquer it.

—Miracle of Forgiveness, 216-17.

I Know That He Lives.

I know that the Lord lives—that God who was with Adam, that God who came to the banks of the Jordan River to say, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" (Matt. 3:17), to introduce his Son to a world that was to depend so completely on him. I know that was the God that we worship, who came on the Mount of Transfiguration and said again to those servants, Peter, James, and John, who were to carry on the work of the Lord even in their imperfections: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" (Matt. 17:5), the same God—we know he lives and exists—who came in the state of New York and said those same things that he had already said to the Nephites—and now said to a world that had been traveling in darkness for a long, long time—"This is My Beloved Son. Hear him!" (Joseph Smith 2:17.)

I know that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God. I know that. I know that the gospel which we teach is the gospel of Jesus Christ and the church to which we belong is the church of Jesus Christ; it teaches his doctrines and his policies and his programs. I know that if all of us will live the program as he has given it and will continue to give it, that all the blessings promised will be ours.

—In Conference Report, October 1974, pp. 162-63.

The Lord's Concern.

I know that God lives. I know that Jesus Christ lives. I know that he loves. I know that he inspires. I know that he guides us. And I know that he loves us. I know that he can love or he can feel greatly aggrieved when he sees us getting off the path which he has marked so plainly and made so straight.

—In Conference Report, April 1975, p. 162.

He Knows What He Is Doing.

Recently a prominent doctor, knowing of my surgery and cancer treatments, exhibited a little surprise at my assuming the great responsibility of the church presidency. He was not a member of the Church and evidently had never known the pull and the pressure one feels when one has a positive assurance that the Lord is not playing games, but rather has a serious program for man and for his glory. The Lord knows what He is doing, and all His moves are appropriate and right.

And I was surprised also that any man would wonder and question the work of the Lord. We who have the positive assurance and testimony of the divinity of this work do not question the ways or determinations of the Lord.

I know without question that God lives and have a feeling of sorrow for those people in the world who live in the gray area of doubt, who do not have such an assurance.

I know that the Lord Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten Son of our Heavenly Father, and that He assisted in the creation of man and of all that serves man, including the earth and all that is in the world. He was the Redeemer of mankind and the Savior of this world and the author of the plan of salvation. . . .

I know that the Lord has contact with his prophets, and that he reveals the truth today to his servants as he did in the days of Adam and Abraham and Moses and Peter and Joseph and the numerous others throughout time. . . .

There have been many times when man would not listen, and, of course, where there is no ear, there is no voice.

—In Conference Report, October 1976, p. 164.

It Was He.

It was He, Jesus Christ, in his glorified state who came to the ancestors of the Indians, who is variously known by them as the Great White Spirit, the Fair God and numerous other names.

It was He, Jesus Christ, our Savior, who was introduced to surprised listeners at Jordan (see Matt. 3:13-17), at the holy Mount of Transfiguration (see Matt. 17:1-9), at the temple of the Nephites (see 3 Ne. 11-26), and in the grove of Palmyra, New York (see Joseph Smith 2:17-25); and the introducing person was none other than his actual Father, the holy Elohim, in whose image he was and whose will he carried out. . . .

It is noteworthy that the Father, God, Elohim came to the earth upon each necessary occasion to introduce the Son to a new dispensation, to a new people; then Jesus Christ, the Son, carried forward his work.

—Ensign, November 1977, p. 73.

Come, Follow Me.

Jesus knew who he was and why he was here on this planet. That meant he could lead from strength rather than from uncertainty or weakness. . . .

Jesus said several times, "Come, follow me." His was a program of "do what I do," rather than "do what I say." His innate brilliance would have permitted him to put on a dazzling display, but that would have left his followers far behind. He walked and worked with those he was to serve. His was not a long-distance leadership. He was not afraid of close friendships; he was not afraid that proximity to him would disappoint his followers. The leaven of true leadership cannot lift others unless we are with and serve those to be led. . . .

The Savior's leadership was selfless. He put himself and his own needs second and ministered to others beyond the call of duty, tirelessly, lovingly, effectively. So many of the problems in the world today spring from selfishness and self-centeredness in which too many make harsh demands of life and others in order to meet their demands. This is a direct reversal of the principles and practices pursued so perfectly by that perfect example of leadership, Jesus of Nazareth. . . .

Jesus had perspective about problems and people. He was able to calculate carefully at long range the effect and impact of utterances, not only on those who were to hear them at the moment, but on those who would read them 2,000 years later. So often, secular leaders rush in to solve problems by seeking to stop the present pain, and thereby create even greater difficulty and pain later on. . . .

Jesus was not afraid to make demands of those he led. His leadership was not condescending or soft. . . .

The scriptures contain many marvelous case studies of leaders who, unlike Jesus, were not perfect but were still very effective. It would do us all much good if we were to read them—and read them often. . . .

Perhaps the most important thing I can say about Jesus Christ, more important than all else I have said, is that he lives. He really does embody all those virtues and attributes the scriptures tell us of. If we can come to know that, we then know the central reality about man and the universe. If we don't accept that truth and that reality, then we will not have the fixed principles or the transcendent truths by which to live out our lives in happiness and in service. In other words, we will find it very difficult to be significant leaders unless we recognize the reality of the perfect leader, Jesus Christ, and let him be the light by which we see the way!

—Ensign, August 1979, pp. 5-7.

Serve and Lead As Christ Did.

Much of this special Church work will be judged by the way in which we serve and lead, in a Christ-like manner, the women of the Church who are in our homes. I say serve and lead because the headship of the man in the home is to be like the headship of Christ in the Church. Christ led by love, example, and selfless service. He sacrificed himself for us. So it must be if we are leader-servants and humble patriarchs in our homes. . . .

I know that God lives, . . . (it is a great joy to say that many, many times), that Christ, the Redeemer of the world, is our Lord, and that this is his Church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with Christ at its head.

—In Conference Report, October 1979, pp. 71-72.

Sweep of the Savior's Labors.

Only when we understand the ministry of Jesus Christ, in which he also had a preeminence in the premortal world, do we begin to get some sense of the sweep of the Savior's labors for and in behalf of all of us. . . .

The more one understands about the ministry of Jesus Christ, the more absurd it is to regard him as any less than the resurrected Son of God. . . .

It is equally important for all of us who are disciples and followers of the Savior, Jesus of Nazareth, to live in such a way that our very lives are a witness by our works and our words that we are indeed believers. . . . May I assure you of the everlasting significance of your personal life. And even though at times the range of your life may seem to be very small, there can be greatness in the quality of your life. . . .

Those of us today who are sustained by you as prophets, seers, and revelators came to feel in the spring of 1978 much as the early brethren did when the revelation came to the effect "that the Gentiles should be fellowheirs . . . and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel" (Eph. 3:6). . . .

We had the glorious experience of having the Lord indicate clearly that the time had come when all worthy men and women everywhere can be fellowheirs and partakers of the full blessings of the gospel. I want you to know, as a special witness of the Savior, how close I have felt to him and to our Heavenly Father as I have made numerous visits to the upper rooms in the temple, going on some days several times by myself. The Lord made it very clear to me what was to be done. We do not expect the people of the world to understand such things, for they will always be quick to assign their own reasons or to discount the divine process of revelation.

—The New Era, April 1980, pp. 33-36.

At the Sesquicentennial.

Let us hold fast to the iron rod. The Savior urged us to put our hand to the plow without looking back. In that spirit we are being asked to have humility and a deep and abiding faith in the Lord and to move forward—trusting in him, refusing to be diverted from our course, either by the ways of the world or the praise of the world. I see that quality of readiness and devotion in our people today. There is so much yet to be done! Let us, then, move forward; let us continue the journey with lengthened stride. The Lord will lead us along, and he will be in our midst and not forsake us.

I know with all my soul that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, that he died on the cross and was resurrected from the dead. He is the risen Lord, the Great Presiding High Priest, and he stands at the head of the Church. Of this I testify . . . on this great anniversary of the restoration and organization of the Church on this very spot 150 years ago.

—In Conference Report, April 1980, p. 111.

My Friend, My Savior, My Lord, My God.

There are some in the world who mistakenly say that we are a non-Christian Church—a cult; that we worship Joseph Smith rather than our Savior, Jesus Christ. How far from the truth they are! What heresy! The Lord declared, "For thus shall my church be called in the last days, even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" (D&C 115:4).

We have a hope in Christ here and now. He died for our sins. Because of Him and His gospel, our sins are washed away in the waters of baptism; sin and iniquity are burned out of our souls as though by fire; and we become clean, we have a clear conscience, and we gain that peace which passeth understanding. . . .

For the past century and a half since the Restoration, beginning with the Prophet Joseph Smith, the latter-day prophets of God have raised their voices in clarity and with authority and truth as they have borne their testimonies of the divinity of this great latter-day work and the redemptive power of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

To the testimonies of these mighty men I add my testimony. I know that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God and that He was crucified for the sins of the world. He is my friend, my Savior, my Lord, and my God.

—In Conference Report, October 1982, pp. 5-6.
