No specific author, I Know That My Redeemer Lives: Latter-day Prophets Testify of the Savior ( 1990)

Chapter 13

EZRA TAFT BENSON

Born: 4 August 1899

Ordained an Apostle: 7 October 1943

Ordained President: 10 November 1985

The Greatest Event.

There is nothing in history to equal that dramatic announcement "He is not here, but is risen."

The greatest events of history are those which affect the greatest number for the longest periods. By this standard, no event could be more important to individuals or nations than the resurrection of the Master. The eventual resurrection of every soul who has lived and died on earth is a scriptural certainty. And surely there is no event for which one should make more careful preparation.

Nothing is more absolutely universal than the resurrection. Every living being will be resurrected. " . . . as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22) . . .

Yes, the Lord Jesus Christ liberated man from the world, by the pure gospel of love. He demonstrated that man, through a love of God, and through kindness and charity to his fellows, could achieve his highest potential. He lived the plain and sure doctrine of service, of doing good to all men, friends and enemies alike. His charge to return good for evil is still the greatest challenge to the mind of man. At the same time it is man's greatest weapon.

No other single influence has had so great an impact on this earth as the life of Jesus Christ. We cannot conceive of our lives without his teachings. Without him we would be lost in a morass of beliefs and worships born in fear and darkness, where the sensual and materialistic hold sway.

We are far short of the goal he set for us, but we must never lose sight of it. Nor must we forget that our great climb toward the light—toward perfection—would not be possible except for his teachings, his life, his death, and his resurrection. . . .

I give you my solemn witness and testimony that I know that Jesus the Christ lives. He was in very deed raised from the dead, as we shall be. He is the "resurrection and the life."

He appeared unto many in the old world after his resurrection.

And according to modern scriptures, sacred to me, he spent three glorious days, before his ascension, with his "other sheep" here in America—the new world.

By him, and through him and his gospel, God the Father has made it possible for you and me to overcome the world. . . .

Jesus is the Christ. He lives. He did break the bonds of death. He is our Savior and Redeemer, the very Son of God.

And he will come again—" . . . this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1:11.)

—29 March 1959 Easter sunrise service address, Hollywood Bowl, California, in So Shall Ye Reap: Selected Addresses of Ezra Taft Benson, comp. Reed A. Benson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1960), 4-9.

Doors Will Open.

Following the glorious appearance of God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ to Joseph Smith, it appears that the first great responsibility placed upon the restored Church was to carry the gospel to the world—to all our Father's children. . . .

The time must surely come when the Iron Curtain will be melted down and the Bamboo Curtain shattered. What the Lord has decreed will be fulfilled. To members of the Church and honest-hearted people everywhere, we remind you that God is at the helm—he is not dead—and he has said, "Be still, and know that I am God." (Ps. 46:10.)

—Improvement Era, 7 June 1970, pp. 95-96.

Gifts of Love.

I would like to talk to you about a few of the many gifts we have received from our Lord, Jesus Christ, and what we in turn might give to him.

First, he gave us the perfect model—himself—after which we are to pattern our lives. He said, "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends" (John 15:13). Not only did he lay down before us the perfect example for earthly living, but for our sake he willingly gave us his life. He went through an agony both in body and spirit, of which we cannot comprehend, to bring to us the glorious blessing of the Atonement and the Resurrection (see D&C 19:15-19).

Some men are willing to die for their faith but will not fully live for it. Christ both lived and died for us. . . .

That man is greatest and most blessed and joyful whose life most closely fits the pattern of the Christ. This has nothing to do with earthly wealth, power, or prestige. The only true test of greatness, blessedness, joyfulness is how close a life can come to being like the Master, Jesus Christ. . . .

I testify to you that his pay for his work is the best pay that you can get in this world or any other.

Secondly, . . . he has provided us the gift of a prophet. Of all mortal men, we should keep our eyes most firmly fixed on the captain, the prophet, seer, and revelator, and President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. . . . A good way to measure your standing with the Lord is to see how you feel about, and act upon, the inspired words of his earthly representative, the Prophet-President. . . .

The most important prophet, so far as we are concerned, is the one who is living in our day and age. This is the prophet who has today's instructions from God to us. God's revelation to Adam did not instruct Noah how to build the ark. . . .

Thirdly . . . is the gift of his church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, "the only true and living Church upon the face of the whole earth" (D&C 1:30). . . . It is the organized means which God is using to establish and expand his work. We must work with it and in it, build it up and move it forward. . . .

Sometimes in our attempts to mimic the world, contrary to the prophet's counsel, we run after the world's false educational, political, musical, and dress ideas. New worldly standards take over, a gradual breakdown occurs, and finally, after much suffering, a humble people are ready to be taught once again a higher law. . . .

Fourthly . . . is the gift of scripture, particularly the Book of Mormon. . . .

I have noted within the Church the difference in discernment, in insight, in conviction, and in spirit between those who know and love the Book of Mormon and those who do not. That book is a great sifter.

Fifth . . . is the gift of his Constitution. The Lord said, "I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up" (D&C 101:80). . . .

Christ's great gift to us was his life and sacrifice—should that not then be our small gift to him—our lives and sacrifices, not only now, but in the future? . . .

Men and women who turn their lives over to God will find out that he can make a lot more out of their lives than they can. He will deepen their joys, expand their vision, quicken their minds, strengthen their muscles, lift their spirits, multiply their blessings, increase their opportunities, comfort their souls, raise up friends, and pour out peace. . . .

To gain eternal life, they must be willing, if called upon, to sacrifice all things for the gospel. "If thou wilt be perfect," Jesus said to the rich young man, "go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me." . . .

Why don't we go all the way with the Lord—not part way? Why don't we sacrifice all of our sins—not some of them?

She was a young girl. She had sacrificed her worldly plans to spend long, tedious hours in work in order to provide for and raise her younger orphan brother. But now she lay on her bed, dying of a sickness. She called for her bishop, and as she talked to him in her last moments, he held her rough, hard, work-calloused hand in his. Then she asked the question "How will God know that I am his?"

Gently he raised her wrist and answered, "Show him your hands."

Someday we may see that pair of hands that sacrificed so much for us. Are our hands clean, and do they show the signs of being in his service? Are our hearts pure and filled with his thoughts?

Each week we make a solemn covenant to be like him and take him for our leader, to always remember him in everything and keep all of his commandments. In return he promises to give us his Spirit.

—"Jesus Christ—Gifts and Expectations," in Speeches of the Year: BYU Devotional and Ten-Stake Fireside Addresses 1974 (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1975), 301-5, 307, 310, 312-13.

Fortifies Testimony.

The Book of Mormon brings men to Christ through two basic means. First, it tells in a plain manner of Christ and his gospel. It testifies of his divinity and of the necessity for a Redeemer and the need of our putting trust in him. It bears witness of the Fall and the Atonement and the first principles of the gospel, including our need of a broken heart and a contrite spirit and a spiritual rebirth. It proclaims we must endure to the end in righteousness and live the moral life of a Saint.

Second, the Book of Mormon exposes the enemies of Christ. It confounds false doctrines and lays down contention. (See 2 Ne. 3:12.) It fortifies the humble followers of Christ against the evil designs, strategies, and doctrines of the devil in our day. The type of apostates in the Book of Mormon are similar to the type we have today.

—In Conference Report, April 1975, pp. 94-95.

Jesus Visited the Spirit World.

Even before the fall of Adam, which ushered death into the world, our Heavenly Father had prepared a place for the spirits who would eventually depart this mortal life. At the time of Jesus' death, the spirit world was occupied by hosts of our Father's children who had died—Adam's posterity down to the death of Jesus, both the righteous and the wicked. There were two grand divisions in the world of the spirits. Spirits of the righteous (the just) had gone to paradise, a state of happiness and a place of peace and restful work. The spirits of the wicked (the unjust) had gone to prison, a state of darkness and misery (see Alma 40:12-15). Jesus went only to the righteous—to paradise.

—"Because I Live, Ye Shall Live Also," in 1978 Devotional Speeches of the Year: BYU Devotional and Fireside Addresses (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1979), 48.

The Divine Birth.

The most fundamental doctrine of true Christianity is the divine birth of the child Jesus. It is a doctrine not comprehended by the world, misinterpreted by the so-called Christian churches, and even misunderstood by some members of the true church. . . .

Thus the testimonies of appointed witnesses leave no question as to the paternity of Jesus Christ. God was the Father of His fleshly tabernacle and Mary, a mortal woman, was His mother. He is therefore the only person born who rightfully deserves the title the Only Begotten Son of God.

We must keep in mind who Jesus was before He was so born. He was the Creator of all things, the great Jehovah, the Lamb slain before the foundation of the world, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. He was and is the Holy One of Israel. . . .

But because His Father was God, Jesus Christ . . . was God in the flesh—even the Son of God. [His] powers enabled Him to accomplish miracles, signs, wonders, the great atonement, and the resurrection—all of which are additional marks of His divinity. . . .

Jesus Christ is the Son of God in the most literal sense. The body in which He performed His mission in the flesh was sired by that same Holy Being we worship as God, our Eternal Father. He was not the son of Joseph, nor was He begotten by the Holy Ghost. He is the Son of the Eternal Father! . . .

I gratefully bear testimony to the marks which bear witness to His divinity: His divine birth, His ministry, His resurrection, His atoning sacrifice, His promised coming.

—The New Era, December 1980, pp. 45-50.

Mark of Divinity.

Jesus' entire ministry was a mark of His divinity. He spoke as God, He acted as God, and He performed works that only God Himself can do. His works bear testimony to His divinity.

It was in Gethsemane that Jesus took on Himself the sins of the world, in Gethsemane that His pain was equivalent to the cumulative burden of all men, in Gethsemane that He descended below all things so that all could repent and come to Him.

The mortal mind fails to fathom, the tongue cannot express, the pen of man cannot describe the breadth, the depth, the height of the suffering of our Lord—nor His infinite love for us. . . .

As I contemplate the glorious atonement of our Lord, which extended from Gethsemane to Golgotha, I am led to exclaim with reverence and gratitude:

I stand all amazed at the love Jesus offers me, Confused at the grace that so fully he proffers me; I tremble to know that for me he was crucified, That for me a sinner, he suffered, he bled and died. I marvel that he would descend from his throne divine To rescue a soul so rebellious and proud as mine, That he should extend his great love unto such as I, Sufficient to own, to redeem, and to justify. Oh, it is wonderful that he should care for me, Enough to die for me! Oh, it is wonderful, wonderful to me. Hymns, no. 193

—Come unto Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1983), 6-9.

A Testimony of Jesus.

A testimony is one of the few possessions we may take with us when we leave this life. Let me explain what it means to have a testimony of Jesus.

To have a testimony of Jesus is to possess knowledge through the Holy Ghost of the divine mission of Jesus Christ.

A testimony of Jesus is to know the divine nature of our Lord's birth—that He is indeed the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh.

A testimony of Jesus is to know that He was the promised Messiah and that while He sojourned among men He accomplished many mighty miracles.

A testimony of Jesus is to know that the laws He prescribed as His doctrine are true and then to abide by those laws and ordinances.

A testimony of Jesus is to know that He voluntarily took upon Himself the sins of all mankind in the Garden of Gethsemane, which caused Him to suffer in both body and spirit and to bleed from every pore. All this He did so that we would not have to suffer, if we should repent. (See Doctrine and Covenants 19:16, 18.)

A testimony of Jesus is to know that He came forth triumphantly from the grave with a physical, resurrected body. And because He lives, so shall all mankind.

A testimony of Jesus is to know that God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, did indeed appear to the Prophet Joseph Smith to establish a new dispensation of His gospel so that salvation may be preached to all nations before He comes.

A testimony of Jesus is to know that the church He established in the meridian of time and restored in modern times is, as the Lord has declared, "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth." (Doctrine and Covenants 1:30.)

A testimony of Jesus is to receive the words of His servants, the prophets, for as He has said, "Whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same." (Doctrine and Covenants 1:38.)

A testimony of Jesus means that we accept the divine mission of Jesus Christ, embrace His gospel, and do His works. It means we accept the prophetic mission of Joseph Smith and his successors. . . .

To walk in the steps of Jesus is to emulate His life and to look unto Him as our source of truth and example. Each of us would do well to periodically review His teachings in the Sermon on the Mount so that we are totally familiar with His way. In that sermon, one of the greatest of all sermons, we are told to be a light to others, to control our anger, to reconcile bad feelings with others before bringing gifts to the Lord, to love our enemy, to refrain from unholy and unvirtuous practices, to not allow lust to conceive in our hearts. We are further instructed how to pray, how to fast, and how to regulate our priorities. When these teachings are applied, Jesus said, we are like the wise man who built his house on a firm, solid foundation. . . .

In the Savior's time the purpose of a yoke was to get oxen pulling together in a united effort. Our Savior has a great cause to move forward. He has asked all of us to be equally yoked together to move His cause forward. It requires not only a united effort; it requires also complete dependence on Him. As He said to His early apostles, "Without me ye can do nothing." (John 15:5.)

—Come unto Christ, 11-13, 37, 97.

Center Confidence, Hope, and Trust in Christ.

I desire to bear witness to the divinity of Jesus Christ and to show by His deeds and honored titles given by His Father and the prophets that He is indeed deserving of our love, our reverence, and our worship.

The fundamental principle of our religion is faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. Why is it expedient to center confidence, hope, and trust in one solitary figure? Why is faith in Him so necessary to peace of mind in this life and hope in the world to come? . . .

Jesus Christ was and is the Lord God Omnipotent. . . .

Jesus Christ is the Son of God. . . .

His unique heredity made Him heir to the honored title the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh. As the Son of God, He inherited powers and intelligence that no human has ever had before or since. He was literally Immanuel, which means "God with us." . . .

To qualify as the Redeemer of all our Father's children, Jesus had to be perfectly obedient to all the laws of God. . . .

As the great Lawgiver, He gave laws and commandments for the benefit of all our Heavenly Father's children. . . .

Appropriately I praise Him as the Rock of Our Salvation. . . .

We may never understand nor comprehend in mortality how He accomplished what He did, but we must not fail to understand why He did what He did.

All that He did was prompted by His unselfish, infinite love for us. . . .

He is the Resurrection and the Life. . . .

He is our Great Exemplar.

He was perfectly obedient to our Heavenly Father and showed us how to forsake the world and keep our priorities in perspective. Because of His love for us, He showed us how to rise above petty weaknesses and to demonstrate affection, love, and charity in our relationships with others.

He is the Bread of Life. . . .

He is the Prince of Peace, the ultimate Comforter. . . .

He is the Good Shepherd. . . .

He is a Wonderful Counselor. . . .

He is our Advocate, Mediator, and Judge. . . .

With all my soul, I love Him.

He is the same loving, compassionate Lord today as when He walked the dusty roads of Palestine. He is close to His servants on this earth. He cares about and loves each of us today. Of this we can be assured.

—Come unto Christ, 127-33.

From the Inside Out.

When you choose to follow Christ, you choose to be changed. . . .

The Lord works from the inside out. The world works from the outside in. The world would take people out of the slums. Christ takes the slums out of people, and then they take themselves out of the slums. The world would mold men by changing their environment. Christ changes men, who then change the environment. The world would shape human behavior, but Christ can change human nature.

—Ensign, November 1985, pp. 5-6.

A Blessing.

I want you to know that I know that Christ is at the helm. This is His world. This is His Church. His purposes will be accomplished. . . .

Now, in the authority of the sacred priesthood in me vested, I invoke my blessing upon the Latter-day Saints and upon good people everywhere.

I bless you with increased discernment to judge between Christ and anti-Christ. I bless you with increased power to do good and to resist evil. I bless you with increased understanding of the Book of Mormon. I promise you that from this moment forward, if we will daily sup from its pages and abide by its precepts, God will pour out upon each child of Zion and the Church a blessing hitherto unknown—and we will plead to the Lord that He will begin to lift the condemnation—the scourge and judgment. Of this I bear solemn witness.

—Ensign, May 1986, pp. 77-78.

Follow the Prophet.

These are they who are valiant in their testimony of Jesus, who, as the Lord has declared, "overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true." (D&C 76:53.)

"Those who are just and true!" What an apt expression for those valiant in the testimony of Jesus. They are courageous in defending truth and righteousness. These are members of the Church who magnify their callings in the Church (see D&C 84:33), pay their tithes and offerings, live morally clean lives, sustain their Church leaders by word and action, keep the Sabbath as a holy day, and obey all the commandments of God.

To these the Lord has promised that "all thrones and dominions, principalities and powers, shall be revealed and set forth upon all who have endured valiantly for the gospel of Jesus Christ." (D&C 121:29.) . . .

One who rationalizes that he or she has a testimony of Jesus Christ but cannot accept direction and counsel from the leadership of His church is in a fundamentally unsound position and is in jeopardy of losing exaltation.

—Ensign, February 1987, p. 2.

Another Testament of Jesus Christ.

The honest seeker after truth can gain the testimony that Jesus is the Christ as he prayerfully ponders the inspired words of the Book of Mormon.

Over one-half of all the verses in the Book of Mormon refer to our Lord. Some form of Christ's name is mentioned more frequently per verse in the Book of Mormon than even in the New Testament.

He is given over one hundred different names in the Book of Mormon. Those names have a particular significance in describing His divine nature.

Let us consider some of the attributes of our Lord, as found in the Book of Mormon, that show that Jesus is the Christ. Then let us confirm each of these attributes about Him with a brief quote from the Book of Mormon.

He is Alive: "The life of the world . . . a life which is endless" (Mosiah 16:9).

He is Constant: "The same yesterday, today, and forever" (2 Nephi 27:23).

He is the Creator: "He created all things, both in heaven and in earth" (Mosiah 4:9).

He is the Exemplar: He "set the example. . . . He said unto the children of men: Follow thou me" (2 Nephi 31:9, 10).

He is Generous: "He commandeth none that they shall not partake of his salvation" (2 Nephi 26:24).

He is Godly: He is God (see 2 Nephi 27:23).

He is Good: "All things which are good cometh of God" (Moroni 7:12).

He is Gracious: "He is full of grace" (2 Nephi 2:6).

He is the Healer: The "sick, and . . . afflicted with all manner of diseases . . . devils and unclean spirits . . . were healed by the power of the Lamb of God" (1 Nephi 11:31).

He is Holy: "O how great the holiness of our God!" (2 Nephi 9:20.)

He is Humble: "He humbleth himself before the Father" (2 Nephi 31:7).

He is Joyful: "The Father hath given" Him a "fulness of joy" (3 Nephi 28:10).

He is our Judge: We "shall be brought to stand before the bar of God, to be judged of him" (Mosiah 16:10).

He is Just: "The judgments of God are always just" (Mosiah 29:12).

He is Kind: "He has loving kindness . . . towards the children of men" (1 Nephi 19:9).

He is the Lawgiver: He "gave the law" (3 Nephi 15:5).

He is the Liberator: "There is no other head whereby ye can be made free" (Mosiah 5:8).

He is the Light: "The light . . . of the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened" (Mosiah 16:9).

He is Loving: "He loveth the world, even that he layeth down his own life" (2 Nephi 26:24).

He is the Mediator: "The great Mediator of all men" (2 Nephi 2:27).

He is Merciful: "There is a multitude of his tender mercies" (1 Nephi 8:8).

He is Mighty: "Mightier than all the earth" (1 Nephi 4:1).

He is Miraculous: A "God of miracles" (2 Nephi 27:23).

He is Obedient: Obedient unto the Father "in keeping his commandments" (2 Nephi 31:7).

He is Omnipotent: He has "all power, both in heaven and in earth" (Mosiah 4:9).

He is Omniscient: "The Lord knoweth all things from the beginning" (1 Nephi 9:6).

He is our Redeemer: "All mankind were in a lost and in a fallen state, and ever would be save they should rely on this Redeemer" (1 Nephi 10:6).

He is the Resurrection: He brought to pass "the resurrection of the dead, being the first that should rise" (2 Nephi 2:8).

He is Righteous: "His ways are righteousness forever" (2 Nephi 1:19).

He is the Ruler: He rules "in the heavens above and in the earth beneath" (2 Nephi 29:7).

He is our Savior: "There is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ . . . whereby man can be saved" (2 Nephi 25:20).

He is Sinless: "He suffereth temptation, and yieldeth not to the temptation" (Mosiah 15:5).

He is Truthful: "A God of truth, and canst not lie" (Ether 3:12).

He is Wise: "He has all wisdom" (Mosiah 4:9). . . .

Those who are committed to Christ "stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places" that they may be in "even until death" (Mosiah 18:9). They "retain the name" of Christ "written always" in their hearts (Mosiah 5:12). They take upon themselves "the name of Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end" (Moroni 6:3).

—Ensign, November 1987, pp. 83-84.

The Greatest Battles.

Great battles can make great heroes and heroines. We will never have a better opportunity to be valiant in a more crucial cause than in the battle we face today and in the immediate future. Some of the greatest battles we will face will be fought within the silent chambers of our own souls. . . .

Christ lived on earth and was subject to all manner of temptation, but He won every battle. He is the most successful warrior that ever walked the earth, and He wants to help us win every battle, be it personal or public. When we fall short, His atonement will compensate for us on condition of our repentance.

—Ensign, September 1988, p. 2.

I Testify of Christ.

I testify that in our premortal state our Elder Brother in the spirit, even Jesus Christ, became our foreordained Savior in the Father's plan of salvation. (See Mosiah 4:6-7; Alma 34:9.) He is the captain of our salvation and the only means through whom we can return to our Father in Heaven to gain that fulness of joy. (See Heb. 2:10; Mosiah 3:17; Alma 38:9.)

I testify that Lucifer was also in the council of heaven. He sought to destroy the agency of man. He rebelled. (See Moses 4:3.) There was a war in heaven, and a third of the hosts were cast to the earth and denied a body. (See Rev. 12:7-9; D&C 29:36-37.) Lucifer is the enemy of all righteousness and seeks the misery of all mankind. (See 2 Ne. 2:18, 27; Mosiah 4:14.) . . .

I testify that God reveals His will to all men through the Light of Christ. (See Moro. 7:16; D&C 93:2; John 1:9.) . . .

I testify that Christ was born into mortality with Mary as His mother and our Heavenly Father as His father. (See 1 Ne. 11:18-21; Mosiah 3:8.) He lived a sinless life, providing us a perfect example. (See D&C 45:4; 3 Ne. 12:48; 27:27.) He worked out the great Atonement, which, through His grace, provides for every soul a resurrection and, for the faithful, the means to become exalted in the celestial kingdom. (See A of F 3; 2 Ne. 25:23; Mosiah 4:6-7; Alma 11:41-45; D&C 76:50-70; 132:19.)

I testify that during His mortal ministry Christ established His church on the earth. (See Matt. 16:18; Acts 2:47; 3 Ne. 21:22.) He called and ordained men to be Apostles and prophets with authority so that what they bound on earth would be bound in heaven. (See Matt. 16:19; John 15:16.) They received revelation, which provided new scriptures. (See 2 Pet. 1:20-21; D&C 68:4.)

I testify that a world so wicked that it killed the Son of God soon began killing the Apostles and prophets and so plunged itself into a spiritual dark age. (See 2 Thess. 2:2-7.) Scripture ended, apostasy spread, and the church that Christ established during His earthly ministry ceased to exist. (See 2 Ne. 27:4-5.)

I testify that God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, appeared to Joseph Smith in the spring of 1820, thus bringing to an end the long night of apostasy (JS-H 1:15-20). . . .

I testify that through the Book of Mormon God has provided for our day tangible evidence that Jesus is the Christ and that Joseph Smith is His prophet. (See D&C 20:8-33.) This other testament of Jesus Christ is a scriptural account of the early inhabitants of America. It was translated by Joseph Smith through the gift and power of God. (See D&C 135:3.) Those who will read and ponder the Book of Mormon and ask our Eternal Father in the name of Christ if it is true may know for themselves of its truthfulness through the power of the Holy Ghost, provided they will ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ. (See Moro. 10:3-5.) . . .

I testify that as the forces of evil increase under Lucifer's leadership and as the forces of good increase under the leadership of Jesus Christ, there will be growing battles between the two until the final confrontation. . . .

I testify that not many years hence the earth will be cleansed. (See D&C 76:41.) Jesus the Christ will come again, this time in power and great glory to vanquish His foes and to rule and reign on the earth. (See D&C 43:26-33.) In due time all men will gain a resurrection and then will face the Master in a final judgment. (See 2 Ne. 9:15, 41.) God will give rewards to each according to the deeds done in the flesh. (See Alma 5:15.)

I testify to you that a fulness of joy can only come through the atonement of Jesus Christ and by obedience to all of the laws and ordinances of the gospel, which are found only in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. (See A of F 1:3.)
