Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

Preface

For thus saith the Lord, in the spirit of truth, I am merciful, gracious, and good unto those That fear me, and live for the life that's to come; My delight is to honor the saints with repose; That serve me in righteousness true to the end; Eternal's their glory, and great their reward; I'll surely reveal all my myst'ries to them,— The great hidden myst'ries in my kingdom stor'd— From the council in Kolob, to time on the earth, And for ages to come unto them I will show My pleasure & will, what my kingdom will do: Eternity's wonders they truly shall know. Great things of the future I'll show unto them, Yea, things of the vast generations to rise; For their wisdom and glory shall be very great, And their pure understanding extend to the skies. —Joseph Smith [^1]

Joseph Smith counseled the brethren to preach both repentance and the warning that the kingdom of God was at hand. He instructed further, "Never meddle with the visions of beasts and subjects you do not understand." [^2] That counsel is good. So what am I doing writing an analysis of a book in which some of the fiercest and most mysterious beasts in the whole Bible are found?

I have asked myself that question quite a number of times both before undertaking the task and as I was in the process of research and writing. I must admit that the book engrosses me as it has other quacks and cranks through all ages up to the present. But I am also impressed that it has haunted the greatest poets from Dante and Spenser through Milton to Blake and Shelley. But most importantly, the work is one of only three biblical texts endorsed in the Book of Mormon.

The greatest commendation went to Isaiah. Of his writing the Lord said to the Book of Mormon people, "A commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah" (3 Ne. 23:1). He also revealed large sections of the writings of Malachi (see 3 Ne. 24-25), explaining that "these scriptures, which ye had not with you, the Father commanded that I should give unto you; for it was wisdom in him that they should be given unto future generations" (3 Ne. 26:2).

Concerning the writings of John, as will be amplified in the next chapter, the Lord has promised that "when ye shall rend that veil of unbelief . . . then shall the great and marvelous things which have been hid up from the foundation of the world from you [be revealed]. . . . Then shall my revelations which I have caused to be written by my servant John be unfolded in the eyes of all the people. Remember, when ye see these things, ye shall know that the time is at hand that they shall be made manifest in very deed" (Ether 4:15-16). I believe that the Saints have come to that era. Through the revelations given to the Church, much of John's master work can be understood. As we do so, we truly see that "the time is at hand."

Those who get into the book can't seem to leave it alone. In Western literature the apocalyptic genre always returns to Revelation rather than to Zechariah, Ezekiel, or Daniel. I believe the book grasps and holds because of the hope that weaves itself throughout the work. Those who understand the message of Revelation want the end to come out as the vision shows. Good must triumph over evil. The cosmos must be swept clean of malevolence, and love must overmaster all. Any other outcome would be tragedy.

But the message is not all that holds a reader. The method in which John saw the vision, wrote it, and magnified it holds the imagination. He used the most graphic of images—images drawn from the most sublime of dreams, and the most tortured of nightmares. Few works depict the depth of evil or the height of good better than Revelation.

Two needs kept pestering me to write. The first was for a clear analysis, using insights from modern scripture and prophetic utterance, of one of the greatest prophecies ever recorded. The second was to identify and point out those portions for which we must yet await further enlightenment.

Two other factors contributed. The first is the whelming enthusiasm I found for the book in my New Testament classes. (Note, I did not write "overwhelming." The response was not exactly "overwhelming," but it was pleasantly surprising and expressed, I believe, a solid interest if not a need.)

The second is something that presses upon me from the pages of the vision itself. I would translate my feeling as a sense of urgency, of a need to move, to prepare, to be ready. John's invocation upon all those who receive the revelation is rendered by the King James translators: "Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein: for the time is at hand" (Rev. 1:3).

The last phrase, "for the time is at hand," is what urges me. The Greek (ho gar kairos eggus) can be translated as the King James Version does it, but I fear that with that rendering we are likely to misunderstand John's thrust. The sense is that time is limited, or that time presses. This captures the idea of how the inner tempo, the spiritual vigor of the age, will escalate as mankind enters the apocalyptic era. As the earth prepares for the coming of her Lord, time becomes laden with force, charged with an irresistible destiny. The Greek does not employ the ordinary word for time (chronos) but speaks of thekairos: time that has matured, that has found fulfillment.

Closely connected with the thought is a phrase repeated three times near the end of the book: "Behold, I come quickly" (Rev. 22: 7, 12, cf. 20). The Lord is not telling the early Christians to expect him at any moment. Rather, the phrase characterizes a dynamic quality of time. The Lord is saying that he comes in the pressing, the urgent time—the time bearing within it a measureless spiritual hastening that moves to crescendo upon a humanity unmoved, unrepentant, and unprepared. One scholar said, "That Christ comes quickly can very well mean that He comes 'too quickly' for an unprepared and sleeping humanity. That the time is 'near' may mean that it is 'short'; that it is actually too short considering the slowness and laziness of human souls." [^3]

In order to fulfill the need for a clear analysis of Revelation, I have done four things: translated the document paying close attention to variations found in the different preserved manuscripts, including the Joseph Smith Translation; studied the most important Jewish and Christian apocalypses, drawing out what I could from them; consulted the studies of scholars both within and without the Church; and most importantly, pulled together those insights gained from the Standard Works and the teachings of the modern prophets.

Further, I have not ignored the historical setting in which the work was composed. To do so would have impoverished the study as it would that of any literature. Though a person may enjoy Shakespeare without a knowledge of Elizabethan England, understanding and appreciation are greatly increased when he has at least some of that knowledge. The same holds true for Revelation, and for that matter, the New Testament as a whole.

Even so, not all the questions concerning John's vision are answered in this book, nor are they answerable. For this reason some may find this study disappointing. The plain fact is that there are portions of Revelation that cannot be fully understood at present. It will take either time or further revelation to make them clear. I have not ignored these difficult areas. Various theories have been presented so that the reader can be aware of the arguments and problems. Often no solution is proposed.

The reader needs to be aware of three additional points. First, this book brings together only the material from the scriptures and the prophetic teachings, both ancient and modern, that clarify John's message. Therefore, this book isneither a compendium of statements about nor a study of the last days. Further, it is not a complete commentary carefully examining each verse of John's vision. It is an analysis of the message of the book of Revelation, overall and chapter by chapter. Second, many biblical quotes will differ from those in the King James Version (hereafter noted as KJV). In most cases I am using my own translation (hereafter noted as AT), and less frequently, the Joseph Smith Translation (hereafter noted as JST) in order to make a passage clearer. Note, however, that the text of the KJV is quoted for reference in its entirety at the beginning of each sectional study. Third, there are a number of references to classical sources and ancient Jewish and Christian apocryphal and pseudepigraphical texts and documents. The citations for these follow the abbreviation and note style found in the Oxford Classical Dictionary and the Interpreter's Dictionary of theBible. [^4]

I am indebted to a host of people for their assistance and suggestions on this endeavor. I would like to give special thanks to Vic Werlhof, whose enthusiasm for the project was a great source of encouragement and whose generous financial contributions made this work possible; to my colleagues Larry E. Dahl, Robert L. Millet, and Paul H. Peterson, who read portions of the text and offered valuable suggestions; to my daughter Jessica E. Draper, who turned a rough draft into a product that I was not ashamed to show others; to my research assistants Amy B. C. Rossiter, Lara K. Harris, and Robert B. Bennett for their painstaking work on checking sources, notes, style, and grammar. I extend special thanks to Richard L. Anderson, who read the entire manuscript and whose insights and recommendations have made this work more sound. Finally, I extend appreciation to my wife, Barbara, not only for her continued support in this product, but also for everything that makes life meaningful.

Though I have sought to be in harmony with Church doctrine, to faithfully interpret the scriptures, and to accurately represent the power of the message of Revelation, all conclusions and assertions in this book represent my own understanding.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Thuc. 3.33; Strab. 10.5.13.
[^2] Nat. Hist. 4.12.23. See Tac. Ann. 3.68; 4.30;15.71; Juv. Sat. 1.73; 6.563-64; 10.170.
[^3] Church News, Dec. 5, 1987, 14.
[^4] R. H. Charles, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Revelation of St. John, 2 vols. (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1920), 1:22,notes the most important passages from Origen, Clement of Alexandria, Pliny, and Tertullian concerning the cause of John's banishment.
