Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 1

"As a Flaming Fire and a Ministering Angel"

(D&C 7:6)

POWER OVER DEATH

To his disciples Jesus said, "Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom" (Matt. 16:28, KJV). One wonders if the Lord's gaze fell upon John. Not many months later, the Savior said to him, "John, my beloved, what desirest thou? For if you shall ask what you will, it shall be granted unto you" (D&C 7:1). Standing before the Lord of life, John asked what would otherwise have been the inconceivable: "Lord, give unto me power over death, that I may live and bring souls unto thee" (v. 2). His desire was granted. "Because thou desirest this," affirmed the Lord, "thou shalt tarry until I come in my glory, and shalt prophesy before nations, kindreds, tongues and people" (v. 3).

John's aspiration set on course the fulfillment of a prophecy made nearly six hundred years earlier. The American prophet Nephi, caught away in vision, saw the entire history of the world. Like others, he was forbidden to write but not without explanation:

The angel spake unto me, saying: Look! And I looked and beheld a man, and he was dressed in a white robe. And the angel said unto me: Behold one of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. Behold, he shall see and write the remainder of these things; yea, and also many things which have been. And he shall also write concerning the end of the world.

Wherefore, the things which he shall write are just and true; and behold they are written in the book which thou beheld proceeding out of the mouth of the Jew; and at the time they proceeded out of the mouth of the Jew, or, at the time the book proceeded out of the mouth of the Jew, the things which were written were plain and pure, and most precious and easy to the understanding of all men.

And behold, the things which this apostle of the Lamb shall write are many things which thou hast seen; and behold, the remainder shalt thou see. But the things which thou shalt see hereafter thou shalt not write; for the Lord God hath ordained the apostle of the Lamb of God that he should write them.

And also others who have been, to them hath he shown all things, and they have written them; and they are sealed up to come forth in their purity, according to the truth which is in the Lamb, in the own due time of the Lord, unto the house of Israel.

And I, Nephi, heard and bear record, that the name of the apostle of the Lamb was John, according to the word of the angel (1 Ne. 14:18-27).

Thus, it fell to John to give the vision to the world. But as he did so, he also chronicled the history through which he himself would live. He knew in broad terms the entire history of the last two millennia. It is unlikely, however, that he knew of the spiritual manifestation that awaited him after a Roman ruler, perhaps Domitian himself, banished him for some time to a little Greek island in the Aegean Sea.

THE SETTING OF THE REVELATION

Patmos is a small, roughly butterfly-shaped volcanic island southwest of the Turkish city of Ephesus. It measures about ten by five miles. The earliest references to it are found in Thucydides and later in Strabo. [^1] The writings of Pliny note that under Rome a number of islands were used as penal settlements. In addition to Patmos, there were Pontia, off the coast of Latium, and Gyara and Seriphus in the Aegean Sea. [^2] At that time Patmos was fertile though it relied heavily upon rain for its watersupply. The prisoners were thus able to take care of themselves. Today, though no longer fertile, the island boasts a population of about 2,400 fishing families. [^3]

The revelation came while John was serving time in that penal colony. He notes that his crime was declaring "the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ" (Rev. 1:9, KJV). [^4] The exact nature of his punishment is unknown, but it consisted at least in part of banishment. Among the Romans there were two types of exile: deportatio and relegatio.Deportatio was permanent and consisted of the loss of rights and property. Only the emperor could impose it. Relegatio ran in length from one-half to ten years and involved no loss of rights or property. The Roman senate, a city prefect, or other officials could inflict it. John seems to have suffered the milder relegatio, probably imposed by a governor of the Roman province of Asia if not by the emperor himself. [^5] At any rate, he was later freed and able to continue his work.

Establishing a firm date for John's imprisonment is impossible. [^6] According to his testimony, it was at a time when the Christians were being persecuted on a fairly large scale. Since some forms of harassment were going on from the mid-40s and continued off and on throughout the first and later centuries after the birth of the Lord, no period is totally exempt. Two times vie for the most support among scholars as the period of greatest persecution: the late-60s and the 90s. During the former, Nero launched his persecution against the Christians at Rome. During the latter, Domitian pushed his empire-wide pogrom of all Christians.

Those who favor the Neronian era use evidence from Revelation itself. For example, they point to the head of the beast that was wounded and came alive (see Rev. 13:3) as a reference to Nero. Because this fits certain legends that sprung up shortly after the death of the emperor, they insist that John had him in mind. Those who favor Domitian's time base their evidence on the early sources, which are quite unanimous on the subject. The decade of the 90s also best fits the evidence.

During this decade the triangular struggle between pagans, Jews, and Christians escalated in Asia Minor. This was an area that had a tradition for religious strife often sparked by the frequent natural disasters. About a.d. 92 there was an anti-Christian outbreak due in part to a serious famine blamed on the Saints because they refused to pay homage to pagan gods. Boycotts and trade sanctions were directed against the churches. Arrests, imprisonments, banishments, and even executions followed. The famine first affected Pisidian Antioch and later Prusa in the north of the province. Apparently, even areas outside this province were hit. [^7]

In addition, the emperor Domitian launched a wide pogrom specifically against the Christians. He had a profound hostility toward any form of religious unorthodoxy, that is, any religion he felt was antithetical to Roman belief. Prominent citizens who lapsed too blatantly into an "external religion" such as Christianity or Judaism came under his censure even to the point of banishment and death. Further, he became megalomaniacal late in his career, eventually persuading himself he was lord and god. He demanded that his court address him as such. He ordered libations to be made and incense to be offered before his statues. Those who refused, many Christians included, were punished. [^8]

Under these or similar circumstances John received a sentence of banishment to the island. There he remained probably for years. [^9] At what point he received the apocalypse is unknown, but one may rest assured that this was not the only time John enjoyed comfort from the Spirit during his long vigil "for the testimony of Jesus." Finally the day came for his release. According to one tradition, he retired to western Asia Minor (present-day Turkey) and there continued the work of the ministry. [^10]

JOHN'S PURPOSE IN WRITING REVELATION

John wrote the book of Revelation with a definite objective in mind. His intent grew out of the visionary experience. It was to fulfill the commandment given him directly by Jesus Christ himself (see Rev. 1:11). However, there were other factors at play. Many of the Saints were discouraged, even frightened. They were in the midst of the greatest crisis yet faced by the early Church. The ordeal through which they were passing had terrifying prospects. Rome, the seemingly omnipotent master of their world, had determined that holding to the Christian faith constituted a crime worthy of death. The churches in Asia already knew the effect of that brutal decision. Many undoubtedly wondered how a few powerless Christians could survive against the Latin colossus.

But more than external danger threatened the life of the fledgling Church. Indeed, a far greater threat overshadowed them than the injustice of the cold Roman master. This was the period in which apostasy was visibly gaining the upper hand after a half century of struggle. The Savior's apostles and prophets knew it was coming. It was one of the themes on which the Lord had dwelt during his forty-day ministry after his resurrection (see Acts 1:3). [^11]

From the days of that ministry, the shadow of the Antichrist haunted the peace of the Saints. Paul warned the Thessalonians, the Melitians, and others that a "falling away" would occur because men would not endure sound doctrine (see 2 Thes. 2:1-5; 2 Tim. 4:3-4; Acts 20:29-31). "Also of your own selves," he told them, "shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them" (Acts 20:30, KJV). As a result of this falling away the "man of sin," a son of perdition, would be revealed "who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple [i.e., the church] of God, [showing] himself that he is God" (2 Thes. 2:3-4, KJV).

The Greek word Paul used that is translated as "falling away" is apostasia. It meant literally to stand apart inimmovable opposition, and in a civil sense, "rebellion" or, better, "revolution" or "mutiny." It carried the idea of an internal takeover by parties hostile to established authority, leadership, and constitution. [^12] Paul warned the Church for over three years that there would be such a rebellion. Once the rebellion succeeded, those leaders whom the Savior chose would be replaced by others of a perverse nature (wolves in sheep's clothing) who would change the doctrine (constitution) of Christ to fit their own base desires. Paul's warning shows that the Church was not in danger of totally disappearing. Rather, those antichrists, who would replace Christ's gospel with the doctrines of men, would assume control.

John fought against these stubbornly disobedient and defiant individuals. We know the names of some of them: Diotrephes, Alexander the coppersmith, Hymenaeus, and Philetus (see 3 Jn. 1:9-10; 1 Tim. 1:20; 2 Tim. 2:17; 4:14). These and others perverted the doctrine by setting themselves up as leaders and replacing the teachings of Christ with their own. It appears that in many areas local officers also struggled to supplant the authority and leadership of the prophets and apostles. Presbyters and bishops vied for power and claimed authority that was not theirs. [^13]

The situation was critical. A false prophetic circle arose that competed with the true prophets for ecclesiastical authority and theological acceptance. False apostles infiltrated the church at Ephesus (see Rev. 2:2); at Pergamos a faction upheld what John called the "doctrine of Balaam" (Rev. 2:14, KJV), which was probably a move to incorporate into Church practice certain elements of the pagan religion of the Romans; while at Thyatira a false prophetess with quite a number of followers seduced many with her teachings (see v. 20). Heresy was spreading everywhere.

We see in the first of John's epistles the thrust that the apostasy was taking. There he admonishes his readers to "believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world" (1 Jn. 4:1, KJV). Apostolic authority with its basis in true prophecy must be followed, he admonished, because "we are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error" (v. 6, KJV).

A better grasp of these passages is gained when one understands the nature of the prophetic office in the early Church. The Apostles were the ranking authorities (see 1 Cor. 12:28); indeed, the very foundation of the Church consisted of apostles and prophets (see Eph. 2:20). However, this led to a problem: certain persons arose claiming the prophetic gift and, on that basis, Church authority. This happened as early as the mid-fifth decade.

Paul pointed out the necessity of discerning between the alternate voices claiming to speak by the Spirit (see 1 Tim. 6:20-21) and laid down some basic rules for distinguishing the true from the false (see 1 Cor. 12:3). The need seems to have become even more acute a few decades later when John told his followers to "test the spirits" (1 Jn. 4:1, AT). [^14] And this problem was still being felt a half century after that. The writer of theDidach warned his readers that a man was not a prophet who sponged off the community of believers and demanded meals or money while in purported prophetic ecstasy. [^15]

At the time John wrote Revelation, a power struggle raged within the Christian community. John wrote his work for those who yet clung to the truth. He warned against false prophets and their source of inspiration, and emphasized that God would not allow them to continue without consequence. If the churches chose to reject God's officers, he would come out in judgment by abandoning the churches and allowing the false leaders to take over. However, this condition would only last for a time. Eventually, the apostate church would be consumed under a blaze of truth and light.

But what of the nation that was the political seat of persecution and whose authority even the least of the Christians felt? The Revelator had an answer. God would move against Rome and the other recreant nations that would follow. His authority would prevail over even these seemingly omnipotent masters. And the powers of hell, which undergirded and supported the corrupt governments and from which they drew both their strength and inspiration, would also incur the terrible wrath of God. Driven into a war lust, they would fight against themselves until the time God would intervene and stop all fighting, rendering them eternally impotent.

Thus, the focus of Revelation—the core around which everything revolves—centers on the issue of authority. Who really overmasters the world? Is it the political institutions? the powers of evil? or God? To the faithful few, struggling against external pressure and deadly persecutions and being buffeted by alternate voices, the message of Revelation with its omnipotent, wrath-filled yet caring God, must have brought comfort and hope with the promise of final victory.

But all was not bliss. There was no promise of relief from suffering outside of death. The picture John portrayed gave no illusion of peace but of an extended period of warfare. The future, until the end of time, was to be ruled by Satan who, though mortally wounded, would fight desperately using his minions both incorporeal and mortal. [^16]

Some have viewed John's intent as nothing more than keeping the Saints in line by holding out the promise of eternal reward. [^17] But John's aim seems far more noble. It is true that the course of history he presents stressed the ultimate, rather than the immediate triumph of goodness over evil, and yet the call was for the Saints to work out their salvation in the present and to place their trust in God who was not yet ready to expose his mastery over history. Triumph was not immediately at hand. The Saints had to exercise faith through a hope that made no demands upon the present. They could not escape history. The work of God would continue for a long period within its confines. Even today, an aspect of faith is a willingness to allow God to operate in his own way in the present, to take what comes, and to continue strong. God, through his Saints, will achieve ultimate victory. John's readers had to accept the agony of the present as travail necessary to bring into being a glorious future. [^18]

CONCLUSION

Of John, the Savior said, "I will make him as flaming fire and a ministering angel; he shall minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation who dwell on the earth" (D&C 7:6). Surely in writing Revelation John partially fulfilled the Lord's intent. He wrote a message of testimony and hope to those "heirs of salvation" who lingered in his own day. But he also wrote for the Lord's people living in the latter days. For those who understand, the flaming fire of his testimony still lights the way to the Lord and Savior of the world.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Northrop Frye, "Typology: Apocalypse," in Bloom,Revelation, 71.
[^2] Joseph Fielding Smith, comp., Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 290.
[^3] Bruce R. McConkie, "Understanding the Book of Revelation," Ensign, September 1975, 87. In his Doctrinal New TestamentCommentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973), 3:431, Elder McConkie further stated, "We are in a much better position to understand those portions of Revelation which we are expected to understand than we generally realize. Thanks be to the interpretive material found in sections 29, 77, 88, and others of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants [and other latter-day scriptures], . . . we have a marvelously comprehensive and correct understanding of this otherwise hidden book."
[^4] Cited in Robert J. Matthews, "A Plainer Translation"—Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible: A History and Commentary (Provo:Brigham Young University Press, 1985), 25; italics added.
[^5] Messenger and Advocate, February 1835, 80. The sealedportion has been described as consisting of about two-thirds the volume of the golden plates. If that is the case, then the vision of Jared's brother would occupy a substantial portion of over one thousand pages of translated text. This dwarfs John's mere twenty-five pages. However, John devoted only a few lines to six thousand years of earth's history in order to concentrate on the period just before the Second Coming.
[^6] See also McConkie, "Understanding Revelation," 86.
[^7] Smith, Teachings, 84.
[^8] See Isbon T. Beckwith, The Apocalypse of John (New York: Macmillan Co., 1919; reprint, Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1967), 411.
[^9] For examples in classical Greek, see Pl. Prt. 352d;Grg. 460a; Plut. Vit., Cat. Mai. 20. This is the sense in which the word isfrequently used in the Septuagint.
[^10] Hort, Apocalypse, 3.
[^11] It does appear in the title of 2 Baruch—"The Book of the Apocalypse of Baruch the Son of Neriah"—published shortly after the Revelation of John but not in any documents that antedate John's work. See Charles, Commentary, 4-5.
[^12] A number of studies have been completed on apocalyptic as a literary genre. See for example D. S. Russell, The Method and Message of Jewish Apocalyptic: 200 b.c.-a.d.100 (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1964); P. D. Hanson, The Dawn of Apocalyptic: The Historical and Sociological Roots of Jewish Apocalyptic Eschatology, rev. ed. (Philadelphia:Fortress, 1979); C. Rowland, The Open Heaven: A Study of Apocalyptic in Judaism and Early Christianity (New York: Crossroad, 1982). Some major apocalypses bearing some resemblance to Revelation are Psalms of Solomon (written ca. 50 b.c.), Odes of Solomon (collected between ca. 50b.c. and a.d. 50), the Testament of the XII Patriarchs (copied between ca. 100 b.c. and a.d. 50), Book of Jubilees (written between ca. 50 b.c. and a.d. 50), Second Esdras or Fourth Ezra (written ca.a.d. 75), the Apocalypse of Baruch (written ca. a.d. 75), the Apocalypse of Abraham (written ca. a.d. 50). There are a number of works (e.g., theAscension of Isaiah, and the Life of Adam and Eve) that have small apocalyptic sections and add some detail but are much later than Revelation. For analysis, see Beckwith, Apocalypse, 186-197.
[^13] Beckwith, Apocalypse, vi. Relevant texts and insights willbe brought to bear in the analyses of the chapters.
[^14] The elements discussed here pertain to Christian apocalyptic in general. Note that a definition of apocalypticism and of the literature as a genre is problematical. Participants at the Uppsala colloquium on apocalypticism refrained from even suggesting a definition. (For a discussion see Fiorenza, Revelation, 1.) It is not my purpose toenter into the debate. The elements chosen here are accepted by a wide range of conservative Christian scholars, meet with my own observations, and conform to LDS theology. The outline followed is that of Mounce, Revelation, 19-21.
[^15] May, "Christian Apocalypse," in Bloom, Revelation, 37.
[^16] M. H. Abrams, "Apocalypse: Theme and Romantic Variations," in Bloom, Revelation, 9; Fiorenza,Revelation, 5.
[^17] For collections, see Hennecke, Apocrypha, 2:578-803, andJames H. Charlesworth, ed., Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, 2 vols.(Garden City: Doubleday, 1983). Volume 1 deals excusively with apocalyptic literature.
[^18] Charles R. Erdman, The Revelation of John (Philadelphia: The Westminster Press, 1966), 16-18; Beckwith, Apocalypse, p. vi.
