Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 2

The Revelation of St. John the Divine

REVELATION—A BOOK TO BE UNDERSTOOD

As a trumpet calls soldiers to battle, a voice deep as eternity summoned John away from his Sabbath meditations. Turning toward the sound, he saw a radiant being surrounded with indescribable light. The heavenly being announced that John was about to have a revelation that he was to record and then send to the churches of God. The title given to this work in the KJV is most appropriate: "The Revelation of St. John the Divine." The term divine, as used here, is not an adjective describingone who is godly, but rather a noun denoting one who foresees. The breadth of the Seer's vision encompassed all earthly time and reached even into eternity.

This revelation has come forth as a testament of the foreknowledge of God, giving many hope and assurance through nearly two millennia. Its message, for those who are willing to pay the price to understand it, continues to proclaim comfort. This is especially true for the Saints living during the last days. It does this primarily by assisting them in preparing for the Second Coming of the Son of the Most High. Indeed, there is no other people for whom it is more germane.

A scholar described Revelation as a book that finds a man mad or leaves him that way. [^1] Many who have labored through its maze would agree. But God gave the vision and preserved it for a purpose. He meant his Saints to understand it. It is not, however, a book for the spiritual novice. The Revelator received it by the power of prophecy, and one can best understand it by that same power. It was in this vein that Joseph Smith declared that the book "is one of the plainest books God ever caused to be written." [^2] To those who live in the day when prophets of God again walk the earth, who have access through the prophets to eternal truths and thus to the gift of prophecy, the central message of the book is clear.

In response to the question, "Are we expected to understand the book of Revelation?" Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated:

Certainly. Why else did the Lord reveal it? The common notion that it deals with beasts and plagues and mysterious symbolisms that cannot be understood is just not true. It is so far overstated that it gives an entirely erroneous feeling about this portion of revealed truth. Most of the book—and it is no problem to count the verses so included—is clear and plain and should be understood by the Lord's people. Certain parts are not clear and are not understood by us—which, however, does not mean that we could not understand them if we would grow in faith as we should. The Lord expects us to seek wisdom, to ponder his revealed truths, and to gain a knowledge of them by the power of his Spirit. [^3]

His point is that Latter-day Saints are in an excellent position to understand the Apocalypse. To us the Lord has stated, "Unto you it shall be given to know the signs of the times, and the signs of the coming of the Son of Man" (D&C 68:11). And again:

For thus saith the Lord—I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end. Great shall be their reward and eternal shall be their glory. And to them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of old, and for ages to come, will I make known unto them the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom. Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations (D&C 76:5-8).

He admonishes further, "The coming of the Lord draweth nigh, and it overtaketh the world as a thief in the night—therefore, gird up your loins, that you may be the children of light, and that day shall not overtake you as a thief" (D&C 106:4-5). These scriptures show that the Lord has no intention of hiding the future from his Saints. The book of Revelation proves this fact. As further evidence that God is willing to share this knowledge, we can look to Joseph Smith's latter-day example. He saw the entire history of the earth. Of the experience, he stated: "After I got through translating the Book of Mormon, I took up the Bible to read with the Urim and Thummim. I read the first chapter of Genesis and I saw the things as they were done. I turned over the next and the next, and the whole passed before me like a grand panorama; and so on chapter after chapter until I read the whole of it. I saw it all!" [^4]

JOHN'S VISION AND THE SEALED PORTIONOF THE BOOK OF MORMON

Numerous prophets have been privileged to see panoramic visions that sweep through time, but to John was given the privilege of recording the comprehensive vision of the beginning to the end. The Book of Mormon prophet known as the brother of Jared saw, like John, the entire history of the world (see Ether 3:25-27). Though there have been few prophets who could rival the seeric power of Jared's brother, the sacred knowledge given to him was not to be shared with a faithless world. The Lord gave him explicit instructions:

Behold, thou shalt not suffer these things which ye have seen and heard to go forth unto the world, until the time cometh that I shall glorify my name in the flesh; wherefore, ye shall treasure up the things which ye have seen and heard, and show it to no man. And behold, when ye shall come unto me, ye shall write them and shall seal them up. . . .

When the Lord had said these words, he showed unto the brother of Jared all the inhabitants of the earth which had been, and also all that would be; and he withheld them not from his sight, even unto the ends of the earth. . . . And the Lord said unto him: Write these things and seal them up; and I will show them in mine own due time unto the children of men (Ether 3:21-22, 25, 27).

The Jaredite prophet Ether preserved and eventually bequeathed, through the people of Lamoni, the record to the Nephites. After the Savior's appearance to his American disciples, the record was translated and became a part of their scriptures. Because of ensuing disbelief, the vision was lost to them. Moroni, however, preserved it as a part of his record. His translation constituted at least part of the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon plates, which Joseph Smith was expressly forbidden to translate with these words: "Touch them not in order that ye may translate; for that thing is forbidden you, except by and by it shall be wisdom in God" (Ether 5:1). That vision has remained sealed ever since. However, another saw and recorded the same vision. The sealed portion of the Book of Mormon "contains the same revelation which was given to John upon the isle of Patmos," albeit Jared's brother apparently wrote with a great deal more detail. [^5]

The unique feature about John's revelation is that the prophet was commanded not to seal it up. Indeed, John seems to be the only prophet commissioned to publish the vision up to this time. Daniel and Nephi also saw and wrote these things, but, like Jared's brother, they were commanded to seal them up that they might later come forth in their purity (see Dan. 12:4, 9; 1 Ne. 14:25-26). Nephi was expressly forbidden to write what he saw (1 Ne. 14:28). [^6]

Someday, the Lord has promised, the revelation recorded by the brother of Jared will be revealed. This will be in conjunction with the restoration of the gospel. As the Lord said to the house of Israel:

When ye shall rend that veil of unbelief which doth cause you to remain in your awful state of wickedness, and hardness of heart, and blindness of mind, then shall the great and marvelous things which have been hid up from the foundation of the world from you—yea, when ye shall call upon the Father in my name, with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, then shall ye know that the Father hath remembered the covenant which he made unto your fathers, O house of Israel (Ether 4:15).

Until then John's record will have to fill the gap. Fortunately, this is far from being a burden. Unto Moroni the Lord stated, "And then [when Israel comes to accept the Savior] shall my revelations which I have caused to be written by my servant John be unfolded in the eyes of all the people. Remember, when ye see these things, ye shall know that the time is at hand that they shall be made manifest in very deed" (Ether 4:16). Reading and understanding Revelation can result in a sensitivity to the latter-day events as they unfold.

THE VISION GIVEN IN CODE

John wrote far less than he knew. Joseph Smith on one occasion stated that the Seer "saw the same things concerning the last days, which Enoch saw." [^7] The statement may allude to the vision of Enoch recorded in Moses 7:41-67, which says in part, "The Lord showed Enoch all things, even unto the end of the world; and he saw the day of the righteous, the hour of their redemption, and received a fulness of joy" (v. 67).

There was, however, a problem with recording that information. Both John and Nephi seemed to have been aware of it, but Nephi articulated it, stating that the Bible would go through the hands of the "great and abominable church, which is most abominable above all other churches; for behold, they have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away" (1 Ne. 13:26). This was done in a deliberate attempt to pervert the gospel and lead men astray (see 1 Ne. 13:14-28). The problem was to get the message through the editors of the great and abominable church.

John did not choose the form of the vision; God did. The form is now called apocalyptic. It provided John with the means of being able to write in a kind of divine code. And it seems to have worked well for him. Though there are more variant manuscript readings of the text of Revelation than those of any other New Testament book, these are not sufficient to cause uncertainty on the meaning of a single paragraph taken as a whole. In the four hundred verses of Revelation, there are about 1,650 variant readings (these do not include different spellings of the same word) in the five available uncials. For comparison the general epistles contain 432 verses and contain about 1,100 variants with considerably more manuscript sources and, therefore, the potential for an even greater number of discrepancies. [^8]

APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE

John's vision is often called "The Apocalypse." This title is derived from the ancient Greek word apokalupt, which means to make bare, disclose, or uncover. [^9] In a religious sense it carries the idea of disclosing divine secrets and making known holy mysteries. [^10] Ancient Greek-speaking Jews and early Christians used the word to signify a vision with its interpretation, as opposed to a revelation or prophecy (see Rom. 16:25; 2 Cor. 12:1; Gal. 1:12). Thus, "The Apocalypse" is an appropriate title for John's revelation.

So far as is known, his is the earliest work in which the word apokalupsis was actually used in the title. [^11] It is notthe only example of this type of literature, however; [^12] the Old Testament provides such examples as Isaiah 6, Ezekiel 1, 40-48, and Daniel 7-12; the Book of Mormon contributes 1 Nephi 8, 11-14. This mode of expression was popular among some Jewish writers from the second century before Christ into the first century after him. It held some appeal for Christian writers until the second century of our era.

Broadly speaking, this genre includes actual and purported visions of the heavenly world and deals chiefly with the coming millennium. The forms, symbols, methods of composition, and certain characteristic conceptions make apocalyptic a distinct class of religious literature. While John's writing is superior to and different from all other apocalyptic writers in important particulars, he does share basic ideas, imagery, language, and style. Indeed, his debt to those writers, especially those of the Old Testament, can be observed in nearly every chapter. This makes a knowledge of their writings most helpful in a study of the Revelation of John. [^13]

THE BASIC THEOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONOF APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE

A basic theological foundation forms the ground that gives apocalyptic literature a unique religious perspective. [^14] This is composed of three elements. First, it is nearly always eschatological. That is, it focuses on a period of time yet future when God will disrupt the flow of history to bring about the end of wickedness and institute a new order of righteousness and peace. It is God's breaking into the flow of history and altering it that distinguishes the apocalyptic panorama from its counterpart, prophecy. Prophecy, like apocalyptic, is predictive but concentrates on a future that arises out of the present such that historical flow is not interrupted. Apocalyptic looks to the end time when God will discontinue the course of history, turn it to his own purposes, and bring about a new beginning. Therefore, apocalyptic ignores, and in this way denies, man's capacity to create a peaceful future by overcoming wickedness. The united witness of apocalyptic literature is that the consummation will come from outside the flow of history, thereby disrupting it to bring about God's own ends. [^15]

Second, apocalyptic literature is dualistic. That is, apocalyptic reality consists of two irreducible elements or opposing principles: good and evil. This dualism is not metaphysical but works on the historical and the temporal plane. The present age is subject to the powers of evil. Satan and his hosts reign. But his world will collapse into a new timeless age of perfect righteousness under the authority of ultimate goodness, the Lord Jesus Christ.

Third, a rigid determinism marks the whole. Revelation testifies that all things move in concert toward a divinely predetermined end. Everything is inevitable; nothing is left to chance. The problem of human agency or free will within the context of God's omniscience never surfaces. But there is a tacit insistence that God's ultimate victory is worked out within the framework of human freedom. Yet apocalyptic writers in general, and John in particular, are very pessimistic about mankind's being able to combat evil and rise out of the present wicked world. Though individuals can and will repent, as John insists throughout his revelation, the world as a whole will not. Thus, God alone has the power to overcome the power of Satan and the wickedness that exist in it. Therefore, central to the apocalyptic framework is faith in God and in his power to control the future and turn all things to the blessing of the righteous. [^16]

Though John's Revelation shares these elements, it is unique. No other piece has the sweep, power, organization, and grandeur of this masterwork, to say nothing of authentic inspiration. In its light, the nonbiblical apocalypses found in the apocrypha and pseudepigrapha [^17] appear crude, confused, and strange. They seem the product of unbridled fancy, written to titillate and mystify rather than edify. In contrast, Revelation stands orderly, dignified, serious, and purposeful. Further, it bears an apostolic stamp. Unlike other apocalypses that use pseudonyms (the unknown author claiming his work to be that of some great person in the past, like Enoch or Moses), Revelation identifies its writer from the first and keeps him ever before the eye of the reader. [^18]

UNDERSTANDING THE BOOK OF REVELATION

A few basic keys are very helpful in grasping the message of the book. Elder McConkie gives seven basic guidelines in his article "Understanding the Book of Revelation." These are 1) "know that the book of Revelation deals with things that are to occur after New Testament times, particularly in the last days"; 2) "have an overall knowledge of the plan of salvation and of the nature of God's dealing with men on earth"; 3) "use various latter-day revelations which expand upon the same subjects in similar language"; 4) "study the sermons of Joseph Smith relative to the book of Revelation"; 5) "use the Inspired Version of the Bible"; 6) "reserve judgment on those things for which no interpretation is given"; and 7) "seek the Spirit." Othershave identified different keys to understanding the book. [^19]

The keys explored here are understanding: the importance of having the Spirit as a guide, the time period covered in Revelation, John's Hebrew perspective, the structure of the book, and the apocalyptic style and methods John used. This portion of the chapter is quite technical, but the reader will be well repaid for the time spent reading it.

A most important key to understanding John's work is the spirit of revelation and prophecy. This is centered in the living apostles and prophets and is found in modern scripture. As the Saints hearken to both the living prophet and the Standard Works, the Lord will reveal his will line upon line and precept upon precept. The result will be a sensitivity among the Saints to the signs of the times and the signs of the coming of the Son of Man (see D&C 98:12; 45:39; 68:11). A response to this sensitivity will prepare the Saints for the great day of the Lord. Without it—well, the parable of the ten virgins may yet prove fully prophetic: half of their number, having done much but not all, were caught unprepared (see Matt. 25:1-13).

In addition to assistance through the scriptures and the spirit of revelation, recognition that most of the book deals with events yet future is most helpful. Over the centuries a strong difference of opinion has marked the discussions on the time period covered by Revelation. Questions such as "Did John write only of things near his own day, or of things far into the future?" have been asked and answered again and again. [^20] The debate is settled for the Latter-day Saint. Joseph Smith stated, "The things which John saw had no allusion to the scenes of the days of Adam, Enoch, Abraham or Jesus, only so far as is plainly represented by John, and clearly set forth by him. John saw that only which was lying in futurity and which was shortly to come to pass." On another occasion he stated, "John had the curtains of heaven withdrawn, and by vision looked through the dark vista of future ages, and contemplated events that should transpire throughout every subsequent period of time, until the final winding up scene." [^21]

John's Hebrew perspective greatly assisted him in comprehending what he saw. Like many other books in the New Testament, but more thoroughly, Revelation is recursive; that is, it represents the present and future by alluding to earlier biblical prophecies, especially those found in Genesis, Exodus, Ezekiel, Daniel, and Zechariah. [^22] In this way John incorporated and confirmed the biblically defined design of the course and cause of history. Breaking with Greek and Roman models based on the theory of cyclism (the idea of eternal recurrence), biblical prophecy reveals a single and sharply defined plot: a beginning with creation under God's direct power; a catastrophe in the Fall; a solution in the incarnation, atonement, and resurrection of Christ; a climactic battle between the forces of good and evil; and a resolution in the Second Coming of the Lord of glory. All this transforms the tragedy of human history into a divine triumph. [^23]

The overall design of Revelation is that of a great arc moving resolutely back to its beginning—from paradise to paradise. This, however, is not the arc of a circle, but that of a spiral. The intent is not to return back to Eden from which man fell but to move to a higher Eden that exceeds the peace, joy, and glory found in the original. This is seen in the recurrence of the edenic motif in John's vision of the new heaven and the new earth. The new Eden has the tree of life and more; the waters of life flow from there as well (see Rev. 22:1-2). The Fall, then, becomes one of man's greatest fortunes. Through it man not only finds Christ but also merits—not merely inherits as at the first—the ultimate paradise through grace and works, the perfect unity between God and man. [^24]

John's perspective is revealed in the structure of the revelation itself. Not just because it is at the end of the New Testament, but because of its perspective, Revelation puts a finishing touch on the apostolic witness. Its companion writings focus on the Christian communities themselves; they never take notice of the broader world. The Apocalypse focuses on the Church in its relationship to the world and to the future. [^25] It does this in part through its structure. [^26]

Three major divisions make up the work: Chapters one through three contain the introduction and the message to the seven Asian churches; four through eleven contain a brief survey of earth history and then focus on the time just before the Second Coming of the Lord; and twelve through twenty-two begin at John's day and again move toward and through the Second Coming, then on through the Millennium to the end time, but from a different perspective. [^27] The latter two divisions are full of instructive interludes, flashbacks, and flash-forwards. Appendix A in this book contains a detailed outline of the contents of Revelation. A careful study of that material may prove very helpful in understanding the structure and flow of John's material.

Not only is an understanding of the structure of Revelation helpful in getting at its message, but also an understanding of the apocalyptic style and methods John used is profitable. Appendix B gives a detailed list and examination of these elements. However, a few items need to be noted here. Most of the New Testament was written primarily for those who have ears to hear; this is not so with Revelation. It was written more for those who have eyes to see. John received the revelation through impressions and symbols. To these he added some explanations to assist his readers.

The Book of Mormon allows the process to be examined. Lehi received a vision that he related to his children (see 1 Ne. 8). Symbols formed the basis of what he saw and experienced. These he transmitted without interpretation, apparently feeling quite comfortable with what it all meant. Nephi, however, was perplexed. After prayer, a vision opened to him. An angelic messenger interpreted the symbols, thus allowing Nephi to understand the realities behind the images.

John's experience matched that of Lehi. There is little doubt that he understood perfectly what the visions meant. But acting as a deliberate composer, somewhat like Nephi, he added explanatory material by way of elaboration and example. These expanded the symbols and served to allow the reader to better understand them.

The question naturally arises whether or not John actually saw the things he describes. Apparently this is indeed the case. Joseph Smith declared:

There is a grand distinction between the actual meaning of the prophets and the present translation [of the Bible]. The prophets do not declare that they saw a beast or beasts, but that they saw the image or figure of a beast. Daniel didnot see an actual bear or a lion, but the images or figures of those beasts. The translation should have been rendered "image" instead of "beast," in every instance where beasts are mentioned by the prophets. But John saw the actual beast in heaven, showing to John that beasts did actually exist there, and not to represent figures of things on the earth. When the prophets speak of seeing beasts in their visions, they mean that they saw the images, they being types to represent certain things. At the same time they received the interpretation as to what those images or types were designed to represent. [^28]

Note that John, in this instance, saw actual beasts. However, this is not the case throughout the book. The beasts to which the Prophet Joseph Smith referred are those mentioned in chapter four, not those in chapters twelve and thirteen. The JST specifically states that the beasts in the latter were only images representing earthly beings or conditions. Nonetheless, John actually saw the image he describes, but, as noted above, he also "received the interpretation as to what those images or types were designed to represent."

Again, using Lehi's vision as a model is instructive. The best and perhaps only study of the nature of apocalyptic visions is found in 1 Nephi 8 and 11. Lehi was taken into a dream world where apparently he actually saw a tree, an iron rod, a building without foundation, and so on. These things did not exist in reality but were types or images of historical events and peoples. In his report of the vision, Lehi felt no need to interpret, possibly because to him the interpretation was perfectly clear, having been conveyed during the presentation of the vision. However, his sons, including Nephi, found only perplexity at not being able to come to understanding on their own. Only after Nephi inquired of the Lord was he granted an interpretation that confirmed that his father both saw the images he reported and also understood their meaning.

Likewise, the Spirit left it up to John to translate what he comprehended into human language, but the vision did not come to him that way. The physical senses were superseded by those of the Spirit. Indeed, Spirit communicated directly with spirit through forms, images, and impressions. In this way nothing was lost in the interchange. Unfortunately John did not have that privilege when he wrote. He had to use the language of his readers to make plain his testimony. To make up the difference, John used earthly symbolisms through which a weak, yet somewhat effective, understanding of what he grasped might be conveyed.

A dozen times in the course of the revelation John was commanded to write. As he did so, full of the Spirit, he became a deliberate composer—a prophet, an artist, a poet—attempting to communicate the sweep of the grand vision presented to him. It was beyond the possibilities of adequate portrayal through the normal use of words. His understanding had compassed marvelous scenes surpassing the natural man's ability to grasp. Forces, both natural and supernatural, had collided before his eyes. All heaven and hell had been set in motion, not on some ethereal plane but on this very planet.

John chose to write in the very form of the vision. Therefore, the key ingredient for understanding was to remain the Spirit. In this way God accomplished two ends: comprehension of the marvelous insights could be gained by those spiritually in tune, and at the same time the vision was protected from those who would pervert it. In the process he revealed history to the end time and built into a unified picture the profound theme of God's full knowledge of history. [^29]

One cannot fully appreciate the message of the book until he can see past the symbols to the vast realities for which they stand. Fortunately, John is very helpful in the task. Though the Seer interpreted his symbols only in a few instances, [^30] he did not design them to contradict or confuse. Therefore, use of major symbols is uniform throughout Revelation. The trumpets, seals, bowls, beasts, and so forth all have a fixed and consistent meaning. [^31] The context allows most of the meanings to be ascertained. Further, modern revelation helpfully elucidates and provides the key to understanding others. But, it needs to be understood that some images remain obscure, and their full interpretation must wait for further light; these, however, constitute but a small portion of the book. [^32]

John uses his symbols as a means of presentation rather than as an attempt to analyze or prove a point. [^33] One of the values of symbolic representation is the multiplicity of meaning that can be generated. John's intention seems to have been to have the reader fix his attention not upon the image but upon the ideas that the image generated. Such is the nature of Near Eastern symbolic usage. God did not design the images for pictorial representation. They come through the eyes of a poet, not the brush of a painter. [^34] Further, John consistently records the full complement of his images to produce understanding about the prophetic matrix upon which he is focusing.

CONCLUSION

The strength of the Apocalypse lies in its ability to communicate its prophetic message by inviting the reader to imaginative participation. God designed the symbols to communicate ideas in a vivid and arresting manner while John developed the narrative flow of Revelation to produce emotions, reactions, and understanding that would have been much more difficult, if not impossible, through conventional language. [^35]

Before leaving this chapter, a word must be said about numbers as they appear in Revelation. Near Eastern literature, not just Hebrew, reveals a fondness for using numbers to communicate ideas. Why certain numbers became laden with symbolic meaning is unknown; in most cases this arose in prehistoric times and is now lost to us. Interestingly there is a general consistency across cultures to the meaning of certain numbers. That is not to say that numbers are never used as numbers. Certainly they mostly signify only literal quantity. However, in certain contexts they express ideas. This is the case in Revelation. One should interpret numbers just as the other symbolic representations. Fortunately, they are used consistently. For example, the numbers 4, 7, 12, and 1,000 denote aspects of wholeness, or completeness: the first to the world, the second to totality or perfection, the third to priesthood, and the last to superlative greatness. [^36]

One last note seems necessary. Not every detail described by John has deep significance. Some of the vision's particulars reflect what John saw and round out the image, giving vividness and power to his presentation. Flaming eyes, feet burning as brass, or various colored stones are all means by which John catches and holds the mind's eye. There, individual meaning must never be taken out of the context of which the images are a part.

The real difficulty in understanding the message of Revelation is twofold: the structure of the text, and its use of symbols. This book has been designed to assist the reader in overcoming both. A word of warning, however. For those whose mental stomachs are unaccustomed to a feast of wild imagery and rapid movement, such as Revelation sets, the banquet can quickly satiate. Often taking each course a little at a time, savoring, tasting, and digesting it are best. Prayer, study, and meditation are indispensable.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to shew unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant John: Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1955), 1: 27.
[^2] Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things that he saw. Erdman, Revelation, 35-36.
[^3] Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein: for the time is at hand. The words sign, mark, and token share themeaning of some discernible indication of what is not itself directly perceptible. But each term denotes a specific aspect of the indication. A sign is anyindication to be perceived by the senses or reason. A mark is somethingimpressed on something or inherently characteristic of a thing. A tokenserves as a proof of something intangible (Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, s.v. sign).
[^4] John to the seven churches which are in Asia: Grace be unto you, and peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to come; and from the seven Spirits which are before his throne; Charlton T. Lewis, A Latin Dictionary (Oxford: ClarendonPress, 1890), s.v. signaculum, signo, and signum.
[^5] And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, Mounce, Revelation, 65.
[^6] And hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. Originally, the worship service of the Christians followed closely the pattern of the synagogue. Scripture reading played a major role in the service. Initially, readings seem to have been only from the Old Testament. Later, the Gospels and Epistles were included. For the Jewish background, see Nehemiah 8:2; Exodus 24:7; Luke 4:16; Acts 13:15; 2 Corinthians 3:15. For the adoption of the practice by Christians, see Just. Apol. 1.67; Charles, Commentary, 1: 7.
[^7] Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen. James E. Talmage, The Great Apostasy (Salt Lake City:Deseret Book Co., 1958), 44-45.
[^8] I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. For discussion, see Mounce, Revelation, pp. 67-68.
[^9] I John, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle that is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ. Josephine Massyngberde Ford, tr., The Anchor Bible:Revelation (Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1975), 376. The Song of the Doves at Dodona speaks of "Zeus who was, Zeus who is, and Zeus who will be" (Paus. Asin. 10.12.10). At Sais theshrine of Minerva boasted, "I am all that hath been and is and shall be" (Plut. Mor., De Is. et Os 9; see Mounce,Revelation, 68; for a technical discussion of the title, see Charles, Commentary, 1:10).
[^10] I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and heard behind me a great voice, as of a trumpet, Caird, Revelation, 16.
[^11] Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and, What thou seest, write in a book, and send it unto the seven churches which are in Asia; unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardis, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea. Mounce, Revelation, 68.
[^12] And I turned to see the voice that spake with me. And being turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks; In Zechariah 4:1-10 the seven lamps represent the omniscience of the Lord. The source of the imagery may specifically have been Zechariah 4:2, 10, where the seven lamps "are the eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the whole earth."
[^13] And in the midst of the seven candlesticks one like unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle. Joseph Smith was permitted to see the future celestial kingdom where, along with past prophets, he saw his then living mother and father along with his dead brother Alvin (Smith, Teachings,107).
[^14] His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire; Mounce, Revelation, 70-71.
[^15] And his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the sound of many waters. The JST states that Christ "hath made us kings and priests unto God, his Father" (v. 6). The omission of the "and" between "God" and "Father" clarifies to whom men become kings and priests. However, some years later Joseph Smith reinterpreted the verse insisting that the "and" should be used (see Smith, Teachings, 370).
[^16] And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth went a sharp twoedged sword: and his countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength. McConkie, Commentary, 3:436. For a discussion of the phrase "kings and priests," see Charles, Commentary, 1:16.
[^17] And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and the last: Joseph. AJ. 3.290, 310.
[^18] I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of death. The idea that all will see him together comes out of Zechariah 12:10, 12; Job 19:24-27; see also Doctrine and Covenants 45:51-52.
[^19] Write the things which thou hast seen, and the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter; Hort, Apocalypse, 14.
[^20] The mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches: and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches. TDNT, s.v. biblion.
[^21] See, e.g., Ex. 28:4; 29:5, Septuagint, where it is connected with the attire of the high priest. The girdle of the high priest was made of fine-twined linen and embroidered with needlework (see Ex. 39:29), while the clasp or girdle that gathered together the long robe of the Lord was of gold. Josephus, however, notes that during his time the high priest's girdle was interwoven with gold (AJ 3.7.2).The golden clasp or porp was worn by the king and his associates (1Macc. 10:89; 11:58) and so served as the mark of an important office (for discussion, see Charles, Commentary, 1: 28; Mounce, Revelation,77-78).
[^22] McConkie, Commentary, 3:443.
[^23] McConkie, Commentary, 3:442.
[^24] TDNT, s.v. machaira and rhomphaia.
[^25] In the Old Testament, Hades was the world of departed spirits. By John's day the meaning of the term was in transition and came to stand in contrast to paradise, the realm of the blessed. Hades lies within the earth—one goes down into it (see Matt. 11:23; Luke 10:15; cf. Rev. 10:7). John calls it the phulak, or "keep," meaning anunderground prison (cf. Rev. 20:2-3 with 20:7). Souls are held there only temporarily. Thus, it stands in contrast to Gehenna (Greek geenna), the placeof eternal torment of the devil and his angels (see Rev. 20:10, 14; see TDNT, s.v. hads and geenna).
[^26] Charles, Commentary, 1:32.
[^27] W. M. Ramsay, Letters to the Seven Churches (Grand Rapids: Baker Book, 1963), 183-92.
[^28] For argument, see Charles, Commentary,1:24-25; Caird, Revelation, 15.
[^29] For argument, see Fiorenza, Revelation, 144.
[^30] Bock, Apocalypse, 33.
[^31] Fiorenza, Revelation, 116.
[^32] 32. See for example Revelation 8:1; 9:14-15; 10:3-4; 12:15-16; 13:3, 18.
[^33] 33. Austin Farrer, A Rebirth of Images: The Making of St. John's Apocalypse (Boston: Beacon, 1963), 19.
[^34] 34. Erdman, Revelation, 14.
[^35] 35. Fiorenza, Revelation, 22.
[^36] 36. Homer Hailey, Revelation, An Introduction and Commentary (Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1979), 41; Erdman, Revelation,15. The analytical chapters draw out the meaning of the numbers in their various contexts.
