Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 3

Things Which Must Shortly Come to Pass

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 1-3)

THE OPENING OF THE VISION (1:1-2)

The first chapter of Revelation, indeed the first sentence,introduces the theme of the entire vision. It is the revelation ofJesus Christ. But the genitive form of the Greek verb can be taken two ways: either as the revelation the Lord gives, or as the revelation that unveils him. The first interpretation emphasizes the purpose of the vision (to disclose the order of future events), the second emphasizes the importance, the work, and the role of the Savior. Both views are valid and are not mutually exclusive. But the direction of the vision as a whole emphasizes the preeminence of the second. That is, the revelation proclaims the mission, ministry, and importance of the Lord and Savior.

The source of the revelation was God, who revealed Jesus Christ. This is in keeping with the role of the Father who has never appeared to fallen man, except to bear record of the Son. [^1] Therefore the central focus of the vision, and that to which the Father testifies through it, is the important work of the Son. The recipient was John, as the JST makes clear (see Rev 1:1), whose duty was to act as witness of the things that were given to him. We see from verse one that God intended the vision to circulate. He wanted it read and listened to. He wanted it understood. He did not give it to be a mystery, a puzzle, or an enigma that his people could not solve. He ordered John to disclose truth that otherwise would have remained hidden. God's purpose was to enlighten and lift the spirits of those who were faithful to him. John's responsibility was to record and to circulate the revelation. [^2]

So important was the vision that an angel "signified it" (v. 1, KJV). The term signify is a translation of the Greeksmain and means not only to foretell, but also to give a sign or identifying token. [^3] The English term comes from the Latin signum, which carries much of the same idea, that is, representing, indicating, or validating something by a sign, mark, or token. [^4] Apparently the angel gave John a sign or a token that authenticated the vision. [^5] John then witnessed this confirmation for his readers.

Such stress on the validation of the vision emphasizes its importance in the sight of both God and of John. Therefore, it had to be communicated precisely. John's responsibility was to write neither less nor more than he received. He stressed that he bore "record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things that he saw" (v. 2, KJV). In this way he reassured his readers that he kept the vision pure.

BLESSED ARE THEY WHO UNDERSTAND (v. 3)

Verse three invokes the first of seven beatitudes found in the revelation. (The others are found at 14:13; 16:15; 19:9; 20:6; 22:7, 14.) The blessing was pronounced both upon "he who reads" and "they who hear" (AT), provided that they respond to the admonition written therein. The singular "he who reads" and the plural "they who hear" reflect a practice of worship in the early Church. Patterned after the service of the synagogue, one person read a scripture or message while the congregation listened. [^6] John declared a blessing upon those who were obedient to his writings whether they read his words or heard others read them.

The JST adds an insight to verse three. It states, "Blessed are they who read, and they who hear and understand the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein." Joseph Smith's modifications point to conditions in which many would be able to read and hear the words of the prophecy. He seems to have the present in mind. Upon any one who receives it, regardless of the time frame, rests the responsibility not only to read, but also to understand and to do. One must pay the price to realize the blessing.

THE ALMIGHTY (vv. 4-8)

In verse four, John identifies those who were to receive hisletter. They are seven of the churches in the Roman province of Asia. Elder James E. Talmage has suggested that these seven were the last bastions of faith, the great apostasy having eaten up all the other areas. John was writing a letter of comfort and warning to the surviving remnant of the true Church. [^7]

However, implications from John's symbolic use of numbers should not be overlooked. John possibly uses seven to denote that the message is universal for all branches of the church, even those outside of Asia, and those beyond John's day. After all, equally important were the churches at Troas (see Acts 20:5ff), Colosse (see Col. 1:2), and Hierapolis (see Col. 4:13). [^8] If this is the case, then the seven churches become symbolic of the church of God anytime, anywhere, and the message applicable wherever similar conditions are faced.

With the words, "Now this is the testimony of John to the seven servants who are over the seven churches in Asia" (v. 4), the JST makes it clear that the letter contains the testimony of John, the last testimony, to be directed to the local leaders. But that testimony was not for the leaders alone. John directed that it be shared with the congregations as well, and he invokes a blessing of grace and peace upon these faithful servants from a three-fold source.

The first "from he who is and who was and who is to come" (v. 4, AT) is a partial quote of the name of God given to Moses in Exodus 3:14-15 as translated in the Septuagint (cf. Jer. 1:6; 14:13; 32:17, where the names of God would also translate "He who is"). The Greek phrase begins with apo, "from," which takes the genitive case but here is followed by three nominative phrases joined by the connective kai, "and." By keeping the form in the nominative, John underscores the idea that God is always the subject: he holds the initiative; things happen because he orders all thing according to his will. Men do not force his hand but work, even in their rebellion, to his purposes (see Rom. 9:15-18; John 10:18; Ezek. 38:4, 14-22). John seems to have intended the phrase to be as one word, an undeclinable noun, a paraphrase of the tetragrammaton, Y-H-W-H, "He who is." [^9] This rephrase of the divine name reminds John's reader that God is eternally existent, without beginning of days or end of years.

Through the use of the title, John brings Jehovah into the arena of history. Jehovah stands as the Lord of the past, the present, and the future. The temporal order holds significance because the present is when he works out his purposes. Yet his eternal present embraces the past and the future. [^10] Such arendering would be especially appropriate at this moment when the Church approached its final hours. The Saints could find hope in the face of a disheartening future on the grounds that God, by virtue of his eternal existence, exercises power and fulfills his purposes through the course of history. [^11]

The second source of blessing to the churches is the seven spirits who stand before the throne of God. We run into these spirits again in chapters 4 and 5, still standing before the throne of God. In Revelation 4:5, these spirits are identified as fiery lamps, and 5:6 calls them the eyes of the Lamb "sent forth to all the world" (AT). [^12] JST 1:4 makes it clear that these spirits are symbolic of the leaders of the various branches and that an angel was sent to testify to them of the things of God. The image of the seven servants could be a foreshadowing of both their future destiny as well as their present responsibility. [^13] As they labor, they act as the eyes of God overseeing the affairs of the Church. In doing so, their calling and election are made sure, and thus they gain eternal life. It is little wonder, then, that these devout servants were a source of blessing to the struggling branches.

The final source of blessing is again from the Lord, but this blessing grows not out of what he is (the God of all time), but out of what he did. John identifies the Savior as "the prince of the kings of the earth," "the faithful witness," and "the first born from the dead" (v. 5, AT). The latter term also appears in Colossians 1:18, when Paul uses the title to declare Christ sovereign over the Church by virtue of his resurrection from the dead. The ideas conveyed by these titles are those of priority and sovereignty, with the latter dominating. John's reference echoes Psalm 89:27, KJV, which states, "I will make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the earth."

The term witness comes from the Greek martus. Itcame to mean in Christian circles one who bore testimony through the giving up of his life. The Savior was the epitome of the faithful witness, or martyr, in this sense. However, death could not hold him, and so he is also the first born from the dead. Because he now exercises sovereign control, he can bestow the powers both of life and of kingship on those who follow him. These will reign with him a thousand years (see Rev. 20:4-6). [^14] He can do this because, through his love, he shed his blood so that all can be cleansed from sin.

The JST states, "I, John, the faithful witness, bear record of the things which were delivered me of the angel, and from Jesus Christ" (1:5). This passage emphasizes three points. First, the revelation had dual attestation (the angel and the Lord), and thus fulfilled the law of witnesses (see Deut. 17:6; Matt. 18:16). Second, angelic and divine administration were coupled in such a way that the Savior himself was somehow involved in the process of the revelation. It was not merely about him but through him. And third, John was true to the charge given him to declare the message accurately.

Verse six focuses on the end result of the resurrection and supremacy of the Lord: he is able to make his followers kings and priests unto God. [^15] The seven servants mentioned twice in Revelation 1:4,JST apparently were to achieve this rank and blessing through their faithfulness. The idea of becoming priests and kings unto God was earlier expressed in Exodus 29:6 and Isaiah 61:5-6. It is repeated in 1 Peter 2:9. The Greek of the Septuagint and of 1 Peter would translate "a kingdom of priests," the idea being that the Savior has set up his kingdom composed of those who hold his priesthood. This kingdom was meant to endure forever, and those who are members are eternal heirs of glory. The kingship John speaks of is an everlasting possession based on the power and authority anchored in the priesthood. According to Bruce R. McConkie, the kings and priests were

holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood [who] have powerto press forward in righteousness, living by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God, magnifying their callings, going from grace to grace, until through the fulness of the ordinances of the temple they receive the fulness of the priesthood and are ordained kings and priests. Those so attaining shall have exaltation and be kings, priests, rulers, and lords in their respective spheres in the eternal kingdoms of the great King who is God our Father. [^16]

That the same program is still going on is evident fromthe Lord's admonition in Doctrine and Covenants 78:15: "That you may come up unto the crown prepared for you, and be made rulers over many kingdoms, saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Zion, who hath established the foundations of Adam-ondi-Ahman."

Knowing that the Lord possesses such power, we should not be surprised that John closed this portion of his epistle with the doxology, "to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen" (v. 6, KJV). The JST adds John's exclamation, "he cometh in the clouds with ten thousands of his saints in the kingdom" (v. 7). The cloud (Greek nephel) was a sign of the presenceof God (see Matt. 17:5; Mark 9:7; Luke 9:34-35) and the vehicle of the Second Coming (see Dan. 7:13; Matt. 24:30; 26:64; Mark 13:26; D&C 133:3, 20). [^17] Many will inherit his kingdom and return to reign with him in glory. When he does return, all will see him together and know, some to their shame, not only who he is, but what he did for those who believed. [^18] Nothing can stop him from bestowing his favor upon the faithful. As he says, "I am . . . the beginning and the ending, . . . the Almighty" (v. 8, KJV).

The Lord himself proclaimed these titles, reminding the reader that even though the world may appear godforsaken, the Lord is in control of all things. The last title, "the Almighty," is most significant. The Greek pantokratr, "almighty,"does not designate one who can do anything, but rather one who holds together and regulates all things. [^19] Therefore, this title alone epitomizes the central message of Revelation. That message is further underscored in modern scripture, which declares that the Savior "ascended up on high, as also he descended below all things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be in all and through all things, the light of truth" (D&C 88:6). It is this "light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed" (v. 13). Thus, the Lord overmasters the sun, the moon, and even the stars with all the world systems that surround them. He is indeed God, the Almighty.

THE VISION OF THE SON OF MAN (vv. 9-18)

This section of the revelation contains John's explanation ofhow the revelation came. It was Sunday, the Lord's day, and John was "in the Spirit" (v. 10, KJV). He heard a voice that he describes as a trumpet. One must not picture a musical instrument, but an instrument used to give orders in battle, or to announce a message from a king. Thus, the voice was that of a herald summoning John, as it were, to battle, or preparing him for a notice from the King. The voice commanded him to write upon a scroll (translated "book") what he was about to see and hear, and to send it to the seven churches. This prophecy, composed of several separate visions, constitutes the book of Revelation.

Three scrolls are identified in the course of the vision: the one John was to produce (chapter one), the one opened by the Lamb of God (chapter five), and the one delivered to John by an angel (chapter ten). John's consistent use of the scroll image specifies its meaning: each contains the divine secrets of God so far as a portion of the earth's destiny is concerned. Therefore, the scroll symbolizes the whole of the divine plan. [^20] John's writings contain the guidance of God to his churches in preparing for the coming of the Son of Man.

As John turned, he saw a figure resplendent in glory standing in the midst of seven lamp stands. The latter image recalls the menorah, the seven-branched lamp stand of the temple (see Ex. 25:31-37; Zech. 4:2). Here, however, each lamp has its own base. Even so, the figure of the temple cannot be far off, for Solomon placed ten separate lamp stands in the Holy of Holies during the temple dedication (see 1 Kgs. 7:49). Tying the vision even closer to the temple was the figure's dress. The words John used to describe the robe are the same as those in the Septuagint for the costume of the high priest (see Ex. 28:4; 29:5; Dan. 10:5). This is combined with the symbol of royal office: the golden girdle or clasp worn just under the armpits. [^21] Thus, John seems to present the Savior as both high priest and king, offices associated with the temple and the fullness of priesthood (see D&C 124:28).

John describes the glorious figure as "like unto a Son of man" (v. 13, KJV). The phrase "son of man" is found in all the Standard Works usually referring to the Savior, though the Old Testament (see Num. 23:19; Ps. 8:4; Isa. 51:12) uses it primarily to distinguish mortals from Gods, especially when the context is one of judgment. The term emphasizes the anthropomorphic nature of deity. But Moses 6:57 suggests that John may have had in mind a higher meaning. There the name is capitalized "Son of Man," showing that it is a proper name or title. According that passage, "in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness" is the name of God, "and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge." Therefore, the name designates he who is the Son of the Man of Holiness. [^22]

The phrase in Revelation implies that John did not actually see the Son of Man but rather one like him. This is not the case. There are a number of instances in the scriptures where the phrase "like unto the Son of man" has definite reference tothe Lord himself, in Abraham 3:27, for example, where there is no doubt that the Lord is being referred to, and in Revelation 14:14. That the divine being is not an angel is further borne out by the fact that he allows John to worship him whereas the angel in Revelation 22:8 rebukes John's attempt to worship him even though the angel is speaking through the divine investiture of authority. Therefore, the personage John saw was the Lord himself in glory. Later in the vision angels are the ones who actually speak to John. Therefore, the context must be used to determine whether the Lord is administering directly or through one of his divine servants.

The resplendent figure stood with the lamp stands—which symbolized the churches—surrounding him (see v. 20). The image is appropriate. Lamp stands do not create the light but make it available to others. The Church is to carry the light of Christ to the world. The Savior stated, "I am the law, and the light. Look unto me, and endure to the end, and ye shall live" (3 Ne. 15:9). He further admonished, "Hold up your light that it may shine unto the world. Behold I am the light which ye shall hold up" (3 Ne. 18:24; cf. Matt. 5:14-16). [^23]

However, the Church is to do more than merely reflect the light. The Lord stated unequivocally, "I give unto you to be the light of this people. . . . Therefore let your light so shine before this people, that they may see your good works and glorify your Father who is in heaven" (3 Ne. 12:14, 16). Further, the Lord is ever with his Church; he stands among his Saints as their king and high priest, knowing every facet of their lives and struggles, giving counsel through their leaders and comfort to all. The leaders are, as it were, in his right hand where he can sustain, uphold, and direct them. Thus, the Church can find security in following them.

Through symbolic representation, John describes the power, glory, and purity of the Lord: "His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as flaming fire" (v. 14, AT). The description rings with power. But the image becomes somewhat hard to picture when the text states, "And out of his mouth went a sharp twoedged sword" (v. 16, KJV). Two Greek words are translated "sword" in the KJV. These are machaira and rhomphaia. Though both terms wereused for swords in general, the term machaira could also describe a knife such as a butcher or surgeon uses. The rhomphaia, the term John chose to use, designated particularly a Thracian broadsword, but the word also denotes a lance or spear with a broad double-edged head. [^24]

The symbolism goes back to Isaiah 11:4—"he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth" (the Septuagint replaces "rod" with "word")—and 49:2—"he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword." Either sword is an excellent symbol for the executive and judicial powers of God: that which severs, cuts, opens, and reveals. But what John seems to portray in particular is the word of God which is "quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of the joints and marrow, soul and spirit; and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart" (D&C 33:1).

Before giving his final commission to John, the Lord stated, "[I] have the keys of hell and of death" (v. 18, KJV). This statement surprises many. They believe wrongly, that Lucifer holds those keys. Keys give access or control; they symbolize authority. In New Testament times, Hell (Greek hads) was the world of spirits where the wicked await the day of judgment in torment. [^25] God rules both paradise and spirit prison. His justice places the wicked in torment that they might be purged in the fire and prepared for glory.

Through his atonement the Savior gained power over hell and death. In exercising the keys of the resurrection, the Lord demonstrated his complete authority. John here echoes Peter, who stated that Christ taught the spirits in prison. Thus, neither death nor hell can resist the power of the risen Lord. The Savior does more than rescue the faithful from death and hell. He entered death's domain as a conquering hero and preached his gospel, bringing life to those who heeded. [^26] Some day, at the Lord's command, hell will empty itself so that all may stand to be judged.

JOHN'S FINAL COMMISSION (vv. 19-20)

Chapter one closes with a reiteration of the commandment for John to write and identifies the immediate audience for what he was to write. However, here it expands to give the outline of the remainder of the book. He must write "the things which thou hast seen, and the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter" (v. 19, KJV). What he has seen is the vision of the Son of Man that he recorded in the preceding verses. The "things which are" constitutes his message to the seven churches (chapters 2-3). What "will come hereafter" comprises most of the rest of the book.

THE MESSAGES TO THE SEVEN CHURCHES(chaps. 2-3)

Rather than move through specific section-by-section analyses of these two chapters, I will here treat the chapters through a more general analysis, identifying the themes and messages common to all sections. The last verse of the previous chapter identified the audience, symbolized by golden candlesticks, as the seven churches in Asia, that is, Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea (see 1:11). The Lord then gives John a particular but at the same time universal message to each church.

Scholars have speculated that the reason the Lord chose these seven churches as recipients of his letter was because they were postal centers all linked by a common road that formed a sort of inner circle around the province, binding together the most populous, wealthy, and influential areas. Once delivered to these churches, the Revelation could easily spread to all the other branches. [^27] As attractive as this hypothesis is, it doesn't work. There were other postal cities (Troas, Adramyttium, and Colossae for examples) that lay on this same route. But the Lord selected only seven, probably, as noted in the preceding chapter, because of the symbolic meaning of the number. The whole church seems to be meant, but the specific churches mentioned exemplified the problems faced by all. The instruction to each church was universal for it tells "what the Spirit is saying to the churches" (AT)—all the churches. Note that the phrase is repeated in Revelation 2:7, 11, 17, 29; 3:6, 13, 22. [^28]

The purpose of the letter was to sound a warning to the Church as a whole. Apostasy was running full steam, fired by false prophets and apostles. Entire branches were ignorantly or willfully falling into it. The message to the churches sounded a clear warning that God would abandon the churches unless they returned to him. Each congregation was responsible to stop the spread of heresy, to hold on to the truth, and to thereby gain salvation.

John, the Seer, followed a general format in his admonition to each church. There is a complimentary opening introduced by the phrase "I know thy works," followed by a rebuke beginning with "I have something against thee," and ending with a promise "to him that overcometh" (KJV). The exceptions to this format are Smyrna (2:8-11) and Philadelphia (3:7-13), which receive no condemnation, and Sardis (3:1-6) and Laodicea (3:14-22), which receive no compliments.

From the content of the letters, the Church's spiritual life foundered in six areas. Two were external: a willingness to compromise with paganism and a denial of Christianity due to Jewish harassment. Four were internal: the acceptance of unauthorized leaders, approval of false doctrine promulgated by pseudoprophets, halfheartedness and indifference, and a loss of love for the Church and her master. Succumbing to any one of these would have sounded the death knell for the Church. And in fact, in some areas the white flag of surrender to the world's ways already flew.

Of the problems listed, the one of greatest concern in the book of Revelation was authority, that is, the question of who had the right to preside and to define the doctrine of the Church. The problem was not new. Peter cautioned the Church that "there were false prophets also among the [Old Testament] people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who will secretly bring in opinions of destruction, even denying the Master that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall follow their licentiousness; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be blasphemed" (2 Pet. 2:1-2, AT). Paul warned the Saints, "Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears" (Acts 20:30-31, KJV).

By the time John wrote his epistles, these prophecies were reality. In sorrow because the time had come, he wrote, "Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time. They went out from us, but they were not of us" (1 Jn. 2:18-19, KJV). Note the root of the problem: men and women deliberately perverting the way of God, willing to deny Christ even though they knew differently. These were not ignorant deceivers, but deliberate workers of darkness.

Peter says that they "walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise constituted authority. Self-satisfied darers, they fear not to blaspheme dignities" (2 Pet. 2:10, AT). Well did Paul brand at least some among them as "that man of sin . . . the son of perdition" (2 Thes. 2:3, KJV), men and women "who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost," who "tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come." These apostates could not be renewed "again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame" (Heb. 6:4-6, KJV). Spurning authority, despising truth, loving error and the glory of men, these hell-inspired antichrists, like spiders, carefully spun their web of half truths, counterfeit ordinances, and false doctrines. Luring and trapping a people no longer willing to follow living prophets and becoming ever more devoid of the Spirit, these spinners of heresy were able to suck out the juice of their spiritual lives.

Revelation gives names to some of the doctrines these false prophets and apostles of darkness taught. There was the doctrine of Balaam and the associated doctrines of the Nicolaitans (see Rev. 2:6, 14). These were coupled with those of a woman the Seer branded as Jezebel, who led some into "the depths of Satan" (2:24, KJV). The exact aspect of these doctrines is unknown, but we can make some general observations. For instance, we know something of Balaam. This Old Testament prophet-turned-apostate introduced into Israel the worship of Baal with its orgiastic perversions (see Num. 22:1-25:9; 31:16). The use of his name suggests that false prophecy was an issue.

The Nicolaitans may have been a pseudoprophetic group since Nicolas is mentioned with the seven presbyters of whom at least four were considered prophets (see Acts 6:5). [^29] Doctrine and Covenants 117:11 warns Newel K. Whitney to "be ashamed of the Nicolaitane band and of all their secret abominations." The language is strong, suggesting that whatever the heresy was, the Lord considered it abhorrent.

Jezebel's activities earned her the sarcastic epithet "woman . . . who calls herself a prophetess" (2:20, AT). We know that Christian women held prophetic power (see Acts 21:8-9). But at Thyatira the gift had been turned to fight against the truth. Based on the conditions of the day, a gentile area would not have had any problem accepting and promoting a prophetess. At that time "sibyls," women easily excited into an ecstasy, became mediums and spoke as oracles. A number of these found their way into the Church. Out of their responses came a collection of maxims known in apocryphal literature as the Sibylline Books. [^30]

Based on Numbers 25:1-2 and 31:16, where the doctrine that Balaam preached is theologically defined, apparently the Nicolaitans and the self-styled prophetess were preaching a form of idolatry that included spiritual fornication. The phrase "to eat meat offered to idols" (v. 20, AT), associated with both the Nicolaitans and Jezebel, referred not only to food consecrated to an idol, but also to participation in pagan feasts with itsrites. Therefore, it would seem that Jezebel and the Nicolaitans were part of the same heretical group working within the cloisters of the Church to pull people to their salacious ways. Their doctrine probably appealed to spiritual prostitution rather than physical, but the imagery depicting extreme sensuality gives an accurate feel for their allure. The false apostles who appeared at Ephesus may have been migrant missionaries perhaps belonging to the same group. [^31]

From their teachings then, it would appear that the Nicolaitans were spiritual libertines working within the Church in Asia Minor. They set up a prophetic tradition standing opposite that of John and those associated with him. They refused to recognize his authority, or that of authorized representatives of the Lord. They presented a real threat to the true church. Many of its members were persuaded by the new seduction, not only leaving the truth, but also fostering the evil. Therefore, the Lord warned them through John, "Repent, and do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his place" (2:5, KJV).

John gives no hint that the churches could or would survive this crisis. Though he offers promises of salvation, they are not to the body of the Church but to individuals. Indeed, for the most faithful among the branches, the church at Smyrna, the Lord holds no promise of continuance: "Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer: behold, the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried; . . . be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life" (2:10, KJV).

The promises to the faithful individual symbolize exaltation and come loaded with allusions to the temple. The promise is that they shall eat of the tree of life in paradise and of the hidden manna (see 2:7, 17), both considered to be the food of angels, but the former with particular significance. In it was the seed of "eternal lives" (D&C 132:24) and immunity to death (see D&C 132:19-22; Gen. 3:12-24). Each will receive "a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it" (Rev. 2:17, KJV). According to Doctrine and Covenants 130:10-11, this stone acts as "a Urim and Thummim to each individual who receives one, whereby things pertaining to a higher order of kingdoms will be made known; and a white stone is given to each of those who come into the celestial kingdom, whereon is a new name written. . . . The new name is the key word." Further, the Savior promises, "He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment," and him "will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is the new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name" (Rev. 3:5, 12, KJV).

CONCLUSION

John's commission was to publish the vision of God to the churches when apostasy and persecution were about to destroy what remained of the Church established by the Master. While John languished on Patmos, counterfeit authorities made their way through the ranks of the Church.

The pattern seems to follow that portrayed in the Book of Mormon when "the people did harden their hearts, for they were led by many priests and false prophets to build up many churches, and to do all manner of iniquity" (4 Ne. 1:34). Further, "they did not dwindle in unbelief, but they did wilfully rebel against the gospel of Christ" (v. 38), and "they did continue to build up churches unto themselves, and adorn them with all manner of precious things" (v. 41). Soon "there were many churches in the land; yea, there were many churches which professed to know the Christ, and yet they did deny the more parts of his gospel, insomuch that they did receive all manner of wickedness, and did administer that which was sacred unto him to whom it had been forbidden because of unworthiness. And this church did multiply exceedingly because of iniquity, and because of the power of Satan who did get hold upon their hearts" (vv. 27-28).

With all this, a power struggle developed between the false leaders and those leaders, known as the three Nephites, whom the Lord appointed. Death could not touch them and, therefore, the false churches had to move against them in other ways (vv. 30-33). Eventually, though the wicked could neither destroy the three nor weaken their testimony, the apostate leaders were finally able to silence them, probably through banishment. The picture in Revelation is about the same. False leaders continuously gaining authority and strength were finally able to silence John's influence among the Church members. But they did not silence his testimony. His revelation endured in spite of their machinations.

To the Saints living in the Roman province of Asia, John bequeathed, through the book of Revelation, a strong testimony that God lived and that Jesus was the Messiah. His message was a light that pierced the darkness of the gathering apostasy and told of the eventual triumph of God. It reassured the Saints that the present distress was not the end of the war but of a single battle. Though God seemed vanquished, he was not, and would turn seeming defeat into glorious victory. The Revelation showed how. Thus, it became a beacon of hope to the faithful until, one by one, they passed away. With their passing the light of truth dimmed and then went out.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] After this I looked, and, behold, a door was opened in heaven: and the first voice which I heard was as it were of a trumpet talking with me; which said, Come up hither, and I will shew thee things which must be hereafter. Charles, Commentary, 1:102.
[^2] And immediately I was in the spirit: and, behold, a throne was set in heaven, and one sat on the throne. It or its equivalent is fairly standard fare in apocalyptic literature for this purpose (see, e.g., Dan. 7:6-7; 1 Enoch 86:2; Test. Jos. 19:3; 4 Ezra 11:22, 33; 13:5, 8. In a shortened form, see Ezek. 1:4; 2:9; 8:2, 7, 10; 10:1; Zech. 1:8; 6:1; 1 Enoch 14:14-15; 2 Bar. 36:1-2, 7,37:1). In each of the above, the phrase introduces an ecstatic condition in which a vision or a new aspect was opened.
[^3] And he that sat was to look upon like a jasper and a sardine stone: and there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald. In the Testament of Levi 2:6, the heavens open to admit that prophet. Note the contrast with John's open door, for all its size, to time depicted in Revelation 19:11 when the whole of heaven is opened so that its legions can march forth in the train of the Son of God.
[^4] And round about the throne were four and twenty seats: and upon the seats I saw four and twenty elders sitting, clothed in white raiment; and they had on their heads crowns of gold. Smith, Teachings, 220.
[^5] And out of the throne proceeded lightnings and thunderings and voices: and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the seven Spirits of God. See Mounce, Revelation, 134.
[^6] And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal: and in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, were four beasts full of eyes before and behind. And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal: and in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, were four beasts full of eyes before and behind. See 1 Enoch 14:18-19; Testament of Levi 5:1; 2 Enoch 22:2. For discussion, see Ford, Revelation, 70-71.
[^7] And the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast like a calf, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying eagle. See Charles, Commentary, 1:114-15; Bock,Apocalypse, 41. Walter Scott, Exposition of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, 4th ed.(Grand Rapids: Kregel Publications, n.d.), 121, notes that these stones appeared on the High Priests breast plate, the sardis being first, and the jasper last (see Ex. 28:17-20).
[^8] And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him; and they were full of eyes within: and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. Caird, Revelation, 63.
[^9] And when those beasts give glory and honour and thanks to him that sat on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever, 2 Baruch 21:6 notes that there are "holy beings . . . [of] flame and fire, who stand around your throne." Thus, the idea of God being surrounded by beings glorious in their own right was current in John's day.
[^10] The four and twenty elders fall down before him that sat on the throne, and worship him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying, The term was used in Greek-speaking areas to designate a civic official such as a senator. Among the Jews the term applied to the chief officer of a synagogue and to a member of the Sanhedrin. Among the Christians, the term seems to have designated any Church officer. The Septuagint uses the term in this way in Isaiah 24:23; 63:9.
[^11] Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. Joseph Smith had the same experience on 21 January 1836. In vision he saw his mother and father—who were still living—in the celestial kingdom (Teachings, 107).
[^12] Charles, Commentary, 1: 132-33; Scott,Exposition, 122.
[^13] Joseph., AJ. 7.365-67; Ford, Revelation,72-73.
[^14] Hailey, Revelation, 168.
[^15] Mounce, Revelation, 135-36. In apocalyptic literature theidea of royal priestly authority as the reward for righteousness is very common (see, e.g., Asc. 7:22; 8:26; 9:10-13, 18, 24, 25; 11:40).
[^16] Charles, Commentary, 1:132-33.
[^17] Bock, Apocalypse, 41-42.
[^18] Scott, Exposition, 124-25.
[^19] In 1 Enoch 71:7 and 39:12, the cherubim praise God day and night, saying "Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord of the Spirits."
[^20] Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 7 vols. (Salt LakeCity: Deseret Book, 1973), 5:324; Ehat, Words, 171.
[^21] Smith, History, 3:325; see also Ehat, Words,189.
[^22] In 2 Enoch 19:6; 21:1 the seraphim and cherubim have six wings and many eyes and are found standing before God's throne singing: "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of Sabaoth: heavens and earth are full of Thy glory." John's description, therefore, appears to follow Jewish apocalyptic motifs (Charles, Commentary, 1:120-21).
[^23] See 1 Enoch 71:7, where they are described as "the sleepless ones who guard the throne of [God's] glory."
[^24] For a discussion of this law, see Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973), 223-59.
[^25] In the Old Testament, Hades was the world of departed spirits. By John's day the meaning of the term was in transition and came to stand in contrast to paradise, the realm of the blessed. Hades lies within the earth—one goes down into it (see Matt. 11:23; Luke 10:15; cf. Rev. 10:7). John calls it the phulak, or "keep," meaning anunderground prison (cf. Rev. 20:2-3 with 20:7). Souls are held there only temporarily. Thus, it stands in contrast to Gehenna (Greek geenna), the placeof eternal torment of the devil and his angels (see Rev. 20:10, 14; see TDNT, s.v. hads and geenna).
[^26] Charles, Commentary, 1:32.
[^27] W. M. Ramsay, Letters to the Seven Churches (Grand Rapids: Baker Book, 1963), 183-92.
[^28] For argument, see Charles, Commentary,1:24-25; Caird, Revelation, 15.
[^29] For argument, see Fiorenza, Revelation, 144.
[^30] Bock, Apocalypse, 33.
[^31] Fiorenza, Revelation, 116.
