Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 4

The Throne in Heaven

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 4)

THE VISION OF HEAVEN

Chapter four presents a change of scene and subject. Up to this point only the earth has been in view; now John's vision expands to encompass heaven. In an instant, John leaves behind him the troubles, the apostasies, the dissensions, and the apprehensions of the earthly church and passes into an atmosphere of perfect tranquility and assurance. Here not even an echo of earthly turmoil disharmonizes the songs of adoration and trust of the heavenly hosts. Everywhere there prevails an infinite harmony of righteousness and power. The might of God thunders, and flashes, and radiates, permeating all heaven with his glory while angelic choirs proclaim the holiness of him whose sovereignty the earth will follow even in its rebellion. [^1]

THINGS WHICH MUST COME HEREAFTER (v. 1)

The phrase "And after these things I looked and behold" (AT) is used throughout the revelation to introduce a new vision. [^2] A voice, carrying the commanding sound of a battle trump, summons John to leave the scene of earthly unrest and worry and to approach a portal of heaven that now stood open. The door is not small. The Greek word thura (door), as used here,suggests a double or folding door such as the entry to a Roman manor or Jewish great house. [^3] It is the entrance to the dominion of God where his power remains ever unveiled.

John's experience perhaps would have been similar to that of Joseph Smith, who reported, "The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire" (D&C 137:1-2). The purpose for John's elevation was for perspective. From this post he could better see "things which must be hereafter."

THE THRONE IN HEAVEN (vv. 2-3)

At this point the vision enters into its second stage andappears to elevate the Seer to an even higher state of ecstasy from that he was already in. John was, of course, already in the Spirit (see Rev. 1:10). What he does now is emphasize the idea. Here the time frame is that of heaven. In this eternal moment, past, present, and future become one. From this perspective John is given to understand the relationship of the parts to the whole and how God overmasters all. Omnipresence takes on a new meaning. Not only is God everywhere present, he is also every-when present. The context of John's vision seems to rest on the same ground as the statement of Joseph Smith that "the past, the present, and the future were and are, with Him, one eternal 'now.' " [^4]

John sees the great Lord of time sitting on his throne, symbol of his absolute omnipotence, in resplendent glory. The description echoes Ezekiel 1:26-28 where the throne appears as a sapphire surrounded by a rainbow. [^5] The Greek thronos, the term John uses, was reserved for kings and gods—those who were absolute rulers. The heavenly throne is frequently referred to in the Old Testament (see 1 Kgs. 22:19; Isa. 6:1; Ezek. 1:26; Ps. 47:8; Dan. 7:9) and in apocalyptic literature to denote the dominion, sovereignty, and monarchial majesty of God. [^6]

John's description, however, keeps the person of God ever hidden. He makes no attempt to portray God's features or form. The Seer focuses on God's splendor and tries to describe and impress this upon his reader: light sparkling, radiating, and scintillating in hues of deep green and blood red—"he that sat was to look upon like a jasper and a sardine stone: and there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald" (v. 3, KJV). The sardine stone (more popularly known as sard) is blood red. The name jasper was given to a number of stones mostly green in color, though there was a red and yellow variety. [^7] John combines the colors symbolizing life and death and has them radiating from the one who is the God of both. By this means the mind's eye beholds the unmistakable testimony of divine power—God covered "with light as with a garment" (Ps. 104:2, KJV), dwelling "in unapproachable light, whom no [natural] man has ever seen or can see" (1 Tim. 6:16, AT; cf. John 6:46).

With each new symbolic representation, the Seer deepens our understanding of the majesty and power of God. A rainbow radiates out from and encircles the royal seat, sign of the covenant between God and Noah, suggesting that his judgment does not eclipse his mercy (see Gen. 9:8-17). But John does not give us a prismatic bow; it shimmers of but one hue, green, suggesting that life overarches all God is and all He does (cf. Moses 1:39). The presence of the rainbow is most important. According to Caird, it suggests that "there is to be no triumph for God's sovereignty at the expense of his mercy, and it warns us not to interpret the visions of disaster that follow as though God had forgotten his promise to Noah." [^8]

THE TWENTY-FOUR ELDERS AND THE SEA OF GLASS (vv. 4-6)

In these verses John rounds out his vision. Surrounding the central point of light stands another circle, not vertical like the rainbow, but horizontal. It is composed of twenty-four seats, or more accurately, thrones. Upon these sit, in majesty of their own, Elders. [^9] The title John gives them (Greek presbuteros,used to designate prominent political and religious leaders) suggests that while mortal they had been men of importance, probably leaders within the congregations. [^10] They "had been faithful in the work of the ministry and were dead; [they] belonged to the seven churches, and were then in the paradise of God" (D&C 77:5). Actually the men may have yet been alive as John wrote for what John saw was their future state. [^11] These men won the promise God holds out for all: "He will take you up in a cloud, and appoint every man his portion. And he that is a faithful and wise steward shall inherit all things" (D&C 78:21-22).

The number and dress of the Elders suggests that John used them to represent the final reward of all the faithful. [^12] The number twelve represents priesthood. Here its multiple is used to suggest fullness. There were twenty-four priestly courses and Levitical orders among the Jews, whose heads were also called Elders (see 1 Chr. 24:7-18; 25:9-31). [^13] According to Hailey, "the number twenty-four suggests a combination of the twelve patriarchs of the twelve tribes of Israel and the twelve apostles, thus representing the redeemed of both covenants now united through Christ." [^14]

The Patriarchs and Apostles are later linked in the description of the New Jerusalem (see Rev. 21:12, 14), where the names of the apostles are placed on the foundation stones and the names of the patriarchs are inscribed over the gates. Further, there is a certain homogeneity depicted between the Old and the New Covenant for the redeemed sing the song of Moses and the Lamb (see Rev. 15:3). In John's vision the Elders hold the two patriarchal offices of priest and king. Their white garments represent priestly holiness and their golden crowns and thrones royalty. [^15] That they represent all the faithful seems apparent from Revelation 20:6, where those who come forth in the first resurrection are kings and priests. [^16]

Out of the throne around which the the Elders sat "proceeded lightnings and thunderings and voices" (v. 5, KJV). In his attempt to capture the power of the rays and currents that flowed from the throne, John adopted the imagery of a great storm. [^17] The word translated "voices" (Greek phn)in the KJV could well be translated as sounds, tones, or noises. These mighty phenomena symbolize divine power, majesty, and glory that almost overwhelm the beholder. Lightning, thunder, and noises also combine to give another aspect of the authority of God. To Sinai, Jehovah had come in the midst of thunders and lightnings and with the voice of the trump (see Ex. 19:16-19). Thus, they manifest the presence of God. But on later occasions when he manifested himself in this manner, it was in judgment against his enemies (see Rev. 8:5; 11:19; 16:18; Ps. 18:13-14; 144:6). Though God is a God of mercy, he is also a God of judgment. Only when justice is satisfied can mercy claim her own (see Alma 42:22-25).

Associated with these powers, John sees "seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the seven servants of God" (JST, v. 5), imagery and wording that echo Ezekiel 1:13 and Zechariah 4:2. Here again we meet, symbolically, the seven men who presided over the churches. John depicts them as lamps burning before the throne of God, acting, it would appear, as God's witnesses in judgment upon the unfaithful portion of the churches.

But the burning lamp stands are not the only things near the throne. John saw before it a sea of glass like crystal, perhaps similar to the "molten sea" or brass basin in Solomon's temple (cf. v. 6 and 1 Kgs. 7:23-26). The adjective glass-like (Greek hualinos) suggests the idea of clear, calm, shimmering. Crystal had a long association with glory and fire (see Ex. 24:9-10, 17; Ezek. 1:22, 27). The two symbols are allied but not quite the same. Glass is a manufactured product while crystal grows in nature. Thus the "glass" of the sea suggests a produced state of purity, and the "crystal," what is native in God's holy nature. [^18] The word sea (Hebrew ya'm) referred to both thefresh-water ocean, the source of all life and fertility according to tradition, and to a basin of holy water in the temple. Thus the sea of glass becomes a perfect symbol for this earth "in its sanctified, immortal, and eternal state" (D&C 77:1). In that state it will be one of the celestial orbs, a source of the power of life for worlds and a retainer of holiness.

THE FOUR LIVING CREATURES (vv. 6-8)

Also associated with the throne are beasts, whose description in verse six echoes those of the living creatures of Ezekiel 1:5-10; 10:14; Isaiah 6:2-3; and Daniel 7:3-7. They form the first of the concentric circles, the Elders the second. John portrays these beasts as honoring and reverencing God. [^19] As John saw real Elders, he saw actual beasts, or better, living creatures. The word chosen by John is zon, meaning living being. Thisstands in contrast to thrion (wild beast), which he later uses todescribe the associates of Satan.

Joseph Smith taught that these beasts probably "had lived on another planet, and not ours." [^20] Expanding this idea, the prophet stated "that John's vision was very different from Daniel's prophecy—one referring to things actually existing in heaven; the other being a figure of things which are on earth." [^21] Joseph Smith's information was based on revealed fact. He had asked the Lord, "Are the four beasts limited to individual beasts, or do they represent classes or orders?" The Lord had responded, "They are limited to four individual beasts, which were shown to John, to represent the glory of the classes of beings in their destined order or sphere of creation, in the enjoyment of their eternal felicity" (D&C 77:3). Thus, like the Elders they are real but also stand as symbols: "They are figurative [i.e., symbolic] expressions, used by the Revelator, John, in describing heaven, the paradise of God, the happiness of man, and of beasts, and of creeping things" (D&C 77:2).

The descriptions of the animals with their various faces like a man, an ox, a lion, and an eagle are highly symbolic. John seems to epitomize the orders of beings—mankind, domestic animals, wild animals, and fowl and other living things—through the representation of the creatures' faces. Their wings and eyes are also symbolic: "Their eyes are a representation of light and knowledge, that is, they are full of knowledge; and their wings are a representation of power, to move, to act, etc." (D&C 77:4). [^22]

Besides praising God, these living creatures may have another important function. In other apocalyptic literature such creatures, called cherubim, act as guardians of the throne of God and at times as guides. [^23] Cherubs are always associated with God but more especially in two capacities: as his steeds or chariots, as in Ezekiel 1, and as guardian figures keeping safe the way of God, as here in Revelation. They seem to work with the Seer particularly in the capacity of guides. At specific points they open up portions of the vision for him to view.

THE SCENE OF PRAISE (vv. 9-11)

Chapter four concludes in a tremendous symphony of worship and praise to God. The Seer declares that the living creatures never cease to extol God (v. 8) and then states that, "whenever the living creatures give glory, honor, and thanks to him who sits on the throne, . . . the twenty-four elders fall down before him who sits on the throne and worship him" (vv. 9-10, AT). The idea is that all beings in heaven worship God constantly. The Elders reverence their Creator by casting their crowns before him. In this way they acknowledge that their authority is delegated from God. The act of casting the crowns before the throne of God symbolizes the full devotion of the Elders to the law of consecration and stewardship. They act as stewards over their domain but consecrate all back to him. [^24]

The act of praise focuses on the life-giving principle in God. The Revelator's frequent reference to the color green has underscored this idea. Because God is the creator of life, mortal and eternal, he is worthy of all honor and glory. But there is another dimension. Not only did God give life—"you created all things"—but "by your will, . . . they have their being" (v. 11, AT). He, at every moment, sustains all life. John saw streaming from the throne light—green light. It is this "which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things" (D&C 88:13). Thus, he generates all life everywhere, even in the heavens.

CONCLUSION

Encouragement and hope flow out of chapter four. It centers on the powers of God, his glory, majesty, and might. In symbolic terms the Seer conveys to the mind of the reader a vision and understanding of God's greatness. He stands at the center of heaven surrounded by all creatures he has saved as well as the faithful to whom he has given power and authority. Light and life proceed from him. He is the essence of being and the principle of all existence—even eternal existence. The exalted ones recognize this and return to him praise and glory forever. This vision marks a transition from John's present to "things which shall come hereafter." Thus, the vision appropriately looks to the future celestial kingdom when God will have fully wrought his designs for this world that will be fully restored into his presence. The vision also serves as the introduction to the rest of the revelation through which the Seer comes to understand how God executes his will.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals. The Greek biblion can mean book, scroll, or document.However, at this early date books were uncommon. What John saw, therefore, was probably a scroll in the hand of God.
[^2] And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof? Mounce, Revelation, 142-43. The idea of a book containingthe history of the earth was not new with John. Psalm 139:16 suggests the idea, and in 1 Enoch 81:1-2 there is mention of heavenly tablets that contain "all the deeds of men . . . that will be upon the earth to the remotest generations" (see also 47:3; 106:19; 107:1).
[^3] And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open the book, neither to look thereon. Ford, Revelation, 92-93. The scroll was found by YigaelYadin in the Judean desert. It was bound by seven threads, each of which was locked with a seal on which was the name of a witness. The document dated from the late first century. That would make it contemporary with Revelation.
[^4] And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to read the book, neither to look thereon. Charles, Commentary, 1:137-38.
[^5] And one of the elders saith unto me, Weep not: behold, the Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the book, and to loose the seven seals thereof. McConkie, Commentary, 3:471.
[^6] And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb as it had been slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the earth. Ford, Revelation, p. 85. For discussion, see chapter ten.
[^7] And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the throne. Hailey, Revelation, p. 175.
[^8] And when he had taken the book, the four beasts and four and twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them harps, and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of saints. The Greek word klai, literally "wailing," denotes deepmourning. Its biblical use frequently refers to the wailing of professional mourners hired for the purpose.
[^9] And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; The figure of the Messiah as a lion is seen in 2 Esdras 12:31 and elsewhere.
[^10] And hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and we shall reign on the earth. Fiorenza, Revelation, 73.
[^11] And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about the throne and the beasts and the elders: and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; Testament of Joseph 19:8; 1 Enoch 90:38; Ford, Revelation,30-31.
[^12] Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing. Mounce, Revelation, 144.
[^13] And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. Hailey, Revelation, 176-77.
[^14] And the four beasts said, Amen. And the four and twenty elders fell down and worshipped him that liveth for ever and ever. Fiorenza, Revelation, 73-74.
[^15] In 1 Enoch 90:9, the Maccabees are stylized as "horned lambs." See Charles, Commentary, 1:141-43.
[^16] Caird, Revelation, 75.
[^17] Smith, Teachings, 158.
[^18] See TDNT, s.v. apostolos.
[^19] Mounce, Revelation, 147.
[^20] Charles, Commentary, 1:146.
[^21] Elder McConkie states that John saw 100,000,000 plus thousands of thousands of saved souls. "The expansion of world population being what it is, we can suppose that the billions who live on earth during the Millennium—and who 'grow up without sin unto salvation' (D&C 45:58)—shall far exceed in number the total hosts of men who have lived during the preceding six thousand years. Truly, in the aggregate, there are many who shall be saved" (Commentary,3:475).
[^22] In 2 Enoch 19:6; 21:1 the seraphim and cherubim have six wings and many eyes and are found standing before God's throne singing: "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of Sabaoth: heavens and earth are full of Thy glory." John's description, therefore, appears to follow Jewish apocalyptic motifs (Charles, Commentary, 1:120-21).
[^23] See 1 Enoch 71:7, where they are described as "the sleepless ones who guard the throne of [God's] glory."
[^24] For a discussion of this law, see Hyrum L. Andrus, Doctrines of the Kingdom (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973), 223-59.
