Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 5

The Lamb Slain from the Foundation of the World

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 5)

THE SCROLL OF DESTINY (vv. 1-5)

As the revelation of the eternal throne room continues, John sees on the right hand of God a scroll of unparalleled significance, "written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals" (v. 1, KJV). [^1] Through modern revelation we understand that it contains "the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God; the hidden things of his economy concerning this earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence" (D&C 77:6; cf. 88:108-10). John notes that the scroll was full, both on the front and the back, which parallels Ezekiel 2:10. Nothing had been left out, and no more could be added. It was the scroll of destiny. [^2] John's imagery bearsa mind-set frequently found in apocalytpic literature that from the beginning God determined the end of history.

We need to clarify here the difference between the view point of Revelation that God has ordained future events and the false idea that individual salvation is predetermined and that therefore there is no individual agency. One of the powers ascribed to God is expressed by the Greek words prognsis, and proginsk. These words are respectively translated"foreknowledge" and "predestine" and catch the idea not only of knowing something beforehand, but of choosing someone beforehand. Paul understood that God, because of his foreknowledge, had marked or set the course of history through the use of individuals who would bring about his will (see Rom. 8-9). That is, God ordered things through the means of sending down spirits when and where he chose. These spirits, without any other manipulation on the part of God, act in ways he knows. Thus, by selection of these souls, God can order the course of history while still maintaining agency.

A major thesis of Revelation is that God set the path of all things and nothing will stray from his design. This idea is symbolized in the scroll where the sovereign will of God has been recorded, where all history has been foretold. Though the idea that God has determined the course of world events may grate on some, it was a source of comfort and hope for those to whom John wrote.

The document is sealed with seven seals. The use of seals was common during ancient times to prevent adulteration of important papers and, more importantly, to prove their authenticity. The verb sphragiz, to provide with a seal,carried the idea of assured content and authenticity. But the idea of ownership was important because the owner protected the document. In John's day, seals carried the mark of the owner who guaranteed the contents and was responsible for carrying out the agreements, if any, contained therein. Out of this grew the association of the seal with the idea of protection and safety. This forms the symbolic base of the use of the term by the early Christians. To be sealed by the Holy Spirit (see Eph. 1:13)meant more than being provided with a means of identification. It assured that an individual could endure to an eternal reward because, belonging to God, protective power would be given from above.

Archaeologists found in Israel a document such as John describes, dating from about the time the apocalypse was written. It was an important legal contract. [^3] Its discovery confirmed the belief that the Seer was making symbolic reference to a binding agreement or covenant. One such type of covenant was the Roman will, which also bore seven seals. Such testaments could not be administered until all the seals were broken. [^4] Only a person of authority could break the seals and execute the will.

Working from this imagery, John describes the heavenly search for the a person with power to open the scroll and execute the demands contained therein. In this case the scroll is the primary symbol for the fullness of time, containing as it does the aggregate of God's will concerning this earth. Unless someone is found who can minister the will of God, the purposes of this earth will fail.

A "strong angel" conducted the search. Just what John meant by the adjective is not known. The Greek term is ischuros and can be translated as strong, mighty, or powerful. The expression often applies to gods and angels. John's use of it suggests that there exists rank among the ministers of heaven. [^5] Possibly the angel John had in mind was Gabriel, Hebrew for "God is my strength," but Michael, the commander of the forces of the Lord of Hosts and the angel of top rank, also fits the description. The Seer may have had him in mind. [^6] Whatever the case, this mighty being cried forth the fateful question: "Who is worthy to open the scroll and to loosen the seals of it?" (v. 2, AT).

He could find no one in the entire cosmos to open the scroll, or even "to look thereon" (v. 3, KJV). To look meant more than just to view. John could clearly see the scroll from where he was. To open and look meant to comprehend, disclose, and execute the contents of the document. No one responded because no one "was able." The Greek (dunamai)suggests that no one had the power or ability in or of himself to do the task, not even the mighty angel asking the question. [^7]

This failure brought an instant and sorrowful response from John: "and I mourned deeply." [^8] However, his pathos did not last long. One of the Elders reassured him that "the Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed" and could therefore open the scroll (v. 5, KJV). Both of these titles come directly out of Jewish messianism. The first echoes Genesis 49:9-10 in which Judah is called a "lion's whelp" and promised that scepter would not depart from him "until Shiloh [i.e., the Messiah] come" (KJV). [^9] The second title suggests Isaiah 11:1, which refers to the root of Jesse, the future ideal king of David's line, who was to usher in the period of peace.

THE LAMB SLAIN (vv. 6-7)

As John looks he does not see a lion, symbol of power and majesty. Instead he sees a lamb "in the midst of the throne" (v. 6, KJV). The phrase suggests that the lamb was at the position nearest to the throne, sharing, as it were, the central place. In this way the Seer symbolizes the principal reality. The Lamb is the center of all things, having preeminence over all God's creations.

The Lamb, though living, bore the marks of a violent death. The Greek verb used, sphaz (slaughter), refers to the act of sacrificing. John could have had the paschal lamb in mind. If so, he was tying the image to Israel's Egyptian exodus, which he considered the prototype of ultimate and final victory through the Messiah. [^10] Indeed, Jewish apocalyptic looked to a conquering lamb that was to appear in the days of the final judgment to destroy all evil. [^11] Through this powerful symbol, Revelation underscores a central theme of the New Testament: victory through sacrifice. [^12] The Lamb prevails (see John 16:33) not by sovereign might but by sacrifice grounded in love. [^13] He is worthy because he purchases God's people with his own blood. The Seer's metaphor emphasizes both the high value of those he purchased, costing him his blood and life, and the universality of the Lord's action in redeeming all the faithful from death and hell. [^14]

John described the Lamb as having seven eyes and seven horns. Again, the image created suggests symbolic interpretation rather than visual reconstruction. The eyes depict knowledge, the horns represent power. The possession of seven eyes echoes Zechariah 4:10, where they are symbols of God's omniscience. The horn is the Old Testament symbol for power (see Num. 23:22; Deut. 33:17; 1 Sam. 2:1; 1 Kgs. 22:11; Ps. 75:4; 89:17). Thus, it was the mark of kingly dignity (see Ps. 112:9; 148:14; Zech. 1:18; Dan. 7:7, 20; 8:3). [^15]

Christ possesses a fullness of the omnipotence and omniscience of God; he is "the power of God, and the wisdom of God" (1 Cor. 1:24, KJV). To these the Seer adds, through the symbolism of the "seven Spirits of God" (Rev. 5:6, KJV), the fullness of administrative authority. All this connects to earthly government, which the Lamb is about to assume in his redemptive character "as . . . slain" (v. 6, KJV). Through "the seven spirits sent forth in all the earth" (v. 6, AT), the Lamb is omnipresent. With this imagery, John does more than invest the Savior with the attributes of deity; he redefines omnipotence. Often felt to describe God's power of unlimited coercion, the Seer reveals its true nature as the power of infinite persuasion, the invincible strength of self-sacrificing love. [^16]

The JST adds insight and clarity. It describes the Lamb as having twelve horns and twelve eyes, "which are the twelve servants of God, sent forth into all the earth" (v. 6). Here the prophet defines the nature of the power of the Lamb. Twelve, as has been noted previously, is the priesthood number, and all priesthood centers in the Lamb. Thus, he is called the "great high priest" Heb. 4:14, KJV). [^17] According to Doctrine and Covenants 107:1-6,

There are, in the church, two priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood. Why the first is called the Melchizedek Priesthood is because Melchizedek was such a great high priest. Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God. But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood. All other authorities or offices in the church are appendages to this priesthood. But there are two divisions or grand heads—one is the Melchizedek Priesthood, and the other is the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood.

Further, "The Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the church in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things" (D&C 107:8). All this power centers in the Lamb and flows from him to his leaders. By its authority, the Savior acted to bring about the Atonement, and he continues to minister its saving power in the world. This is the central deed in the scroll of destiny, for all history pivots on this one act. It alone allowed for the complete fulfillment of the Father's will.

The JST notes that the eyes and horns symbolized the servants of God, those sent forth as ministers. The Greek word apostell is translated "sent forth," and from this thenoun apostolos, or "apostle," is derived. In its Judeo-Christian context, however, the word apostle took on a different nuance than it normally had. For the Greeks, the one sent was the one empowered or commissioned to act for the one doing the sending. For the Jews and Christians, the term designated anyone commissioned and empowered by God: one who had authority to speak his word and administer his ordinances. The Greek term was used to translate the Hebrew shaleha, one commissioned to act for God. The Rabbis recognized two groups. The first was the priesthood body as a whole, the second, a small number of outstanding prophets, especially Moses, Elijah, Elisha, and Ezekiel. [^18] The Savior used this term for his chosen leaders. Therefore, the JST shows us that John looked to the foundation of the Church, the apostles and prophets, as the means through whom the Lamb exercises his authority upon the earth. These authorized ministers hold the keys of life and salvation under the Lord for all the world.

THE NEW SONG (vv. 8-14)

Exultation erupts as the Lamb takes the scroll. The moment to open it has arrived. The elders take up their harps to sing praises to God and the Lamb (see vv. 8-9). A new song is necessary because the death of the Lamb established a new covenant. This covenant is not new merely in point of time, but more important, it is new and distinctive in its superiority to the old one. [^19]

The Greek words translated "a new song" (dn kainn)suggest those songs expressive of gratitude for mercies granted to those in need (see, e.g., Ps. 33:3; 40:3; 96:1; Isa. 42:10). In Isaiah 42:9-10 the Lord states, "Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I declare: before they spring forth I tell you of them. Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the isles, and the inhabitants thereof" (KJV). These verses express the full context of the phrase that corresponds to a deeper sense of "new things."

Appropriately, the new song comes just at that point when one cycle of events has been fulfilled and another is about to begin. However great the things of the old earth were, they are about to be dimmed by the coming of the new paradise. [^20] Such gratitude does not belong to the elders alone. Along with their harps they carry incense burners from which flows sweet smoke representing the outpouring of gratitude from the Saints. This refreshing savor perfumes the divine halls of heaven.

Verses 9-14 bring chapters four and five to a climax as the assembly sings three glorious hymns of praise. Already, John has heard a hymn sung to the majestic power seated upon the throne (see 4:10-11). It focused on God with his holiness, almightiness, and everlastingness as manifested in life and creation. The first song in chapter five is the song of the Elders, dwelling on the redemptive power that is in the Lamb. He is worthy because he has purchased creation with his blood. The testimony of the Elders supports the witness of much of the New Testament (see, e.g., Acts. 20:28; 1 Cor. 6:20; 7:23; 1 Pet. 1:18-20; 2 Pet. 2:1). Because of what the Lamb did, the redeemed are now kings and priests who will reign forever (see v. 10).

A larger chorus made up of millions of exalted beings now joins with the Elders in singing the second anthem. It too proclaims the Lamb's worthiness. [^21] No sooner do its strains die than the climax begins, uniting in one grand closing hymn all creation, the very cosmos. Nature itself praises God and the Lamb, "saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever" (v. 13, KJV).

CONCLUSION

The point of the chapter is that the Lamb was able to do what no one else could: to execute the will of the Father. The vision specifies why the Lamb was able to open the book and look thereon: he was slain. He, God, gave himself as sacrifice to appease the demands of justice and allow the twin powers of mercy and grace to flow. Victory grew out of death, redemption out of blood. This allowed the will of the Father to operate.

The hymns express the adoration of heaven, earth, and all creation in recognition of that sacrifice. Worthiness is the focus, but other honors are mentioned: blessing, glory, power, and wisdom. The hymns are not requests that the Lord receive these honors but a celebration of adoration because he possesses them. Thus, the cosmos rejoices in a grand recognition of the dual powers of the Father and the Son, the law-and life-givers of the universe.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard, as it were the noise of thunder, one of the four beasts saying, Come and see. The concept of definite divisions of the world's history appears for the first time in Daniel 7, 9, the prophecies dealing respectively with the four kingdoms and the seventy weeks. Various modes were adopted in other apocalyptic writings. The most common break is into four, seven, ten, or twelve periods (for a full bibliography, see Beckwith, Apocalypse, 78-79).
[^2] And I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him had a bow; and a crown was given unto him: and he went forth conquering, and to conquer. Caird, Revelation, 79-80.
[^3] And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast say, Come and see. Mounce, Revelation, 152.
[^4] And there went out another horse that was red: and power was given to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another: and there was given unto him a great sword. The KJV follows the major manuscript tradition with the words: "I heard . . . one of the four beasts saying, Come and see," as though it were directed to the Seer himself. However, there is another strong tradition in which the command is a summons to each horse and rider to execute their power on the earth. A major point this tradition has going for it is that the imperative form of the Greek here is erchou, as it is with each of the other seals. In thoseinstances where the Seer is specifically summoned (see Rev. 17:1; 21:9), the imperative is deuro (Charles, Commentary, 1:161; Beckwith,Apocalypse, 516). Thus, a better translation of the text would be, "I heard one of the four living creatures say, . . . 'Come!' And I saw, and behold . . . " I have chosen to follow the majority tradition in the text.
[^5] And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast say, Come and see. And I beheld, and lo a black horse; and he that sat on him had a pair of balances in his hand. See, e.g., Herod. 7:40; 9:63; Philostr. V. A. 1:30; Charles,Commentary, 1:162.
[^6] And I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts say, A measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny; and see thou hurt not the oil and the wine. By the time John was writing the distinction between the two words was beginning to blur (see James H. Moulton and George Milligan, The Vocabulary of the Greek Testament [Grand Rapids:Eerdmans, 1952], s.v. stephanos). However, their use in Revelationsuggests that the distinction was important to John.
[^7] And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth beast say, Come and see. McConkie, Commentary, 3:477.
[^8] And I looked, and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on him was Death, and Hell fol-lowed with him. And power was given unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the earth. Cf. Zechariah 1:8; 6:2; 2 Kings 3:22, Septuagint, on the color applied to horses; and 1 Clement 8:3 and Ford,Revelation, 98, on its symbolic meaning.
[^9] And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held: See chapter three, pp. 25-42, for a discussion of the term.
[^10] And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? Ford, Revelation, 106.
[^11] And white robes were given unto every one of them; and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellowservants also and their brethren, that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled. McConkie, Commentary, 3:478-79.
[^12] And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and, lo, there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood; Ibid., 479-80.
[^13] And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind. On prices, see Cic. Verr. 3:81, 84.; Beckwith,Apocalypse, 520; Charles, Commentary, 1:166-67.
[^14] And the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled together; and every mountain and island were moved out of their places. McConkie, Commentary, 3:480.
[^15] And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains; Beckwith, Apocalypse, 521.
[^16] And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: BJ. 5:565.
[^17] For the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand? Ford, Revelation, 98-99.
[^18] The Greek word thanatos, death, should probably not be taken literally here, but rather be translated as "pestilence." The Septuagint often uses thanatos as a translation of the Hebrew word meaning"pestilence" when a specific kind of death is meant (see, e.g., Lev. 26:25; Jer. 14:12; 24:10; Ezek. 5:12, 17; 14:21; 33:27). Since it is coupled with famine, the choice seems sound (Beckwith, Apocalypse, 523;Hailey, Revelation, 193).
[^19] Beckwith, Apocalypse, 524-25; Charles,Commentary, 1: 174.
[^20] A saying of Rabbi Akiba, Aboth, R.N. 26; see Charles,Commentary, 1:173.
[^21] Beckwith, Apocalypse, 526.
