Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 6

The Six Seals

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 6)

THE SEVEN SEALS AND THE FOUR HORSEMEN

As the songs of adoration cease, the Lamb begins the task only he can do. One by one he breaks the seven seals. As he does so, John beholds in vision the dramatic events associated with them. Each seal attached to the scroll of destiny symbolizes a set portion of earth's history: "The first seal contains the things of the first thousand years, and the second also of the second thousand years, and so on until the seventh" (D&C 77:7). [^1] According to the Doctrine and Covenants, the seals will be opened in connection with the Second Coming:

Then shall the first angel again sound his trump in the ears of all living, and reveal the secret acts of men, and the mighty works of God in the first thousand years. And then shall the second angel sound his trump, and reveal the secret acts of men, and the thoughts and intents of their hearts, and the mighty works of God in the second thousand years—and so on, until the seventh angel shall sound his trump; and he shall stand forth upon the land and upon the sea, and swear in the name of him who sitteth upon the throne, that there shall be time no longer; and Satan shall be bound (88:108-110).

The breaking of the seals does not open any portion of the document. The scroll will not open until the seventh seal breaks. All must wait until then for the will of God to be fully executed. Before that day, evil will rule. But judgment, fully fueled bythe indignation and wrath of God, will be executed when the seventh seal is broken.

John uses horses and their riders to symbolize the events of the first four thousand years. The symbolism is found in the Old Testament. In Revelation it is modified for a purpose, but it definitely echoes the two visions of Zechariah, one of four horsemen, the other of four chariots (see 1:8-11; 6:1-8). However, in Zechariah's vision both sets were but patrol squads whose purpose was to report on the peaceful condition upon the earth. Like John's, the horses Zechariah saw were of different colors, but they corresponded to the different winds or points of the compass. [^2] In Revelation the four colors indicate a significant aspect of each millennium: conquest (white), bloodshed and war (red), plague and famine (black), and death (pale or livid). [^3]

THE FIRST SEAL (vv. 1-2)

As the Lamb breaks the first seal, one of the living creatures summons John to "come and see" (v. 1, KJV). [^4] With that command, the first vision opens and the first rider appears on a white horse. The color suggests two things: purity and victory. It was the Near Eastern custom for conquerors to ride white horses in their triumphs. [^5] The color reflects the nature of the horseman. He is one of God's own, a prophet of power and light. He carries the bow, a symbol of war, suggesting a period in which righteousness was on the offensive. The rider receives "a crown," not the sign of political rule (Greek diadma)but of victory (Greek stephanos, the laurel crown won through athletic achievement). [^6] Thus, victory goes to the one sitting on the white horse who conquers and receives commission to continue his conquests.

The use of the passive voice, "a crown was given unto him" (v. 2, KJV), is instructive. John uses this voice continuously throughout Revelation. By doing so, he indicates that an unseen power operates behind history, shaping it, molding it, making it conform to a specific will. That power is God, as John has already indicated, working through the Lamb.

The first thousand years of earth's history saw the beginning of wickedness, apostasy, and war but saw also what could be considered the greatest triumph for good yet achieved. During this period Enoch and his people laid the foundations of Zion, and righteousness truly was on the offensive. Note "that what John saw was not the establishment of Zion and its removal to heavenly spheres, but the unparalleled wars in which Enoch, as general over the armies of the saints, 'went forth conquering and to conquer.' " [^7]

They waged battles in ways never seen before or after. The primary weapons of the righteous were faith and the word of God: "So great was the faith of Enoch that he led the people of God, and their enemies came to battle against them; and he spake the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, even according to his command; and the rivers of water were turned out of their course" (Moses 7:13). Having subdued earthly enemies, the people of Zion subdued earthly appetites, passions, sickness and pain, and eventually even death. Truly, righteous conquest was the highlight of the era.

THE SECOND SEAL (vv. 3-4)

But righteousness did not prevail into the next millennium. Zion fled, and corruption gained the day. As John sees the second seal broken and hears the command "Come and see" (v. 3), a horse with its rider charges into view. The Seer describes the horse as purros in color. The word means literally red as fire(the dragon in chapter twelve has the same color). The color suggests death by violent means, usually by bloodshed. But it also represents sin, especially the sin that moves against humanity. [^8] Of those living early in the second millennium, the Lord said,

For these many generations, ever since the day that I created them, have they gone astray, and have denied me, and have sought their own counsels in the dark; and in their own abominations have they devised murder, and have not kept the commandments, which I gave unto their father, Adam. Wherefore, they have foresworn themselves, and, by their oaths, they have brought upon themselves death; and a hell I have prepared for them, if they repent not (Moses 6:28-29).

Enoch saw the result. To him the Lord said, "Look, and I will show unto thee the world for the space of many generations" (Moses 7:4). Enoch describes what happened:

I beheld in the valley of Shum, and lo, a great people which dwelt in tents, which were the people of Shum. And again the Lord said unto me: Look; and I looked towards the north, and I beheld the people of Canaan, which dwelt in tents. And the Lord said unto me: Prophesy; and I prophesied, saying: Behold the people of Canaan, which are numerous, shall go forth in battle array against the people of Shum, and shall slay them that they shall utterly be destroyed (Moses 7:5-7).

The second millennium saw the advent of organized warfare with the objective of genocide. Clearly, the red horse galloped supreme.

The horse's rider received the curved bladed saber (Greek, machaira), the favorite weapon of the cavalry. [^9] Like the color red, it symbolized violent death coupled with all the fury of war (cf. Rom. 8:35; Gen. 31:26). But it also carried the idea of authority to punish evildoing (see Rom. 13:4). Therefore, there is a sense of judgment about it. As Mormon said, "The judgments of God will overtake the wicked; and it is by the wicked that the wicked are punished; for it is the wicked that stir up the hearts of the children of men unto bloodshed" (Morm. 4:5). John states that the horseman was given power "to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another" (6:4, KJV). The phrase "kill one another" (Greek, allloussphaxousin) indicates both international and civil strife. [^10]

The rider could easily be the devil, reigning supreme during this period of gross wickedness. So great were the abominations that Noah was pained and God judged the nations with the Flood. [^11] But Satan's rule was more apparent than real. Note how John again uses the passive voice. The rider possessed neither the sword nor the power. They were given to him. War, strife, bloodshed must come, but God overrules even here, setting bounds on who carries the sword, how hard it is swung, and how long.

THE THIRD SEAL (vv. 5-6)

At the command of the living creature, "Come and see" (v. 5), the third horse thunders forth, its blackness symbolic of death, especially by plague, famine, pestilence. The engine of want drove the third millennium. Even the Lord's people knew the gnawing of hunger. Abraham's brother, Haran, died of starvation, and the famine forced the prophet himself to move into Canaan and eventually into Egypt to survive (see Abr. 1:29-30; 2:2-15). The same held true for Jacob and his sons (see Gen. 41-44). [^12] Vast movement marked the whole era from 2,000 to 1,200 b.c. It is called the Volkswanderungenzeit,the time of the people's wandering—an era of mass migrations when peoples collided against peoples. Strife and war resulted, and tumult ruled the day.

The rider holds a scale on which to make weight, and a voice hocks his wares: "A measure of wheat flour for a denarius, and three measures of barley meal for a denarius" (v. 6, AT). A measure, Greek choinix, was equal to about a U.S. quart. The silver denarius, or "penny" in the KJV, was the daily wage for a common laborer (see Matt. 20:2). Ordinarily, a denarius would buy between ten and sixteen quarts of wheat flour or twice that of barley meal. Here, under famine conditions, a day's work supplied only enough flour to keep a person alive for one day, or enough meal for three. [^13]

The warning against hurting the oil and the wine follows John's principle of showing that God is in charge. Limits are set on how far the famine could go. [^14] It is unlikely that only wine and oil are meant. The terms were used as a standing formula designating the nutritive products of the earth in both times of plenty and want (see, e.g., Deut. 7:13; 11:14; 28:51; 2 Chr. 32:28; Neh. 5:11; Hosea 2:8; Joel 2:19). [^15] The point is that God controlled the breadth of the famine. Though much could be taken, the world would not succumb to the dearth. Further, the Lord had prepared a way of escape for his faithful people.

There is an aspect of this that is interesting. In the Temple Scroll (one of the Qumran scrolls), two previously unknown Jewish feasts are mentioned: the Feast of Oil and the Feast of New Wine. Both products were closely associated with the burnt offering of the temple in which they acted as sacrificial elements along with the animal. They were stored in a special place and handled only by the priests. Josephus described the horror coming out of sacrilege as the temple was plundered by one John and his troops who drew every drop of sacred wine and oil and anointed themselves and drank freely. He concluded this alone warranted the destruction of Jerusalem. [^16] The Seer may have been suggesting that God's house would survive the famine. [^17]

THE FOURTH SEAL (vv. 7-8)

With the command "Come and see" (v. 7), the last of the horses lunges into view. Its color is a sickly pale green (Greek,chlros). Not inappropriately, the rider is death himself riding roughshod between 1,000 b.c. and the period of the Lord's birth. And he rides not alone—Hell follows with him. Surely no period before this saw more vicious generals and armies. It was the time when some of the world's greatest empires rose and fell: Babylon, Assyria, Persia, and Macedonia among them. As armies marched, men died in droves, and Hell gaped open wide its jaws to receive them.

Caught up in all this strife were the people of Jehovah. Palestine was often a hotly contested area. Pulled by the forces of the day, its political leaders tried to play power politics to their shame and destruction. The great prophets, Hosea, Amos, Isaiah, and later Jeremiah and Lehi, tried to warn them of their folly. They would not heed. Too caught up in idolatry to repent, too licentious to reform, too hard-hearted to feel, they warred among themselves and weakened their nation. As a consequence, they left Jehovah and life eternal. Hell was truly their reward.

The power of Death and Hell, symbolized in the great barbarian broadsword (rhomphia), exacted its due. The sphere of operation of these two horsemen was a fourth part of the earth. John's use of the fraction suggests a limited sphere. Not all the earth was under their domain. Their means of destruction was fourfold: war, famine, pestilence, and the wild beasts of the earth. The fourfold means of destruction corresponds to the four sore judgments found in Ezekiel 5:16-17; 14:21. [^18] The latter suggests the general conditions of the era. So many were destroyed that whole areas became depopulated to the point where wild beasts ran free. Few were left to protect the weak or ill.

With these horsemen John continues his underlying theme. Note that Death and Hell possess no power of their own. It is given to them. Their area of operation was limited. Only a fourth part of the earth, a determined amount, was subject to them. Most of the earth lay outside their domain. The rest came under the protection of another—the one John keeps hidden. And even that portion over which they held sway was not given up totally to them: their fearsome weapon being given to them by he who directs all things.

Note how both death and destruction have been escalating through the course of the revelation. After Righteousness, War rode affecting the nations, primarily the soldiers and men of war. Famine followed bringing distress upon whole populations. Next came Death and Hell, which affected a fourth part of the earth. This pattern of ever-greater circles of destruction continues through the rest of the vision: trumpets bring destruction upon one-third of the earth (see 8:7-8, 10, 12), and the vials bring total annihilation to all wickedness (16:1-17).

THE FIFTH SEAL (vv. 9-11)

At the breaking of the fifth seal, no horse thunders forth.Instead the Revelator sees the fulfillment of a prophecy given for his own day. The fifth seal represents John's era, the era in which the Son of God was born, ministered, and atoned for all mankind. It was the era during which the new covenant was established and the keys of resurrection were first manifested. Interestingly, John depicts none of these things. The event on which the vision focuses is the deliberate destruction of those who stood as witnesses of the Word of life. As mentioned earlier, John already knew the way his dispensation would end. The Lord had made this abundantly clear. He told his disciples that after he departed, "then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake. And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another" (Matt. 24:9-10, KJV). John viewed the terrible fulfillment of that dire prophecy. Those men and women he saw in vision who had died for the Word's sake were in reality yet giving up their lives.

John saw the souls of the righteous under the altar of heaven. The image of the altar suggests sacrifice. The direct association of these saints with the altar implies that their lives had been given in sacrifice because of their loyalty to God. Their position under the altar suggests that they were martyrs, their souls resting there only because their lives had been offered, as it were, upon it. During sacrificial rites the blood of the victim, symbolic of its life, was poured out at the altar's base, seeping beneath it (see Lev. 4:7; 17:11). John's view of the life, or soul, of the martyr as under the altar probably echoes this practice. [^19] What made their lives a sacrifice for righteousness was not in dying for the faith but in living for it. As Paul admonished, "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God which is your reasonable service" (Rom. 12:1, KJV).

The idea that the souls of the righteous awaited their reward from under the altar of heaven was popular a little later in Judaism. The Rabbis taught that those buried in Israel were just as if they had been buried under the altar, and those buried under the altar were as if they were buried under the throne of glory. [^20] The whole idea suggested that martyrs were in a state of holiness and peace within the kingdom of God. These men and women had given their lives on the strength of their testimony. They had received their witness directly from the Savior himself, and this witness is what they bore, as John makes clear when he states that they "were slain on account of the word of God, even the testimony borne by Jesus" (v. 9, AT). Most manuscripts include the words "of the Lamb" (tou arniou),suggesting that the testimony of the martyrs was the same as that of the Lord.

That testimony emphasized his divinity. He was the Messiah, the Son of God (see, e.g., Matt. 16:16-20; John 4:42; Acts 18:5). It was because they held to this that they were killed. Other passages in which we find this expression (see Rev. 1:2, 9; 20:4) leave no doubt that the witness is that borne by the Savior himself and which the disciples share byrevelation. [^21] As Elder McConkie has said,

Martyrs of religion are found in every age in which there have been both righteous and wicked people on earth. Christ himself was a martyr who voluntarily laid down his life, according to the Father's plan, that immortality and eternal life might become available for his brethren (John 10:10-18). 'Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends' (John 15:13). . . . True martyrs of religion receive eternal life. 'Whoso layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake, shall find it again, even life eternal' (D&C 98:13; Mark 8:35; John 12:25; Rev. 2:10). But the mere laying down of one's life standing alone is not gospel martyrdom. Both the righteous and the wicked have and do sacrifice their lives for friends or country without gaining thereby any hope or assurance of exaltation. Those on the other hand who have the truth and who could escape death by denying it are the martyrs who shall receive a martyr's reward—eternal life. When they seal their testimony with their blood, they are honored and their murderers are condemned (D&C 136:39). [^22]

John hears the cry of the martyrs to God, asking how long "dost thou not judge the nations and avenge our blood" (v. 10, AT). Their appeal is for judgment through which vindication of their testimonies would come. The world must stand trial for the witness it has received and violently rejected. However, the Seer learned that the time for judgment was not to be during the fifth millennium; during that period the martyred Saints would be comforted and would enter into the rest of the Lord, but they would not yet be vindicated. White robes, symbolic of the purity of their lives and of their ultimate victory, were given to them, and patience was enjoined.

The rest into which they entered was not their final reward. The Greek word (anapau) carried the idea of rest from toil, weariness, distress, and pain. These martyrs were "received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow" (Alma 40:12). Their rest was grounded on the assurance that their word would be avenged. For the time being, they were to be patient; the register of martyrs was not yet full. [^23] Others must die as well. These, however, would not be from the fifth seal, but from the sixth and the seventh.

THE SIXTH SEAL (vv. 12-17)

With the sixth seal, we enter into the modern era. As the Lamb broke it, a terrible scene of cosmic proportions met the eyes of the Seer. A tremendous earthquake rocked the planet, affecting every mountain and island. The sun ceased to shine, the moon hung blood red, and the stars seemed to fall from heaven. In ancient Jewish thought, cosmic order depended upon man's obedience to God. They felt that when man became so wicked that he attempted to set up his own system against God, the constellations would abandon their harmony and the universe would begin to disintegrate (see, e.g., Ps. 19). [^24] The Revelator's point seems to be that man cannot sin without influencing heaven and earth (cf. Moses 7:28, 37, 48). The cosmos will echo back his unholy deeds.

John could have well understood the idea of the cosmos in turmoil from popular apocalyptic belief that had its roots in earlier prophetic portrayals of the end of time. Not every detail is to be taken literally. [^25] For example, the moon will not become blood though it may take on a sanguine hue. (John prophesied that the moon would become red, the color of the second horse, and the sun black, the color of the third.) But behind the symbol stands reality. The cosmos really does react to events on earth, and the earth itself reacts through great convulsions.

Biblical literature regularly associated the earthquake with divine visitation. When God revealed his presence on Mount Sinai, "the whole mount quaked greatly" (Ex. 19:18, KJV). Isaiah stated that men would hide in caves from the terror of the Lord "when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth" (Isa. 2:19, KJV). "For thus saith the Lord of hosts; Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; and I will shake all nations" (Hag. 2:6-7, KJV). [^26] Thus by use of the earthquake, the Lord shows his incredible power as he begins to warn the nations. Such power will be sufficiently terrifying to drive men to wish for death rather than face vengeance. John's forceful symbols dramatically convey the great natural disasters that bring the sixth millennium to a close and act as forerunners to the final catastrophes. [^27]

The portrayal in Revelation could be quite literal in these verses. The Lord revealed to Joseph Smith those events destined to occur as the sixth seal closed: "Not many days hence and the earth shall tremble and reel to and fro as a drunken man; and the sun shall hide his face, and shall refuse to give light; and the moon shall be bathed in blood; and the stars shall become exceedingly angry, and shall cast themselves down as a fig that falleth from off a fig-tree" (D&C 88:87; see also Isa. 34:4). On another occasion the Lord said, "Before that great day shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned into blood; and the stars shall refuse their shining, and some shall fall, and great destructions await the wicked" (D&C 34:9).

Elder McConkie states that "some heavenly meteors or other objects, appearing as stars, will fall 'unto the earth.' Indeed, the events of that day shall be so unprecedented and so beyond human experience, that the prophets are and have been at an almost total loss for words to describe those realities pressed in upon them by the spirit of revelation." [^28] The threat of the awesome desolation of the world will bring all to their knees.

Another event will transpire of such consequence that only symbolic language can describe it: "The heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled together" (v. 14, KJV). John gives the sky the attributes of a flexible material expanse that can be withdrawn by being rolled up like an ancient scroll. Just what is meant here is unknown. The Greek word apochorizein does not mean to split or rend, but rather to remove to another place. The present heaven, from the standpoint of those on earth, will be removed (see Mark 13:31; 2 Pet. 3:10). Doctrine and Covenants 88:95 suggests that after the folding up of the heavens, there shall be an unfolding in which "the face of the Lord shall be unveiled."The Seer notes seven consequences to the wickedness of mankind: (1) the earthquake, (2) the darkened sun, (3) the reddening of the moon, (4) the stars falling, (5) the heavens rolling up, (6) the mountains and islands moving out of their places, and (7) the universal consternation of mankind. Further, he notes seven classes of men who will be affected: (1) kings, (2) great men, (3) rich men, (4) chief captains, (5) mighty men, (6) bondmen, and (7) free men. Such numbering seems deliberate on his part. It emphasizes the idea of completeness: no enemy of God, no matter how high or low born, will escape the wrath of the Lamb. [^29] He will move in his fury when patience ceases to be a virtue: "It shall come to pass, because of the wickedness of the world, that I will take vengeance upon the wicked, for they will not repent; for the cup of mine indignation is full; for behold, my blood shall not cleanse them if they hear me not" (D&C 29:17).

CONCLUSION

John associates a major event with the breaking of each seal. He catches the major characteristic of each millennium through the fifth. When he arrives at the sixth, his pace slows, and he gives more detail. He notes not just one event, but seven. It seems fitting that his rapid narrative should slow at this point. This is the moment just before the final millennium begins—the preparation period for it. It is the time when the Lord will reach out in terrible majesty and shake the very foundations of the earth in an attempt to break the hard-heartedness of the race. The Lord explained his purpose in these words:

Hearken, O ye nations of the earth, and hear the words of that God who made you. O, ye nations of the earth, how often would I have gathered you together as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but ye would not! How oft have I called upon you by the mouth of my servants, and by the ministering of angels, and by mine own voice, and by the voice of thunderings, and by the voice of lightnings, and by the voice of tempests, and by the voice of earthquakes, and great hailstorms, and by the voice of famines and pestilences of every kind, and by the great sound of a trump, and by the voice of judgment, and by the voice of mercy all the day long, and by the voice of glory and honor and the riches of eternal life, and would have saved you with an everlasting salvation, but ye would not! Behold, the day has come, when the cup of the wrath of mine indignation is full (D&C 43:23-26).

This scripture suggests that the Lord will try everything from promises to punishments to bring people to him. But once all is tried, the retribution will follow: he "would have saved" them, but now they are left to his anger. Little wonder that the wicked will cry "to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb" (Rev. 6:16, KJV).

What transpires in the sixth seal is a severe warning, but it is not the end. It is God's attempt to get men to repent and come to him. Looking at this same time period, an angel prophesied to Nephi saying,

Wo be unto the Gentiles if it so be that they harden their hearts against the Lamb of God. For the time cometh, saith the Lamb of God, that I will work a great and a marvelous work among the children of men; a work which shall be everlasting, either on the one hand or on the other—either to the convincing of them unto peace and life eternal, or unto the deliverance of them to the hardness of their hearts and the blindness of their minds unto their being brought down into captivity, and also into destruction, both temporally and spiritually, according to the captivity of the devil, of which I have spoken (1 Ne. 14:6-7).

Therefore, the Lord will use the sixth seal to call people to repentance in ways that will shake the very foundations of the earth. Given every opportunity, unrepentant men and women will feel the wrath of the Lamb. The fullness of that wrath is revealed in chapters eight and nine. But what of the righteous? What happens to them as the world is gripped by the mailed fist of justice? That is the subject of chapter seven.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And after these things I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on theearth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree. John is not the only apocalyptist to use interludes. Such are found in the Old Testament just before the deluge (see Gen. 6-7) and in apocalyptic literature before the building of the ark (1 Enoch 66:1-2, 67) and before the destruction of the temple (2 Bar. 6:4-7:1).
[^2] And I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea, See Matthew 14:30, 32; Mark 6:51; John 6:18; Acts 27:14.Anemos stands in contrast to pne, "wind" or "breeze," in Acts27:40 and pno, "wind," in Acts 2:2.
[^3] Saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. Ford, Revelation, 121. The Greek equivalent was thekauma, or "hot wind." 1 Enoch 76 speaks of noxious winds that brought drought, heat, destruction, and cold, as well as locusts and other pests. In this chapter Enoch was shown the secrets of the winds, how they both bless and curse.
[^4] And I heard the number of them which were sealed: and there were sealed an hundred and forty and four thousand of all the tribes of the children of Israel. Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1953), 1:300-301.
[^5] Of the tribe of Juda were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Reuben were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand. McConkie, Commentary, 3:490.
[^6] Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Nepthalim were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed twelve thousand. If the number four is to be taken literally, these angels could symbolize John the Baptist and Peter, James, and John, who restored the priesthood keys to the dispensation of the fullness of times (see D&C 27:12-14).
[^7] Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Levi were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Issachar were sealed twelve thousand. McConkie, Commentary, 3:491-92. See also Smith,Doctrines of Salvation, 1:170-174.
[^8] Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand. Branding slaves and soldiers, especially those in the emperor's service, was a common practice in certain parts of the Roman empire. Guild members also bore tatoos as a means of identification. Among those religions that came out of the east, it was not uncommon for devotees of a certain god to wear his mark upon their heads as a sign of their consecration to that God (see Ford, Revelation, 116-17for discussion).
[^9] After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands; Smith, Teachings, 321.
[^10] And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. For an excellent discussion of this doctrine, see McConkie, Commentary, 3: 323-350.
[^11] And all the angels stood round about the throne, and about the elders and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces, and worshipped God, Smith, History, 6:365; Ehat, Words, 368.
[^12] Saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen. McConkie, Commentary, 3:491.
[^13] And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they? Iren. Haer. 5.30.2. The argument is based on theinterpretation of Genesis 49:17 and Jeremiah 8:16 and expressed in the Testament of Dan 6:1.
[^14] And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. The Testament of Dan 5:6 states that the prince of the tribe of Dan is Satan. However, not too much should be made from this since omitting tribal names from various lists was not uncommon: for example, Simeon in Deuteronomy 33, Judah in Judges 5, and Gad and Asher in 1 Chronicles 27.
[^15] Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them. Ford, Revelation, 118.
[^16] They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. Caird, Revelation, 100.
[^17] For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. Scott, Exposition, 171.
[^18] Mounce, Revelation, 173.
[^19] Beckwith, Apocalypse, 524-25; Charles,Commentary, 1: 174.
[^20] A saying of Rabbi Akiba, Aboth, R.N. 26; see Charles,Commentary, 1:173.
[^21] Beckwith, Apocalypse, 526.
[^22] McConkie, Commentary, 3:483-84.
[^23] Apocalyptic literature was full of the belief that the consummation would not occur until the predestined number of the elect had been filled (cf. 2 Es. 4:36; App. Bar. 30:2).
[^24] See, e.g., Testament of Naphtali, 3:2-5; Ford, Revelation,111.
[^25] Mounce, Revelation, 161-62.
[^26] In apocalyptic literature, see Assumption of Moses 10:4; 2 Esdras 5:8; 2 Baruch 70:8.
[^27] Beckwith, Apocalypse, 528.
[^28] McConkie, Commentary, 3:486.
[^29] Ford, Revelation, 112.
