Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 7

The Seal of the Living God

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 7)

THE FOUR ANGELS (v. 1)

John has prepared his reader for the crashing of God's judgment upon the world as the Lamb breaks the last seal. The Seer concluded chapter six with "the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every free man, [hiding] themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains," crying in terror against the face of God and the Lamb, "for the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?" (Rev. 6:15, 17, KJV). But that wrath does not explode from chapter seven. Just at the moment of greatest crisis, an interruption occurs; the vision changes, and an interlude begins, bringing a moment of quiet and explanation to the reader.

Such a break in flow characterizes the Seer's pattern. At each turning point, as events are about to get ugly, he pauses to give encouragement and hope through explanation. Chapters four and five do this for the six seals, chapter ten for the third woe, chapter fourteen for the seven vials, and chapter 20:1-6 for the battle of Gog and Magog. This is exactly the case here. [^1]Chapter seven answers the question posed in 6:17: "Who shall be able to stand?" (KJV).

As the new vision opens, John sees four angels standing on the four corners of the earth. The repetition of the number four suggests geographical fullness—all the world will be involved in the events of chapter seven. These angels hold in check the wind so that it "should not blow on the earth" (v. 1, KJV). The Greek word anemos, translated "wind," indicates a storm wind, sometimes almost hurricane-like. [^2] Such winds brought drought, heat, insect plagues, and desolation. The mention of sun and withering heat in verse sixteen suggests that John had in mind the sirocco, a scorching wind that burnt up vegetation and left the land dust dry. [^3] Bibical people viewed such winds as displays of divine wrath (cf. Hosea 3:5; Rev. 16:9, "great heat" being from a scorching wind). In this light, the angels play the role of divine executioners with power to destroy the whole earth.

Modern revelation confirms this view and adds depth. God commissioned these four angels and gave them "power over the four parts of the earth, to save life and to destroy; these are they who have the everlasting gospel to commit to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people; having power to shut up the heavens, to seal up unto life, or to cast down to the regions of darkness" (D&C 77:8). These angels have, as it were, two faces. They are not only destroying angels, but saving angels as well. What makes the difference is how men respond to the message they dispense.

The angels have long since left their home in heaven and are now on the earth. President Wilford Woodruff stated that these angels have been loosed and are at work here. However, their job is not just to destroy but to commit the gospel as well. [^4] Their main period of operation is the sixth seal, or the period just preceding the Millennium. Thus, angelic administration is combining with mortal efforts to assure the world-wide preaching of the gospel during that time (see D&C 77:10). [^5] Only after they fulfill that commission will they unleash the winds of destruction. [^6]

The signs associated with the sixth seal—the earthquake, the plagues on the sun and moon, the stars falling—play a major role in the objectives of the sixth seal. Their function is not primarily destruction. They represent additional effort on the part of God to bring all men to him. The four angels symbolize the spiritual forces that oversee and assist in fulfilling this objective. But one must keep in mind that the same power that can save the nations also can destroy them. That power is Jesus Christ. During the sixth seal, the fullness of his gospel will be restored to the earth and both natural and supernatural forces will combine to see that it spreads to all lands and cultures. Those who respond with fullness of heart will enter into the rest of the Lord and find peace and safety. Those who reject it will find vexation and misery.

The world has already rejected the gospel many times, but during the sixth seal it will be in a position where one more rejection will assure its doom. This is because the gospel, preached with tremendous power, will not be easily ignored. Those who reject it will not do so out of ignorance. Therefore, the sixth seal will heighten the ideological conflict between the forces of good and evil. The conflict will not be resolved during the sixth seal, but the battle lines will be clearly drawn.

The Book of Mormon provides insight on how this will be done. In a vision Nephi saw the beginning of a conflict and its advance not long before the second coming of the Lord. He states:

I looked and beheld many nations and kingdoms. And the angel said unto me: What beholdest thou? And I said: I behold many nations and kingdoms. And he said unto me: These are the nations and kingdoms of the Gentiles.

And it came to pass that I saw among the nations of the Gentiles the formation of a great church. And the angel said unto me: Behold the formation of a church which is most abominable above all other churches, which slayeth the saints of God, yea, and tortureth them and bindeth them down, and yoketh them with a yoke of iron, and bringeth them down into captivity. And it came to pass that I beheld this great and abominable church; and I saw the devil that he was the founder of it.

And I also saw gold, and silver, and silks, and scarlets, and fine-twined linen, and all manner of precious clothing; and I saw many harlots. And the angel spake unto me, saying: Behold the gold, and the silver, and the silks, and the scarlets, and the fine-twined linen, and the precious clothing, and the harlots, are the desires of this great and abominable church. And also for the praise of the world do they destroy the saints of God, and bring them down into captivity (1 Ne. 13:1-9).

These verses define the antagonist to righteousness along with its objective and battle plan. The great and abominable church craves the material, lusts after the sensual, and fuels itself on the praises of the world. Because it stands opposite God's kingdom, it grows only as it shuts out the light of the gospel and the refining power of the Holy Spirit. Therefore, for self-preservation, it must destroy the Saints of God.

In cosmic terms, the battle lines will fall between the church of the devil and the church of God. The mortal perspective may not perceive and report it that way, but from a spiritual standpoint the issue is clear. Returning to Nephi's vision, an angel said to him:

Look, and behold that great and abominable church, which is the mother of abominations, whose founder is the devil. And he said unto me: Behold there are save two churches only; the one is the church of the Lamb of God, and the other is the church of the devil; wherefore, whoso belongeth not to the church of the Lamb of God belongeth to that great church, which is the mother of abominations; and she is the whore of all the earth. And it came to pass that I looked and beheld the whore of all the earth, and she sat upon many waters; and she had dominion over all the earth, among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people.

And it came to pass that I beheld the church of the Lamb of God, and its numbers were few, because of the wickedness and abominations of the whore who sat upon many waters; nevertheless, I beheld that the church of the Lamb, who were the saints of God, were also upon all the face of the earth; and their dominions upon the face of the earth were small, because of the wickedness of the great whore whom I saw.

And it came to pass that I beheld that the great mother of abominations did gather together multitudes upon the face of all the earth, among all the nations of the Gentiles, to fight against the Lamb of God. And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld the power of the Lamb of God, that it descended upon the saints of the church of the Lamb, and upon the covenant people of the Lord, who were scattered upon all the face of the earth; and they were armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory (1 Ne. 14:9-14).

The armor of the Saints—righteousness and tremendous power from God—will protect them from the world-embracing colossus while the destroying angels prepare to move against it. As noted above, the primary preparation will be the preaching of the gospel. Pure testimony will flow through the nations during the sixth seal. Many will respond. Those who do not, who willfully rebel against the light and who seek to destroy God's work, will face the wrath of the seventh seal.

THE ANGEL OF THE EAST (vv. 2-3)

In concert with the four angels, John sees another angel ascending from the east. The imagery used in these verses reminds one of the rising sun, which recalls the glory of God, spreading light and life. The idea is reminiscent of Ezekiel 43:4, where the glory of Jehovah comes out of the east. This angel "is he to whom is given the seal of the living God over the twelve tribes of Israel; . . . and, if you will receive it, this is Elias which was to come to gather together the tribes of Israel and restore all things" (D&C 77:9). Speaking of this Elias, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has said,

Correcting the Bible by the spirit of revelation, the Prophet restored a statement of John the Baptist which says that Christ is the Elias who was to restore all things. (Inspired Version, John 1:21-28.) By revelation we are also informed that the Elias who was to restore all things is the angel Gabriel who was known in mortality as Noah. (D. & C. 27:6-7; Luke 1:5-25; Teachings, p. 157.) From the same authentic source we also learn that the promised Elias is John the Revelator. (D. & C. 77:9, 14.) Thus there are three different revelations which name Elias as being three different persons. What are we to conclude?

By finding answer to the question, by whom has the restoration been effected, we shall find who Elias is and find there is no problem in harmonizing these apparently contradictory revelations. Who has restored all things? Was it one man? Certainly not. Many angelic ministrants have been sent from the courts of glory to confer keys and powers, to commit their dispensations and glories again to men on earth. At least the following have come: Moroni, John the Baptist, Peter, James and John, Moses, Elijah, Elias, Gabriel, Raphael, and Michael. (D. & C. 13; 110; 128:19-21.) Since it is apparent that no one messenger has carried the whole burden of the restoration, but rather that each has come with a specific endowment from on high, it becomes clear that Elias is a composite personage. The expression must be understood to be a name and a title for those whose mission it was to commit keys and powers to men in this final dispensation. [^7]

The angel that John saw, symbolic of all these Eliases, carries the seal of the living God. He has to place this upon the servants of God before the end of the sixth seal, before the time when the destroying angels vent their fury. The seal, as mentioned in chapter five, is both a guard against defilement and pollution and a means of security. Both ideas apply here: the seal identifies the Saints as God's own, and, as its major purpose, it insures their protection against the coming judgments. The imagery parallels that in Ezekiel 9:4 where a mark on the forehead protects the righteous from the destruction about to fall on Jerusalem. [^8]

Joseph Smith taught that the four angels assisted in "sealing the blessing upon their [the Saints'] heads, meaning the everlasting covenant, thereby making their calling and election sure." [^9] Peter expounded the doctrine of calling and election (see 1 Pet. 1:3-5; 2 Pet. 1:1-19), and Paul referred to it on a number of occasions (see Eph. 1:11-14; 4:30; 2 Cor. 1:21-22). The basic idea is that through faith, repentance, and baptism, a person can receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. As he responds to its teachings, he becomes purer and develops the attributes of godliness, culminating in Christ-like love. Certain benefits flow out of this. As Nephi said, "Ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life" (2 Ne. 31:20).

A person has made his calling and election sure when the promised blessings are sealed to him. Peter admonished the Saints of his day to "give diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall" (2 Pet. 1:10). The "these things" he referred to include growing in virtue, testimony, patience, brotherly love, and the pure love of Christ. Those who do these things are assured that they shall have eternal life from which they will never fall. Revelation suggests that this power will function widely before the end of the sixth seal.

There is another step one can achieve in mortality, but Peter does not focus on this. He does allude to it when he states, "We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts" (2 Pet. 1:19). The Doctrine and Covenants states that the term "the more sure word of prophecy means a man's knowing that he is sealed up unto eternal life, by revelation and the spirit of prophecy, through the power of the Holy Priesthood" (131:5). Thus, a person can receive a revelation that he has attained unto eternal life while in mortality. [^10] The symbol of the seal as used by John does not necessarily include the more sure word of prophecy. It does include having the Holy Ghost ratify the covenants that one has entered into and the person maintaining a state of justification through faithfulness.

THE 144,000 (vv. 4-8)

The number of those sealed, states the Seer, is 144,000. The number need not be taken literally. The Doctrine and Covenants states "that those who are sealed are high priests, ordained unto the holy order of God, to administer the everlasting gospel; for they are they who are ordained out of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, by the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth, to bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn" (77:11). Note that this scripture does not specify a number. Instead it notes that the group is composed of high priests who have a special calling "to administer the everlasting gospel" and "to bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn."

Joseph Smith associated them with the temple. [^11] The symbolic meaning of the number supports this association. Twelve represents the priesthood. Biblical people squared a number to amplify its symbolic meaning. Thus, 144 suggests a fullness of priesthood authority. But John is not satisfied with that. He gives the image a superlative quality by multiplying 1,000, representing completeness. In this way he shows the strength and breadth of the priesthood in the latter days, in this dispensation that is, indeed, the dispensation of the fullness of times. During this period that complete priesthood authority will operate. It is little wonder that as the world spurns this authority, it will be condemned.

The attachment to the temple fits perfectly since only there can one receive the fullness of the priesthood (D&C 124:25-30). Elder McConkie states that the 144,000 are kings and priests "converted, baptized, endowed, married for eternity, and finally sealed up unto eternal life." [^12] Their mission is not merely to bring people into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It goes beyond that. Their special assignment centers in getting people sealed into the church of the Firstborn through the administration of the fullness of the endowment (on the church of the Firstborn, see D&C 76:50-70; 93:21-23).

John indicates that the 144,000 will be those sealed from all the tribes of Israel. Curiously, he leaves out Dan, adds Levi, and has Joseph taking the place of Ephraim to get twelve tribes. The Seer gives no hint why he left out Dan. Some early Christians believed that John dropped the tribal name because of a tradition that the Antichrist would arise from there. [^13] The disfavor into which Dan fell goes all the way back to 1 Chronicles 7, which also omits Dan from the list of tribes. [^14] It may be that Dan's association with idolatry marked the tribe for omission since Jeroboam set up his idols in that tribal territory (see Judg. 18:30; 1 Kgs. 12:29). Since John was writing in part against the influences of idolatry invading the church, he may have omitted Dan as a warning. [^15]

THE COUNTLESS MULTITUDEOF THE SAVED (vv. 9-17)

John's vision expanded beyond the 144,000 to include a vast congregation "which no man could number," composed of those saved from all nations and peoples (v. 9, KJV). The enormous throng represents conquerors with their white robes and the palm fronds, the double symbol of victory. The former also signifies their purity, for they have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb (see v. 14). In joy, they make homage to their God: "Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb" (v. 10, KJV).

The word translated "salvation" (stria) expresses theidea of a great deliverance by the hand of God through which his people find total victory. But in this context, they are celebrating neither God's salvation nor their own. The victory of God and the Lamb is what makes all other victories possible. Thus, because the Savior prevailed, the throng prevailed. Without his victory, nothing they could have done would have mattered. But the Lamb, slain before the foundation of the world, satisfied justice so that grace could abound, and through that grace the multitude was redeemed and became priestly members of the divine kingdom (see Rom. 3:24; 5:20; Eph. 2:8; 1 Pet. 1:13; 5:5; 2 Ne. 25:23). [^16]

Because of the victory of the Lamb, the efforts of the Saints take on meaning. Their faith and good works now play an important part in their own salvation and that of others, which they could not do before. One of the elders explained the nature of their saving acts to John, saying: "These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb" (v. 14, KJV). The definite article (present in the Greek but not in the KJV) is significant: "The great tribulation" points to a definite prophetic period,not simply to the common troubles that afflict God's people in all ages. [^17] The period is the final series of woes the angelsare about to loose on the world. [^18] Verse 14 changes tense to the future. It appears that at this point John begins speaking from the standpoint of a prophet foretelling the future. He views the final abode of the Saints upon the celestialized earth.

Millions will prevail during this time of trial because they heeded the warnings and prepared themselves, "therefore are they before the throne of God" (v. 15, KJV). John's use of the word "therefore" is deliberate. It means that the multitude stand before God because they have been purified from all sin. In this state they "serve him day and night in his temple" (v. 15, KJV). The word serve (Greek latreu) specificallydenotes the performance of ceremonies associated with God's sanctuary (cf. Heb. 8:5), which these men can perform because they are kings and priests of the Most High. But in this state, they not only serve, but are served in return. The Lamb feeds them and leads them. God himself wipes away their tears. Hunger, thirst, discomfort are all unknown to them, for the one who "sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them" (v. 15, KJV). Having overcome, they are honored by those whom they honor and loved by those whom they love. Such is the state of eternal life.

CONCLUSION

Chapter six, anticipating the outpouring of the wrath of God, asked the question: "Who shall be able to stand?" John answers that question in chapter seven: those who have been sealed against destruction by washing their robes in the blood of the Lamb. By this means they become pure and are able to dwell with the Lord. However, that dwelling need not be just in heaven. There is an earthly counterpart to paradise: Zion. The Lord has said: "Let Zion rejoice, for this is Zion—the pure in heart; therefore, let Zion rejoice, while all the wicked shall mourn. For behold, and lo, vengeance cometh speedily upon the ungodly as the whirlwind; and who shall escape it? The Lord's scourge shall pass over by night and by day, and the report thereof shall vex all people; yea, it shall not be stayed until the Lord come; . . . nevertheless, Zion shall escape" (D&C 97:21-23, 25).

As early as the first millennium of earth's history, prophets understood the importance of the latter-day Zion as the means of preserving the Lord's people. To Enoch the Lord declared:

As I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance, to fulfil the oath which I have made unto you concerning the children of Noah; and the day shall come that the earth shall rest, but before that day the heavens shall be darkened, and a veil of darkness shall cover the earth; and the heavens shall shake, and also the earth; and great tribulations shall be among the children of men, but my people will I preserve; and righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City, that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem (Moses 7:60-62).

It is little wonder that, with righteousness and truth sweeping "the earth as with a flood," the judgment of God pours out against those who reject it. As for those who respond, they shall be gathered to places of safety. As the Lord declared, the righteous shall be gathered "upon the land of Zion, and upon her stakes . . . for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth" (D&C 115:6). The Lord has specified that "those places which I have appointed for refuge, shall be the places for your baptisms for your dead" (D&C 124:36). In other words the Lord shall gather his people to his temples. This brings us back to the 144,000, those special ministers sealed by the four destroying angels against the day of indignation. Those under their care will find

a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for thesaints of the Most High God; and the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion. And it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety.

And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another. And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand. And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from among all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy (D&C 45:66-71).

In this light, the most important work for the Saints of the sixth seal is the establishment of Zion by faithfulness, diligence, and especially purity. Missionary work must spread, temple work increase, and righteousness flow out of the homes and into the communities of the Saints. In this way God will have a people "prepared to receive the glory that I [God] have for them, even the glory of Zion" (D&C 136:31).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about the space of half an hour. In 1 Enoch 20:2-8 the names of the seven archangels are given as Suru'el, Raphael, Raguel, Michael, Saraqa'el, Gabriel, and Remiel. Seven angels are also mentioned in 1 Enoch 81:5; 90:21-22. The "angel of his presence," coming out of Isaiah 63:9, is mentioned repeatedly in Jubilees 1:27, 29; 2:1-2, 18; 15:27; 31:14. The idea of seven angels who administer the will of God was not foreign to John. However, John probably used the number to symbolize totality. All of heaven is mobilized to move at God's command.
[^2] And I saw the seven angels which stood before God; and to them were given seven trumpets. John's erratic grammar causes some doubt as to the relationship between the incense and the prayers of the Saints. Thephrase hina dsei tais proseuchais translates literally "in orderthat he will give [the incense] with the prayers." Here "with" translates the simple dative of the Greek. But in 5:8 the Seer has already specified that the incense and the prayers are one. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the same correlation exists here. The incense represents the prayers of the Saints making the dative a dative of reference (for discussion, see Mounce, Revelation, 182).
[^3] And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne. Bock, Apocalypse, 68.
[^4] And the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the saints, ascended up before God out of the angel's hand. The silence has been represented as a symbol of eternal rest, as a necessity so that God can hear the prayers of the Saints, as a military silence just before battle, and as the silence of creation (see Ford, Revelation, 134-35, for discussion). None of these seemto fit John's context.
[^5] And the angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake. Smith, Teachings, 157-58, 167-69.
[^6] And the seven angels which had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound. Bock, Apocalypse, 71.
[^7] The first angel sounded, and there followed hail and fire mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the earth: and the third part of trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up. The Way to Perfection (Salt Lake City: Genealogical Societyof Utah, 1931), 291. See also Bruce R. McConkie, The MillennialMessiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982), 578-88.
[^8] And the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea: and the third part of the sea became blood; Mounce, Revelation, 184.
[^9] And the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were destroyed. Charles, Commentary, 1:234.
[^10] And the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters; Reference to the burning mountain is found in 1 Enoch 18:13 with a clear parallel to Revelation in 21:3, but cf. 1 Enoch 108:4.
[^11] And the name of the star is called Wormwood: and the third part of the waters became wormwood; and many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter. McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 379-88.
[^12] And the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the stars; so as the third part of them was darkened, and the day shone not for a third part of it, and the night likewise. The dendron of Matthew 7:17 is a fruit bearer, as is that ofJude 1:12. The Baba Metzia 59b states that when the world wassmitten, a third of the olive crop, a third of the wheat crop, and a third of the barley crop were destroyed (on this, see Ford, Revelation,132-33).
[^13] The idea current in John's time of God's judgments being in part a strike against the waters, which would turn them useless, is found in 4 Ezra 5:9. The thought may have come out of Jeremiah 9:15 and 23:15 and Proverbs 5:3-4. It is the reverse of the miracle recorded in Exodus 15:25 in which God healed the bitter waters. Wormwood (Hebrew la'nah and Greek apsinthion) is not itselfpoison, but in a number of Old Testament passages it is found parallel to a plant(ra'ash) that is (see Deut. 29:18; Lam. 3:19; Amos 5:7; 6:12). The connection may result from the fact that the bitterness of wormwood would make the water as undrinkable as if it were poisoned.
[^14] Hugh W. Nibley, Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1967), 384-87. Elder McConkie has written that these destructions "are of such a nature that they (speculatively!) could be brought to pass in large part through atomic warfare" (McConkie, Commentary,3:499).
[^15] Caird, Revelation, 113.
[^16] The KJV, which uses aggelos, "angel," apparently is of the segment that follows Andreas's commentary on Revelation.
[^17] Mounce, Revelation, 189.
[^18] Mounce, Revelation, 173.
