Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 8

The Opening of the Seventh Seal

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 8)

SILENCE IN HEAVEN (vv. 1-4)

The interlude over, John resumes where chapter six left off. But once again, there is no clash of thunder, no outpouring of wrath. The Lamb breaks the seventh seal; the scroll of destiny lies open, but quiet prevails. God's testament, his will for the nations, stands ready to be executed. The day of judgment has come. The world will now receive its inheritance and just reward. Six thousand years of indifference, of carelessness toward God, of transgression, of deliberate corruption of his ways, of willfull rejection and sometimes slaughter of his prophets, of conscious rebellion and evil—all these will now receive their just compensation.

As the seal is broken, "there is silence in heaven for the space of about half an hour" (v. 1, AT). A solemn moment intervenes before judgment commences. Nothing breaks the solitude, but tension builds as seven angels, as captains over a host, receive seven trumpets and prepare to give their commands. [^1] The image of the trumpets creates a feeling of foreboding, for soon their blast will shatter the world. But an interval is needed: a period of preparation, of devotion and worship, of readying before heaven executes God's will, a moment of mourning for a world sick unto death.

John sees an angel approach the altar in heaven holding a golden censer, "and there was given to him much incense, consisting of the prayers of all saints" (v. 3, AT). [^2] Thus, both heaven and earth, angels and Saints, combine to create a holy crescendo of expectant, if painful, silence. Never has heaven been filled with the sweet smell of earthly prayers as now. The moment of anguished calm is about to end. But the silence will not end until the heavenly priest, the mighty angel, performs at the altar a priesthood act—the judgment of the nations. [^3]

The theological importance of the half hour of silence is derived from the Old Testament. In Habakkuk 2:20, the prophet commands, "the Lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him" (KJV). Then follows a description of the Lord moving in glory and anger against wickedness. The day of judgment has arrived. Zechariah also commands silence as the Lord arouses from his holy dwelling (2:13). Zephaniah does the same thing, "For the day of the Lord is at hand: for the Lord hath prepared a sacrifice" (1:7, KJV), and will move against the wicked (see 1:7-18). In each of these three instances, the silence heralds a wrathful theophany and may indicate a period of mourning before calamity. [^4] The Doctrine and Covenants supports this view. The Lord states:

But the day soon cometh that ye shall see me, and know that I am; for the veil of darkness shall soon be rent, and he that is not purified shall not abide the day. . . . For all flesh is corrupted before me; and the powers of darkness prevail upon the earth, among the children of men, in the presence of all the hosts of heaven—Which causeth silence to reign, and all eternity is pained, and the angels are waiting the great command to reap down the earth, to gather the tares that they may be burned (38:8, 11-12).

Doctrine and Covenants 88:95 also speaks of a half hour of silence associated with the last days. In this case, it follows the acts of judgment and immediately precedes the coming of the Lord. Though it is out of position with that of Revelation, it carries the same import: it signals a theophany, but this time of total victory.

The period of silence, the Seer states, lasted "about half an hour" (AT). The idea of approximation is clear in the Greek: The word used, hs, means "approximately" or "nearly."Thus, getting an exact fix on the amount of time John had in mind is impossible. The half hour, it has been speculated, may actually approach twenty-one years, based on the Lord's time being 1,000 years to the day (see Abr. 3:4; 2 Pet. 3:8). If such is correct, it will be a period when all will seem to be at rest, a return to the normal after the pounding taken during the sixth seal. The earth will cease to shake, the stars to fall, and the cosmos will return to a definite pattern. However, no matter what the duration, wickedness will not cease. Therefore, the half hour represents a short interval during which angels and Saints prepare in sorrow for the sentence of destruction to be executed upon the world.

One idea stands out: this is the period in which the heavenly and earthly churches of God will be linked as never before, a period in which the Saints will make their final preparation for what is to come. The Doctrine and Covenants states, "The servants of God shall go forth, saying with a loud voice: Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come; and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters—calling upon the name of the Lord day and night, saying: O that thou wouldst rend the heavens, that thou wouldst come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence" (133:38-40). The devastations that follow will be, at least in part, a response to this prayer of God's servants. Thus, the righteous will not be caught off guard. They will follow the Lord's admonition: "The coming of the Lord draweth nigh, and it overtaketh the world as a thief in the night—therefore, gird up your loins, that you may be the children of light, and that day shall not overtake you as a thief" (D&C 106:4-5).

THE FIRST FOUR TRUMPET BLASTS (vv. 5-12)

Finally the judgment commences. The angel, performing his priestly service, moves to the altar. He is not one of the seven, but a minister of authority. This angel may have already intervened twice at critical points. He could be the one called "a strong angel" (5:2, KJV), "another angel" (7:2; 8:3; 14:15, KJV), and "another mighty angel" (10:1, KJV). The term "another angel" seems to suggest someone other than the ones who have gone before. However, in each instance where the term is used, it distinguishes one angel from the others just mentioned. It may be that this is Michael or father Adam, the only angel named by John, who holds the keys over this earth.

This conjecture is based on Adam's role as understood by Joseph Smith. Adam acts under Christ over this earth, holding the key of presidency. Angels are under his direction; hereveals the gospel; and he watches over the ordinances. [^5] In the Doctrine and Covenants, he is called the seventh angel, perhaps symbolic of the fact that he represents all the angels or that he directs them. He is the one who, in the end, will lead the forces against Satan (see 88:112-13, 115). [^6]

This special minister of authority will make the first thrust against the wicked. He takes the censer, fills it with the fire of the heavenly altar, and casts it upon the earth (cf. Ezek. 10:2-7). Noise, thunder, lightning, and earthquake follow. In an instant the silence is shattered. The seventh seal now picks up the destruction scenario of the sixth and multiplies it.

For not many days hence and the earth shall tremble and reel to and fro as a drunken man; and the sun shall hide his face, and shall refuse to give light; and the moon shall be bathed in blood; and the stars shall become exceedingly angry, and shall cast themselves down as a fig that falleth from off a fig-tree. And after your testimony cometh wrath and indignation upon the people. For after your testimony cometh the testimony of earthquakes, that shall cause groanings in the midst of her, and men shall fall upon the ground and shall not be able to stand. And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds.

And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people. And angels shall fly through the midst of heaven, crying with a loud voice, sounding the trump of God, saying: Prepare ye, prepare ye, O inhabitants of the earth; for the judgment of our God is come. Behold, and lo, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him (D&C 88:87-92).

Mankind's chance for repentance is rapidly coming to a close. God tried every means to reclaim them, but they would not hear. Now comes the response to the cry of the earth itself: "Wo, wo is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone forth out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?" (Moses 7:48). The answer is "now," for judgment has commenced.

Four of the angels follow the mighty angel's devastations with additional plagues. Again, the number four is symbolic of geographical totality. The whole earth will fall under the angel's censer, and thus there is the need for the Saints to be sealed against these destructions. But remember that the prayers of the Saints have played an important role in initiating this judgment. Their petitions, at least in part, have unleashed the wrath. This case seems to parallel that of Noah. According to the book of Moses, Noah's "heart was pained that the Lord had made man." The result was that the Lord decided to act, "for it repenteth Noah that I have created them, and that I have made them: and he hath called upon me" (Moses 8:25-26). The result of Noah's petition was the flood. But just what role the Church plays during the period of the seventh seal is not disclosed. It is not in view in chapter eight; only the world is.

The sounding of the trumpets has important symbolic meaning. The Doctrine and Covenants makes it clear that, "as God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his work, and sanctified it, . . . the sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels are the preparing and finishing of his work, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years—the preparing of the way before the time of his coming" (77:12).

Much work must be done before the Lord comes in glory. The beginning of the Millennium will see the finishing of that work. The term millennium can be defined at least three ways. It means literally a period of a thousand years. According to LDS theology, the earth has passed through five full millennia and is about to pass through a sixth. Using this definition, we think of the Millennium as the last thousand years of the earth's history before the "short season." The term can further be defined as that period during which the earth experiences peace and rest—the period when paradisiacal conditions will prevail. Finally the term can define the period during which the Savior will take charge of affairs and reign personally upon the earth. These definitions are not mutually exclusive, and for the vast majority of the last thousand years all three definitions will be correct.

But Doctrine and Covenants 77 states that the seventh seal and the seventh thousand years coincide. That being the case, the Millennium will have begun before the Second Coming at the time the Savior begins to reign on this earth at the great council at Adam-Ondi-Ahman. According to Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, "At that time there will be a transfer of authority from the usurper and imposter, Lucifer, to the rightful King, Jesus Christ. Judgment will be set and all who have held keys will make their reports and deliver their stewardships, as they shall be required. Adam will direct this judgment, and then he will make his report, as the one holding the keys for this earth, to his Superior Officer, Jesus Christ. Our Lord will then assume the reigns of government; directions will be given to the Priesthood; and He, whose right it is to rule, will be installed officially by the voice of the Priesthood there assembled." [^7]

So the second coming of the Savior does not usher in the Millennium; the plagues of the seven angels do. That work must first be completed before the Lord appears in glory. The plagues are, therefore, God's last effort to soften the hardened. The plagues have but one purpose: to begin the cleansing process of the earth. But the method is twofold: first, to reclaim any who will repent under the excruciating pain of the last plagues; and second, to destroy those who will not.

As each angel sounds, echoes from Exodus 7-12 are heard. The scourges that God placed upon Egypt become John's type of the millennial plagues. The point seems to be that God will once again make bare his mighty arm before the nations. As Pharaoh hardened his heart and brought the plagues upon Egypt, so the Lord directs trumpet blasts against a world adamant in its hostility toward the Lamb. As happened with Egypt, as the intensity of the judgments increase, so also does the vehemence with which man refuses to repent (see Rev. 9:20-21; cf. Ex. 7:22-23; 8:15, 19, 32; 9:7, 12, 34-35; 10:20, 27-28).

But the trumpet blasts are not designed to destroy the earth. They affect a significant proportion, but not all. Some twelve times the Seer limits the destruction to one-third, symbolically showing that their bounds have been set. They can go only so far. The fraction one-third is used by a number of the prophets in association with what is called "remnant theology," the remnant being the unaffected part. We see this in Ezekiel 5:1-5. The prophet performs his dramatized prophecy (Hebrew 'ot,) against Jerusalem by shaving his head and beard, burns one-third of the hair with fire, cleaves one-third with the sword, and scatters the remainder to the wind. Only the latter one-third remains alive though scattered. It is the remnant. The fraction is used again in Ezekiel 5:12 and in Zechariah 13:8-9. In the latter, one-third is all that remains alive after the divine judgments while another one-third is burned with fire. So the fraction John gives suggests that the purpose of the destruction in Revelation 8 is not so much retribution as a last attempt to turn man to God. [^8]

The plagues do not arise out of natural phenomena such as volcanic action. They represent eschatological judgments of which there is no equivalent in Jewish apocalyptic. [^9] The picture John paints graphically shows the tremendous power that will rampage upon the earth. When the first trumpet blasts, hail and fire mixed with blood fall to the earth, burning up plant life. John seems to be alluding to the first Egyptian plague (see Ex. 7:20; Ps. 78:44) where the Nile was turned into blood and many creatures died. The Egyptians also saw fiery hail (see Ex. 9:23-25; Ezek. 38:22). But the combination of destructive elements and the extent of the plague John sees make it unique. With the second trumpet, a blazing mountain falls into the sea, [^10] killing many of its creatures and disrupting shipping, while the third summons a blazing star against the fresh water systems. Finally, the forth trumpet, in a modification on the ninth Egyptian plague (see Ex. 10:21-23), strikes at the moon and the sun, blotting out much of their light.

In this way John symbolizes the great destructions he saw unleashed. The separate plagues are not to be taken as happening one after the other. Rather, the whole world will likely be set in commotion simultaneously. [^11] The attack is directed primarily against nature. Nonetheless, mankind is seriously affected. When the grass and trees are hurt, the wheat and fruit trees go up in flames. [^12] When the fresh waters are affected they become as wormwood, a very bitter herb that makes the water impossible to drink. [^13] The catastrophes apparently cause the atmosphere to become so polluted that sunlight and moonlight are significantly dimmed. This may cause a drastic change in the weather patterns of the earth. A greenhouse effect may be set up and temperatures rise unusually, resulting in the conditions noted by John in chapter sixteen.

The day of darkness as a symbol of the day of judgment runs thoughout the Old Testament. Amos notes that the Lord's day will be a day of darkness and not of light (5:18). For Joel it will be a "day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick darkness" (2:2, KJV). As the Savior noted, in the day of the Lord, "the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light" (Mark 13:24, KJV; cf. Isa. 13:10). The fourth trumpet plague fulfills these conditions.

In each of the first three instances, fire is an active ingredient in the judgments. However, it is not associated with the fire of the Lord's coming, during which "the elements should melt with fervent heat, and the earth should be wrapt together as a scroll, and the heavens and the earth should pass away" (3 Ne. 26:3: cf. Morm. 9:2). It precedes it. It has been called "the Great Overburn," an apt description of the final holocaust of Revelation, and has been associated with the last great war before the Second Coming—a war of a special nature. [^14] It is not described in the usual term of bloodshed and the work of the sword. It is a war of burning in which "the people shall be as the fuel of the fire" (2 Ne. 19:19).

It would take a miracle for anyone to survive such a general holocaust, but that is exactly the point. The destruction is limited. God supervises the whole thing. Further, the fire acts as his agent. Its purpose is not only to destroy, but also to protect his people:

For the time soon cometh that the fulness of the wrath of God shall be poured out upon all the children of men; for he will not suffer that the wicked shall destroy the righteous. Wherefore, he will preserve the righteous by his power, even if it so be that the fulness of his wrath must come, and the righteous be preserved, even unto the destruction of their enemies by fire. Wherefore, the righteous need not fear; for thus saith the prophet, they shall be saved, even if it so be as by fire. Behold, my brethren, I say unto you, that these things must shortly come; yea, even blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke must come; and it must needs be upon the face of this earth; and it cometh unto men according to the flesh if it so be that they will harden their hearts against the Holy One of Israel (1 Ne. 22:16-18).

The Lord is perfectly prepared to allow thousands to die in order to protect his people. Some may have trouble with this idea, but the Seer has a very realistic understanding about death. From John's perspective, all must die. The question is when and how. Ultimate destiny is not determined by the moment or manner of death; it is by the manner of life. Those who are destroyed are not annihilated. They have further existence. But for the present they have not been playing the game by God's rules. They have become mean, and so they are thrown into the penalty box, so to speak, for unnecessary roughness while the game goes on. According to Caird, the idea that mortality is so infallibly precious that

the death which robs us of it must be the ultimate tragedyis precisely the idolatry that John is trying here to combat. We have already seen that John calls the enemies of the church 'the inhabitants of earth', because they have made themselves utterly at home in this transient world order. If all men must die, and if at the end heaven and earth must vanish, along with those whose life is irremediably bounded by worldly horizons, then it is surely in accord with the mercy of God that he should send men from time to time forceful reminders of the insecurity of their tenure. [^15]

Besides, as already noted, the purpose of the plagues is todrive those who would not otherwise do so to repentance and, thus, into the protective arms of God. Those who will not repent must be accountable to the fire.

CONCLUSION

The Lord has stated, "Mine indignation is soon to be poured out without measure upon all nations; and this will I do when the cup of their iniquity is full" (D&C 101:11). The world will not take advantage of the half hour of silence to repent. Though warned and recognizing the source of that warning, they will not respond. Thus, sin will be added to sin until the measure is complete; when it is, the moment of grace will pass. Then the angels will sound, and the earth will fall under the power of the four trumpets.

As if this destruction were not enough, John hears the ominous cry of a bird of prey (not an angel as in the KJV) preparing to dive for the kill. Most manuscripts have the Greek word aetos here, which translates as either eagle or vulture, as in the Septuagint and the New Testament (e.g. Luke 17:37). [^16] The image of the vulture hovering over a dying beast or of the eagle ready to swoop down for the kill best expresses the doom that the other three trumpets are about to bring upon unrepentant man. From the high heaven where all are visible to it and it is visible to all, it screeches its dirge: "Woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants of the earth because of the trumpet blasts that are about to be sounded by the other three angels" (v. 13, AT). Real destruction, of which mankind has had only a little taste up to this point, awaits the fifth trumpet blast. Indeed, verse thirteen serves as a "transition between the four plagues brought by God upon nature to lead man to repentance and the subsequent demonic woes in which man will be directly subjected to the forces of the abyss." [^17]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth: and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit. The Greek for the KJV phrase "the key to the bottomless pit" is h kleis tou phreatos ts abussou, literally, "the keyto the shaft of the abyss." The phrear is the shaft that leads down to hell.
[^2] And he opened the bottomless pit; and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit. See Amos 9:3; Job 41:31-32, Septuagint; 1 Enoch 17:7-8. These verses indicate that initially the abyss was the ocean, but it came to be viewed as a chasm in the earth, perhaps influenced by Isaiah 24:21-22. This latter idea prevailed in later literature. It was viewed as the place of intermediate punishment (cf. Luke 8:31; Charles,Commentary, 1: 240).
[^3] And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth: and unto them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power. Hailey, Revelation, 225-26.
[^4] And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree; but only those men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads. Ibid.
[^5] And to them it was given that they should not kill them, but that they should be tormented five months: and their torment was as the torment of a scorpion, when he striketh a man. See Mounce, Revelation, 193-94.
[^6] And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them. Ford, Revelation, 148.
[^7] And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men. 1 Enoch 76 shows this same influence having the locusts invade primarily out of the north.
[^8] And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of lions. Mounce, Revelation, 195.
[^9] And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron; and the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses running to battle. Hailey, Revelation, 230.
[^10] And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their tails: and their power was to hurt men five months. For discussion, see Ford, Revelation, 151; Mounce,Revelation, 196-97.
[^11] And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon. The term abad refers both to destruction (see Job 31:12) andto the place of destruction (see Job 26:6; Prov. 15:11; 27:20). The personification of Destruction along with Death in Job 28:22 could give rise to the name being associated with the prince of the underworld. The name of the Greek god Apollo comes from the same stock as Apollun. The sign of Apollo was the locust, and the god was called the "far darter" (referring to the darts he cast against his enemies) because he was the god of plague (for an example of his work, see Hom. Il.1:43-52; for discussion, see Mounce, Revelation, 198).
[^12] One woe is past; and, behold, there come two woes more hereafter. Ford, Revelation, 145. The idea of angels of punishment is a popular motif in apocalyptic literature (see e.g. 1 Enoch 40:7; 53:3; 56:1; 62:11; 63:1; Test. Lev. 3:3; 2 Enoch 10:3). An example of destroying angels instigating a great host to move against Israel is found in 1 Enoch 56:5-6.
[^13] And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is before God, Charles, Commentary, 1:248.
[^14] Saying to the sixth angel which had the trumpet, Loose the four angels which are bound in the great river Euphrates. The JST seems to underscore the idea that the numbers are not literal. John "sees" a vast host, which he symbolizes as myriads.
[^15] And the four angels were loosed, which were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men. The source of the number could be Psalm 68:17 where the Septuagint has myriads of myriads (cf. Dan. 7:10; Rev. 5:11).
[^16] And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thousand thousand: and I heard the number of them. Scott, Exposition, 211.
[^17] And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on them, having breastplates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone: and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions; and out of their mouths issued fire and smoke and brimstone. Scott, Exposition, 213.
