Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 9

The Locusts

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 9)

THE FIFTH TRUMPET BLAST AND THE FIRST WOE (vv. 1-2)

As the fifth trumpet blasts, the first of the eagle's woesstrikes the earth. A star, symbolic of a once divine being, a premortal power of such proportion his name was "light bearer," unlocks a terror so great that no nightmare can match it. The tense of the verb fall in verse one is perfect: "I saw a star fallenfrom heaven" (AT). John did not see the star fall but knew that it had fallen. The star had become evil and twisted, partaking too long of a poison so strong it could snuff out all light and turn a "son of the morning" into the devil himself. John will have more to say of the fall of this great and terrible being in chapter twelve. For now, the Seer seems to have had the words of the Lord in mind, "I beheld Satan fallen as lightning from heaven" (Luke 10:18, AT). Isaiah's imagery also holds:

How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High. Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit (14:12-15, KJV).

John witnesses Satan turn the key to unleash the very powers of hell upon an unsuspecting world. The predator's intent is to destroy the earth. From the onset of this millennial battle, John shows that Satan leads the hosts forth upon the earth. Before this, God overmastered the plagues through the destroying angels. From this point on, Satan personally directs the operations bringing the misery that fuels hell to the surface of the earth. The Seer reveals the Adversary at his worst—venting anger, frustration, and rage. The world will feel the full thrust of his fury.

John sees the evil pour out of the pit in the abyss. [^1] Ancient writings show this place to be the abode of Jehovah's enemy and a kind of holding tank for fallen angels or even Satan himself. [^2] The key Satan uses to open the pit symbolizes power, authority, and ownership. But note, Satan does not own the key. He receives it. Once again, John reveals that someone acts behind the scenes, controlling and directing even the machinations of the Evil One. Ironically this potent one, for all his flaunted authority, cannot free the might of hell until God gives him the key. In this way John shows that Perdition's dominion starts and ends where the Lord dictates. Satan's limits are firm—he cannot go beyond them (cf. Job 1:12; 2:6). [^3] But in the last days, because of the wickedness of men, the devil will have great power, "For I [God] am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion" (D&C 1:35).

As the pit is opened, smoke billows forth and obscures the light of the sun. Darkness reigns. Through this powerful symbol, John reveals the nature of the first thrust against mankind: a blow against the light. The darkness of false philosophy and theology must first hide the truth. [^4] The Destroyer mustmitigate the positive effects of the sixth seal and the first four trumpets. So he sends forth deceptions and delusions after the pattern he has used before with tremendous success.

At an earlier time, when none could ignore the signs and many began to believe, Satan's smoke billowed forth: "From this time forth there began to be lyings sent forth among the people, by Satan, to harden their hearts, to the intent that they might not believe in those signs and wonders which they had seen" (3 Ne. 1:22). Yes, "Satan did stir them up to do iniquity continually; yea, he did go about spreading rumors and contentions upon all the face of the land, that he might harden the hearts of the people against that which was good and against that which should come" (Hel. 16:22). His plan worked well. Under his influence men began to rationalize against the continuing fulfillment of the words of the prophets, saying: "Some things they may have guessed right, among so many; but behold, we know that all these great and marvelous works cannot come to pass, of which has been spoken" (Hel. 16:16). History is about to repeat itself.

THE LOCUSTS (vv. 3-11)

Out of this smoke of the abyss comes an appalling nightmare. The portrait of horror John describes focuses on one monstrosity: the locust. This dreaded engine of destruction ravages vegetation to such an extent that famine invariably follows. Coming out of the desert, locusts invade fertile areas in search of food. Some of their columns reach hundreds of feet in breadth and up to four miles in length. They strip the land bare of all vegetation. In Algiers, for instance, a plague of locusts created a famine that left two hundred thousand people dead. [^5] The Bible used locust plagues in a special symbolic sense that John follows: judgment against the rebellious. Pharaoh received this judgment from God because of his rebellion (see Ex. 10:4-20; Ps. 105:34-35). God told his own people that if they turned from him, he would send the locust plague upon them (see Deut. 28:38; 1 Kgs. 8:35, 37; 2 Chr. 7:13-14). Infestations of these swarming beasts were so dreaded that, even on the Sabbath, the shophar (the ram's horn trumpet blown only for sacred and very special occasions) would sound the alarm.

These insect demons were often associated with darkness. This was not accidental. The cloud they form is often so compact that it obscures the light of the sun. [^6] However, John's monsters do not cause the darkness; they result from it. They are men, blinded by the lack of light due to sin and corruption. According to the Doctrine and Covenants 93:39, "that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men." The result is a frenzy of evil not unlike the feeding frenzy of the locusts.

John's symbolism follows that of Joel 1-2, which describes a plague of natural locusts but which shows elements that appear to spring from mythology. They come, like John's, from the north instead of the south or southeast as is usual (see Joel 2:20). Joel and John are probably both picking up the Gog-Magog motif from Ezekiel 37-38 and Amos 7:1, where, in the Septuagint, a locust plague is specifically associated with the armies ofGog, that great leader of the anti-God host who fights against God in the last days. [^7]

They are not real locusts, as John makes clear in his statement, "It was said to them, Do not harm the grass of the earth, or any green thing, nor any tree, but only those men who have not the seal of God upon their forehead" (v. 4, AT). Their objective, unlike real locusts', is men. But not all men. Only those who do not wear the seal of the living God upon their foreheads. This verse glances back at chapter seven and the sealing of God's servants. Further, God forbids the locusts to kill, "but only to torture them [i.e. the unsealed men] five months" (v. 5, AT).

Note again that the nature, the length, and the target of the torment are all specific. The locusts must not kill, at least not at first. God permits them initially only to cause spiritual and mental anguish. The Greek word basanisthsontai used by John and translated "torment" is from the noun basanismos, which occurs only in Revelation: twice here in 9:5, once of those who worship the beast in 14:11, and three times in 18:7, 10, 15 in association with the anguish of the Great Whore. In each instance it indicates mental and spiritual suffering, not physical.

The time limit given to the monstrous insects is five months, the normal life expectancy of a locust. However, the time reference may be symbolic: the Seer appears to be using it to show that there is a limited period in which the tormentors will be allowed to operate. Their target is confined to those men who do not bear the mark of the living God. The righteous have nothing to fear from these demonic hordes. Once again John does not let the reader forget that a power is moving behind the scenes, setting the limits, determining how far and how long things will go. The plague, though driven by the minions of hell, is under sovereign control. [^8]

Just how the locusts are able to torment the wicked is not known. But John insists that the anguish is real, for "in those days men will seek death, but will not find it; they will long to die, but death will elude them" (v. 6, AT). The scene is not pretty, but it is not as though there is no means of relief; righteousness, however, is the price. For these men and women, that price is too high. Death appears much cheaper; to melt into nothingness seems more desirable. Of course, this is an illusion. Nevertheless, they will cling to it as their only hope of escape.

Again, a parallel comes from the Book of Mormon. During the final battles that destroyed the Nephite nation, as blood and carnage swept through the land, "no man could keep that which was his own, for the thieves, and the robbers, and the murderers, and the magic art, and the witchcraft [i.e. sorceries] which was in the land" (Morm. 2:10). Everyone was out for everyone else's wealth. As a result of the butchery and thievery, many were filled with sorrow and mourned, but "their sorrowing was not unto repentance, because of the goodness of God; but it was rather the sorrowing of the damned, because the Lord would not always suffer them to take happiness in sin" (Morm. 2:13). As a result, "they did curse God, and wish to die. Nevertheless they would struggle with the sword for their lives" (v. 14).

Note that in both Revelation and the Book of Mormon, "it is by the wicked that the wicked are punished; for it is the wicked that stir up the hearts of the children of men unto bloodshed" (Morm. 4:5). The locusts breed their sadistic torment and pour it out upon the corrupt. God's judgment comes fully, but God needs to do nothing. In fact, his judgment is to do nothing.

John describes the locusts as wearing gold like crowns. The Greek word here is stephanos (the award for athletic prowess, as noted before), not diadma, "royal crown." This is theonly place where the word is associated with any other than the Lord and the Saints. However, these are not crowns of permanent victory. John makes it clear that "they wore something like crowns of gold" (v. 7, AT), but not the real thing: his phrase stephanoi homoioi chrus means "laurels like unto gold."Victory of the wicked is at best only an imitation of the genuine; it is never lasting or true. The locusts, though terrifying in their appearance and crushing in their initial onslaught, cannot conquer. [^9]

Their human faces, women's hair, and lion's teeth heighten their demonical appearance. If John had some other purpose in mind by reporting these images it is unknown. Speculation gives three meanings to the long hair of the locusts: seductive power, antennae of real locusts, or the ancient locks worn by Parthian horsemen. [^10] Whatever his purpose, he does continue to finish the fearful portrait of the monsters. Breastplates of iron make them nearly impregnable, wings give them great mobility, but the scorpions' tails hold the greatest fear. The Seer uses the threat of the poisonous sting as the symbol of that which causes men to be in torment.

A single king drives the frenzied host. Though not identified specifically as such, he is the fallen star, Satan who is the angel of the abyss. John gives him both a Hebrew and Greek epithet. In the Hebrew he is called Abaddn. The name is derived from abad, meaning "to perish," and the noun meaning "he who causes to perish," or "the destroyer." The Greek Apollunmeans "destroyer" as well. [^11] No matter what the language is, the message is the same. Satan, an unseen general, pushes the horde forward. They are his minions, aping his nature, being led by his demonic inspiration. Their rise and torment constitute the fifth trumpet blast and the first period of woe. There are still two more woes to go.THE SIXTH TRUMPET BLAST

AND THE SECOND WOE (vv. 12-19)

As the sixth trumpet sounds, John hears a voice coming from the horns of the altar in heaven. The horns are a symbol of God's power that people obtain through faithful worship, especially through sacrifice. These horns have special significance in two ways. First, on the Day of Atonement the high priest sprinkled them with the blood of the offering to bring reconciliation between God and Israel. Second, they serve as an asylum for malefactors (e.g. 1 Kgs. 2:28-35, where Joab caught hold of the horns of the altar to avoid death at Solomon's hands). Therefore, one might expect the voice from the horns to offer reconciliation and asylum to the world. However, this is not the case. Instead, it commands the sixth angel to "release the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates" (v. 14, AT). [^12] That the voice comes from the horns of the altar suggests that in some way the second woe is connected with or a result of the prayers of the Saints, for the voice that commands the infliction comes from the very place, the altar, on which their prayers were offered (see 7:3-4). [^13]

These angels, kept in check while the Saints of God were sealed against destruction, now unleased their fury "for to slay the third part of men" (v. 15, KJV). Though the KJV has them coming from the Euphrates, the prophetic northernmost part of the kingdom of Israel, the JST makes it clear that they come out of the pit of the abyss (see 9:14). Thus, Satan frees them at the same time he unleashes his demons. With these angels now fully in charge, the plagues are no longer directed at the earth. Now men become the sole target. These angels have been prepared specifically for this moment, for "they had been kept ready" (v. 15, AT). Here the Greek participle hoihtoimasmenoi (a reflexive perfect passive) is "those having been prepared," or "those having been made ready." The use of the perfect tense heightens the idea of their purpose. At an exact moment, and not a second before, Satan will release the demonic tetrad. But the destroying angels do not have complete reign. John once again uses the symbolic number one-third to show that there is a limit to what they can do. God continues to hold sway even at this moment.

Quite abruptly the Seer shifts his gaze to the engines of destruction: an unbelievably large cavalry force no longer depicted as locusts. The terror of a mounted attack by armored riders becomes John's means of symbolic communication. The Seer hears (or as the JST states "sees") their number. [^14] The number is twice 10,000x10,000 or 200,000,000 mounted troops. As usual, this number should not be taken literally. John has given us a multiplied myriad: an expression of incalculable immensity. [^15] The main idea in the passage is that of a vast army exceeding by far any before witnessed. A revised version reads, "the armies of the horsemen": not one army, but "armies,"not a host, but many. The Greek reads, ho arithmos tn strateumatn tou hippikou dismuriades muriadn, literally, "The number of the bodies of soldiers of the cavalry [was] two myriads of myriads." John seems to use the plural rather than the singular to show that more than one invasion into the territory will be attempted and will succeed. [^16]

Another terrifying aspect of the vision is the horses with their mouths filled with lion's teeth, the embodiment of cruelty and destruction, out of which issue fire, smoke, and brimstone, symbolic of the torment of hell and underscoring the diabolical nature of the horde. John's horses echo the monster Leviathan of Job 41:19-20, who breathes out fire and smoke. By this imagery, John shows that it is grounded in the very heart of Satan's domain.

The fire-breathing monsters succeed in their mission of destruction, killing a staggering number of people. Fire, smoke, and brimstone execute the judgment and inflict the judicial power of Satan. They do not represent the quick and clean death of the sword but the agonizing misery upon which hell feeds. John sees more than mere human slaughter by modern scientific methods. Combined with these, and driving them, are the destructive forces of the pit let loose upon a "third part of men," to kill. The slaughter appears to be selective, for there is aremnant that remains. [^17] Perhaps only the more wicked part succumb to the three agents of death.

THE REST OF THE MEN REPENTED NOT (vv. 20-21)

As amazing as it seems, those that are not killed continue to worship the very forces that worked for their destruction. [^18] They refuse to give up their materialistic idolatry. Their hearts continue to crave gold, silver, brass, and other material objects that, as John points out, "neither can see, nor hear, nor walk" (v. 20, KJV). Though their world is collapsing because of it, these wicked souls sell themselves as the lackeys of the Never-living and the Destroyer-doomed-to-destruction. Thievery, murder, and fornication, specifically prohibited in the ten commandments, all continue apace.

To the list John adds sorcery (see v. 21). The Greek word he uses is pharmakeia, from which the word pharmacyis derived. Pharmakeia indicates the use of drugs, elixirs, and contraceptive potions associated with the occult. When freely accepted, these narcotics addict, desensitize, and deceive the nations, resulting in blindness and the inability to change. The use of drugs, simple and potent, is the same means by which the Mother of Abominations is able to deceive the nations (see Rev. 18, particularly v. 23).

CONCLUSION

John's two images, combining to reveal the nature of the latter-day nightmare, give the reader a feel for the horror that Satan will free against the wicked. The vision creates a picture composed of the most horrible images that can be imagined; not so much to detail what actually will be but to give the reader, through the use of powerful metaphors, a feeling for the reality behind what will be. But the real horror is neither the horses nor the horsemen. It is those men and women who will live through the evil day and not be humbled, who will continue to cling to their idols of gold, silver, brass, stone, and wood. Inanimate objects, which neither see, nor hear, nor feel, will become masters and bind to themselves these demented souls. Thus, these people practice the most blatant form of idolatry—placing material things before God—even in the face of the reality that their idols do them no good.

And all this will "be accomplished after the opening of the seventh seal, before the coming of Christ" (D&C 77:13). The Second Coming does not usher in the millennial era. The woes pronounced by the trumpets do. Let me emphasize, Christ will not appear in glory as the millennial day dawns. Instead, Satan's inferno-creating horses and sadistic hoards "having fiery breastplates, dusky red, and sulfurous" will (v. 18, AT).

The Millennium, for the purpose of this study, begins at the time the Savior commences his reign on the earth. But to begin his rule, he does not have to have appeared to the world. His reign begins as he collects the keys he has given to the prophets through the ages and directs affairs personally. Daniel gives a hint when this will be. Speaking as though it had already happened, he notes that war was made against the Saints and that the wicked had power to prevail "until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom" (7:21-22, KJV). The prophet appears to have had in mind the great future gathering at Adam-ondi-Ahman. At that time Adam, the Ancient of days, will appear, as will the Savior. An account will be given to the Lord, and he will then begin to personally orchestrate all events from that point (see D&C 116). [^19] Very likely the events in Revelation 8 and 9 will take place after this event.

How long after the Millennium begins will it take for the Lord to come? "The hour and the day no man knoweth, neither the angels in heaven, nor shall they know until he comes" (D&C 49:7). But it will likely be some time after the seventh sealis opened. For the present, we of the sixth seal are to watch for the signs the Lord has given and wait in faith. In this way we prepare ourselves to receive the Savior's mark, because of which we will have no need to fear the millennial-day horrors.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire: Ford, Revelation, 161.
[^2] And he had in his hand a little book open: and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the earth, See ibid., 162.
[^3] And cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth: and when he had cried, seven thunders uttered their voices. Ibid.
[^4] And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write: and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Seal up those things which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not. McConkie, Commentary, 3:505.
[^5] And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth lifted up his hand to heaven, Smith, History, 1:176.
[^6] And sware by him that liveth for ever and ever, who created heaven, and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the things which are therein, that there should be time no longer:
[^7] But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared to his servants the prophets.
[^8] And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again, and said, Go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth.
[^9] And I went unto the angel, and said unto him, Give me the little book. And he said unto me, Take it, and eat it up; and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey.
[^10] And I took the little book out of the angel's hand, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter.
[^11] And he said unto me, Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.
[^12] One woe is past; and, behold, there come two woes more hereafter. Ford, Revelation, 145. The idea of angels of punishment is a popular motif in apocalyptic literature (see e.g. 1 Enoch 40:7; 53:3; 56:1; 62:11; 63:1; Test. Lev. 3:3; 2 Enoch 10:3). An example of destroying angels instigating a great host to move against Israel is found in 1 Enoch 56:5-6.
[^13] And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is before God, Charles, Commentary, 1:248.
[^14] Saying to the sixth angel which had the trumpet, Loose the four angels which are bound in the great river Euphrates. The JST seems to underscore the idea that the numbers are not literal. John "sees" a vast host, which he symbolizes as myriads.
[^15] And the four angels were loosed, which were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men. The source of the number could be Psalm 68:17 where the Septuagint has myriads of myriads (cf. Dan. 7:10; Rev. 5:11).
[^16] And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thousand thousand: and I heard the number of them. Scott, Exposition, 211.
[^17] And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on them, having breastplates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone: and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions; and out of their mouths issued fire and smoke and brimstone. Scott, Exposition, 213.
[^18] By these three was the third part of men killed, by the fire, and by the smoke, and by the brimstone, which issued out of their mouths. Mounce, Revelation, 204.
[^19] For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: for their tails were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they do hurt. Smith, Teachings, 157; McConkie, MillennialMessiah, 578-80.
