Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 10

The Little Scroll

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 10)

ANOTHER MIGHTY ANGEL (vv. 1-7)

John has prepared his reader to expect in chapter ten the final trumpet blast to fill the air the final woe to be hurled against the wicked. But it does not happen. The seventh angel does not appear; the trumpet remains mute. Instead, the picture shifts and a new vision opens. In this way, John dramatically intro duces another interlude, a moment of instruction and insight before the resolution of the crisis.

As the new vision opens, John sees another angel, mighty and radiant, descending from heaven, holding a little scroll in his hand. This angel stands in sharp contrast to the star that introduced chapter nine: The star fell to earth; the angel descends of his own accord. The star had to receive the key to the pit; the angel possesses the book. Thick black smoke boiled from the star's abyss, while brilliant spectral light emanates from the angel's face. The star drove the demonic horde; the angel governs cosmic phenomena—cloud, rainbow, sun. One stands as a prince of darkness; the other as a prince of light. [^1] One is Satan, the father of lies; the other, the revealer of truth. Thus, John demonstrates the vast difference between the two beings.

Once again the image of the rainbow is present, sign of God's covenant not only with mankind, but also with all living creatures. It surrounds the angel's head like a many-colored diadem beaming around a face full of celestial glory prepared to bestow favor and blessings. It reminds one of the invocation that Aaron bestowed upon Israel saying, "The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace" (Num. 6:24-26, KJV). The Palestinian Targum adds Aaron's plea that the people may be guarded against demons and malignant spirits. [^2]

This vision stands in sharp contrast to the one that just closed. There God turned his face, that is his favor, away from the wicked. In consequence, evil smote the malevolent souls (cf. Ps. 33:17; Lev. 17:10; Ezek. 14:8; 15:7). [^3] The angel reflects not only the glory, but also the magnanimity of God whose face is ever toward John. Therefore, with the rest of the faithful, John is beneficiary of the promise: "The Lord God is a sun and shield: the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly" (Ps. 84:11, KJV).

The angel places his feet on the land and the sea. The "foot" symbolizes the power of possession; just as conquerors often placed their feet on the necks of the defeated (see, e.g., Josh. 10:24), whatever he places it upon, he subordinates. Theangel's stance indicates that all earth is subject to him, "sea and land" being the Hebrew formula for mastery of the terrestrial order (see Ex. 20:11; Ps. 68:22; cf. Mark 6:48; Matt. 14:28-36). From this position the angel gives a mighty shout to which the "voices" of seven thunders respond. However, John gives neither the content of the angel's cry nor the thunders' message. In fact, God specifically commands him to seal up the message.

This is the only place in all Revelation where disclosure is forbidden, but insight may be gained from John's Gospel. As the Savior approached the hour of atonement, he prayed for strength to glorify the Father. "Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again. The people therefore, that stood by, and heard it, said that it thundered: others said, An angel spake to him. Jesus answered and said, This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes. Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out" (John 12:28-31, KJV). The "thunder" bore testimony not for the sake of the Savior but for those who heard. In doing so, however, it placed the world in a position to be judged and the stronghold of the prince of darkness to be overthrown. This may be the message of the thunders. The declaration of the angel supports this view. He said, "In the days when the seventh angel is about to sound [his trumpet], the mystery of God will be finished, just as he declared to his servants the prophets" (v. 7, AT).

In the New Testament, God's dealings in history are a mystery because one can recognize and understand them only through revelation to the prophets. Before then they are hidden. The sounding of the seventh trumpet makes God's designs from the beginning fully known. These include the overthrow of the kingdom of darkness and the full establishment of the kingdom of God on the earth. In Revelation 11:15, following the sounding of the seventh trumpet, a heavenly chorus proclaims, "The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever" (KJV). As Elder McConkie has stated:

It appears from the added and clarifying knowledge revealed to Joseph Smith that the seven thunders which here utter their voices are the seven angels reciting in some detail that which is to be in each of the thousand year periods of the earth's temporal continuance. In the very nature of things, lest men become as God, knowing the end from the beginning, John was forbidden to record these hidden things.

It also appears that John's vision prefigured what is to be when the events occur and that the promised proclamations shall yet be made when the hour for Millennial peace actually arrives. [^4]

Lifting his hand to the sky, the omnipotent angel then swears a solemn oath "that there should be no further delay" (v. 6, AT). The word chronos here is not to be equated with time. When a thousand years of temporal existence yet remain, it seems unreasonable to have the angel declare that time is at an end from the moment the seventh trumpet sounds. Besides, it seems unnecessary for the angel to swear an oath just to make a statement about the nature of eternity. The sense of the term here seems to be one of delay. The angel swears that delay will not be permitted. All things will move according to God's dictates from this moment on. God's will is about to be fully executed, and nothing can stop it. The day of repentance is past.

THE LITTLE SCROLL (vv. 8-11)

In this context John receives the commandment to take a little scroll that the angel held open in his hand. Following Ezekiel 3:1-3, the angel instructs John to eat the scroll with the understanding that, though it would be sweet to the taste, it would make his stomach bitter. The reason is made clear. Thescroll contains his role or mission particularly as it relates to the latter days. His specific task is "to gather the tribes of Israel; behold, this is Elias, who, as it is written, must come and restore all things" (D&C 77:14). John is an Elias.

His job includes active participation in restoring the gospel and priesthood blessings to scattered Israel. He did this in part when he moved in concert with Peter and James in restoring the Melchizedek order of the priesthood to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery (see D&C 27:12-13; 128:20). Presently, he is actively involved in fulfilling the rest. In June conference, 1831, the prophet Joseph Smith stated "that John the Revelator was then among the Ten Tribes of Israel who had been led away by Salmanasser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion." [^5]

Just why his mission would contain bitterness is unknown. In Ezekiel's case, the parchment he figuratively ate contained woes, lamentations, and judgments (see 2:9-10). Because it was the word of God, it pleased Ezekiel, but because it was harsh it pained him. Note too how God's word is considered sweet in Psalm 119:103 and Jeremiah 15:16. Perhaps John's mission is somewhat the same. The angel told him that "thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings" (v. 11, KJV). The formula used seven other times by John is changed here, "kings" replacing "tribes." John's commission includes testifying not just to peoples but to heads of state. The term "many" suggests the vastness of the field; not just to one empire but to a multitude. But by witnessing the gospel, John participates directly in damning rebellious nations. Therefore, their rejection of his message, in part, brings upon them the horrible judgments he saw while on the Isle of Patmos.

CONCLUSION

This interlude helps explain why John received the Patmos vision. He was to play an active role in the events he recorded. Thus, God commanded him to devour the scroll, symbolic of mental digestion, and thereby internalize its contents. TheSeer did so, and by this means made a complete appropriation of his mission and the message he was to bear. This done, he was ready to act. The degree to which he internalized the message is illustrated by the book of Revelation itself. The vision rings with clarity and purpose. It had become a part of John. Only after this point does John becomes a participant in, not just an observer of, what goes on. His first official act opens chapter eleven.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein. Ford, Revelation, 168.
[^2] But the court which is without the temple leave out, and measure it not; for it is given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two months. On Solomon's temple, see 1 Kings 6; Ezekiel 10:5; 40:17, 20. If John had meant the temple complex of Herod with its courts, buildings, and porches, he would have probably used the word hieron, "temple" (cf. John 2:14).
[^3] And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. The verb carries the meaning of being cast out by force, removed from favor, or left out of consideration.
[^4] These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth. 1 Enoch 61:1-5 mentions an angel with a measuring cord surveying the righteous for the purpose of preservation (cf. Zech. 12:2-3).
[^5] And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. McConkie, Commentary, 3:509.
