Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 11

The Seventh Trumpet

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 11)

JOHN'S COMMISSION (vv. 1-2)

As chapter eleven opens, the seventh trumpet remains mute; tension continues. Before it breaks, John must perform a task growing out of the commission he received in chapter ten. He is given a measuring rod or surveyor's rule, probably made from the "giant reed" (arundo donax) that grows in the swampy areas of Mediterranean lands and can reach heights of twenty feet. [^1] John is instructed to measure the sanctuary (Greek naos) but not the outer court. He probably has either the Tabernacle or Solomon's temple in view rather than Herod's, for both of the former had two courts whereas the latter had four. [^2] Since John draws so much of his imagery from the Old Testament, it is likely that he envisions Solomon's Temple. That it is not the tabernacle is suggested by association of the edifice with Jerusalem. However, with the Lord's propensity to adapt images for his own use, John may have had none of these in mind. Certainly, the picture he builds includes a temple properwith its altar and an outer court.

John's instructions leave no doubt about the fate of the outer court: "It has been given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two months" (v. 2, AT). Therefore, the angel forbides John to measure the court, and further, it, along with the Holy City, is to be "cast out" (Greek, ekball) [^3] because both have lost divine favor. Thus, thephrase "it has been given" (Greek, edoth) carries the idea thatGod has already determined how far the destruction will go.

Measuring is God's symbolic means of noting that protective power will not allow the sanctuary to be profaned. The background appears to be Ezekiel 40-42 where the prophet sees the temple measured with great care. Zechariah 1:16, where Israel is saved in association with a measuring line, shows that protection is symbolized. [^4] For those outside those limits, there is no celestial shelter. Proximity will not be good enough. The outer court will be in no better position than the city itself. There is a message here. It appears that the sanctuary is itself a symbol of the Lord's people, those who are the living temple of God wherein his Spirit dwells (see 1 Cor. 3:16-17; 2 Cor. 6:16; Eph. 2:19-22). If that is the case, then the outer court is those who are just outside the reach of the Spirit. They are not antagonistic to God, but they are not fully committed to him either. They are the lukewarm, and, as God has said, "I will spue thee out" (Rev. 3:15-16, KJV).

THE TWO WITNESSES (vv. 3-14)

The Revelation makes clear the means by which the righteous will be preserved. Human agents with divine power act for God. "They are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration, and to prophesy to the Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers" (D&C 77:15). Two is the canonical number necessary to sustain a charge at court (see Deut. 19:15; 2 Cor. 13:1; cf. Deut. 17:6; Num. 35:30). The two witnesses will provide the dual testimony against their antagonists that will bring down the full wrath of God.

"These two shall be followers of that humble man, Joseph Smith," states Elder McConkie, "through whom the Lord of Heaven restored the fulness of his everlasting gospel in this final dispensation of grace. No doubt they will be members of the Council of the Twelve or of the First Presidency of the Church." [^5] John symbolically notes their high position with God. They stand before Him as two olive trees, and two lampstands. This reflects Zechariah 4:12-14. Here the two are anointed ones who stand next to the Lord, thus showing the position of preeminence. Note that they not only uphold the light (i.e., the Savior), but that the substance of the light, the Holy Spirit, alsoflows through them.

The witnesses combine the powers of Moses and Elijah. The latter caused a three-and-one-half-year drought upon Israel (see 1 Kgs. 17:1; Luke 4:25; James 5:17), and on two occasions fire consumed troops sent to arrest him (2 Kgs. 1:9-12; cf. 2 Ezra 13; Jer. 5:14); while the former held authority over water (see Ex. 7:20; cf. Ps. 105:29) and brought plagues against Egypt (see Ex. 7-11). During the course of their ministry, the two latter-day prophets will be absolutely indestructible. Those who attempt to stop the two witnesses will be smitten, so powerful will be the Spirit of the Lord upon them. [^6] As the Lord said to Jeremiah, so it will be with these prophets: "I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them" (5:14, KJV). Note, too, that Jeremiah wrote, after he attempted to refrain from bearing witness, God's "word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay" (20:9). On this basis, the fire issuing from the mouth of the two prophets is testimony that condemns the heathen to destruction.

John gives the active ministry of these prophets as forty-two months. This corresponds to 1260 days (see 11:3; 12:6), "time, and times, and half a time" (12:14), and three-and-one-half years, if each month is computed as thirty days based on a lunar calendar. [^7] However, it may be best not to take John too literally here. The message probably lies behind the symbol. Three and one-half, half of seven (see Rev. 11:9, 11), denotes what is arrested midway in its normal course. The apocalyptic usage of this number goes back to Daniel 7:25 (cf. 9:27; 12:7). Bear in mind that the period from the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes to the rededication of the Temple was about three and one-half years, from 168-67 to 164-63 b.c..

The number six also connotes deficit, a failure to attain the completeness of seven, while eight designates superabundance. Symbolically forty-two is pejorative, since, as one scholar has pointed out, "it is the result of six multiplied by seven, i.e. 'perfection missing the mark.' " [^8] The number is used again in Revelation 13 where it personifies complete imperfection. In apocalyptic material it designates a limited period in which evil is allowed free reign. [^9] The Seer's use of it underscores the idea that the period of the witnesses, of divine protection upon the Saints, and of vehement antagonism toward righteousness are all concurrent. [^10] During his mortal ministry the Lord had stated: "Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled" (Luke 21:24, KJV). When that time is fulfilled, wickedness will end. The ministry of the two prophets marks the moment.

To seal their sure witness (Greek, marturia), these two great prophets will be martyred. Thus, their testimony will join with those of the fifth seal to cry against the world of wickedness. Just how these two will die is unknown. John notes that it will come only when they have finished their ministry, and that the beast that ascends from the pit in the abyss will attack and overpower them. But there has not been any previous mention of a beast from the pit. However, in chapter nine Abaddn, or Satan, is called the king of the pit. We may assume then that Satan and the beast are one and that he will inspire his minions to renewed fury against the prophets. Those within the camp of the witnesses may engineer their death since the enemies outside have been held in abeyance for years. This is suggested through the association of their death with that of the Lord, killed by his own people. Moreover, the witnesses shall lie in the streets of Jerusalem (termed Sodom and Egypt to reflect its corruption and rebellion), not in the camps of the enemy.

The death of the two prophets causes ecstasy among the wicked. The Revelator pictures the whole area involved in a frenzy of joy, the people sending presents to one another and generally making merry "because these two prophets had been a torment to those who dwell on the earth" (v. 10, AT). [^11] The nature of that torment, of course, had been their invincible testimony. The brilliant light of truth had burned the eyes and scorched the hearts of the people who had grown to love darkness. With the prophets' deaths, there appears to be nothing to stop the victory of evil. The beast from the abyss has overcome. He has proved himself more mighty than God. No wonder his lackeys rejoice. This is the moment of triumph; death and hell are victorious. But are they?

For three-and-a-half days the bodies, serving as war trophies, remain unburied. Among ancient people, such treatment was a means of mocking and generating great shame toward the unburied, their families, and all they stood for. The time reference, three-and-one-half days, seems symbolically fitting, for this is the period when evil rules unchecked. However, revelries are suddenly cut short; celebrations turn to shock. In an instant, before the carousing multitudes, the spirit of life enters into the bodies of the witnesses, and they are called into heaven. John's phrase parallels that of Ezekiel 37 when the breath of life entered into the dry bones and they arose and stood on their feet. John continues to shadow Moses and Elijah. The witnesses have the same manner of ascension: a chariot and horses of fire catch up Elijah and mount on a whirlwind (see 2 Kgs. 2:11). Moses, according to Clement of Alexandria, was removed from the sight of followers by a cloud. [^12] The result is consternation such as has seldom been seen on this planet. What appeared to be total triumph suddenly becomes complete defeat.

Murder is the last resort of the wicked. What happens when the murdered do not stay dead? The ultimate power of the unrighteous fails, and with it all other forms of coercion and intimidation. With this act, God begins to move directly onto the historical stage. No longer working behind the scenes, he shows that he has final authority over life and death.

As the wicked watch the ascension, a great earthquake rocks the area, "and a tenth of the city collapse[s]; seven thousand people [are] killed" (v. 13, AT). For the third time, the Seer evokes the picture of an earthquake. Here it further reveals God's direct intervention. The damage is selective. A tenth of the city falls. This is the Lord's portion—his tithe that he will demand of the wicked. The number ten indicates, among other things, the whole of a part. The ten plagues were the whole of that portion of God's wrath brought against Egypt, but not the fullness of his wrath. The number ten represents all the tribestaken into captivity, but not all of the house of Israel, nor all of any one tribe. [^13] Thus, it may be that the Seer indicates that the judgment came at the moment of ascension, upon all the wicked who fought against the witnesses.

That John uses the figure seven thousand as the number devoted to death lends support to this idea. The number is probably not to be taken literally. Rather, it signifies, as in other places, fullness and completeness. Thus, the specific number doomed to death all died during this judgment.

But there are many spared. These may represent the less wicked, the court followers but not the actual doers of evil. Certainly, they do not appear to be the righteous. The effect of the appalling judgment on the city does not lead these survivors to repentance and faith. However, in fright they give "glory to the God of the heaven" (v. 13, KJV). But note, they do not invite him among them. They reverence him as the God of heaven because that keeps him at a distance. But John already stated that the two prophets bore witness of "the God of the earth" (v. 4, KJV; italics added). It is God who has right and title to the earth. That is the issue in dispute with these recreantpeople and the beast from the abyss. John insists that God has the unqualified and peremptory title, and he will not debate or forego the issue. [^14] Hence God settles the question permanently with one last blast of the trumpet.

THE SEVENTH TRUMPETAND THE LAST WOE (vv. 15-19)

With the ascension of the two prophets, the second woe is fulfilled and, at last, the seventh trumpet sounds. Instantly angelic voices proclaim, "The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will reign for ever and ever" (v. 15, AT). The issue of ownership is settled. The twenty-four elders exclaim, "We give thanks to you Lord God Almighty, who is and who was, because you have taken your great power and have begun to reign" (v. 17, AT). Although included in the KJV, the phrase "who is to come" is not in the Greek and does not appear again in Revelation. This is probably because the moment awaited for has now arrived. God has come. Now as he reigns, all is set for "destroying the destroyers of the earth" (v. 18, AT). [^15] The destruction of the wicked remnant is the last woe. All heaven prepares for this last assault that God himself will direct.

In preparation, the temple of heaven opens and displays the ark of the covenant. Few things could better symbolize the covenant that God made with Israel. At this moment, when all that was promised is about to come about, the heavenly host enter the Holy of Holies and receive their eternal rest. In Hebrews 9:1-11 Paul notes that the opening of the temple symbolizes that all may now enter God's rest. [^16] But not all is done. The world's wicked must still stand judgment. So from the temple issue flashes of lightning, rumblings, peals of thunder, an earthquake, and a great hailstorm. All these are sent against the earth once more.

CONCLUSION

Chapter eleven moves through the second woe and introduces the third. But it only introduces the third. There is no description of the final onslaught, no explanation of how God will wrest control of the world, no judgment. Instead, it focuses on the praise and glory of God as he begins to reign and prepares for the destruction of the wicked. Certainly there must be more to come. Indeed, the Seer does give a preview that justice is about to be meted out. A crescendo of disaster, greater than that shown, is about to usher in the great and terrible day of the Lord.

However, that must wait while John rounds out the picture with additional information. So John breaks the narrative just at the point where God begins his reign. With chapter twelve, John starts anew, and this time he uses a different point of view to disclose additional details of the same scenes. In doing so, he more clearly portrays the foundation, beginning, development, and final end of the antagonism between good and evil.

Some may be concerned because the day of the Lord is filled with destruction. But it has its purpose. Nothing unclean, that is, unjustified, can enter into the Lord's presence and survive (see Nahum 1:2-8; Moses 6:57). The glory of God is about to sweep the earth so that the Holy City can be established. Therefore, evil must come to an end.

Note that by the time the Lord comes, very little evil will be left to put to an end. Throughout Revelation we have seen the self-destructive nature of wickedness. But God cannot allow such self-destruction to act as an impersonal nemesis, an independent self-operating moral law sweeping away all in its path. To do so would allow the powers of evil to carry all the inhabitants of the earth down with them to utter ruin. God would be left with a hollow, Pyrrhic victory that resembled defeat far more than victory. Since God's victory must also be man's victory, it must be won through righteous human agents exercising faith in God. Evil must be allowed to combine its nefarious forces against the Savior's people and then be forced back in utter defeat through the faith, trust, and loyalty of the Lord's disciples. [^17]

This is what the second woe is all about. As the third comes, the Saints ride with their Christ on the clouds and move against the remnant of evil in total faith toward victory. Those whose souls have lain beneath the altar will find that they are notonly vidicated but also that they are the vindicators. As it states in Joseph Smith-History 1:37, "The day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts." [^18]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars: See endnote 21 following.
[^2] And she being with child cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered. The full texts can be found in Ehat, Words, 168-90.
[^3] And there appeared another wonder in heaven; and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. TDNT, s.v., smeion. SeeMoulton, Vocabulary, s.v. smeion where the word is used for a "sign," "seal," or "distinguishing mark" that is visible to the eye.
[^4] And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth: and the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was born. Ford, Revelation, 188; Scott, Exposition, 247.
[^5] And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne. Ford, Revelation, 188. Zion herself in 4 Ezra 9:43-45 and10:43-45 also bears a child.
[^6] And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days. Hyrum L. Andrus, "Joseph Smith, Social Philosopher, Theorist and Prophet" (unpublished D.S.S. thesis, Syracuse University, 1955), 569. For discussions of the political kingdom of God, see James R. Clark, "Church and State Relationships in Education in Utah" (unpublished Ed.D. dissertation, Utah State University, 1958); Hyrum L. Andrus, Foundations of the Millennial Kingdom of Christ,vol. 3 in Doctrines of the Kingdom (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1973) the unsympathetic version by Klaus Hansen, Quest for Empire: The Political Kingdom of God and the Council of Fifty in Mormon History (Michigan: Michigan State University, 1959).
[^7] And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, Smith, History, 7:381-82, where Brigham Young states: "As observed by one of the speakers this morning that kingdom [i.e. the kingdom of God] grows out of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but it is not the church."
[^8] And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven. Brigham Young, The Kingdom of God (n.p.: n.p., n.d.), 13.This is a pamphlet containing a speech given by the prophet July 1855 in Salt Lake City. A copy is located in the Harold B. Lee library at Brigham Young University.
[^9] And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. Smith, Doctrines, 1:229; italics in original.
[^10] And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night. This was not the only thing that failed during the period of the meridian church. Joseph Smith noted that the Savior wished to gather Israel that they might "build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom. . . . Jesus did everything to gather the people, and they would not be gathered, and He therefore poured out curses upon them" (Teachings, 307-8). Part of that cursing was totake the kingdom away.
[^11] And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death. TDNT, s.v., drakn. The symbol reaches wayback in antiquity, being found among the Mesopotamians as both Tiamat and Labbu and among the Egyptians as Apophis, the main symbol of the Typhon along with the crocodile. In the Old Testament, it has the name of Rahab (see Isa. 51:9-10; Ps. 89:10), Leviathan (see Ps. 74:12-19; Isa. 27:1), and as the dragon of the sea (see Job 7:12; Ezek. 29:3-6; 32:2-8; see Charles, Commentary, 1:318-19).
[^12] Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time. For discussion, see John Day, God's Conflict with the Dragon and the Sea (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), 62-87.
[^13] And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child. Scott, Exposition, 249-50.
[^14] And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent. Joseph Smith noted that when the prophets speak of beasts, they mean images, "they being types to represent certain things. At the same time they received the interpretation as to what those images or types were designed to represent" (Teachings, 291). Hestated, further, that the word "dragon" is actually a mistranslation andshould be rendered "devil" (see Ehat, Words, 187).
[^15] And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood. Some variant readings replace red (purrhos) with fire(pur). The color may be derived from tradition. The serpent Set-Typhon of Egypt is red, as is that of Homer, Iliad 2.308.
[^16] And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth. Of interest is that the Ugaritic sea monster Leviathan possessed seven heads (see A. Herdner, Corpus des tablettes en cuneiformesalphabÃ©tiques, 2 vols. [Paris: University of Paris, 1963], 3.IIID.39;5.I.3); and the idea is repeated in the Odes of Solomon 22:5 and Pis. Soph.66.
[^17] And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. Hailey, Revelation, 270.
[^18] Mounce, Revelation, 237-38.
