Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 12

The Dragon, the Woman, and the Child

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 12)

A NEW SERIES OF VISIONS

With the angelic rejoicing caused by the blast of the seventh trumpet, the vision of the seven seals closes. But the revelation does not end. Immediately another series of visions begins. These, however, do not take up where the old series left off. Chapter twelve breaks the flow of the vision and introduces new elements and explanations. Flashing back to John's day, it develops the whole story again, this time continuing on to the end of time.

The second half of Revelation has far fewer scriptural guides than the first half. Doctrine and Covenants 77, very helpful up to this point, contains no information on material after the eleventh chapter of Revelation. The JST, however, remains useful. In it we see that Joseph Smith made more changes in chapter twelve than in any other portion of Revelation with the possible exception of chapter one. However, a careful examination of these changes shows that the amount of actual material added is small. Most of the changes constitute little more than switching verses. The result, unfortunately, is not very helpful. [^1]

Joseph Smith, breaking from total silence on the subject, gave three discourses on the beasts of Revelation, two on 2 April 1843 and one on 8 April 1843. The speeches were recorded in brief in Joseph Smith's diary by his scribe Willard Richards and more extensively by William Clayton. Franklin D. Richards made a few notes on points of interest to him. Unfortunately all these accounts are so abbreviated that a great deal of ambiguity exists. These speeches do provide some assistance and will be used in reconstructing John's message in this and the following chapter. [^2]

THE WOMAN AND THE MAN CHILD (vv. 1-2, 5)

John introduces this section, according to the KJV, with the words: "And there appeared a great wonder in heaven." Here "wonder" would be better translated as "sign" (Greeksmeion). A wonder is a surprise of great magnitude, but a sign is replete with meaning and points to a definite subject or object. The word denotes an optical impression through which one gains confirmations. [^3] John's use of the word is consistent. It foreshadows a coming event and thus serves as a prophetic or anticipatory omen. The JST notes that the sign in heaven was "in the likeness of things on the earth," (v. 1), making it clear that the heavenly vision symbolized earthly conditions.

The adjective "great" is used six times in this chapter, suggesting the importance of the themes covered. The first of the great signs, in order but not in eminence, is the woman. John describes her as being "clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars" (KJV). The woman, according to the JST, represents the Church (see v. 7). On her head are the victor's laurels (stephanos) garnished with twelve stars. These symbolize the twelve apostles, or priesthood authority, who stand at the Church's head.

Celestial glory surrounds her as a garment, showing that the power of God is upon her. The Greek word used here, peribebmen, "having been clothed," suggests that thewoman wears the glory as a garment but that it does not belong to her. It is reflected by her. Thus, she manifests the light of Christ but is not the source of that light. There is also a secondary meaning of the Greek verb periball, translated "clothed," that isvery likely at play here. The word means "to throw up a rampart around" (cf. Luke 19:43). John's imagery could, therefore, represent the glory of God acting as a bulwark to protect the Church. [^4]

The woman is in travail. Her pangs suggest creative suffering, a suffering that ends in joy as she brings forth a son. The Old Testament often associates such suffering with the suffering that precedes the establishment of Zion (cf. Isa. 13:8; 26:17; 66:7-8; Jer. 4:31; 13:21; Micah 4:10). These references suggest that the imagery represents the coming forth of the New Israel or the New Jerusalem. J. Massyngberde Ford notes that the woman is the antithesis of the harlot exposed in chapter eighteen and thus is the symbol of the New Jerusalem. [^5] She is not far from the mark. As will be shown below, the child represents the political kingdom of God whose laws will come forth from Zion. John's vision suggests that this nearly became a reality during the apostolic ministry. The book of Acts shows that the earliest Saints practiced, albeit briefly, a kind of law of consecration and enjoyed immense spiritual power and unity (see 2:41-47; 4:31-37).

However, the child, according to the JST, does not represent Zion per se but a particular aspect of God's work in establishing Zion. The child, "who was to rule all nations with the rod of iron" (v. 3), is "the kingdom of our God and his Christ" (v. 7). Insights from modern prophets make it clear that John's "man child" represented a real political kingdom that was to be established by God to govern the whole earth. [^6] Brigham Young taught that this political power actually grows out of the Church. [^7] Speaking of the latter-day event, he explained, "The Church of Jesus Christ will produce this government, and cause it to grow and spread, and it will shield round about the church. And under the influence and power of the Kingdom of God, the church will rest secure and dwell in safety, without taking the trouble of governing and controlling the whole earth." [^8] Elder Joseph Fielding Smith stated:

After Christ comes, all the peoples of the earth will be subject to him, but there will be multitudes of people on the face of the earth who will not be members of the Church; yet all will have to be obedient to the laws of the kingdom of God, for it will have dominion upon the whole face of the earth. These people will be subject to the political government, even though they are not members of the ecclesiastical kingdom which is the Church.

This government which embraces all peoples of the earth, both in and out of the Church, is also sometimes spoken of as the kingdom of God, because the people are subject to the kingdom of God which Christ will set up. [^9]

John's account suggests that the early Church endeavored to establish the political kingdom in the meridian of time. The attempt proved unsuccessful. [^10] Such an institution would have shaken the very powers of hell as it overmastered the world and protected the Church. Little wonder that the manifestation of the woman and the child is followed by another portent showing Satan's opposition to the kingdom.

THE GREAT RED DRAGON (vv. 3-4, 6)

The second sign John sees is that of a great red dragon—not the winged and fire-breathing creature of fairy tales, though just as ferocious and evil. The Greek word (drakn) signifies aserpent or sea monster, but it is best understood as the personification of seething chaos, often represented as the dark primeval waters, which oppose not only God but all that isholy. [^11] It is no minor power. Indeed, in the Old Testament it represents that force which only God can subdue. [^12] The distinguishing feature of the beast is its insatiable cruelty. [^13] It is demonic in its genesis and intent and, as such, is the perfect type of Satan at his worst. [^14]

John sets this symbol against that of the woman, who represents poise, harmony, beauty, and life-giving creation. In this context the significance of the dragon's color is heightened. It is fiery red, the color of what engulfs and consumes. [^15] The color seems to suggest the despiteful, violent, and murderous means by which Satan, the dragon, brings about his ends. Jesus said of his adversaries, "Ye are of your father the devil. . . . He was a murderer from the beginning" (John 8:44).

The dragon has seven crown-wearing heads and ten horns. Note the inconsistency. There are either too many or too few horns for the heads. But God is not creating an image to be pictured but is rather communicating through symbols the nature of the thing he describes. [^16] Both numbers are significant. The seven crowns are not the laurels of victory (stephanos),which the woman wears, but diadems (diadma), symbols of political domination. The scriptures never depict Satan wearing laurels because he wins no permanent victories. [^17] The seven crowned heads suggest the universality of his rule as the king of chaos. They represent Satan's pseudoclaim to royalty set against that of the King of kings and the Lord of lords, whom John describes as wearing "many diadems" (Rev. 19:12—"crowns" in KJV). [^18]

The horns seem to denote the dragon's all-pervasive false sovereignty. Horns symbolize power. As discussed previously, ten represents the whole of a part but not the whole itself. Thus, the dragon has great power, but John shows that he does not have all power; some portion is lacking. This is not true of the Lamb whom John depicts with seven horns, the symbol of fullness (see 5:6). Thus, John's metaphors subtly show that the Lamb has all power and can overmaster the dragon.

In this episode, John depicts Satan as a tremendous and frightening spiritual force working against the Church of God. But he does not work alone. John states that his mighty tail "draws a third part of the stars of heaven" (AT), symbolic of his fallen minions. The tense John chooses, contrary to that shown in the KJV, is present. [^19] By this means John shows that the dragon draws his lackeys with him by clutching them in the coils of his tail. John has the dragon rise against God's earthly authority by attempting to destroy God's agent the moment he is born into the world. This hostile act symbolizes Satan's attempt to become king of the earth. [^20] Once again, the Seer emphasizes the issue of sovereignty and authority. The Church during the meridian of time briefly challenged Lucifer's domain by bringing forth the kingdom of God. The old dragon had to act with all his fury, bringing the entire legion of demons with him, to stop this threat to his kingdom.

Though Satan failed in his attempt to destroy the man child, he was partially successful. He did prevent the kingdom of God from being permanently established. According to the JST, "the dragon stood before the woman which was delivered, ready to devour her child after it was born" (v. 4), but the "child was caught up unto God and his throne" (v. 3). Thus it appears that God took the fledgling kingdom—that is, the political keys and authority given to the apostles and other leaders—to heaven, where it was safe from the dragon, until the restoration in the in the latter days. Frustrated because he could not destroy the child, the dragon turns on the woman herself, but she escapes by fleeing into the wilderness (see v. 6).

THE WAR IN HEAVEN (vv. 7-12)

At this point, John chooses to do a flashback to the war in heaven, probably to show that the conflict between the Church and the dragon had its genesis in the premortal world. I am cautious on when this battle occurred. Depending on how it is read, the JST may suggest that the war in heaven was not the premortal conflict. The JST notes that the devil did not win the battle "against Michael, neither the child, nor the woman, which was the church of God, who had been delivered of her pains, and brought forth the kingdom of our God and his Christ" (v. 7). Further, it notes how Lucifer was overcome: "For they [the righteous] overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; for they loved not their own lives, but kept the testimony even unto death" (v. 11). Placing these two passages in a premortal context is difficult for two reasons: first, the battle takes place after the man child is taken into heaven, and second, those who overcame Satan did so by giving their lives. Since righteous immortals do not die any form of death, the context suggests mortal martyrs.

It would be easy to see the changes in the JST reordering the events recorded in the KJV in such a way that those in chapter twelve continue the story in chapter eleven. This would give chapter twelve a nineteenth-century context. The woman would be the Church, which went into the wilderness; the child would be the kingdom of God, which the early brethren tried to establish but could not, the keys of which are presently dormant; and the battle, a representation of the spiritual conflict between the forces of good and evil continuing from that time forth. The problem with this view is that the JST places the woman in the wilderness for an extended period (1,260 years, v. 5), which does not fit a contemporary setting; furthermore, the dragon is cast out of heaven (see vv. 8, 11), an event associated directly with the war in heaven. Because of the ambiguity in our modern work, I have elected to follow the ancient Greek text.

John reveals that the central figure in the premortal battle was Michael, who led the angels of God against Satan and his minions. There victory resulted in banishment of the Devil from heaven but not from the world: the old dragon "was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him" (v. 9, KJV). On the earth the battle was renewed, and the Church in John's day felt the brunt of it.

The Seer's account gives insight into the nature of the heavenly war. He states that Lucifer, the accuser (Hebrew, satan), "accused [the brethren] before God day and night" (v. 10). (One wonders what the nature of those accusations were. Perhaps that the gospel would fail, that the Savior would back away from the wracking pain of the Atonement, or that the priesthood would crumble under the pressure of mortality.) The vision emphasizes the powers that overcame Satan: faith and testimony—faith that the Redeemer would make the Atonement, and willingness to proclaim it to all who would hear. Courageously, these Saints of the spirit world put their eternal lives on the line. Their witness won many souls and assisted in overthrowing the great enemy.

With the defeat of the dragon, John hears a voice proclaim, "Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ" (v. 10, KJV). The exclamation suggests that much was at risk during the great war. Satan sought to introduce modifications in God's plan of salvation through which Satan himself would take the honor, or power, of God (see Moses 4:1-3; D&C 29:36). Apparently Lucifer's intent was to replace Elohim. The victory secured God's authority over the rest of the children and firmly established his kingdom in heaven. Further, it confirmed the power of the Savior.

But heaven's win was earth's loss. Thus the angel laments, "Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time" (v. 12, KJV). Satan has lost. However, the prison prepared for him and his angels, Gehenna, yet stands empty. Gehenna comes from the Hebrew through the Greek and represents the place of misery for rebellious souls. The term is often used as a synonym for hell but is more expressive of perdition. It is briefly described in Doctrine and Covenants 76:44-48. Satan has a little season in which to operate before God freezes him into eternal impotence, but this fact only serves to anger him. He is not out to win. He can't, and no one knows it better than he. But driven by his insane wrath, he seeks the misery of God's children for as long as he can (see 2 Ne. 2:27).

THE DRAGON AND THE WOMAN (vv. 13-17)

The war in heaven serves as the background for understanding the attack on the man child and the woman. Satan exercised his energy first on the organization of the kingdom. Once he had chased off that threat to his earthly sovereignty—the greater threat—he turned on the woman. However, she received divine assistance and escaped into the wilderness. "The two great wings of an eagle" (v. 14, AT) symbolize this assistance. The insertion of the definite article, omitted in the KJV, underscores the explicitness of the action.

The wings have a double meaning: rapid motion or flight and divine deliverance. The idea of divine protection grows out of the reference to eagles' wings in Jehovah's past care of his people and deliverance from impending danger. Note Deuteronomy 32:10-11, where the care of God for Jacob is compared to a mother eagle fluttering over her young, where she "spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings" (cf. Ex. 19:4). In Isaiah 40:31 the prophet promises that those who wait upon the Lord "shall mount up with wings as eagles."

With these wings the woman flees into the wilderness, symbolic of spiritual refuge. [^21] Both the Old and the New Testaments represent the desert as a place of provisional safety, of discipline, of waiting for the promises of God. It was thus of the Exodus period (cf. Deut. 8:2-10). Twice Elijah withdrew to the wilderness (see 1 Kgs. 17:2-3; 19:3-4). Jehovah attracted his bride there that she might find comfort (see Hos. 2:14). In Song of Solomon, the litter and bride of Jehovah come from there (see 3:6-8; 8:5). In Revelation 12, the desert illustrates that the church has become inaccessible to humans. [^22]

As the woman flees to her place of refuge, the dragon makes a last desperate attempt to destroy her. Casting out water, his primary weapon, from his mouth he endeavors to sweep her away in a flood of destruction. But the earth assists the woman by swallowing the vast tide. Just what John intended is difficult to assess. Satan is the father of lies, that much is known for sure. In one way or another, everything that issues from his mouth conveys deception. Perhaps with a deluge of lies, not unlike those that the modern Church faces from its detractors, he tried to destroy the early Church.

But John could have had other ideas in mind. Flood waters are a common metaphor in the Old Testament for tribulation as well as overwhelming evil (see Ps. 18:4; Isa. 43:2). The term is used to denote oppressive nations such as Assyria (see Isa. 17:12-14, cf. 8:5-8), Egypt (see Jer. 46:7-8), and Babylon (see Jer. 51:55), as well as hostile nations generally (see Ps. 18:14-15; 46:1-3). [^23] Oppression may be what John alludes to, especially in light of the heightened persecution of Rome against the Christian people at the time of the Seer's writings. Further, the waters represent chaos, the result of unchecked iniquity. Satan, once the kingdom of God was gone, secured his place as prince of the world. Unchecked iniquity characterizes his reign. [^24]

Perhaps Satan tried through tribulation and unbridled wickedness to destroy the Church. Conceivably, he attempted to seduce and threaten, or wear out, the true saints. Just how the earth assisted in saving the woman is unknown. The metaphor echoes Numbers 16:32 where Korah's rebellion against Moses ended when "the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that appertained unto Korah, and all their goods" (KJV). [^25] Somehow the earth absorbed Satan's lies and malice long enough to allow the Church time to secure what was most precious before fleeing to the safety that awaits the righteous in God.

The wilderness, as the Revelator makes clear, was a place of protection where the woman would be nurtured. The period of her rest would be one thousand two hundred and sixty days, or three-and-one-half years. (Verse five of the JST changes "days" to "years," probably to suggest that the stay in the wilderness would be of long duration.) This number, as has been shown earlier, represents a period of tremendous trial. The trial comes because it is the period of Satanic rule. Since three and one-half, half of seven, which is the symbol for perfection, represents the fullness of imperfection, it describes the period of Satan's rule. However, in each case where the number is used, the period ends in total victory for God. Thus the woman, though forced to flee from the earth to heaven where men would have no access to her, would triumph in the end.

For a time the Church's progress ceased. But it may be fair to ask, what church? Since the temporal church fell into apostasy, what church did God preserve and place in safe-keeping? Likely John refers to the Church of the Firstborn spoken of in the Doctrine and Covenants. There the Savior states, "I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn; and all those who are begotten through me are partakers of the glory of the same, and are the church of the Firstborn" (93:21-22). How one is begotten is clearly spelled out in Doctrine and Covenants 76:50-70: faith, baptism, and reception of the Holy Ghost are prerequisite. Then one must be sealed through continuous good works by the Holy Spirit of Promise. Those who do so become the Church of the Firstborn, being "priests and kings, who have received of his [God's] fulness, and of his glory" (D&C 76:56).

In John's day, this group constituted those who had ears to hear what the Spirit was saying to the churches. Upon their death, they carried the keys back to heaven where they could be restored to the earth in the latter-days. Thus, God frustrated Satan in his attempt to destroy this church. Having failed to rid the earth of the Church, the dragon turned upon the few remaining faithful—those who continued to resist the forces of apostasy in their own lives—and made war on them.

CONCLUSION

John seems to have written the book of Revelation during the period portrayed in chapter twelve. The external church was on the defensive, and John warned her of what would happen if she failed to resist the floods of evil and persecution that Satan was loosing upon her. But to those who were true and faithful, the Lord held out hope. Indeed, the inner church, during the period of John's writing, was already escaping—sometimes through the assistance of Roman persecution—to a place prepared by God where it would be secure until God needed the keys to begin the work again.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy. See Ehat, Words, 184-87.
[^2] And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority. Smith, Teachings, 294.
[^3] And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death; and his deadly wound was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast. Ehat, Words, 184. See the beginning of chapter twelve. The record of Joseph Smith's talk by William Clayton shows that the beasts in chapter thirteen do not represent all the kingdoms of theworld, but either the prophet did not explain what they did mean or the recorders missed it.
[^4] And they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast: and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him? McConkie, Commentary, 3:520-21. Joseph Smith commented: "I make this broad declaration, that whenever God gives a vision of an image or beast, or figure of any kind, He always holds Himself responsible to give a revelation or interpretation of the meaning thereof, otherwise we are not responsible or accountable for our belief in it. Don't be afraid of being damned for not knowing the meaning of a vision or figure, if God has not given a revelation or interpretation of the subject" (History, 5:343; cf. Ehat, Words,185).
[^5] And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months. Smith, Teachings, 293; cf. Ehat, Words, 187.
[^6] And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. Collins, "Power," 80.
[^7] And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations. Hailey, Revelation, 283-84.
[^8] And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. TDNT, s.v., zon; thrion; ktnos.
[^9] If any man have an ear, let him hear. Mounce, Revelation, 250.
[^10] He that leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity: he that killeth with the sword must be killed with the sword. Here is the patience and the faith of the saints. Hailey, Revelation, 283-84.
[^11] And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon. For a discussion of theories, see Hailey,Revelation, 285-86.
[^12] And he exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him, and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed. For an argument against the popular view, see A. Minear, "The Wounded Beast," Journal of Biblical Literature, 72(1953): 97.
[^13] And he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, Ford, Revelation, 219. Joseph Smith's explanation of verses2-3 has been poorly transmitted, making it difficult if not impossible to understand what he taught on the subject. According to the Clayton diary: "The beast John saw [crossed out at this point are the words 'as spoken of in the 13th chapter'] was an actual beast to whom power was to be given. An actual intelligent being in heaven and this beast was to have power given him" (Ehat, Words, 186). Thecrossed-out portion suggests that a correction was made because the reference was not to the beast in chapter thirteen. What Joseph did refer to seems to have been lost in transmission.
[^14] And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast, which Charles, Commentary, 1:351.
[^15] And he had power to give life unto the image of the beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the image of the beast should be killed. Caird, Revelation, 166-67.
[^16] And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads: Ibid., 167; Mounce, Revelation, 254.
[^17] And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. This is my translation. The passage is difficult. The NIV reads, "If anyone is to go into captivity, into captivity he will go. If anyone is to be killed with the sword, with the sword he will be killed." The RSV reads, "If anyone is to be taken captive, to captivity he goes; if any one slays with the sword, with the sword must he be slain."
[^18] Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred threescore and six. Mounce, Revelation, 257.
[^19] Ibid., 248.
[^20] The tradition of the Antichrist held that miracles would be his mark (cf. 2 Esd. 5:4; Sib. Or. 3:63-67).
[^21] Mounce, Revelation, 258-59.
[^22] Bock, Apocalypse, 106-7.
[^23] Commentary, 3:523.
[^24] Mounce, Revelation, 259.
[^25] Mounce, Revelation, 260.
