Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 13

The Beasts of Revelation

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 13)

THE BEAST FROM THE SEA (vv. 1-10)

Foiled in his attempt to destroy the church ofGod, the dragon moves to the seashore and there summons assistance. There are two manuscript traditions for verse one. One has John standing on the seashore (the KJV follows this one); the other, the dragon (as seen in the RSV and the NIV). The JST solves the problem by noting that the monster from the sea was what stood upon the sandy shore.

"I saw another sign," states the JST, "in the likeness of the kingdoms of the earth; a beast rise up out of the sea, and he stood upon the sand of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns; and upon his horns ten crowns" (v. 1). In this way John introduces the first of two agents through whom the dragon will carry out his seduction of the earth over the next two millennia. This appears to have been the period seen by Nephi when he saw "among the nations of the Gentiles the formation of a great church." This church, or institution, was, according to an angel, "most abominable above all other churches, which slayeth the saints of God, yea, and tortureth them and bindeth them down, and yoketh them with a yoke of iron, and bringeth them down into captivity." Further, Nephi notes, "I saw the devil that he was the founder of it" (1 Ne. 13:4-6).

Satan, though the very personification of evil, must, as with God, carry out his work through people and human institutions—the great and abominable church and the kingdoms of the earth. Joseph Smith notes that Daniel saw the image of a beast but not an actual beast, but that John saw real beasts in heaven. [^1] The prophet's statement, however, was not referring to chapters twelve and thirteen but rather to chapters four and five. In chapter thirteen God uses a metaphor, as it were, to describe the organized wickedness that Lucifer will use to promote his purposes. Joseph Smith taught that "the beast that rose up out of the sea [in Rev. 13:1] should be translated the image of a beast, as I have referred to it in Daniel's vision." [^2] He also said, "The beasts are spoken of to represent the kingdoms of the world, the inhabitants whereof were beastly and abominable characters; they were murderers, corrupt, carnivorous, and brutal in their dispositions." [^3] But precise identity ofthese kingdoms remains unknown.

"The beast," states Elder McConkie, "is being used to symbolize certain unnamed kingdoms on earth and to show their dealings toward the saints and the cause of righteousness." Further, "the beast does not represent all the world, but only selected 'kingdoms.' " [^4] Taking his text from the Seer's statement that "all the world wondered after the beast," Joseph Smith asked: "If the beast was all the world, how could the world wonder after the beast?" Then answering, he stated, "It must have been a wonderful beast to cause all human beings to wonder after it; and I will venture to say that when God allows the old devil to give power to the beast to destroy the inhabitants of the earth, all will wonder." [^5] Ambiguity also surrounds the meaning of the word "kingdom," though "political entities" seems to best fit the context.

Though the exact identity of these kingdoms remains unknown, their nature and disposition do not. What symbolizes them comes out of the sea. The home of the beast as well as its features bring to mind Daniel 7-8. But other Old Testament themes come to play as well. Echoes of Jehovah's battles with the sea monsters Leviathan and Rahab are heard. These monsters, which only God could subdue, were the epitome of the forces of chaos, death, and sterility. Order, fertility, and life won the victory through their defeat. [^6] From certain Old Testament uses, clearly the sea often portrays unsettled political and social conditions, the kind of stormy circumstances from which revolution and tyranny arise (see Dan. 7). [^7] The Revelator sees in the oceans the peoples of the world, those nations and institutions that will originate during and after his day to carry on a work of darkness. For this reason, all should exercise caution against identifying one group, one nation, or one institution as the beast.

And yet, there is a commonality. These organizations were and are grounded on a common philosophy, seek specific objectives, and use a similar methodology. All possess an air of superiority anchored in pride, ambition, vanity, and a lust for power. However, the fuel that drives their collective engine is derived neither from human ego nor from human spirit but from Lucifer.

The Bible uses the term beast to translate three Greek words: zon, ktnos, and thrion.Zon describes living creatures, often those connected with God like the seraphim of Isaiah 6:2-3 and the four living beings in Revelation 4:6-9. Ktnos refers todomesticated animals, especially beasts of burden and animals used for food as in Revelation 18:13. Thrion, on the otherhand, characterizes wild beasts, especially beasts of prey. [^8] John calls the sea monster thrion, and the term aptly fits. The beast'sthree components—leopard, bear, and lion—are all untameable and flesh-devouring.

This beast has seven heads and ten horns each crowned with a diadem. At first glance the image is that of the dragon, but there is an important difference. The old serpent had but seven diadems that he wore upon his heads. The beast on the other hand has its ten crowns placed upon its horns, suggesting that its power rests upon brute force. [^9] The beast, however, does not overshadow the dragon in either power or rule. The number of crowns reveals that the beast actually has less power than the dragon, seven representing a whole with ten representing only a portion. Thus, the beast comes under the authority of the dragon, drawing its power from him. Even so, the likenesses cannot be overlooked. This beast of prey is thoroughly diabolic: he possesses the power, authority, and very image of the devil, and his objective is to devour men spiritually. [^10]

A curious aspect of the beast, from which has risen no end of speculation, is that one of its heads had been mortally wounded yet the beast survived (v. 3). [^11] One of the most popular views is that the head represents the Roman emperor Nero or Domitian. The former started the pogroms against the Christians, and the latter resurrected them, as it were, thus negating Nero's death at the time of John's writing. A major problem with this view is that it confines the beast and its activities to the Roman period. Further, it was the beast, not the head, that survived the wound (v. 14). [^12]

The wound unto death echoes that of the Lamb in chapter five. Comparing the beast and the Lamb allows us to surmise what the Seer had in mind. As the dragon is the antithesis of God, the beast is the converse image of Christ. Satan bestows on the beast his throne, power, and great authority. The Savior shares these same privileges with the Father. The beast receives authority over every nation, tongue, tribe, and people (see v. 7); the Lamb holds this same domain. In 17:8, John states that the beast "was and is not and is to come" (AT). This mimics the description of the Savior in Revelation 1:4 as he "which is, and which was, and which is to come" (KJV). The Lamb is Lord of lords and King of kings, and the beast seeks the same positions. In short, the beast is the spiritual antithesis of Christ and his kingdom. Thus, the beast not only wears the name of blasphemy upon its heads, it embodies the name by counterfeiting the attributes and position of deity. [^13]

In light of this evidence, the beast, together with its heads and horns, represents kingdoms and organizations opposed to Christian principles. However, the beast also seems to be something else, something that undergirds and supports governments and leagues in their antireligious movements. Its broad influence and wide domain suggest that this beast should be understood as a philosophical system and political ideology inspired by satanic ideals. The revelation shows that the influence of this monster is so great that all the world, except the righteous, begin to revere it and its initiator. But the world's song of praise belies its sincerity and devotion to this master: "Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him?" (v. 4, KJV). The motive for worship is not reverent awe generated by moral greatness, but rather amazement generated by fear of brute force. [^14]

The beast speaks great blasphemies. One target is God and his name. Of the other target, the manuscript tradition varies. Some manuscripts state that the beast also blasphemes God's tabernacle and those who dwell in heaven. The problem may be resolved in John's use of the Greek word skn,translated "tabernacle." John's usage suggests that the skn isGod's heavenly dwelling place among men, a kind of heaven on earth (see 7:15; cf. 21:3). In verse six skn seems to denote God'stabernacling presence upon the earth that overshadows and protects the Saints. It could be against these—God's temple or heavenly home on earth, and the Saints who are worthy to enter therein—that the beast rails. [^15]

The beast's authority and power lasts for a restricted period: forty-two months, or three-and-one-half years. Once again John uses the symbol denoting the period of temporary victory for Satan, the time when he and his minions prevail and the righteous suffer. However, because the beast had to receive authority and power to blaspheme, it is, in all its ferocity, a dependent being. Though Satan gives the beast his throne, Satan himself is restricted and can move only when allowed. Thus, the real authority of the beast derives from God alone. It exists only by divine permission, and it speaks and acts within the bounds the Lord has set. Bounded by God, the beast is destined to assist, against its own desires, with God's grand strategy. [^16]

Even so, the period of its rule will cause great distress among the righteous, and that period sweeps from John's time to the latter days. But its meanest work was done during the mortal ministry of the Seer. That was the period of the tribulation of the Saints when patience and faith were enjoined. In verse ten John warns: "If any one is destined for captivity, he will go into captivity. If anyone kills with the sword, with the sword he must be killed" (AT). [^17] The statement echoes that of the Savior in Matthew 26:52: "All they that take the sword shall perish with the sword" (KJV). The first phrase of the couplet taught the Saints that they must accept and endure what God had ordained, the second that they must not take the offensive in any war against the beast. [^18] That was not to say the Saints should not work against the monster, but that they should work by promoting the gospel of Jesus Christ and its objectives.

THE BEAST FROM THE LAND (vv. 11-17)

had the wound by a sword, and did live.

The first beast does not work alone. John sees a second beast "coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon" (v. 11, KJV). The second monster is unlike the first, and perhaps even more dangerous because of its deceptively harmless appearance. It stands as a deliberate counterfeit of the Lord. The two beasts with their master, the dragon, "constitute an unholy trinity of malicious evil." [^19]

The lamb is Antichrist working miracles and teaching false doctrines in the name of salvation. Later in the revelation this lamb is called the "false prophet" (16:13; 19:20; 20:10, KJV) and uses counterfeit prophetic knowledge as a means of deception. The two horns represent feigned benevolent authority. Note John's words carefully. He says that the beast had horns "like a lamb," not like the Lamb. Therefore, the second beast, the fraudulent Christ, imitates the Lord.

But the Lord works through mortal agents, and the two most prominent are those already met in chapter eleven. These witnesses testify of Christ and bring men to worship him. The beasts similarly imitate this relationship; the second beast testifies and affirms the first. Like the witnesses, the second beast uses miracles, especially control over fire, to validate its authority (see Matt. 24:24; 2 Thes. 2:9). [^20] In fact, this becomes the primary means by which it is able to deceive the nations into worshipping the first beast.

With the coming of the false prophet, a wolf in lamb's clothing, the evil triumvirate stands complete. Now they can imitate by deception the true Godhead. As the Son has his two witnesses, so too the dragon has his two monsters; as the Son draws his power from the Father, so too the first beast draws authority from the dragon; as the Holy Ghost glorifies the Son, so too the evil lamb glorifies the first beast. [^21] There is little doubt but that John exposes them in symbolic terms as the counterfeit godhead, the beguiling revelators, the false law-givers whose powers will rule through the last days.

The second beast never comes fully into view but remains in the background, the deceptive distance catching those who might not otherwise be attracted to the first beast, and in this way it betrays people into the worship of the latter. Indeed its whole function seems to be to seduce mankind into this false worship. And what is the objective of this worship? In a word, materialism: the ability to buy and sell and to get gain.

John lays before the reader the terrifying prospect of an economic system completely dominated by what has been called "the Mahanic principle." Satan, who stands as initiator of this system, first revealed its great secret to Cain, who in turn revealed it to his followers (see Moses 5:29-31). Satan "did plot with Cain and his followers from that time forth" (Hel. 6:27). And what was the objective of all that plotting? To learn the trade of turning human life into property. Evil and conspiring men formed the secret combination that then swept across oceans and survived through time. And Satan "doth hand down their plots, and their oaths, and their covenants, and their plans of awful wickedness, from generation to generation according as he can get hold upon the hearts of the children of men" (Hel. 6:30).

The Seer shows that this power will stoke the destructive forces of the latter days. Slowly genuine humility and brotherliness will be suppressed under a vast and complex coercion of sophisticated and bewitching propaganda and the brutality of pragmatism and unrestrained egoism. [^22] We may not know exactly who the beasts are—Elder McConkie has noted that "the identity of these powers remains to be revealed" [^23]—but whatever they are, the only reason the beasts can gain control is because of the fallen and spiritually degenerate state brought about by evil being able to impose itself on mankind because of indifference and ambivalence toward the good.

The real issue is one of worship. The battle is for the hearts and minds of mankind. The objective of the false lamb is to get men to worship the beast. Thus, the false prophet takes on a priestly role with pseudoreligious authority. A false religion drives the people. Blinded by selfishness and lust, they worship secular power that is able to explain away real miracles. The result is the universal victory of secular humanism in which God is denied and mankind is exalted. [^24] Out of this philosophy and its worldliness come the "miracles" of the age. Such miracles have deceived many into false faith and blinded many into a false security. Willingly, the deluded follow the ways of the first beast.

The second beast commands those "who dwell upon the earth," that is, the unregenerate among mankind, "to make an image for the beast" (v. 14, AT). The dative is used here, which marks the possessor. In other words, the false lamb creates an image that then belongs to the beast. In verse fifteen the Greek use of the genitive is possessive, so the phrase "image of the beast" should be understood as the image that belongs to the beast rather than the image that looks like the beast.

Here we see the false prophet acting as minister of propaganda for the beast, causing men to yield to it all that it desires. The false prophet is able to engender this submission by those miracles he has power to do "in the sight of the beast" (v. 14, KJV). As the two witnesses in chapter eleven stand before the Lord and have power over fire, so the false prophet performs miracles as he stands before his lord. [^25] Both God and Satan have their servants upon the earth working miracles. Many who refuse to follow those whom God has appointed will fall under the spell of those whom Satan has.

THE MARK OF THE BEAST (v. 18)

Those who worship the beast receive the right to wear its mark. Verses fifteen through eighteen underscore the idea that only through the act of worship can one receive the mark. Since refusal to wear the mark results in death, the only way to escape is to venerate the beast. [^26] But such homage does not bring peace or happiness. John states that those who worship the beast "have no rest day nor night" (14:11, KJV). Though looking to a future state, John well describes the restless, nervous, and nearly exhausted existence of individuals who sell themselves to the idol of materialism.

The mark of the beast has intrigued many. The Seer uses the Greek term charagma, which denotes a stamp, etching, engraving, or impression. It also describes the brand upon an animal or a slave. And it must not be overlooked that it also describes the mark left by a serpent's bite. [^27] The objective of the beast is that "all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond" receive the mark "in their right hand, or in their foreheads" (v. 16, KJV). No one is to be free of the mark. This mark stands in contrast to and is the converse of the seal placed upon the faithful followers of the other Lamb. As such it signifies those who are slaves of the Adversary.

The mark of the monster consists of the letters of its name written in its numerical equivalent. Most ancient people did not have a separate numbering system and alphabet, so letters also served as numbers. Generally the first nine letters of the alphabet stood for numbers one through nine, the next nine for numbers ten through ninety, and so on. In one kind of riddle, a name was translated into its numerical equivalent. For example a line of graffiti from Pompeii reads, "I love her whose number is 545." [^28] Among the Jews the practice was known as gematria. Many Rabbis looked for esoteric meanings in the numbers found in the Old Testament. For example, Abraham is said to have taken 318 trained men to rescue Lot from his captors (see Gen. 14:14). That number translates into "Eliezer," Abraham'schief servant. [^29]

Verse eighteen has caused no end of speculation. There John gives the challenge, "Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast" (KJV), and then gives the number as 666. Scholars and amateurs both have suggested many ingenious solutions ranging in possibilities from single individuals to whole institutions. [^30] Some popular suggestions include, for an individual, the emperor Titus (Greek teitan, where t = 300,e = 5, i = 10, t = 300, a = 1, n = 50); for a nation, the Romans(Greek lateinos, where l o = 100, a = 1, t = 300, e = 5, i= 10, n = 50, s = 200). There are other names that work as well, like the man's name Euanthas. [^31] Significantly thrion, theword John uses for the beast, also equals 666.

One popular suggestion is that the number refers to the Catholic Church because the Greek forms Italika ekklsia(Italian Church) and h letana basileia (the Latin Church) both add upto 666. Further, some claim that the inscription on the mitre of the Pope also yields the same number. If such an inscription exists, the Catholic Encyclopedia and other reference works on religious vestments used by the Catholics do not disclose it. The view that the beast is a church seems narrow, if not bigoted, especially since the idea behind the beast seems more state than church. The Adversary would probably like the wrong kingdoms to be pegged.

The whole problem is fraught with difficulties. First, there are two manuscript traditions. The majority give the number 666, but others give 616. Second, the meaning may require the use of the digamma, an archaic letter out of use in the Greek alphabet before John's day but sometimes retained for use as the number "six."

Taking the Greek as it stands, John's riddle points to "a man," that is, a single individual. Historically, the one man who has left his mark as the arch persecutor of the Christians is Nero, whom many have argued for as the man John had in mind. To derive the number, Nero's name is transliterated into Hebrew nron ksr. The breakdown is n = 50, r = 200, o = 6, n =50, k = 100, s = 60, r = 200. Though the solution is ingenious, itis hard to believe that John would have put his readers through so much trouble. Also, Nero had been dead for nearly a quarter century before John wrote. However, in John's day there was another who bore the spiritual nature of Nero. This was Domitian. As emperor, he sought to exterminate the church of God. To John he may have seemed to be Nero reincarnate.

But a specific historical entity may not be what John had in mind. It may be that he was portraying a spiritual condition. As noted above, the mark and the worship of the beast cannot be separated. The mark stands for the beast. In such a case, the number six would stand in contrast to the number seven, God's number. Six would then be what comes the closest to perfection but falls short in each of its digits. The three digits could thus represent a trinity of imperfection: the dragon, the beast, and the false prophet. Partaking of the mark signifies spiritual devotion to the beast. It designates those who throughout time have been bitten by the serpent from the sea and who carry its venom in their veins. [^32]

CONCLUSION

There is much in chapter thirteen that awaits further revelation. When it is important for the Latter-day Saints to know specifics, the prophet will reveal them from God. In the meantime, an understanding of the message underlying the chapter sheds a little light. John's major concern is the question of worship, that is, to whom will men give their loyalty. Herein lies the message for those living in the last days when the beast will again actively recruit souls.

The monster is not Satan but the result of the unchecked work of Satan within institutions, communities, and countries. Wherever men refuse to be controlled by God or governed by truth, Satan rules; this is the danger of drive without humility. All spiritual aberrations are rooted here and are a result of the greatest of moral evils—pride. President Benson has warned the Saints against pride. "The central feature of pride," he instructs, "is enmity—enmity toward God and enmity toward our fellowmen. Enmity means 'hatred toward, hostility to, or a state of opposition.' It is the power by which Satan wishes to reign over us." He goes on to state that "the proud cannot accept the authority of God giving direction to their lives. (See Hel. 12:6.) They pit their perceptions of truth against God's great knowledge, their abilities versus God's priesthood power, their accomplishments against His mighty works." The prophet further states that the proud man gets no joy out of having anything but only out of having more than others. [^33]

Thus, pride is competitive. It drives men on and on, never allowing satisfaction, all the while twisting their minds and souls into eternal selfishness. "I am the greatest," such insist, "therefore, what I want should happen. I'll step on anyone or anything that will not bow to my will." Sooner or later, such souls become saturated with the same poison that turned the son of the morning into the devil himself. Affected by the bite of the serpent from the sea, they carry his mark always with them. It affects both their labor (the mark on the hand) and their thought (the mark on the forehead). To these prideful, perverted souls, all men must eventually become slaves. Those who refuse are considered the enemy and soon become the persecuted. Since God will not submit to their program, will not follow their agenda, he becomes their ultimate enemy. [^34]

The beast does not work alone. He teams up with the false lamb, a treacherous religious system pushed by pseudoprophets. The two beasts have produced the philosophical base and theological foundation for the satanic doctrine upon which the world feeds. The promise is always easy salvation, that property exists for the taking, that man can rejoice in sins and find joy. The doctrine is clearly enunciated by such men as Sherem (see Jacob 7:1-18), Nehor (see Alma 1:3-5), and Korihor (see Alma 30:6-16). Each taught what was "pleasing unto the carnal mind," and they "had much success" (Alma 30:53). But a lesson awaited each of these men.

There is an old saying that "you can't get something for nothing." But the truth behind the beasts is that you get nothing for something. That is Satan's method of operation. His minions make satanically inspired but empty promises ("ye shall not surely die"—Moses 4:10), and then extract their payment. Note that it is neither the monster nor the false prophet who makes the image for the beast. The people do that. The image is made from the salt of their sweat, their toil, their tears, and even their blood. But in their hour of need, the beast will quickly abandon them; "and thus we see that the devil will not support his children at the last day, but doth speedily drag them down to hell" (Alma 30:60).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father's name written in their foreheads. Erdman, Revelation, 116-17.
[^2] And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps: Caird, Revelation, 179; Mounce, Revelation,270.
[^3] And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders: and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. TDNT, s.v. pseudos.
[^4] These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. These were redeemed from among men, being the firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb. Ford, Revelation, 243-44.
[^5] And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before the throne of God. McConkie, Commentary, 3:529-30.
[^6] And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, Bock, Apocalypse, 118.
[^7] Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters. Caird, Revelation, 184.
[^8] And there followed another angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. The idea of the Greek phrase (kekerasmenou akratou)translates literally "having been mixed undiluted." The participle denotes wine prepared with the addition of spices. The terms used stress that the wine is carefully prepared in its full strength (see Mounce,Revelation, 275.)
[^9] And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, Cf. Mounce, Revelation, 274, and Caird,Revelation, 185.
[^10] The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: See Matthews, "A Plainer Translation," 210.
[^11] And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever: and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name. Mounce, Revelation, 281.
[^12] Here is the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. Ibid., 280-81.
[^13] And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do follow them. Zechariah 14:1-4 sets the scene of the final battle near Jerusalem, while 1 Enoch 53:1 describes a deep valley near the city as the place of judgment.
[^14] And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle. Mounce, Revelation, 283.
[^15] And another angel came out of the temple, crying with a loud voice to him that sat on the cloud, Thrust in thy sickle, and reap: for the time is come for thee to reap; for the harvest of the earth is ripe.
[^16] And he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth; and the earth was reaped.
[^17] And another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven, he also having a sharp sickle.
[^18] And another angel came out from the altar, which had power over fire; and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth; for her grapes are fully ripe.
[^19] And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the great winepress of the wrath of God.
[^20] And the winepress was trodden without the city, and blood came out of the winepress, even unto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.
[^21] Mounce, Revelation, 258-59.
[^22] Bock, Apocalypse, 106-7.
[^23] Commentary, 3:523.
[^24] Mounce, Revelation, 259.
[^25] Mounce, Revelation, 260.
[^26] Charles, Commentary, 1:360.
[^27] TDNT, s.v., Charagma.
[^28] Adolf Deissmann, Light from the Ancient East, 277.
[^29] In a Christian example, the Sibylline Oracles 1:342-44 give the number of the name of the Savior in Greek as 888 (I=10, A=8, S=200, O=70, Y=400, S=200; for discussion, see Mounce,Revelation, 263).
[^30] For methodology, bibliography, and a list on many of the proposed solutions, see Ford, Revelation, 215-17; and Charles,Commentary, 1:366-68.
[^31] On these, see Irenaeus, Against Heresies 5.30.3.
[^32] For a broad spectrum of views on the subject, see Erdman, Revelation, 114-15; Hailey, Revelation, 297-99;Mounce, Revelation, 264-65.
[^33] Ezra Taft Benson, "Beware of Pride," Ensign, May 1989,4-7.
[^34] Cf. C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1960), 94-99.
