Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 14

The Winepress of the Wrath of God

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 14)

THE VIRGINS (vv. 1-5)

Chapter fourteen serves as yet another interlude. It presents a message of hope and encouragement just before vivid descriptions of destruction. Here it is sandwiched between the great persecutions carried on by the two beasts and the judgment of God upon both them and the world they have created. The central, though less obvious, message of this section is a plea for the Saints to follow the Lord even during periods of distress. [^1] The message is relevant for this chapter brings the readerinto the present age.

The chapter divides into three sections, each starting with the phrase "I looked" or "I saw" (vv. 1, 6, 14, KJV). The first scene is of the Lamb and the Saints in Zion, the second of the three angels who both warn and comfort, and the last of the harvest of the earth. The final section is further divided into two parts: first, the ingathering of the righteous—the period of the harvest; and second, the destruction of the wicked—the time of the vintage.

This chapter echoes the interlude between the sixth and seventh seals where the 144,000 were introduced (chapter 7). In this chapter John sees them standing with the Lamb on Mount Zion. Unlike the earlier vision, this one depicts their earthly station at the time judgment commences in earnest.

The vision has prepared the reader for the onset of a great battle, but, as usual, God throws in a twist. The figure standing on Mount Zion is not a terrible warrior-king garbed in battle array, but instead, a lamb, the symbol of meekness and peace. Further, harmony and joy reign over all those in John's view. These people do not know worry, distress, or the threat of war. The harmony of sweet music fills the region, reaching a climax as the heavens explode into the rhapsody of a new song—new not only because it has never been sung before, but also because it could never have been sung before. It signals a total victory that only now has become possible. For this reason, only the 144,000—representing the sealed, those who have won the battle—are able to sing it.

Doctrine and Covenants 84:96-102 provides the setting for and content of such a song. In it the Lord states:

For I, the Almighty, have laid my hands upon the nations, to scourge them for their wickedness. And plagues shall go forth, and they shall not be taken from the earth until I have completed my work, which shall be cut short in righteousness—until all shall know me, who remain, even from the least unto the greatest, and shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, and shall see eye to eye, and shall lift up their voice, and with the voice together sing this new song, saying:

The Lord hath brought again Zion;

The Lord hath redeemed his people, Israel,

According to the election of grace,

Which was brought to pass by the faith

And covenant of their fathers.

The Lord hath redeemed his people;

And Satan is bound and time is no longer.

The Lord hath gathered all things in one.

The Lord hath brought down Zion from above.

The Lord hath brought up Zion from beneath.

The earth hath travailed and brought forth

her strength;

And truth is established in her bowels;

And the heavens have smiled upon her;

And she is clothed with the glory of her God;

For he stands in the midst of his people.

Glory, and honor, and power, and might,

Be ascribed to our God; for he is full of mercy,

Justice, grace and truth, and peace,

Forever and ever, Amen.

Here we understand the triumphant nature of the song. The plagues of judgment have cleansed the earth. Only the redeemed remain. God and his Saints have won the day, and Zion stands supreme.

The focus of this part of the vision is on the 144,000 servants of God. As has been suggested, the term symbolizes priesthood authority in its fullness. The term virgin (Greekparthenos) used by John to describe them emphasizes a spiritual quality. The image of "virgin" as applied to males was probably related to Israelite military practices. Soldiers were required to maintain ritual purity, including sexual abstinence, before going into battle. This state of ceremonial cleanliness for those engaged in war seems to be an excellent symbol for the moral purity that the Saints must maintain during the spiritual war against the beasts (on conducting holy war, see Deut. 20; 23:9-10; cf. 1 Sam. 21:5; 2 Sam. 11:11). [^2] For this reason there should be neither concern for the epithet "virgins" pertaining to males, nor the idea that John is espousing celibacy.

The scriptures use the image of the virgin to represent the church and frequently portray her as the Lord's bride. Inreality, the term reflects the state of individual members of the Lord's earthly kingdom who have kept themselves from defilement by the world (see 2 Kgs. 19:21; Jer. 18:13; Hosea 2:5; 2 Cor. 11:2). Thus, John states that they "follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth" (v. 4, KJV).

John makes the point that "in their [the virgins'] mouth was found no guile" (v. 5, KJV). The Greek word translated "guile" (pseudos) means "falsehood" in a broad sense, thus encompassing both lying and deceiving. However, John uses the term with a specific meaning. For him it is neither error nor lying but an active contesting against truth. [^3] Thus, the 144,000 are the antithesis of the beast and the false prophet. The Seer's context suggests that the men represented by the 144,000 are the true prophets. The whole picture captures the fidelity to Jehovah that the Saints of God espouse. [^4]

THE MESSAGE OF THE THREE ANGELS (vv. 6-11)

Having shown the nature of the latter-day church, the vision dramatically switches scenes. John sees an angel in the midst of heaven "having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth" (v. 6, KJV). Modern revelation bears directly on the interpretation of this verse. To the world the Lord has declared:

I have sent forth mine angel flying through the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel, who hath appeared unto some and hath committed it unto man, who shall appear unto many that dwell on the earth. And this gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. And the servants of God shall go forth, saying with a loud voice: Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come; and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters (D&C 133:36-39).

On one hand, the angel apparently symbolizes Moroni and those events connected with the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. The Lord states that he sent Moroni "to reveal the Book of Mormon, containing the fulness of my everlasting gospel, to whom I have committed the keys of the stick of Ephraim" (D&C 27:5). On the other hand, the angel seems to represent the Church members serving in their callings as missionaries who will take the teachings of that book and a warning message to all the nations of the earth. [^5] Of this period the Lord has said:

Through their administration the word may go forth unto the ends of the earth, unto the Gentiles first, and then, behold, and lo, they shall turn unto the Jews. And then cometh the day when the arm of the Lord shall be revealed in power in convincing the nations, the heathen nations, the house of Joseph, of the gospel of their salvation. For it shall come to pass in that day, that every man shall hear the fulness of the gospel in his own tongue, and in his own language, through those who are ordained unto this power, by the administration of the Comforter, shed forth upon them for the revelation of Jesus Christ (D&C 90:9-11).

We are living in the day when more missionaries preach the Savior's word to greater and greater portions of the earth in native tongues. The Lord has prophesied that "the poor and the meek shall have the gospel preached unto them, and they shall be looking forth for the time of my coming, for it is nigh at hand—and they shall learn the parable of the fig-tree, for even now already summer is nigh" (D&C 35:15-16; cf. 45:37-39).

However, along with the message of comfort, there is a message of warning: "The hour of his judgment is come" (Rev. 14:7, KJV). The Greek word John uses (krisis), translated "judgment," was originally a legal term often meaning "condemnation" and including the punishment associated with it. But there was a medical application denoting that point when it was uncertain whether or not the patient would recover. [^6] Thus, the cry of the angel places the world in a position to respond to either life or death. It is truly a moment of crisis. The rejection of the gospel will immediately bring condemnation upon the world. Accordingly, the voice of the first angel is followed by that of the second proclaiming, "Babylon is fallen, is fallen" (v. 8, KJV). The angel proclaims his joyful message in the present tense. There is good reason. The advent of the gospel sounds the death knell of the kingdom of Satan, a composite of the first and second beast and named Babylon. (Further discussion of this subject appears in chapters seventeen and eighteen.)

Note that the first angel invites all men to worship God the creator. Our Lord is not the destroyer of the universe—man is. God merely allows (usually through inaction) men to receive the results of their own lawlessness. The book of Revelation shows the result: the four horsemen, the burning mountain, the star Wormwood, the angel Apollyon, and, in the end, the beasts. These are the destroyers of the earth (see 6:1-8; 8:8-11; 9:7, 18). But judgment grows from the clear pronouncement of the gospel; it removes these destroyers so that the God of life may reign. For this reason the second angel, who proclaims the fall of Babylon, follows the first. [^7]

The reason Babylon must fall is clearly given: "Because she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication" (v. 8, KJV). The translation of the last phrase is difficult. The term given as "wrath" (Greek thumos) carries the meaning of "wrath," "rage," or "anger" pushed with a passion. Those who drink the wine of whoredom must yet drink from another cup. This too will be a cup of unbridled passion, but this time of anger—a just God's anger meted out in its full strength, entirely undiluted and untempered by either mercy or grace. [^8]

The passion against Babylon, the great whore, results from the seduction of the nations through her use of intoxicating philosophies and corrupting power. [^9] However, the nations did not have to partake; they chose to be deceived. The truth, a sharp but refreshing antidote to Babylon's sweet wine, was available, but they refused it. In this light the prophetic warning of the third angel takes on meaning. Anyone who partakes of Babylon's favors, or in other words, who worships "the beast and his image, and [receives] his mark in his forehead, or in his hand," comes fully under the condemnation of God (v. 9, KJV). The Seer paints a graphic picture of the hellfire suffered by those who worship the beast and carry his mark (see vv. 10-11). By this symbolic means, John conveys the state of the burning conscience where the soul is racked "with eternal torment" and "tormented with the pains of hell," where the "very thought of coming into the presence of . . . God" racks the "soul with inexpressible horror" (Alma 36:12-14).

A MESSAGE AND PROMISE TO THE SAINTS (vv. 12-13)

Verses twelve and thirteen contain the heart of this chapter. It is an interlude within the interlude and allows John to petition the Saints to forbear and "keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus" (v. 12, KJV). This applies to Saints living in any era but especially during the time when the beasts will make a living hell on earth—before divine judgment will free the Saints from the tyranny of Babylon and before Zion will protect them from the wrath in store for the world. For those who continue faithful, their state will be blessed, for they will "rest from their labours; and their works do follow them" (v. 13, KJV). Note the shift in tense that accurately follows the Greek. The futurestate of the Saints will be glorious because good deeds follow them; that is, the effects of a good deed do not pass away. The consequence of many good deeds results in a future reward.

Joseph Smith is also reported to have taught that the phrase "their works do follow them" should be translated "they shall continue their work." Understood in this way, Revelation teaches that the Saints continue the work of the gospel into the next life. [^10] In either interpretation, notice that this message follows the dual emphasis in John's vision on the faith of the Saints and their good works.

THE HARVEST OF THE WORLD (vv. 14-20)

At the close of the interlude, the scene swiftly shifts. John beholds a white cloud upon which is seated "one . . . like unto the Son of man" (v. 14, KJV). The imagery is taken from Daniel 7:13-14 and appears to be a reference to the resurrected Lord coming in the fulness of his power. On his head sits the golden wreath (stephanos) of victory, and in his hand the sickle ofjudgment readied for the harvest. The day of judgment has fully come "for the harvest of the earth is ripe" (v. 15, KJV).It is the ripeness that determines the timing of the reaping. The Lord expresses this idea in a parable of harvest:

In the last days, even now while the Lord is beginning to bring forth the word, and the blade is springing up and is yet tender—behold, verily I say unto you, the angels are crying unto the Lord day and night, who are ready and waiting to be sent forth to reap down the fields; but the Lord saith unto them, pluck not up the tares while the blade is yet tender (for verily your faith is weak), lest you destroy the wheat also. Therefore, let the wheat and the tares grow together until the harvest is fully ripe; then ye shall first gather out the wheat from among the tares, and after the gathering of the wheat, behold and lo, the tares are bound in bundles, and the field remaineth to be burned (D&C 86:4-7).

The first harvest, the harvest of the Lord, is the ingathering of the wheat. That time is now and the time is urgent. To his Saints the Lord declared: "Ye are called to lift up your voices as with the sound of a trump, to declare my gospel unto a crooked and perverse generation. For behold, the field is white already to harvest; and it is the eleventh hour, and the last time that I shall call laborers into my vineyard" (D&C 33:2-3). In this light the Lord admonishes: "Whoso desireth to reap let him thrust in his sickle with his might, and reap while the day lasts, that he may treasure up for his soul everlasting salvation in the kingdom of God" (D&C 11:3). Now is the time when the wheat must be gathered in. Those who participate are the Lord's sickle. The Lord will reward the effort of his laborers with the wonders and peace of Zion.

Through the efforts of the laborers, the world will hear the gospel. But when the world openly rejects goodness and turns against God's people, then another sickle will begin to do its terrible work. Note 2 Nephi 28:15-20 with Alma 37:30-31, which teach that the world is fully ripe when it both rejects and fights against goodness. That will be the day when the voice of God will utter "out of heaven, saying:"

Hearken, O ye nations of the earth, and hear the words of that God, who made you. O, ye nations of the earth, how often would I have gathered you together as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but ye would not! How oft have I called upon you by the mouth of my servants and by the ministering of angels, and by mine own voice, and by the voice of thunderings, and by the voice of lightnings, and by the voice of tempests, and by the voice of earthquakes, and great hailstorms, and by the voice of famines and pestilences of every kind, and by the great sound of a trump, and by the voice of judgment, and by the voice of mercy all the day long, and by the voice of glory and honor and the riches of eternal life, and would have saved you with an everlasting salvation, but ye would not! Behold, the day has come, when the cup of the wrath of mine indignation is full (D&C 43:23-26).

This scripture seems to depict the period of the second sickle, when all attempts to redeem the world have failed and the harvest is ripe for judgment and destruction. The harvest of ruin will be carried out not by the Lord but by an angel of destruction. His target is not the fields but the vineyards. His instrument is the drepanon ("sharp sickle," KJV), anall-purpose blade used for pruning, cutting clusters of grapes, and harvesting grains. Its roughly foot-long curved blade made it easy to handle with clean cutting power. The angel is to "gather the clusters of the vine of the earth; for her grapes are fully ripe" (v. 18, KJV). Further, he is to cast the fruit "into the great winepress of the wrath of God" (v. 19, KJV). His authority comes from the angel of the altar, probably the one already met in 8:3-5 who cast fire upon the earth. As noted elsewhere, the altar is connected with the prayers of the Saints. John may again be suggesting that the faithful play a significant role in bringing about the harvesting of the wicked. [^11]

This part of the vision does not seem to depict the final judgment that belongs to God alone (see 20:11-15) but the time of the return of the victorious Son, who has overcome all things and who takes his place as God of the earth. Upon his return, later in chapter nineteen, he will tread "the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God" (19:15, KJV).

If John intended the first harvest to denote the time of separation of the wheat from the tares (see Matt. 13:30; D&C 86:1-6), or the wheat from the chaff (cf. Luke 3:17), the second denotes unmitigated judgment. The association of the angel of the altar with the temple suggests that he is God's agent, the destroying angel given full authority for this awesome task. [^12]

God executes judgment outside the city. John probably has Jerusalem in mind, following the imagery of Joel 3:12-14 (which also uses the dual symbols of vintage and harvest). The judgment upon the nations takes place in the valley of Jehoshaphat, a name meaning "Jehovah is judge" (see Joel 3:2, 12). According to tradition, this is synonymous with the Kidron valley between Jerusalem and the Mount of Olives [^13] and was near the place where the Son of Man suffered so that all who would come to him would not need to suffer (see John 19:20; Heb. 13:12; D&C 19:16-18).

Those who refuse this first suffering will feel the full effect of the second. In graphic and appalling terms, John symbolizes the slaughter: blood flowing for 1600 furlongs (about 184 miles). Geographically, this is about the maximum length of Palestine. Symbolically, the number is the square of four, denoting geographical completeness, multiplied by the square of ten, the number denoting all of a part. Taken together, the number suggests that God's judgment actually involves all John's world, not just those who are around Jerusalem, and that all those who belong to that portion outside the protecting power of God will be directly affected. [^14]

John's vision seems to take in the same geographical area as that of Jeremiah 25:15-26 and Ezekiel 38:1-7. It is essentially central Europe, western and southern Russia, the Near East including Egypt, and much of North Africa. If other nations play any role in the battle at all, Revelation does not note it. Very likely conditions in the rest of the world will be such that regional problems will take up the time, energies, and resources of all the other nations.

CONCLUSION

John continues to use the pattern that shows first the protected state of the righteous and the indefensible position of the wicked. In this chapter, he symbolically shows that the gospel will be preached in all the world before the end comes; furthermore, he indicates that this preaching dooms Babylon. This is the time when the Church will move "out of the wilderness of darkness, and shine forth fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners" (D&C 109:73). The onslaught of this mighty kingdom of righteousness will be invincible. But for a time, conditions will be rough and opposition heavy.

When the true Saints are strong in the faith, when all peoples have clearly had a chance to hear the gospel proclaimed in their own tongue, when missionaries and Church officers are within reasonable reach of every soul, when temples dot the face of the lands, then the preparation for the first harvest will be complete. The actual harvest will commence in earnest when the world turns against the truth, actively persecuting righteousness because it is righteous, attacking the Saints of God and all who are good. The Son of Man will then gather the righteous out from among the wicked. Simultaneously the second harvest will begin. The angel of destruction will wield his sickle and cast those ripe in iniquity into the "great winepress of the wrath of God" (v. 19, KJV). Chapters fifteen through nineteen describe that harvest.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvellous, seven angels having the seven last plagues; for in them is filled up the wrath of God. Hailey, Revelation, 319.
[^2] And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire: and them that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of God. Caird, Revelation, 198.
[^3] And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints. Mounce, Revelation, 287.
[^4] Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest. Caird, Revelation, 199-200.
[^5] And after that I looked, and, behold, the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened: Scott, Exposition, 318.
[^6] And the seven angels came out of the temple, having the seven plagues, clothed in pure and white linen, and having their breasts girded with golden girdles. Ibid., 323-24.
[^7] And one of the four beasts gave unto the seven angels seven golden vials full of the wrath of God, who liveth for ever and ever.
[^8] And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his power; and no man was able to enter into the temple, till the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled.
[^9] And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, Cf. Mounce, Revelation, 274, and Caird,Revelation, 185.
[^10] The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: See Matthews, "A Plainer Translation," 210.
[^11] And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever: and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name. Mounce, Revelation, 281.
[^12] Here is the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. Ibid., 280-81.
[^13] And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do follow them. Zechariah 14:1-4 sets the scene of the final battle near Jerusalem, while 1 Enoch 53:1 describes a deep valley near the city as the place of judgment.
[^14] And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle. Mounce, Revelation, 283.
