Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 15

The Seven Angels

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 15)

THE GREAT AND MARVELOUS SIGN (v. 1)

Chapter fourteen closes with a description of carnage. The harvest of the earth has begun. Chapter fifteen opens with a new vision. Once again John sees a sign in the heavens. Seven angels, having the seven last plagues, prepare to do their work against the wicked. The vision is moving irresistibly toward its climax. John reveals the full extent of God's wrath as it is vented against the wicked.

The Seer's view changes from its perspective in the earlier part of the vision. It becomes much narrower. He sees the seven plagues neither as they affect the whole earth (as in chapter eight), nor as they molest mankind in general (as in chapter nine). Here only the wicked are in view. Thus, John says of the angels' plagues, "In them is filled up the wrath of God" (v. 1, KJV). The term translated "filled up" (Greek tele) meansto reach a consummation or perfection as well as to carry out, accomplish, perform, or fulfill. The Seer's use of the word suggests that in these judgments the wrath of God achieves its goal. [^1]

THE SAINTS OF GOD (vv. 2-4)

As already noted, John has a pattern of describing the peaceful condition of the faithful before presenting the horrors unleashed against the ungodly. His pattern continues here as he briefly mentions the blessed condition of the Saints before the vials of wrath are poured out upon the earth. The vision centers on the final glorious reward of the victorious Saints as they "stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of God" (v. 2, KJV). We have already learned that the sea of glass represents the celestialized earth. John assures us that the Saints will come through the fiery trials—which will destroy the wicked—to their eternal glory. Thus, appropriately they sing a new song. As did the Israelites who overcame Pharaoh and his army through faith in God, so these victorious Saints celebrate their triumph in song. But because they won through no other weapon than the blood of the Lamb, the song is appropriately called the song of the Lamb.

While their song echoes a number of Old Testament doxologies, John has combined them in such a way as to amplify the Christian hope. [^2] The song, praising God and the Lamb who give victory, is sung by those who were delivered from the wrath of the dragon and who prevailed in their testimony of Christ. The song focuses on the works and the ways of God. His deeds amaze men in two ways: in their magnitude and in their unpredictability. At the same time they consist of two attributes: they are perfectly just and totally proper. Because of these, God is worthy of praise and honor.

Though the song is a celebration of victory, it does not mention God's judgment upon his enemies. Rather, it concentrates on the rightness of his redemptive acts through which "all nations shall come and worship before thee" (v. 4, KJV). [^3] The phrase "King of the saints" as rendered in verse three of the KJV is highly questioned. The term saints is replaced by either ages (aionion) or nations(ethnon) in most ancient manuscripts. Because of a near parallel verse in Jeremiah 10:7, the favored translation is "King of nations." The point of the praise is in the last clause of verse four, "for thy judgments are made manifest." Nothing can stop the will of God from being done. He executes it through the course of history—thus, constructing that history. In the end, justice will be done, and judgment will have its total sway.

THE SEVEN ANGELS (vv. 5-8)

John again looks and sees the heavenly tabernacle. Once before he has seen this celestial shrine (see 11:19); however, that time the vision focused on the ark that held the covenant. The covering of the ark was called the mercy seat (see Ex. 25:22; Lev. 16:2), and there the mercy of God shone forth. This time the ark is not what occupies the Seer's attention but the "tabernacle of the testimony" (v. 5, KJV). The covenant and the law stand center. Mercy has had its day. The time for the execution of the law has arrived. [^4] That John focuses on judgment, flowing not from the throne but from the temple, dramatically changes the nature and purpose of the scourge. The more severe course of chastisement does not derive from God's sovereignty but from his righteousness and holiness. [^5]

God designates seven angels to enforce the judgment. Again the symbolism is important. All heaven combines in this great moment to see that God's will is fully executed. The ministers of justice are angels of high rank, as suggested by the golden girdles they wear like that of the Son of Man (see 1:13). One of the living creatures hands each of the angels of doom a vial, or bowl (Greek phial), filled with God's wrath. At the sametime John sees God's glory and power fill the heavenly temple, "and no man was able to enter into the temple, till the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled" (v. 8, KJV). Thus, John depicts the ominous moment. No one can enter the temple. No blood of expiation can be sprinkled as the High Priest had done on the Day of Atonement to bring renewal of the covenant of peace and mercy between God and Israel. No one can enter and make peace until judgment has had its way.

Note the contrast between the seven seals, seven trumpets, and seven bowls. The seals announce the designs of God, the trumpets sound the voice of warning, and the bowls execute his judgment. The bowls and trumpets strikingly correspond. In the first four of each series, the sphere of operation is the same, namely, earth, sea, rivers, fountains, and sun. But in the trumpets the area touched is somewhat restricted. The change produced under the bowls is different and of a more severe character. Further, the fifth, sixth, and even seventh trumpets correspond in general respects to the last three bowls. But in the latter, the range of the various plagues is in no way limited to a fourth (see 6:8) or third part (see chap. 8) of the prophetic earth. All evil is searched out and destroyed. [^6] From this point on, there is neither turning back nor remorse. God has clearly stated: "If ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me; I will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins" (Lev. 26:21, KJV). During this time of ultimate justice, any show of mercy would be wickedness.

CONCLUSION

This chapter celebrates not the God of mercy but the God of justice. John shows that justice must have its day. "For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands" (Alma 42:24). They who "bring forth evil fruit . . . must be hewn down and cast into the fire" (Jacob 6:7). This "according to the power of justice, for justice cannot be denied" (v. 10) because "on such the plan of redemption could have no power, for the works of justice could not be destroyed, according to the supreme goodness of God" (Alma 12:32). John has aptly shown that the world has had its chance to repent but refused. As a result of its recalcitrance, the world forfeited mercy. Now according to the "goodness of God," justice must be satisfied.

Chapter fifteen makes two points: first, that the plagues are inexorable once they commence; and second, that God executes them in justice and vengeance upon the world. Though punishment comes without mitigation, it is both just and righteous. In modern times the Lord has declared that the testimony of his witnesses "shall also go forth unto the condemnation of this generation if they harden their hearts against them; for a desolating scourge shall go forth among the inhabitants of the earth, and shall continue to be poured out from time to time, if they repent not, until the earth is empty, and the [wicked] inhabitants thereof are consumed away and utterly destroyed by the brightness of my coming" (D&C 5:18-19). Further, he has warned: "Lo, vengeance cometh speedily upon the ungodly as the whirlwind; and who shall escape it? The Lord's scourge shall pass over by night and by day, and the report thereof shall vex all people; yea, it shall not be stayed until the Lord come; for the indignation of the Lord is kindled against their abominations and all their wicked works" (D&C 97:22-24).

Once the plagues begin, there is no way to stop them. But what of the Saints? The Lord has both warned and promised them: "Nevertheless, Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her" (D&C 97:25). Here the Lord states his conditions: obedience will bring safety and security, disobedience will bring wrath. No unrighteousness is exempt even if found within the Church. The Saints must never forget the Lord's declaration:

Vengeance cometh speedily upon the inhabitants of the earth, a day of wrath, a day of burning, a day of desolation, of weeping, of mourning, and of lamentation; and as a whirlwind it shall come upon all the face of the earth, saith the Lord. And upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord; first among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house, saith the Lord (D&C 112:24-26).

Under the power of judgment, the mask of pretended righteousness will be ripped off and all hypocrisy fully revealed. The rebellious Latter-day Saint will not escape the justice of God.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And I heard a great voice out of the temple saying to the seven angels, Go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth. Hailey, Revelation, 325. The scene painted here isnot that of the final judgment, but that of the recompense of the Son of Man upon the wicked. The final judgment does not come into view until chapter twenty.
[^2] And the first went, and poured out his vial upon the earth; and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image. See, e.g., Mounce, Revelation, 291-92.
[^3] And the second angel poured out his vial upon the sea; and it became as the blood of a dead man: and every living soul died in the sea. Ibid., 293-94.
[^4] And the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of waters; and they became blood. See Moulton, Vocabulary, s.v. kakos, for thisusage.
[^5] And I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, because thou hast judged thus. Hailey, Revelation, 327.
[^6] For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink; for they are worthy. Ibid., 328.
