Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 16

The Seven Bowls

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 16)

THE VOICE FROM THE TEMPLE (v. 1)

The revelation of chapter fifteen forms the backdrop for that of sixteen. John has already seen the victorious Saints sing their song of triumph. In this way, the Seer assures his readers that they will eventually be victorious and that they have nothing to fear from the vials to be poured out against the wicked. This assurance steels them for the doom that grips the ungodly as the vision continues.

Chapter fourteen closed with the picture of wrath contained in the symbolism of the harvest of the vintage. Why does sixteen go through the whole thing again? Probably because of the need to emphasize both the intensity and finality of the coming judgment. [^1] This suggests why the Lord chose symbols different from those he used in chapters eight and nine to depict the same judgments. In those chapters the purview took in all the earth. There judgment was mitigated. Here he concentrates only on the wicked: "the men which had the mark of the beast, and . . . worshipped his image" (v. 2, KJV).

Some commentators see the plagues of chapter sixteen as additional to those in chapters eight and nine. In this viewthe plagues are seen as the fulfillment of the final trump. The reasons are primarily three in number. First, the trumpet plagues are partial while the bowl plagues are total; second, the trumpet plagues are viewed as a call to repentance while the bowls leave no room for remorse; and finally, mankind is not affected but indirectly by the first four trumpets while the bowls blast right at him. [^2] I believe that these reasons do not take into account the different focus of the two visions. The trumpets are universal and, taken in the aggregate, many people will survive, whereas the bowls are specifically directed at wickedness, which shall utterly be destroyed.

From the temple "filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his power" (Rev. 15:8, KJV) comes the voice of command. "Go your ways," it directs the seven angels, "and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth" (16:1, KJV). The imagery echoes Isaiah 66:6: "a voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord that rendereth recompense to his enemies." The content of the vials, or bowls, renders the recompense. The term translated "vial" (Greek phial) means "bowl,"especially one used in making sacred offerings. In this context John probably envisioned the bowl used to catch the blood of the sacrificial animal. In making the sacrifice, the priest splashed the blood against the altar (e.g., Lev. 1:5; 3:8). Here the content of the bowls is not blood but that which will shed blood. It is the wrath of God poured out in its fullness against the wicked.

THE FIRST THREE BOWLS (vv. 2-7)

The voice dispatches the first angel to pour out his bowlagainst the followers of the first beast. These have proudly worn the beast's mark; now they will wear the sign of God's wrath. [^3] Foul and angry sores come upon them. The KJV states that they are "noisome" and "grievous." Noisome (from kakos)is often translated "evil." The word emphasizes the pernicious and destructive nature of the sores that plague the mind as well as the body. [^4] Grievous (from ponros) suggests theirvirulent and serious nature. The sores themselves are open abscesses or ulcers echoing those of the sixth Egyptian plague brought by Moses (see Ex. 9:8-12; see also Job 2:7-8, 13). [^5]

The second angel pours out the wrath of God upon the sea, while the third directs his vial toward the rivers and springs of waters. The result is that all became as blood, and "every living soul died in the sea" (v. 3, KJV). Here the sea, as part of creation, suffers as a result of sin. Speaking of the last days the Lord has stated: "There are many dangers upon the waters, and more especially hereafter; for I, the Lord have decreed in mine anger many destructions upon the waters" (D&C 61:4-5). Further, "I, the Lord, in the beginning blessed the waters; but in the last days, by the mouth of my servant John, I cursed the waters. Wherefore, the days will come that no flesh shall be safe upon the waters. And it shall be said in days to come that none is able to go up to the land of Zion upon the waters, but he that is upright in heart" (D&C 61:14-16). Note that only the righteous can transverse the waters during this period. All others, the wicked, die.

In verse three, the Lord incorporates an important symbol in constructing his message. In chapter thirteen, the first monster arose from the sea. There the term sea denoted a large segment of society out of whose upheavals the beast came. In 17:15 an angel states that the waters "are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues" (KJV). Here, in verse three, the sea may have a double connotation: the real sea, and a spiritually dead society that has abandoned itself to idolatry and immorality. As one scholar has noted: "In such a society, morals decline to the lowest level; the family collapses, schools breed anarchy and rebellion, business ethics are forgotten, entertainment becomes base and sordid, and printing presses exude smut and filth, until the whole is strangled in its own death blood and suffocated by its own stench." [^6]

What fuels the furnace and drives the engines of such a society is the spirit of idolatry. According to the Doctrine and Covenants, this evil spirit "has been growing stronger and stronger, and is now the very mainspring of all corruption, and the whole earth groans under the weight of its iniquity" (D&C 123:7).

The angel of the water, speaking for the other seven, proclaims the righteousness of God "because [he has] judged thus" (v. 5, KJV). [^7] The execution of the sentence reveals and underscores the justice of God. John shows that this justice is a cosmic force that acts as a heavenly flame. When this consuming fire contacts something that is not itself just, conflagration occurs. Corruption must fall to the flame: "When the veil of the covering of my temple, in my tabernacle, which hideth the earth, shall be taken off, and all flesh shall see me together. And every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed" (D&C 101:23-24). Nothing that has basked and gloried in corruption shall escape the justice of God.

However, it should be noted that the bowls of wrath are not designed to destroy the natural order, but rather to enlist it in the service of divine recompense. Thus, the whole of creation becomes a means by which the wicked are punished. But, as was shown in chapter nine, the most important determinant is man's own malicious disregard for man.

Throughout Revelation (except 11:1), judgment and altar are inseparable (see 6:9; 8:3-5; 9:13; 14:18; 16:7). God inextricably interweaves two principles: sacrifice and judgment. Thus, echoing the angel of the water, the angel of the altar declaresthe absolute justice of God in executing his judgments. One hears reverberations of the song of Moses and the Lamb (see 15:3-5) as the angel declares, "True and righteous are thy judgments" (16:7, KJV). God's actions are in absolute accordance with truth and justice. The execution of God's will enacted by the pouring out of the first three bowls ends in the declaration of his justice. The next two bowls focus on men's reactions to that justice.

THE FOURTH AND FIFTH BOWLS (vv. 8-11)

The fourth angel pours out his bowl upon the sun. Scorching heat results. Very likely this symbolizes the turmoil and unremitting strife of the times. It stands in sharp contrast to the condition of the sealed where they "hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat" (7:16, KJV; cf. Ps. 121:5-7). With the righteous, there is peace, security, and love; where the beast rules, anxiety, unrest, and turmoil.

But the pressure does not let up. The fifth angel releases the power of his bowl upon the seat of the beast. The result is darkness—not a cool and relieving penumbra but a smothering and suffocating blanket. The smoke of the pit in the abyss produces the darkness (see 9:2). Its purpose is to expel light and truth. The result reflects the warning from the Almighty: "The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart: and thou shalt grope at noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall save thee" (Deut. 28:28-29, KJV; cf. Ex.10:21-23). Now has come the time when "all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people" (D&C 88:91). This is the day of the locusts, those engines of destruction associated with heat and fire (see 9:3-12). As darkness swallows the kingdom of the first beast, the whole movement underscores one theme: finality.

The core of the Seer's message centers on the reaction of men to the plagues. They recognize God as the one who controls the plagues, and they curse him because of their pains and anguish, but they do not repent (see 9:20-21). Instead, they blaspheme their maker. This point is significant. Before, only the beast has spoken blasphemy. In chapter sixteen, men are the ones who thrice curse God (vv. 9, 11, 21). John seems to be showing that these men have wholly taken on the character of the beast they serve. The mark of the monster has become indelible not only on their bodies, but also upon their souls, resulting in a sickness that can only reap the reward for which it has blindly sought: reprobation and annihilation (see 14:10-11; 20:15; 21:8; 22:15). [^8]

THE SIXTH BOWL (vv. 12-16)

The sixth angel prepares the world for war. As he pours out his bowl, the Euphrates River dries up. The idea of waters being dried up for God's purposes is common in the Old Testament (see Ex. 14:21; Josh. 3:13-17; Isa. 11:15-16; 44:27; Jer. 51:36;Zech. 10:11). [^9] The locusts of chapter nine have been waiting forthe directive to come out of the darkness. The sixth plague sounds the command. With it, everything that held back the war, symbolized by the great river, is removed. The nature of the symbols used in this chapter, as in others, suggests that they reflect actual conditions. [^10] Bizarre weather patterns, scorching heat, large rivers drying up, famine, and plague reveal nature itself working with God in his recompense upon wickedness gone mad.

There is an irony in the sixth plague. On at least two other occasions, waters were dried up in the service of God's people: the first time was the Red Sea (see Ex. 14:21); and the second, the Jordan River (Josh. 3:14-17). This time the dry waters allow horror to sweep the land. But the engines of destruction are in reality the tool of the Almighty. "I, the Lord, am angry with the wicked," he proclaims, and "I am holding my Spirit from the inhabitants of the earth. I have sworn in my wrath, and decreed wars upon the face of the earth, and the wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every man; and the saints also shall hardly escape" (D&C 63:32-34).

The war results from a great delusion. The dragon, the beast, and the false prophet spin lies into webs that captivate the nations. John pictures their pervasive and persuasive philosophy as frogs working among men. Leviticus classifies frogs as unclean (see 11:10). That these three originate from the unholy triumvirate suggests the deceptive nature of their propaganda. Its effectiveness results in the unconditional surrender by men to the cause of evil. [^11]

From the visions recorded in chapter twelve on, John had watched the dragon and his beasts in the act of working their lies. Filth had already spewed from their mouths: from the dragon came a river of lies (see 12:15), from the beast came blasphemies (see 13:5), and from the false prophet came seductive propaganda that enticed the world to follow the ways of the beast (see 13:14). [^12] In the last days all three send forth their agents.

Here John stops to identify the symbolism of the frogs. They are evil spirits that work counterfeit signs to deceive the nations. The KJV states that the frogs are "spirits of devils"(16:14). The phrase translates the Greek eisin gar pneumata daimonin. The phrase should be translated "demonic spirits" or "spirits, that is, demons." The genitive is one of apposition or definition. Devils have no spirits, being themselves spirits. [^13] The purpose of the evil spirits is totally satanic, that is, to gather the forces of evil in an effort to annihilate the good. Thus, the object of the unclean spirits is to muster the forces of the kings of the earth "to the battle of that great day of God Almighty" (v. 14, KJV).

Through the machinations of the frogs, nations will be seized with a passion for war. But the battle will be God's, for this is the great day when he will reckon with the wicked nations of the world (see Ezek. 38-39; Zech. 14). [^14] John's vision goes beyond nationalistic limits as he views the entire Mediterranean area moved to battle. This is no mere skirmish, nor merely another war. John depicts nothing less than the end of the telestial world order caused by the abrupt coming of God himself. [^15]

At this point John makes an interjection. Paraphrasing Matthew 24:42-46, he notes the Lord's admonition that he will come as a thief in the night and that one must be constantly prepared. The warning just at this point is very appropriate. As the forces of the beast gather, the crises will not bypass the Saints. They must respond to the moment in faith, with constant alertness, or else they will be as a soldier who, because he has misplaced his rifle, must flee to his shame at the first sound of alarm. [^16] Having given the warning, John returns to the narrative.

The army gathers, but who musters it? John states, "He gathered them together" (v. 16, KJV). The singular pronoun suggests it was neither the frogs nor the evil triumvirate. Most likely the reference is to God, for everything is proceeding exactly as he has planned. The evil host is gathered to one spot where he can more easily dispose of it.

John calls this place "Armageddon." Just what he had in mind is unclear due to ambiguity with the term. The Greek form is Harmagdn. John states that this is a transliteration of aHebrew word, but he does not supply the word. Many feel it should be "har-magedon," meaning "the mount of Megiddo." If this is the case then the reference would be to an ancient fortress that guarded one of the major highways going through the Jezreel valley to and from Jerusalem. Megiddo was the site for a number of famous battles, perhaps the most celebrated being the defeat of Sisera and his army when "the stars in their courses fought against Sisera" (Judg. 5:19-20). Also in the valley Esdraelon (Jezreel), Gideon's three hundred soldiers roundly defeated the Midianites (see Judg. 7); Saul and Jonathan met their end (see 1 Sam. 31:1-6); and king Josiah fought Pharaoh Neco and was killed (see 2 Kgs. 23:29-30).

A problem arises in that there is no reference to a "Mount Megiddo" in any ancient writing. Scriptural references abound for Megiddo and its three small towns (see Josh. 17:11; Judg. 1:27), [^17] to "the waters of Megiddo" (Judg. 5:19, KJV), and even to "the valley of Megiddo" (2 Chr. 35:22, KJV; Zech. 12:11), but there is not a whisper about a mount with the name Megiddo. In John's day, the site of the city would have been little more than seventy feet above the plain. That hardly qualifies for the epithet "mountain."

Other scholars have suggested that "Har" identifies Mount Carmel and "Megadon" as the citadel Megiddo, both being alluded to in the same breath. Others translate the expression as the mount of assembly mentioned in Isaiah 14:13; or "his [Jehovah's] fruitful field," or "the desirable city" meaning Jerusalem, still others as the "marauding mountain" paralleling Jeremiah's destroying mountain (see 51:25). [^18]

Whatever John had in mind, one thing seems clear: as with his other names, the intent is symbolic. The final battle is not to end in northern Israel but at Jerusalem. Zechariah connects Jerusalem and Megiddo in this context (see 12:10-11). The mountain that is the object of the battle must be the Mountain of the Lord's House, for, as has been shown, the battle is essentially religious: one ideology and theology against another. Therefore, the beast must eventually destroy the Mountain of the Lord's House, the seat of God's power on earth, if he is to reign supreme. [^19]

THE SEVENTH BOWL (vv. 17-21)

With the seventh bowl, the voice emanating from both the temple and the throne declares, "It is done" (KJV). The combining of both the throne and temple suggests the absolute authority by which God accomplishes his will. He invokes both kingly and priestly authority. The pouring out of the seventh bowl fully executes the will of God. As John said in 11:18, the time has come to destroy those who destroyed the earth.

In vivid language, John describes the power God unleashes against the wicked: thunder, lightning, tumult, and finally an earthquake of unprecedented proportions (cf. Dan. 12:1). "For, with you saith the Lord Almighty, I will rend their kingdoms; I will not only shake the earth, but the starry heavens shall tremble" (D&C 84:118). In reality, all this is nothing less than the preparation of the earth for its paradisiacal state.

He shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people; and it shall be a voice as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder, which shall break down the mountains, and the valleys shall not be found. He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land; and the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided. And the Lord, even the Savior, shall stand in the midst of his people, and shall reign over all flesh (D&C 133:21-25).

The earthquake causes the fall of the cities of the nations: "The great city was divided into three parts" (v. 19, KJV). The focus appears to be on Babylon, divided into thirds, symbolic of the fullness of the divine wrath that strikes her to her destruction. Men have long stood in fear of the power of the earthquake. Here the force of God rocks the lands, and entire civilizations fall at the blow. Babylon herself comes down, her division becoming a mortal wound.

Associated with the seventh bowl, John sees one last plague of tremendous proportions. As was the earthquake, this one is not directed at the cities and nations under the power of spiritual Babylon. The new threat is directed at the people who inhabit those cities: "There fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent" (v. 21, KJV). From the days Moses brought this plague upon Egypt, hail has served as both the symbol and reality of God's judgment upon hardened mankind (see, e.g., Ex. 9:18-26; Ps. 78:47; 105:32; Josh. 10:11). [^20]

Here the weight of each stone is between 60 to 80 pounds. Through this symbol, John describes the pounding power that will bring all men to their knees. But it will not bring penitence. Once again John notes how hardened these men have become who can only curse God and wish to die and who never for a second consider repentance. Little wonder that the angels declared that God's judgments against the wicked were entirely true and just.

CONCLUSION

After bringing his reader three times to the point of judgment, John finally shows its execution. Sandwiched between all the symbolically graphic material is a warning to the Saints: watch and be prepared (see v. 15). Now is the time to set that watch. The Lord has charged his prophets to "prepare the saints for the hour of judgment which is to come; that their souls may escape the wrath of God, the desolation of abomination which awaits the wicked, both in this world and in the world to come" (D&C 88:84-85). To the Saints, he commands: "Entangle not yourselves in sin, but let your hands be clean, until the Lord comes. For not many days hence and the earth shall tremble and reel to and fro as a drunken man. . . . [For] after your testimony cometh wrath and indignation upon the people" (D&C 88:86-88).

The world must respond to the cry of repentance or face the consequences. Chapter sixteen describes what will happen to those who will not repent. Ironically, their refusal to repent is the very thing that continues the plagues. They curse God when they should be blaming themselves. God is not the cause of their misery—they are. But they are too blinded, too hardened, too spiritually dead to see it. They bring upon themselves the fires of Hades even in mortality. Yet while they hate it, their minds have become so perverted that the filth of hell seems better than the purity of heaven. And thus they die.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither; I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters: Hailey, Revelation, 345.
[^2] With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication. Bock, Apocalypse, 165-66.
[^3] So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns. Alfred Edersheim, The Temple: Its Ministry and Services As They Were at the Time of Jesus Christ (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1975 reprint ed.), 312.
[^4] And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colour, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication: Ford, Revelation, 287.
[^5] And upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. Sir. 50:14-15 notes specifically that the cup of libation used by Simon the high priest was made of pure gold and filled with "the blood of grapes."
[^6] And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration. Ford, Revelation, 288.
[^7] And the angel said unto me, Wherefore didst thou marvel? I will tell thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carrieth her, which hath the seven heads and ten horns. For discussion, see Steven E. Robinson, "Early Christianity and 1 Nephi 13-14," in Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate, Jr., eds., The Book of Mormon: First Nephi, The Doctrinal Foundation(Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University,1988), 177-91.
[^8] For an excellent discussion of the great and abominable church in this guise, see Robinson, "Early Christianity," 182-84.
[^9] And here is the mind which hath wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth. Bock, Apocalypse, 146.
[^10] And there are seven kings: five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come; and when he cometh, he must continue a short space. Fiorenza, Revelation, 7.
[^11] And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and goeth into perdition. Robinson, "Early Christianity," 180.
[^12] And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which have received no kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings one hour with the beast. See Moulton, Vocabulary, s.v., thaumaz, forsuch usage.
[^13] These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the beast. The tense is future but the construction is paraphrastic (kai mellei anabainein ek ts abussou). The beast is about to come outof the abyss; its arising is close at hand.
[^14] These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings: and they that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful. Caird, Revelation, 215-16.
[^15] And he saith unto me, The waters which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. From the days of Servius Tullius, Rome's sixth king, the city was known as urbs septicollis, the city of seven hills. TheSeptimontium, a holiday in December, celebrated the enclosure of the seven hills with Rome's walls (see Suet Dom. 4). Latin literature abounds inreferences to the city of seven hills (see Verg. G. 2.535;Aen. 6.783; Hor. Carm. 7; Ov. Tr. 1.5, just as examples).
[^16] And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. Mounce, Revelation, 315.
[^17] For God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his will, and to agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled. For a sampling, see Charles, Commentary, 2:71-72; and especially Ford, Revelation, 289-90.
[^18] And the woman which thou sawest is that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth. See Charles, Commentary, 2:67, 70, 76-87.
[^19] Mounce, Revelation, 316-17.
[^20] See also 1 Enoch 9:4; 2 Maccabees 13:4. The title is old and can be traced back to early Babylonian times when the god Marduk was designated by this title. Further, Babylonian and Persian kings claimed the title, maintaining that they were rulers by divine right (see Ezra 7:12; Daniel 2:37). Thus, the title designates deity or one empowered by deity.
