Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 17

Babylon the Great

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 17)

THE WOMAN AND THE BEAST (vv. 1-3)

To John, an angel cries: "Come hither, I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great whore" (v. 1, KJV). With those words, the angel invites John to take a microscopic view of the destruction of that prepossessing evil "that sitteth upon many waters." The imagery rests on Jeremiah 51:13, where the prophet describes ancient Babylon as the city that "dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasure" (KJV). The waters the woman sits upon represent "peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues" whom the harlot rules (v. 15, KJV). Little wonder that the angel calls her "great," an adjective denoting quantity not quality.

To find the harlot, they go into the wilderness. The last time John viewed the wilderness, a different woman was there—the virtuous mother, the pure church of God. Now upon his return, that woman is gone, and in her place sits another "upon ascarlet coloured beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns" (v. 3, KJV). The great woman reeks of prostitution and revels in sin as she urges the beast forward. But the harlot is not the master of the beast. They form a union, a mutual bond of assistance. Indeed, the beast supports and sustains the woman while the woman seduces men to honor the beast.

Some commentators speculate that the immoral woman represents the true church become apostate through the seduction of the philosophy and propaganda of the beast. They base this argument on the idea that the harlot and the woman are both in the same place, the wilderness. However, the assumption does not necessarily hold. The wilderness has a dual symbolism in the scriptures. On the one hand, it denotes a place of discipline and protection where the Lord "made his own people to go forth like sheep, and guided them in the wilderness like a flock" (Ps. 78:52, KJV). Indeed, his people "shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods" (Ezek. 34:25, KJV). On the other hand, those who are not his people shall find their habitation "a desolation, and dry like the wilderness," full of wild beasts, and the haunt of scavengers. (Zeph. 2:13.) Therefore, the wilderness may be the abode of peace, protection, and divine schooling with God's assistance, or it may be the place of desolation, desertion, and death without him. The Church is in the first place, the whore exists in the second. [^1]

The close connection between the two women, however, seems deliberate. The harlot with her beast is the reverse image of the woman with the man child. Herein stands an interesting contrast: the Church produces the kingdom of God, a heavenly society, while conversely, the kingdom of the devil produces and sustains Babylon, the degenerate society. Unlike the virtuous woman, the whore has no son; indeed, one of her most striking features is her perpetual barrenness. All her glitter and ornamentation do not hide the reality; she personifies sterility and death. [^2]

John views the period just before the end time when nearly all the world follows after the whore, committing economic, political, and religious immoralities for both pleasure andgain. By promoting her objectives, society purchases her favors; and as flatterers and sycophants, they yield to her whims. No class of society is without representation; all have become intoxicated with her lusts. As Isaiah prophesied, "They are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink" (29:9, KJV). The Old Testament uses harlotry as a symbol for inordinate wealth-getting that arises through commerce and trade. Ezekiel blasts Israel with the words: "Thou hast played the whore also with the Assyrians, because thou wast unsatiable; yea, thou hast played the harlot with them, and yet couldest not be satisfied. Thou hast moreover multiplied thy fornication in the land of Canaan unto Chaldea; and yet thou wast not satisfied herewith" (16:28-29, KJV). In the last days, the inebriating wine of materialism and unchastity fills their souls; the liquor of selfishness dissipates them.

Nephi notes that the great and abominable church had its genesis just before the Lord's apostles died. Its members, called the children of the devil, removed plain and precious parts from the Bible. The purpose was to entrap the unwary in Satan's snare. They were largely effective, for Nephi sees that "an exceedingly great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them" (1 Ne. 13:29). Then looking at the last days, Nephi notes that this same institution will dig a great pit, a kind of doorway to hell, for the destruction of men. At the same time God will work a great work "which shall be ever-lasting, either on the one hand or on the other—either to the convincing of them unto peace and life eternal, or unto the de-liverance of them . . . to the captivity of the devil" (1 Ne. 14:7). Nowhere does he identify the historical name of the great and abominable church or any of the institutions that support it.

The beast that supports the woman appears to be the monster that came up from the sea. Its color, horns, and heads are the same as the dragon's, but it is more closely associated with blasphemy. In chapter thirteen John states that the monster wore "upon his heads the name of blasphemy" (v. 1, KJV) and that he "opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name" (v. 6, KJV). The beast in the wilderness is "fullof the names of blasphemy" (17:3, AT). Clearly the beast that supports the mistress has become the embodiment of sacrilege.

This does not mean that it merely defiles and reviles the name of God. It goes even further by claiming the very attributes of deity; indeed, of being deity itself. Second Thessalonians 2:3-4 tells us that the "son of perdition . . . opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God" (KJV). The special form this blasphemy takes is the claim of savior. But the salvation the dragon offers is the momentary thrill—the cheap pleasure of the prostitute that is fleeting, empty, and immoral. The beast's seductive promises are anchored solely in the illusion that one can find happiness and security in iniquity.

Scarlet radiates from the beast and the dress of the woman. The blush reflects the essence of the dragon from which both monster and rider receive their power. But it is not the same color as that of the dragon. John described the old serpent as purros, fiery red. The color here is kokkinos,crimson blended with dark blue. A ribbon of this color, representing the sins of Israel, was tied round the neck of the scapegoat on the Day of Atonement before it was driven into the wilderness to its death. [^3] It became indirectly associated with harlotry and the deep sins of ungodly conduct. (See Isa. 1:18; Ps. 51:7.) The color stands in contrast to the white robes of the redeemed and of the gown of the bride of the Lamb (see 19:8). [^4]

THE GREAT WHORE BABYLON (vv. 4-6)

Since God directs his total wrath against theharlot, understanding what she represents is important. First and foremost, she reeks with the stench of gross immorality. The figure of the harlot is used consistently in the Old Testament to represent spiritual apostasy, the deliberate and willful rebellion against God and his covenants. This disobedience results in a kind of false worship that draws strength, momentum, and addiction from selfishness and pride.

The harlot drinks from a golden cup filled with abominations and corruption (cf. Jer. 7-8). This stands in contrast to the golden chalice held by the Levitical high priest and used in the temple for making a wine offering to God. [^5] But this is not the only imitation of holy things that John associates with the woman. Purple and scarlet comprise her clothing. These colors, along with white and blue, dominate the fabric of the veils and interior of the temple as well as the vestments of the high priest. Further, the high priest wore a mitre. Engraven upon a golden plate fastened to it were the words "Holiness to the Lord," identifying the priest as the Lord's own. The whore also wears an inscription upon her brow proclaiming her threefold status as "MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH" (v. 5, KJV). Unlike the high priest, she belongs to no one. No covenant ties her to one order or loyalty. She is faithful only to herself.

Through these images, John paints the picture of a priestess-harlot standing as a counterfeit high priest. [^6] The woman, therefore, represents more than rulers or nations with their attendant power (the beast's heads and its horns do that). The woman epitomizes a religious-philosophical or theological system through which men are seduced to worship the dragon. For this reason she combines elements of both the first and second beast but more especially those of the false prophet.

She bears the name: "MYSTERY." Significantly, the word not only makes up part of her name, but also stands as the leading element. The term generally refers to the most holy teachings and doctrines of God kept from the profane world. Paul speaks of the Apostles as "stewards of the mysteries of God" (1 Cor. 4:1, KJV). Only "the power of the Holy Ghost" reveals these mysteries (1 Ne. 10:19), which remain in the temple and constitute in large measure the mysteries of God. The woman represents counterfeit ordinances with their secret oaths and binding covenants, a kind of pseudoworship containing "secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness" (2 Ne. 9:9). These are "the combinations of the devil, for he is the founder of all these things" (2 Ne. 26:22). These combinations constitute the "ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH" (Rev. 17:5, KJV; cf. 3 Ne. 5:6). They also form the last part of the harlot's titles.

In the Bible the term abomination describes those things so vile that they rouse the instant wrath of God. In their worse form, they are called "the abomination of desolation" and are associated with the corruption of the temple (cf. Dan. 11:31; Matt. 24:15). Their presence in the temple causes God's spirit to withdraw, leaving the sanctuary fully exposed to destruction. In particular, the Greek form of the word bdelugma denotes idolatry and harlotry, especially when combined to create a maleficent worship (see Deut. 29:26; 2 Chr. 28:3). [^7]

This worship has its objectives: the acquisition of wealth and luxury at the expense of righteousness and decency. The whore represents those forces that move the world to wholesale adoption of the Mahanic principle. For this reason, it stands counter to the Christian objectives of service, virtue, and love. In self-defense born of a seared conscience, the whore mocks, derides, and openly persecutes the Church of God. So severe is her hatred that she is only satisfied when she can glut herself on the wine of their tears and blood.

John also identifies the woman as "Babylon." This image will be discussed more fully in chapter eighteen, but note here that the ancient city had the reputation of being the first where men combined against God with the deliberate goal of frustrating and wresting control from him. It was where a false theological system fought against the true (see Gen. 11:1-9). In the first and last books of the Bible, Babylon incarnates arrogance, pride, and insatiable corruption in opposition to God and his kingdom. It stands in contrast to the heavenly city, theNew Jerusalem, where the law of God thrives.

In this image Babylon represents a real historical organization. Nephi saw the devil establish it among the nations and kingdoms of the Gentiles (see 1 Ne. 13:4-6), and he traced its continual existence into the present (see 1 Ne. 13:26-29; 14:1-17). That prophet makes it clear, however, that it is composed of more then one entity. He notes that "they have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious. . . . And all this have they done thatthey might pervert the right ways of the Lord" (1 Ne. 13:26-27, italics added). Seeing spiritual Babylon as only one association, either at its inception or today, would therefore be wrong. It symbolizes all leagues that may be properly called Antichrist, that pervert the right way of the Lord, and that promote antichristian principles and life-styles. [^8]

The term Antichrist seems to fit well with the whore in the form of Babylon. The term comes out of the writings of John (1 Jn. 2:18, 22; 4:3; 2 Jn. 1:7) where it takes the form of a collective order. Babylon is the symbol for this group. The historical reality takes first the form of false teachers moving out from the true church with the purpose of deception, and then the leagues that base themselves upon and promulgate these falsehoods.

John's two motifs make apparent two major aspects of the same phenomenon: the figure of the city portrays the historical bodies, the figure of the woman the essence of their souls. [^9] Both operate among the nations of the world. Taken together they symbolize a kind of state-cult that combines with local and national governments to impose its sham religious system upon men. [^10] Such a system can be either theistic or atheistic. As one scholar put it, "The whore provides the theory; government provides the muscle." [^11] Both together compose the state-church.

THE MYSTERY OF THE BEAST (vv. 7-13)

. 8. The beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition: and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose names were not written in the book of life from the foundation of the world, when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.

The greatness of the woman's power causes John to feel nothing short of consternation (see v. 6). The Greek word thaumaz, translated "admiration" in the KJV, means to be amazed, to wonder, to be astonished. The common element seems to be incredulous surprise. [^12] The context dictates the positive or negative sense of the word. Here the context suggests the translation "consternation," rather than "admiration" as used in the KJV. Seeing John's reaction, the angel asks, "Why didst thou marvel? I will tell thee of the mystery of the woman and of the beast" (v. 7, AT).

The messenger begins with the monster. It is the same beast John depicted in chapter thirteen. As noted there, the description shows that it is a counterfeit of the Lamb of God: "The beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit" (v. 8, KJV). As noted earlier, this statement stands in contrast to the description of the Savior as "the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come" (1:8, KJV). The Savior is the great Jehovah who exists from everlasting to everlasting (see D&C 20:17; 61:1). The beast is, at best, only a momentary reality. John's statement that he "is not" suggests his shadowy nature. He seems to have suffered death, but in reality he is but momentarily in the abyss, waiting to arise. [^13]

Again a backhanded parallel emerges. This satanically inspired power imitates the resurrecting power of the divine Lamb who died and came back to life. The beast returns to hurlitself in fury against the kingdom of God. This resiliency causes those who "dwell on the earth" to wonder "when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is" (v. 8, KJV). John can see that the beast is neither dead nor gone, it is only hidden; it still pulls the strings and will do so until the day it emerges full force from the abyss.

The last of its descriptive phrases, "and yet is" (Greek kai parestai), has the same root as the Greek word parousia,a technical term used to describe the arrival of an emperor and used consistently for the second coming of the Lord. The word appears in 1 Thessalonians 4:15-17 and 2 Thessalonians 2:1, where it is translated in the KJV with the phrase "the coming of the Lord." It is also used as a title for the Lord in Revelation 1:8. Here in 17:8 the angel connects it with the ascent of the beast out of the abyss. As the Savior will have his second coming, so too the monster will have its diabolical parousia. [^14] This will not be long lasting, for, from the moment it arises, it shall move relentlessly toward its final destiny—perdition.

The beast, as viewed in chapter seventeen, is thus not a particular political organization but a composite entity working from a common ideology that pits government against true religion. Mutual support therefore exists between the beast, its heads, and its horns. In this light John states, "These have one mind," which is the mind of the beast, and they "shall give their power and strength unto the beast" so that his perverse theology may be imposed upon all (v. 13, KJV).

John begins the interpretation of the heads and horns with an admonition, "Here is the mind which hath wisdom" (v. 9, KJV). John seems to be warning his reader that the reality behind the symbols is not obvious. The amount of scholarly generated speculation accentuates this. Unfortunately, Latter-day Saints have no better understanding than the rest of the world. No prophetic or scriptural commentary exists to help decipher this portion of John's revelation. Though Nephi seems to have seen the historical period covered in this part of Revelation, he focuses only on the great whore. He tells us nothing about the kings or other institutions that support and sustain her. Even so,there are a few generalities that can be said about her adherents.

John states that "the seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth" (v. 9, KJV). The allusion to seven hills best fits Rome, which was called the city of seven hills [^15] and certainly manifested the spirit of the great beast in John's day. However, Rome itself stands as a symbol of the archetypal Babylon. As the number for completeness, seven not only symbolizes the power exercised by Rome in John's day, but it also denotes the political powers of the latter days. [^16]

Associated with the hills are seven kings. More than likely they represent Roman rulers contemporary with John. A number of schemes have been created to identify these rulers. None, however, have found universal acceptance. [^17] John states that the beast "is the eighth, and is of the seven" (v. 11, KJV). It has been speculated at great length, due to a myth circulating among the Romans in the last half of the first century, that the eighth emperor represents Nero. In spite of knowledge of his death in a.d. 68, a rumor persisted that he had actually escaped toParthia in the east and would return to recapture the empire. Many feel that the beast represents this Nero redivivus. The problem isthat such a view leaves the prophecy of John unfulfilled. Others argue that the eighth is Domitian, who embodied the evil disposition of Nero against the Christians. [^18] Note that the monster is not one of the seven (the Greek reads kai ek ton hepta estin) but encapsulates all of them, for they all play the same role.

Affiliated with these are certain kings, probably representing institutions that would come into being after the period of Roman rule, for John states that they "have received no kingdom as yet" (v. 12, KJV). John uses the number ten to describe them, symbolically representing the whole of a part. As applied to the kings, it suggests that they represent all those kingdoms and rulers whom the great whore seduces and who, therefore, adopt her philosophy and manner. But they do not represent all kingdoms. The kingdom of God particularly, as John has shown, stands apart.

The beast is ever present but holds greatest hegemony in the latter days, the period of the ten kings. At that time, hewill be able to make many nations subservient to his will. Taking up his banner, the nations will war against the Messiah. [^19] But the time of their rule will be short, for they "receive power as kings one hour with the beast" (v. 12, KJV). Here, John also notes that their kingly authority is derived. Whoever gives the authority can set the limits and strength of the power. Once again, the Seer subtly shows that God controls all. The machinations of both the kings and the beast work God's will, to their total frustration. Indeed, the Lord will win, "for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings" (v. 14, KJV), unlike the rulers of the earth who are but pseudokings. John is perfectly consistent with the Bible and Jewish apocalyptic literature in applying the superlative title "Lord of lords and King of kings" to deity (see, e.g., Deut. 10:17). [^20]

THE FALL OF THE HARLOT (vv. 14-18)

The beasts gather the Babylonian portion of mankind into a great war. The frogs of chapter sixteen efficiently spread their seductive propaganda (see v. 14). A great army forms in response and moves forth with one objective: destruction. Of this period, Ezekiel proclaimed:

After many days thou [Gog of Magog] shalt be visited: in the latter years thou shalt come into the land that is brought back from the sword, and is gathered out of many people, against the mountains of Israel, which have been always waste: but it is brought forth out of the nations, and they shalldwell safely all of them. Thou shalt ascend and come like a storm, thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thy bands, and many people with thee.

Thus saith the Lord God; It shall also come to pass, that at the same time shall things come into thy mind, and thou shalt think an evil thought: and thou shalt say, I will go up to the land of unwalled villages; I will go to them that are at rest, that dwell safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither bars nor gates, to take a spoil, and to take a prey; to turn thine hand upon the desolate places that are now inhabited, and upon the people that are gathered out of the nations, which have gotten cattle and goods, that dwell in the midst of the land (Ezek. 38:8-12, KJV).

But things do not go as planned.

At the same time when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord God, that my fury shall come up in my face. For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel; so that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground.

And I will call for a sword against him throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord God: every man's sword shall be against his brother. And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone. Thus will I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I will be known in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that I am the Lord (Ezek. 38:18-23, KJV).

Thus, a kind of civil war will erupt that brings down the whore with all her power. John makes it clear, despite the apparent chaos, that God designed the whole thing to happen this way. Nephi seems to have had this same period in mind when when he prophesied: "I beheld that the great mother of abominations did gather together multitudes upon the face of the earth, among all the nations of the Gentiles, to fight against the Lamb of God. And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld the power of the Lamb of God, that it descended upon the saints of the church of the Lamb, and upon the covenant people of the Lord, who were scattered upon all the face of the earth; and they were armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory" (1 Ne. 14:13-14). The enemy cannot win against the power of the Lamb. In frustration and rage, the nations will turn upon the whore who drove them to the fight and "shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire" (Rev. 17:16, KJV; cf. Ezek. 23:25-30). The attackers carry the seeds of their own destruction.

The task of the Saints is to rely on God and continue in the faith unto the end. Apparently, the Saints do not fight though they are present. They do not need to: rather than physical, their weapons are spiritual, that is, being faithful and bearing witness. John identifies them as the "called, and chosen, and faithful" (Rev. 17:14, KJV). Though there is a Jewish tradition that the righteous take direct part in the destruction of the wicked, this is not an act of revenge but the fulfillment of righteous retribution. [^21]

CONCLUSION

The prominence of the whore in the drama of the latter days shows that when men cease to worship God, they do not cease to worship. They turn to a false form of religion to establish meaning and direction in life. The whore provides them with a "priestess" counter to God's true priests, with false rites in contrast to God's saving ordinances and with useless sacrifices in opposition to the Lord's effective ones. Both God and the beast demand a lot, but the beast renders nothing in return while the Lord blesses with everything.

The Seer casts the great evil of the last days in a double form. One is that of the seductive and shameless harlot, reveling in the slaughter of the righteous. The other is that of the great city Babylon, mother of abominations, dominating kings and kingdoms while crushing truth, virtue, and love. The image of the harlot and the city, taken together, represents theformation of a kind of state religion that is able to impose its will on the people. During this period the warning words of John hold true: "Here is the patience and faith of the Saints" (13:10, KJV; cf. 14:12). Indeed, this is the time—as with the Saints in John's own day, waiting, forbidden to take the offensive against the whore, concerned with doing nothing but good works—when the Saints need great faith and patience most. In the end, these attributes will prove to be the very tools of victory.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And after these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having great power; and the earth was lightened with his glory. Caird, Revelation, 222.
[^2] And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. Mounce, Revelation, 330-31.
[^3] For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies. Caird, Revelation, 224.
[^4] And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. Ibid., 223.
[^5] For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities. Ford, Revelation, 303.
[^6] Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works: in the cup which she hath filled fill to her double. This whole passage appears to have been modeled after Ezekiel 27. There the fall of Tyre is described in much the same way as that of Babylon.
[^7] How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. The last phrase (hoti ekrinen ho theos to krima humn eksauts) is difficult to translate. It says literally "because God judged the judgment of you from her." Since krin carries the idea todecide cases or pass judgment upon, I have translated it in the sense "to pass judgment upon." Krima is used three ways in the New Testament: the rightto act as judge (see Rev. 20:4), the judicial act of passing sentence (see John 9:39; Rom. 5:16), and most frequently the sentence passedby a judge. Only the last definition fits the context as "your judgment."
[^8] Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her.
[^9] And the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning,
[^10] Standing afar off for the fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city! for in one hour is thy judgment come.
[^11] And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her; for no man buyeth their merchandise any more:
[^12] The merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all manner vessels of ivory, and all manner vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble,
[^13] And cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves, and souls of men.
[^14] And the fruits that thy soul lusted after are departed from thee, and all things which were dainty and goodly are departed from thee, and thou shalt find them no more at all.
[^15] The merchants of these things, which were made rich by her, shall stand afar off for the fear of her torment, weeping and wailing,
[^16] And saying, Alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls!
[^17] For in one hour so great riches is come to nought. And every shipmaster, and all the company in ships, and sailors, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar off,
[^18] And cried when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What city is like unto this great city!
[^19] And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the sea by reason of her costliness! for in one hour is she made desolate.
[^20] Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her.
[^21] And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.
