Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 18

The Fall of Babylon the Great

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 18)

SINS THAT REACH UNTO HEAVEN (vv. 1-8)

Chapter eighteen fulfills the promise of the angel that he would show to John "the judgment of the great whore" (17:1, KJV). John sees an angel radiant with power and glory descend from heaven, "and the earth was lightened with his glory" (18:1, KJV). The imagery parallels that found in Ezekiel. In a grand vision, that prophet saw the heavens open and a restoration commence in which the glory of the Lord returned to his temple and overspread his people, "and the earth shined with his glory" (Ezek. 43:2, KJV). From this we gather that the angel John sees, in spite of the gloomy nature of his dirge that "Babylon the great is fallen" (Rev. 18:2, KJV), bears the power of the gospel. He does not exult over the overthrow of the woman but proclaims the triumph of the good. God has fully realized his purposes, and his people at last are ready to enjoy liberation from all oppression. [^1]

The angel's proclamation describes the fallen city of Babylon as the great keep for devils, unclean spirits, and hateful birds. The latter inhabitants seem out of place with devils and spirits. In the Mosaic law, fowls that ate carrion were considered unclean (see Lev. 11:13-20). However, it is unlikely that John had this image in mind. The Old Testament associates fowl with the judgment of God upon a rebellious people. Out of this grew the association of something feeding upon the souls of men (see, e.g., Deut. 28:26; 1 Sam. 17:44; 1 Kgs. 14:11; Ps. 79:2; Isa. 18:6; Jer. 16:4; Ezek. 29:5). The birds thus probably symbolize in general those incorporeal forces that destroy the souls of men.

The fallen Babylon becomes a shattered palace and wretched prison for abomination because of the role she played with the leaders of the world, seducing them to partake without measure of her fornications. In this chapter the angel makes clear the true nature of her power of seduction—the allure of wealth. While earthly lords were guilty of economic dalliance, the merchants committed idolatry through the worship of mammon. The term mammon (Greek mammonas) means money in any form. It symbolizes avarice deified.

The leaders had ample opportunity: Babylon offered it all—for a price. She had cargos of gold, silver, precious stones, and pearls; clothiers who produced fine linen, purple, silk, and scarlet cloth; furniture makers and home decorators who used citron wood and made articles of ivory, costly wood, bronze, iron, and marble. The list goes on. She was the great supermarket carrying cinnamon and spice, incense, myrrh, frankincense, wine, oil, fine flour and wheat, cattle and sheep; her transportation department included horses and carriages.

Finally, she offered as slaves the very souls of men (see vv. 12-13). The word translated "slaves" is literally "bodies" (Greek sma). Babylon seeks to reduce people to flesh that can bebought and sold for profit. In the conquest, men are dehumanized by the consorts of Babylon. This idea is brought out by the last phrase, "souls of men." This is an old Hebrew phrase depicting men as "little more than human livestock." [^2] This last commodity shows the spiritual depth of Babylon's wickedness: she sold human beings, both old and young, male and female. Their lives were to be drained away to provide more for those whose fortunes were already so vast that not even the most lavish expenditures could deplete them.

John shows that Babylon's seductive power tempts almost everyone. In the face of this reality the angel gives a command and warning: "Come out of her, my people . . . that ye receive not of her plagues" (v. 4, KJV). The Saints in the latter days have received the same warning: "The voice of the Lord is unto you: Go ye out of Babylon; gather ye out from among the nations, from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other" (D&C 133:7). And more explicitly: "Go ye out from among the nations, even from Babylon, from the midst of wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon" (D&C 133:14). The Lord means the Saints to take him seriously; he warns: "After today cometh the burning—this is speaking after the manner of the Lord—for verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of Hosts; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon" (D&C 64:24).

So great is the total of her iniquities that it has reached, as it were, into heaven. And heaven pays her back for all her mischief. But the payback is not one for one—it is two for one, for she must satisfy the full measure of God's judgment. Therefore, that which she rendered shall be rendered to her doubled. Sins of commission and omission must both be accounted for.

John's vision shows a consistent belief in the lex talionis, the idea that punishment should match the crime. However, this is modified in two instances. The first modification affects those who refuse to come out of the great city. Her punishment, thereby, becomes their punishment. Because they have been warned, they will have to answer not only for their own sins, but for hers as well. The second alteration concerns those who do come out of her. Angels keep books of judgment in heaven (see 20:12). But what the books contain is a matter of what God chooses to remember, not what he chooses to forget. He has promised that, when his people repent and become one with him, "I will remember their sin no more" (Jer. 31:34, KJV). As one scholar noted, what "God forgives, he also forgets; and what God forgets is blotted for ever from the record (Jer. xxxi.34)." [^3] When men and women forsake Babylon, God forgets they were ever there.

One of the great sins of Babylon is that she glorifies herself. "I sit a queen, and am no widow," she exults (v. 7, KJV; cf. Isa. 47:7-8). Her fault is twofold: boastful arrogance, and total faith in her boundless resources without a whisper of conscience. [^4] Her death shall be swift, "in one day," and full, "she shall be utterly burned with fire" (v. 8, KJV). Her fate is significant. John's harlot is no commoner. As has been noted earlier, she represents a priestly class. The Levitical punishment for adultery or harlotry for the daughter of a priest was burning (see Lev. 21:9). For the nonpriestly class, the less torturous punishments of strangulation or stoning were employed. Babylon, as apostate—even idolatrous religion—deserves her fate. [^5]

THE THREE DIRGES (vv. 9-19)

The smoldering ashes of Babylon become the smoke signals of her own destruction. As they ascend upward in tribute to the omnipotence of God, her lovers' lamentations also rise. The kings of the earth (vv. 9-10), the merchants (vv. 11-17), and all those in the maritime trades (vv. 17-19) sing dirges. [^6] Each has his special reason for sorrow. The kings lament because they have lost their mistress, she who provided them with such great satisfaction. The merchants weep and mourn because suddenly their overstocked wares are worthless. Finally, the sailors "cast dust on their heads" (v. 19, KJV) and weep and wail because the appetite of Babylon was what made them wealthy.

The Seer shows that without the false values of Babylon, the merchants and sea lords cannot foist their goods upon mankind. The whole of their marketing enterprise is built upon a pretense sustained by the creation of artificial needs. They do this by simple tricks of marketing through which warmth becomes mink; shelter becomes marble and brass; food becomes escargot and caviar. And when the bottom falls out of the market, the kings are left without taxes, armies, or treasuries, and the merchants with rotting cargos and glutted stockpiles that no one will buy.

THE GREAT REJOICING (vv. 20-24)

The command of the angel to "rejoice over her, O heavens, and the Saints, and apostles, and prophets, because God passed your judgment upon her" (v. 20, AT) stands in contrast to the lamentation of the men of the world (see vv. 9-19). [^7] Twice John has intimated that the prayers of the Saints greatly influenced the time of the judgment. Here he indicates that more was going on than mere timing. The whore played the role of the great judge against the Saints. Now the tables are turned, and those the harlot once wrongfully judged become the judges.

All this is quite just according to divine law. God had set down two laws that apply—the law of bloodshed, and the law of the spiteful witness. According to the first, the life of a man is required if he slays a fellow man (see Gen. 9:5-6). According to the second, when a witness is found guilty of perjury, he receives the punishment he desired for his fellow (see Deut. 19:16-19). Here God allows the Saints, apostles, and prophets to pass sentence on the harlot. Of course, based on their own experience, they find her guilty of both perjury and murder. Because she brought forth false accusations and then passed the death sentence on holy men and women—"in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth" (v. 24, KJV)—she must forfeit her life.

An angel's symbolic act dramatizes the fate of the whore. He hurls a heavy millstone into the sea with the cry, "With violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all" (v. 21, KJV). This act represents the complete and final demise of the harlot-city. As the massive stone could never rise again from the depths, so the great city will ever remain buried and lifeless (cf. Jer. 51:61-64).

CONCLUSION

The story of the tower of Babel is no mere myth; it provides historical background for understanding man's rebellion against God. The most impressive symbol of the Babylonian religion was its ziggurats, of which some ruins stand even to this day. As noted earlier in this work, they reveal the quest of base men to compete with the Gods by erecting colossal buildings, counterfeit holy mountains, where men could pretend to know the mysteries of God while promulgating unholy laws and base practices. These mountainlike towers stand in defiance of true faith and emphasize the growing gulf between God and the natural man.

The Book of Mormon testifies of God's wrath upon these people (see Ether 1:33), and what caused it? The arrogant Babylonians combined purely sensual and material principles with the lofty striving within the soul of man. Out of this grew the principle of spiritual fornication. Men mistook lust for joy, sought happiness through passion, and pursued security through materialism. The bit of graffiti, "He who dies with the most toys wins," could have been written as easily in Babylon as in New York, or Las Vegas. Today many still seek to find heaven through drugs, lust, money, success, or power. People continue to try to escape the deadly round of daily life through material and immoral means. The result merely mires them more deeply in the muck that spews from the pit in the abyss.

God has provided a solution: flee Babylon. The command demands a complete severing of relations. God allows no association whatsoever. There is good reason. Babylon is not to be converted but destroyed: "We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her" (Jer. 51:9, KJV). Any that linger in Babylon will be taken with her plagues, "For after today cometh the burning . . . and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon" (D&C 64:24). Therefore, the cry is "deliver thyself, O Zion, that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon" (Zech. 2:7, KJV).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia; Salvation, and glory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God: Moulton, Vocabulary, s.v. alths.
[^2] For true and righteous are his judgments: for he hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand. In apocalytic literature, cf. 2 Baruch 29:3-7.
[^3] And again they said, Alleluia. And her smoke rose up for ever and ever. Scott, Exposition, 382.
[^4] And the four and twenty elders and the four beasts fell down and worshipped God that sat on the throne, saying, Amen; Alleluia. Teachings, 119.
[^5] And a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, all ye his servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great. Exodus 15:3 depicts Jehovah as a man of war. The idea persists in 2 Maccabees 3:22-30 and in the Qumran scrolls 1QM 12.10-11; 19.2-4.
[^6] And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth. McConkie, Commentary, 3:566.
[^7] Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready. Caird, Revelation, 241.
