Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 19

The King of Kings

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 19)

IN PRAISE OF A GOD OF JUDGMENT (vv. 1-5)

Chapter nineteen continues the tempo of rejoicing begun in chapter eighteen. John hears the multitude of heaven joining in one unified act of praise: "Hallelujah; salvation, and glory, the honor, and power belong to our God" (v. 1, AT). The adoration focuses on those aspects of God revealed through his victory over Babylon. Exaltation, authority, and blessing all originate and end in him. Therefore, all honor is due him.

The heavenly host repeat the theme of the nature of God's judgments; they are both "true and righteous" (v. 2, KJV). The idea behind the term true (Greek alths) is"exact" or "correct" but goes beyond that. The word conveys the idea of legitimacy. [^1] The term righteous (Greek dikaios) denotes what isin keeping with the sovereignty of God, by which his laws are kept inviolate. Out of this grows the rest of the praise: "He hath judged the great whore . . . and hath avenged the blood of his servants" (v. 2, KJV). Judgment always comes. Though God may delay the time in accordance with his designs, it is inevitable. The world will learn that mercy cannot rob justice.

Mankind can have faith in God because before all else he is just. As the Book of Mormon prophet Alma explained to one of his sons: "The work of justice could not be destroyed; if so, God would cease to be God" (Alma 42:13). Further, "there is a law given, and a punishment affixed, and a repentance granted; which repentance mercy claimeth; otherwise, justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law, and the law inflicteth the punishment; if not so, the works of justice would be destroyed, and God would cease to be God" (v. 22). The point is that God gave the law that inflicts the punishment upon those who will not repent. This is totally just. Thus, God "changeth not; if so he would cease to be God; and he ceaseth not to be God"—that is, a God of justice (Morm. 9:19). John shows that the unrepentant world will learn this lesson too late.

During this act of praise, a voice from the throne speaks. When a voice near the altar spoke in a former vision (see 16:7), the focus was on the witness and suffering of the Saints. In the present vision, the Saints suffer no longer. Thus, from the source of government—for God is on his throne—goes forth the call to praise (see v. 5). All the heavenly host join in the anthem. But just at this moment, a shift occurs as a new cause of rejoicing springs forth.

THE MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB (vv. 6-10)

The multitude thunders its praise: "Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth" (v. 6, KJV). But the cause of joy does not arise solely from God's reign. Rather, it also stems from what develops out of it: the marriage of the Lamb. "Let us be glad and rejoice," sings the host, "and give glory to him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come" (v. 7, AT). The day has arrived when, at last, the Church unites forever with her king. The revelation skillfully weaves together three distinct strands from the Old Testament, all of which have been used before in the New Testament and related literature, but never together. The first is the depiction of the reign of God as a great feast (see Isa. 25:6; cf. Mark 2:19; Matt. 22:1-14; 25:1-13; Luke 14:15-24). [^2] The second is the notion of Israel as the bride of Jehovah (see Hosea 2:5; Isa. 1:21; Jer. 2:2; cf. Eph. 5:32). The final is the use of clean garments as a symbol of sanctity (see Gen. 35:2; Isa. 52:1; 61:10; Zech. 3:4; cf. Rev. 3:4; 6:11; 7:14).

The Church as a bride wears a garment both clean and white. John, so that the reader does not miss the meaning of this important symbol, adds, "The fine linen is the righteous deeds of saints" (v. 8, AT). The Greek word used here, dikaima,focuses on the acts of the righteous rather than on righteousness itself. The Seer's wording in this verse is interesting: "It was granted her to be clothed with fine linen, bright and pure" (AT). The thrust of the verb (edoth, from didmimeaning "to give") conveys the impression of an impartation, bestowal, or endowment. The active agent is God; he is the bestower of the garment. All righteousness centers in him. Even man's righteous deeds result from God's goodness in that the spirit and light within man, as well as all law, come from God (see D&C 88:11-13).

The harlot's costume and manner, revealed in chapter seventeen, contrast with the glorious dress and demure behavior of the bride. The great whore, gorgeously arrayed in bright and expensive apparel, insisted that her ornamentation, splendor, and pomp are her full due—a direct result of her own works. The bride's attire is different; her apparel reflects her acknowledged dependence on grace. [^3]

At this point an angel commands John to write. The injunction marks the importance and seriousness of the communication. The angel dictates the exact words for the Seer to record: "Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb" (v. 9, KJV). The word called (Greekklsis) in its religious context denotes an invitation to enter the kingdom of God. Not everyone receives such an invitation, only those who have found the grace of the Lord. John does not separate the called from the chosen as the Savior did in Matthew 22:1-14. The context of Revelation suggests that those who are called are also chosen because, based on the angel's insistence that "these are the true sayings of God" (v. 9, KJV), those who are invited receive the blessings. Therefore, the list is exclusive, containing only the names of those who will have eternal life. God says (and his word will not be altered) that only those who are invited to the marriage supper of the Lord will enter the state of blessedness.

Interestingly, John makes a distinction between the bride and the guests. The former is in more intimate association with the Lamb than the latter: the bride is wed while the guests sup. If the bride represents the Church, then whom do the guests represent? Apparently, John sees the bride as the institution itself—the Church as a whole, composed of both leaders and members. The guests symbolize individual Saints. The bride, then, represents the true and living church in which God's covenant resides. The guests are those who "are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory; and are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son. Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God" (D&C 76:56-58). Because this verse focuses exclusively on priesthood authority, it must not be assumed that righteous women, the queens and priestesses of the church, are not there. The gathering is of all the justified. In this light, all the righteous are truly the blessed ones.

At this point, John bows in worship before the divine being who proclaimed the words. Just what brought on this deep expression of awe is not stated. Perhaps it was the angel's declaration that the words he spoke were of God. At any rate the Seer receives a sharp rebuke from the angel: "See thou do it not." The angel goes on to explain, "I am thy fellowservant" (v. 10, KJV), one of those who have the testimony of Jesus. He then commands John to "worship God: for the witness which testifies that Jesus is the Christ is the spirit of prophecy" (v. 10, AT). The last phrase of the verse as interpreted in the KJV "for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy" (Greek h gar marturia Isou estin to pneuma ts prophteias) has beenvariously understood. Based on John 15:26 and Joseph Smith, [^4] I have taken it as an objective genitive, meaning that the testimony about Jesus is the common ground of all prophecy.

THE RIDER ON THE WHITE HORSE (vv. 11-16)

The command to worship God relates directly to the next vision. At the beginning of his heavenly revelations, John saw "a door . . . opened in heaven" through which he was able to see the throne of God (4:1, KJV); later "the temple of God was opened in heaven" such that the Seer could behold the arkof the testimony (11:19, KJV); afterward, the whole temple opened so that the seven angels with the seven bowls could come out (see 15:5). Now John sees the entire expanse of heaven unfold to make way for the Warrior-king and his army prepared to battle the hosts of darkness. [^5]

The Rider, terrible in majesty (cf. D&C 45:74-75) upon his white horse, is the Savior, "called Faithful and True" (v. 11, KJV). These names of Christ, as Elder McConkie points out, "signify that he is the embodiment and personification of these godly attributes. Above all his fellows, he was obedient to the will of the Father and true to every trust imposed upon him." [^6] John clearly states the rider's purpose: "In righteousness he doth judge and make war" (v. 11, KJV). War results from his just judgment. Evil must be put down even by force when necessary.

John deliberately contrasts the King with the dragon and the sea beast. While the former two possess seven and ten diadems respectively, the Warrior has "many diadems" (v. 12, AT). The King's true royalty far surpasses the false sovereignty of Satan and his minion. He now rides as "KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS" (v. 16, KJV)—and he has acquired his crowns since John last saw him. Although there was no doubt earlier that he was king sitting upon his throne (see 3:21, cf. 1:5), John mentions no crowns. Here they are prominently displayed. They signify that the "kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever" (11:15, KJV). [^7]

The Rider bears a name "that no man knew, but he himself" (v. 12, KJV). Again Elder McConkie gives insight: "As with all glorified beings, our Lord has a new name in celestial exaltation, a name known to and comprehended by those only who know God in the sense that they have become as he is and have eternal life. See Rev. 2:12-17. Thus, Christ's 'new name' shall be written upon all those who are joint-heirs with him (Rev. 3:12), and shall signify that they have become even as he is." [^8]

But the Warrior does have a known name: "The Word of God" (v. 13, KJV). John calls him by this same title at the beginning of his gospel (see John 1:1-3). In Revelation the name emphasizes the authoritative declaration that judges the kings of the world. [^9] "In Hebrew thought," states Mounce, "a word is not a lifeless sound but an active agent that achieves the intention of the one who speaks" [^10] (see, for example, Gen. 1:3, 7, 9; Heb. 4:12). The Savior is the active agent who executes the word (i.e. the will) of God. That word is now judgment. Thus, the Rider's vestments are blood red for the judgment is one of death (cf. Isa. 63:1-6). According to the Doctrine and Covenants, his appearance will cause consternation among the nations. Many will ask:

Who is this that cometh down from God in heaven with dyed garments; yea, from the regions which are not known, clothed in his glorious apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength? And he shall say: I am he who spake in righteousness, mighty to save. . . .

So great shall be the glory of his presence that the sun shall hide his face in shame, and the moon shall withhold its light, and the stars shall be hurled from their places. And his voice shall be heard: I have trodden the wine-press alone, and have brought judgment upon all people; and none were with me; and I have trampled them in my fury, and I did tread upon them in mine anger, and their blood have I sprinkled upon my garments, and stained all my raiment; for this was the day of vengeance which was in my heart (133:46-51).

Clearly John depicts the moment of vengeance when the Lord will destroy all wickedness by the brightness of his coming (see D&C 5:19). At this moment all nations will come under his authority, "and he shall rule them with a rod of iron" (v. 15, KJV).

THE BATTLE OF THE WARRIOR-KING (vv. 17-21)

Suddenly the vision changes. John sees an angel bathed in celestial glory. The divine being summons birds of prey to a great feast (cf. Ezek. 39:17-20). This banquet stands in contrast to the banquet at the wedding party of the Lamb. Here the bodies of the rebellious supply the entree. Ignorant of their fate, John sees "the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his army" (v. 19, KJV). The purpose of the battle is clear. They fight to decide who is to be the king of the earth. The irony is grim; the outcome is already certain. Before the armies even march, the birds of ruin stand ready.

Though the battle itself is not described, clearly the first to fall are the beast and the false prophet. Under the light of the power of Christ, false political entities and faithless institutions along with pseudoreligious philosophies will fail. No longer supported by these philosophies, the armies of the world will succumb to anarchy. A work of death will result. The legions will be unable to stand against the sword of the Rider. As noted earlier, the sharp sword symbolizes the power of the prophets. In reality it is the word they speak that cuts the wicked to the core because it is the word of God (see Isa. 49:2; Heb. 4:12; Eph. 6:17). The only weapon the prophets need to defeat the enemy hosts and to establish peace upon the earth is the proclamation of the gospel. [^11] With false ways exposed and destroyed, nothing can stand in the way of the total victory of righteousness.

CONCLUSION

Chapter nineteen depicts two feasts. One is the feast of the justified, the other the feast of the condemned. The Lord will set both tables. The feast for the birds is called "the supperof the great God" (v. 17, KJV). Thus, the Lord stands as host as he does at the wedding. For the obedient the banquet will consist of "fat things, of wine on the lees well refined, . . . a supper of the house of the Lord, well prepared, unto which all nations shall be invited" (D&C 58:8-9). Those who refuse to come to it may well be the fare of the second meal, for it will consist of "the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great" (Rev. 19:18, KJV). What determines to which feast a person will go? It is clearly a matter of worship. Those whom God calls to the wedding supper worship him, those who come to the death feast worship the beast and its image. Blessedness awaits the first gathering, destruction the second.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand. Erdman, Revelation, 153.
[^2] And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years, In 1 Enoch 53:4-54:5, the binding powers are exercised against the dark angels and the kings of the earth, and both are judged together. In 1 Enoch 28:12-16; 19:1-2; 21:1-6, the angels of the devil are held in temporary punishment until the final judgment. Azazael, however, is bound separately from the rest and in the end is cast into everlasting punishment (Charles, Commentary, 2:141-42).
[^3] And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a little season. Scott, Exposition, 396.
[^4] And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. McConkie, Commentary, 570-71.
[^5] But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection. George Eldon Ladd, Revelation (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1972), 263.
[^6] Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years. Smith, Doctrines, 2:29; 3:63-64.
[^7] And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, The Greek of Revelation is sufficiently irregular that it is hard to determine if John had in mind one, two, or even three groups.
[^8] And shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle: the number of whom is as the sand of the sea. TDNT, s.v. krin and krima,where it is noted that the Greek words refer to judgment in legal matters but that when they are used to translate Old Testament concepts, they take on the idea of rule.
[^9] And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city: and fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them. Ladd, Revelation, 264.
[^10] And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. M. Eugene Boring, Revelation (Louisville: John Knox Press, 1989), 202.
[^11] And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there was found no place for them.
