Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 20

The Thousand Years

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 20)

SATAN IS BOUND FOR A THOUSAND YEARS (vv. 1-3)

After the eradication of the false prophet and the beast, John's vision centers on the destruction of the dragon. The importance of Satan's defeat must not be overlooked. Not only must instruments and agents of evil be overthrown, but the father of evil himself must perish. Casting the two monsters into the lake of fire would be insufficient; the dragon, who motivated and empowered them, must share their fate. A lesson grows from this. War will end neither through pacifist or militant means nor by leagues or treaties as long as hatred, malice, and lust for power dominate the hearts of men. Zion will not come by political revolution, only by spiritual renovation. Zion, being the pure in heart, expands only as love dominates society. The fall of Satan, master of hate, must precede the era of millennial peace. [^1]

John beholds an angel coming down from heaven having the key to the pit in the abyss. The contrast with the "star" of chapter nine is striking: the star fell and the angel descends; while the star was given the key, the angel possesses it on his own. The identity of the angel remains unknown, but he holds the key to seal the pit. This suggests that he ministers directly under the Lord. More than likely he is Michael once again warring with and defeating the lord of darkness. Doctrine and Covenants 88:112 identifies Michael as the seventh angel, and in verses 106-7 the seventh angel proclaims the victory of the Lamb and his angels. Michael is definitely involved in the latter-day overthrow of the satanic kingdom. The book of Daniel may reflect this period when it notes that the Saints of the last days could not prevail over the world until "the Ancient of days [i.e. Michael] came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom" (7:21-22, KJV).

There appears to be no real contest between the adversary and the angel. The archangel seizes, binds, and throws the devil into the pit of the abyss with little if any struggle on Satan's part. The idea of binding Satan goes back to Isaiah, who speaks of him being bound for a brief period in Isaiah 24:22 and forever in 24:23. [^2] Though no human eye may witness the event, John makes it clear that the act will be a historical reality (see D&C 43:31; 45:55; 84:100; 88:110-11).

The key and the chain denote God's supremacy over both Satan and his realm. Indeed, the angel incarcerates Satan in the pit. Thus, Satan is not the magistrate of hell, God is. The angel not only locks the dragon away with a key, but he also binds him with chains and seals the pit. The KJV suggests that the devil is the one who has the seal upon him, but the Greek manuscript makes it clear that the pit is what is sealed over him (cf. Dan. 6:17). Thus, the devil's power is triply curtailed. Only when all three bonds are freed will he be able to make mischief again. [^3] Through the use of this triple binding, John emphasizes the extent of Satan's impotency during the Millennium when "Satan shall not have power to tempt any man" (D&C 101:28).

One point should not be overlooked. The angel does the binding, not mankind. People do not bring about the millennial condition through some kind of supreme righteous act; God does. [^4] However, it would be incorrect to believe that the people play no role in keeping Satan bound. "Because of the righteousness of his people," Nephi proclaimed, "Satan has no power; wherefore, he cannot be loosed for the space of many years; for he hath no power over the hearts of the people, for they dwell in righteousness, and the Holy one of Israel reigneth" (1 Ne. 22:26). Thus, the subjugation of Satan involves teamwork: the Lord's power binds Satan initially, and the righteousness of the Saints keeps him bound.

The purpose of Satan's binding is not yet punitive but precautionary. [^5] The Savior and his people must have time to prepare the earth for celestial glory. Satanic delusions are not to get in the way for a season. John spells out precisely the reason for the dark lord's incarceration: "that he should deceive the nations no more" (v. 3, KJV). Satan has used deception as a major tool from the beginning, whispering to Cain and his brethren the Mahanic secret that one could obtain gain by murder and remain forever free. Yet Satan knew full well that "these things are not hid from the Lord" (Moses 5:39; see vv. 29-41). And when Cain faced the wrath of a just God, Satan, with his delusion, discreetly stayed away.

The Seer's use of the term nations is significant. Because of Satan's power to deceive the kings of the earth through the glitter of Babylon, one may mistakenly believe that all nations were under the deceptive power of the beast and his false prophet and fought against the Lamb and his people. In verse three, John makes it clear that the "kings of the earth" (Rev. 12:9; 16:12, 14; 17:2; 18:3, 9, KJV) represent a select number of nations and peoples who are deceived by and assist Satan in his cause. Only these will be annihilated during the great battle (see 19:19). Many of those who do not join this cause will survive and come to Christ during the Millennium (see 21:24). Joseph Fielding Smith notes that there will be many within the nations who shall not know of the gospel law yet who shall live terrestrial-quality lives. These will be spared destruction andenjoy the millennial period with the Saints of God. Through a tremendous missionary effort, all will eventually come to worship the Lord. [^6]

THE FIRST RESURRECTION ANDTHE LORD'S REIGN (vv. 4-6)

After the angel binds Satan, John sees the paradisiacal era.Other prophets have focused their attention on the millennial world, where they describe the nature, beauty, and peace of that time (see, for example, Isa. 11:6-9; 65:17-25; Ezek. 34:25-31). Unlike the other prophets, however, the Seer draws the readers' attention to the type of people who will share in that reign. These people worshipped God and not the dragon; they did not fall to Satan's blandishments and false values but actively fought for truth. Having done so, they came under the power of the first resurrection and became kings with the Lamb. "I saw thrones," the Seer states, "and they [who] sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast" (v. 4, KJV). John may have viewed two sets of kings: those who suffered martyrdom in his day (see 6:9-11) and those who overcame the beast in the latter day (see 14:4-5). [^7] But more than likely he wished to symbolize all who gave their lives in service to the Lamb.

The Seer notes the nature of their reward: "Judgment was given unto them" (v. 4, KJV). The Greek here (kai krimaedoth autois) can also be interpreted "judgment was given for them," meaning God judged them righteous and worthy of the reward. The translation followed in the text, however, is based on the Savior's promise to his apostles that they would be the judges of Israel (see Matt. 19:28). John, being one of those, would be acutely aware of this.

Judgment here should signify presiding power or rule. [^8] The Doctrine and Covenants supports this context: "Mine apostles, the Twelve which were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand at the day of my coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am, to judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none else" (29:12). The Twelve do not determine the eventual station of souls but rather preside over the righteous. Further supporting this definition of judgment is the Lord's promise that "in mine own due time will I come upon the earth in judgment, and my people shall be redeemed and shall reign with me on earth. For the great Millennium, of which I have spoken by the mouth of my servants, shall come" (D&C 43:29-30).

Joseph Smith explained what would happen to both the righteous living and dead at the time of the second coming.

The saints that are upon the earth, who are alive, shall be quickened and be caught up to meet him. And they who have slept in their graves shall come forth, for their graves shall be opened; and they also shall be caught up to meet him in the midst of the pillar of heaven— they are Christ's, the first fruits, they who shall descend with him first, and they who are on the earth and in their graves, who are first caught up to meet him; and all this by the voice of the sounding of the trump of the angel of God.

And after this another angel shall sound, which is the second trump; and then cometh the redemption of those who are Christ's at his coming; who have received their part in that prison which is prepared for them, that they might receive the gospel, and be judged according to men in the flesh.

And again, another trump shall sound, which is the third trump; and then come the spirits of men who are to be judged, and are found under condemnation; and these are the rest of the dead; and they live not again until the thousand years are ended, neither again, until the end of the earth (D&C 88:96-101).

The first resurrection takes in all those, living and dead, who are Christ's at the moment he comes in glory. These are they who "were sanctified, and their garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb," who "being [made] pure and spotless before God, could not look upon sin save it were with abhorrence" (Alma 13:11-12), who are "virgins" because "they . . . were not defiled with" sexual immorality, and in whose "mouth was found no guile" (Rev. 14:4-5, KJV). These, the first fruits of Christ, are the ones whom John sees as the rulers during the thousand years when the earth shall rest.

"Wickedness shall not be upon the earth," the Lord declared, "for I will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand" (D&C 29:9, 11). John is the only biblical writer to speak of a thousand-year reign of the Lord. What is significant is that he passes over the period in just three verses. John does not elaborate on details that distract from his primary objectives. He writes with a specific agenda: to prepare the Saints for the Second Coming. Thus, the bulk of his writing focuses on the last days and the great battle to be won. Once he has completed this task, he gives but a quick preview of the result of righteousness.

By mentioning the Millennium, John assures the Saints that they will be rewarded for their struggles. John underscores the personal quality of those who will enjoy it. They are both "blessed and holy" (v. 6, KJV), two attributes belonging to both God and the Lamb. Those who overcome and take upon themselves these attributes need not fear the second death. In other words, having come alive in Christ, their lives, like his, are eternal. Therefore they can share the glory, honor, authority, and majesty with him. They are a kingdom of priests and kings, priestesses and queens who rule and reign with him forever. The Saints compose the kingdom of God not because he rules over them, but because they reign with him. [^9] The Millennium marks the beginning of their eternal dominion.

THE BATTLE OF GOG AND MAGOG (vv. 7-10)

The era of bliss, however, does not move smoothly into eternal glory. John sees that "when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison" (v. 7, KJV). Since the power of God bound him, only it can loose him. Therefore, his freedom must play an important part in the purposes of deity. John makes this clear. Immediately after being loosed, the old serpent sets about doing mischief, "and shall go out to deceive the nations" (v. 8, KJV). The result will be that "men [shall] again begin to deny their God" (D&C 29:22). Perhaps the best model to help understand how this can happen is the demise of the near millennial society found in 4 Nephi and Mormon 1 in the Book of Mormon.

With saddened heart, the prophet Mormon records how a small group of people revolted from the Church around a.d. 150 (see 4 Ne. 1:20). By that time wealth had became both widespread and abundant. Some could not handle it. Ostentation began to abound, and a materialistic mind-set became prevalent. The effect on the society as a whole was twofold: goods and substance were no longer common within it, and class distinction was initiated and promoted. Ironically, there was a proliferation of churches at this same time. However, the record shows that these were not built up to serve God but to justify getting gain. As the people denied goodness, they feverishly sought security in pseudorighteousness. Thus, they promoted wickedness and drank deep of the pernicious poison of the beast and his false-prophet who were yet on the earth. These churches began not only to deny the true church of the Lamb, but also to fight against it. Persecution of the righteous escalated (see 4 Ne. 1:1-37).

Mormon gets at the crux of their condition. He states clearly that the Nephites "did not dwindle in unbelief, but they did wilfully rebel against the gospel of Christ; and they did teach their children that they should not believe" (4 Ne. 1:38). In their willful rebellion, they taught their children "to hate the children of God" (v. 39). The result was war—a war that destroyed the nation.

Satan, smoldering in his pit for a thousand years, will have plenty of time to plot his plans for deception. Very likely he will follow the same scheme that has worked so well for him before. Seducing certain ones, the devil will eventually cultivate them into slaves. These newly won minions will be his mortal executors. They will gather the nations, symbolized as Gog and Magog, against the Saints. John tells us little of the battle. From modern scripture we know only that Satan "shall be loosed for a little season, that he may gather together his armies" (D&C 88:111). This is illuminating. God frees Satan for a purpose: to gather his armies for the very last battle. Of this battle we know that

Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall gather together his armies, even the hosts of heaven. And the devil shall gather together his armies; even the hosts of hell, and shall come up to battle against Michael and his armies. And then cometh the battle of the great God; and the devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the saints any more at all. For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him who seeketh the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the Lamb (D&C 88:112-15).

This latter-day revelation specifically clarifies two important points. First, the Doctrine and Covenants suggests that the "fire [that] came down from God out of heaven, and devoured" Satan's host (Rev. 20:9, KJV) shall be the glory of Michael and his heavenly hosts marching in power to protect the cities of God. Second, the earthly Saints do not appear to have to fight the battle. They are rescued from such horror by the great archangel and his celestial legions. The result is the total overthrow of all wickedness. The wilfully corrupt are devoured by the fire, while "the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone" (v. 10, KJV). The divine inferno, which long before began its ceaseless torment of the beast and the false prophet, now accepts their master.

THE LAST JUDGMENT (vv. 11-15)

Only after Michael destroys Satan does the final judgment commence. With the blindness of satanic delusion gone, men, both small and great, will stand to face Christ. The basis of their judgment will consist of records kept in earth and heaven. John sees two sets of records. The first he refers to as "books"; and the second, as "the book of life" (v. 12, KJV). Speaking of these two sets of records, Joseph Smith wrote: "The dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works; consequently, the books spoken of must be the books which contained the record of their works, and refer to the records which are kept on the earth. And the book which was the book of life is the record which is kept in heaven" (D&C 128:7). He went on to explain that John actually hadreference to priesthood sealing ordinances:

Whatsoever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Or, in other words, taking a different view of the translation, whatsoever you record on earth shall be recorded in heaven, and whatsoever you do not record on earth shall not be recorded in heaven; for out of the books shall your dead be judged, according to their own works, whether they themselves have attended to the ordinances in their own propria persona, or by the means of their own agents, according to the ordinance which God has prepared for their salvation from before the foundation of the world, according to the records which they have kept concerning their dead (D&C 128:8).

All will be "judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works" (Rev. 20:12, KJV). In the final analysis, the Lord judges on the basis of works. Those who have accepted the gospel and been sealed by the power of the priesthood will come under his domain and receive everlasting life. But those who have not accepted him, who have not partaken of his grace and power, who have not participated in the sealing ordinances "remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition, to all eternity; and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever" (D&C 132:17).

After the battle, John sees the sea (the old home of chaos and misery), death, and hell, give up the dead that are in them. The moment of universal judgment has come, which none can escape. The Lord declared: "Before the earth shall pass away, Michael, mine archangel, shall sound his trump, and then shall all the dead awake, for their graves shall be opened, and they shall come forth—yea, even all. And the righteous shall be gathered on my right hand unto eternal life; and the wicked on my left hand will I be ashamed to own before the Father; wherefore I will say unto them—Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels" (D&C 29:26-28).

Though a somber note ends this declaration, for the vast majority of people neither sorrow nor lamentation cast a shadow over the glory of the moment. This judgment does not mark the beginning of torment, but its end. The misery of death and the pain of hell cannot endure the divine flame emanating from grace and love. All who belong to the Lamb, or who have paid the uttermost farthing, shall come out of captivity into a kingdom of glory.

Nonetheless, John concludes this vision with a note of warning: he whose name "was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire" (v. 15, KJV). There are those who deny grace and reject Christ, who in their rebellion refuse the power of repentance and spurn the love of God. The Savior spoke of the "eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels" (Matt. 25:41, AT). Gehenna was not prepared for men, only for demons. But those men who become devils and angels to the devil must partake of that punishment.

This is the second death. It is visited only upon the most hardened, those who cannot find humility and acceptance and who remain "filthy still." These are "vessels of wrath, doomed to suffer the wrath of God, with the devil and his angels in eternity" (D&C 76:33). Becoming like Satan, they have no redemption. Any who "breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin, and altogether abideth in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment. Therefore, they must remain filthy still" (D&C 88:35). These are not resurrected until the very end. When they are resurrected, death—spiritual death—immediately reclaims them.

CONCLUSION

This portion of John's vision, though abbreviated, teaches some important principles. Among them, it teaches that the power of the first resurrection reaches only those of the past and present ages who are Christ's at the time of his coming. That moment is critical. Those who must seek a little time while they get their lives in order will find that the words "I come quickly"indeed mean "I come suddenly, even before you are ready." These, like the five foolish virgins, may find, when they finally are ready, that the door to celestial glory has been shut. Their cry "Lord, Lord, open unto us," will hear the response, Go away for, "verily I say unto you, Ye know me not" (Matt. 25:9-11,JST .

John's vision drives home another point: the binding of Satan does more than merely give hope for the future. It speaks to the present. It says that there is no ultimate dualism. The power of evil, though deadly real now, has no place in the future. It exists and operates at any time only by permission of God. [^10] When he determines that it will end, it will end. There will be no argument, no retort, only the irresistible and overpowering explosion of divine fire in which all corruption will be eternally consumed and evil forever incarcerated. Not a whisper of rebuttal will overreach or penetrate through the massive and frozen walls of Gehenna.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea. Ladd, Revelation, 278.
[^2] And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. The idea appears in Sibylline Oracles 5:447 and the Assumption of Moses 10:6 (Caird, Revelation, 262).
[^3] And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God. See 2 Baruch 4:2-4; 1 Enoch 7:26; 13:36. Charles,Commentary, 2:161.
[^4] And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away. Caird, Revelation, 262.
[^5] And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things new. And he said unto me, Write: for these words are true and faithful. Mounce, Revelation, 370.
[^6] And he said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely. For discussion, see Caird, Revelation, 264-65.
[^7] He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. Ibid., 264-65.
[^8] But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the second death. Ibid., 266.
[^9] And there came unto me one of the seven angels which had the seven vials full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife. Some mauscripts have gegona and seem to refer to thosethings spoken to John.
[^10] And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, and shewed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God, Smith, Teachings, 220.
