Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 21

The New Jerusalem

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 21)

THE PEOPLE OF GOD (vv. 1-4)

As the vision of the general resurrection closes, a new vision immediately opens. John sees what he describes as a new heaven and a new earth (cf. Isa. 51:6; Ps. 102:26-27; Matt. 24:29; 2 Pet. 3:10). However, the old earth is not so much annihilated as reconstituted to become a new celestial orb. What John reports confirms a long established Judeo-Christian tradition. Salvation, in the biblical sense, is not just for mankind but for all creation (see, e.g., 2 Cor. 5:17; Rom. 8:21). All things are to be saved including the cosmos itself. [^1] The Doctrine and Covenants also affirms this view of the earth: "It must needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness, that it may be prepared for the celestial glory; for after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father" (D&C 88:18-19). In order to withstand the full glory of God, the earth and its inhabitants will need to be entirely reconstructed.

"The end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth. For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof, both men and beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea; and not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost, for it is the workmanship of mine hand" (D&C 29:23-25). That the universe or even the galaxy will pass away when the earth is renewed is unlikely. More likely a new heaven will manifest itself as the earth takes up its new position as a celestial sun.

What strikes John about the new world is that "there [is] no more sea" (v. 1, KJV). The abode of chaos, the home of the satanic beast, the old seat over which the whore held sway, has vanished. Under the force of the Lamb's radiance, the source of Babylon's sea-borne luxuries and what helped feed and sustain her corruption has boiled into oblivion. But the sea and the abyss are one and the same. Therefore, the destruction of the sea represents the annihilation of the primeval deep, the home of malevolence and evil. Up to this point, it has dominated the world. As the stronghold of Satan's supporters, its existence mocked the hope of a complete victory and a complete sovereignty of the Lord. It has no place in the transformed world where all things spontaneously obey their Lord and their God. [^2]

Previewing what he will explore more fully later, John introduces the central seat of celestial rule—the New Jerusalem. In this, John follows Zechariah 9:9-10. Many of the Old Testament prophets were well aware of the millennial Jerusalem and the splendor that it will acquire (see Isa. 54:11-14; 60:10-14; Hag. 2:7-9; Zech. 2:1-5. Moses 7:62-63 also focuses on the millennial New Jerusalem). The same theme is picked up by nonbiblical Jewish documents dating from the second century b.c., showing a clear belief in a new Jerusalem associated with the heavenly order. [^3] John compares the beauty and purity of the city to that of a bride adorned for her husband. The Seer meticulously paints this picture, careful to catch just the right image. The dazzling whiteness of the bride's gown, mirroring her radiant purity, stands in contrast to the gaudy splendor of Babylon, which was exposed as nothing more than the seductive trappings of a decrepit and raddled whore. [^4]

One point needs to be emphasized. At the center of John's new vision lies a city—a real city. John clearly makes this the heart of the vision. Heaven exists as a society. Joseph Smith explained that the "same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoy" (D&C 130:2). The celestial kingdom is a community or system of communities presided over by a central city. Celestial beings, the church of the Firstborn, occupy these areas as families, for families make up communities. Thus, the ideal and perfect community is the eternal family of God. [^5]

John records that "the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them" (v. 3, KJV). His statement echoes Ezekiel 48:35, which notes that the name of the eternal city is "The Lord is there" (KJV). The word John uses for "tabernacle" (Greek skn) translates the Hebrew mishkan.Mishkan means "tent." However, in a number of places in the Old Testament, it is used to denote God's personal presence and attention to Israel (see Lev. 26:11; Ezek. 37:27). [^6] The Seer's statement thus emphasizes the very personal association that will be set up on the new earth between God and his children.

The reason why such an association can be maintained is clearly stated: "They shall be his [God's] people" (v. 3, KJV). This fulfills the promise that God made with Israel at Sinai, which had been continuously renewed through his prophets (see Lev. 26:12; Jer. 7:23; 11:4; cf. Hosea 1:9. Note how the promise is renewed in Jer. 30:22; Ezek. 36:28; 37:23, 27; Zech. 8:8). The covenant found fulfillment in the Lord (see Rom. 9:25; 1 Pet. 2:10), and it continues today as part of the new and everlasting covenant. Out of heaven, John hears a great voice proclaiming the privileges of those who have sacrificed the things of the old world in hope of obtaining those of the new. While on earth, they felt themselves as little more than strangers and pilgrims seeking "a better country, that is, an heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he hath prepared for them a city" (Heb. 11:16, KJV). [^7] The blessing is spoken by none other than God himself.

HE THAT SAT UPON THE THRONE (vv. 5-7)

These words mark the point at which God no longer hides behind the passive voice or the oblique reference. Revelation 16:1, 17 refer to a great voice coming out of the temple, while 16:17 and 19:5 speak of the voice coming from the throne. In each instance, God is the one who is likely speaking. "I make all things new," he now declares (21:5, KJV). As he begins to reveal himself, the first fact fully exposed is that this God is the maker, the creator, the director of all things. He holds the power of regeneration. His purposes allow nothing of the old order to remain. All things must become new, not just heaven and the earth, but all things.

God places humankind foremost in his operation. According to Paul, God begins in mortality to transform people into his image. Those with a spark of the light of Christ behold as in a mirror "the glory of the Lord, [and] are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord" (2 Cor. 3:18, KJV). The operation is quiet and subtle and unseen by the natural man. Nonetheless, working through his Spirit, God makes his minute but daily transformation upon those who are his own. Ever so gradually, but ever so surely, his people become as God.

The vision allows John to realize that transformation also occurs on a cosmic scale. The historian and social prophet may see only the natural world moving ever more swiftly through deepening stages of depravity to doom. But John understands that the hand of God moves in all things, slowly refashioning the whole. In this light the suffering of the earth both at the beginning and end of the millennium is but the travail preceding a new order. [^8]

God identifies the objective of the refreshing newness so far as man is concerned: "I will be his God, and he shall be my son" (v. 7, KJV). Each man and woman will be fully one with God, their very constitutions being remade so that they are bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh.

The importance of this work is emphasized by the Lord's command to John, "Write: for these words are true and faithful" (v. 5, KJV). By this oath, John understands that God will accomplish his designs toward mankind and creation. Nothing can prevent it. In this context God states, "They are done" (v. 6, AT), not "It is done," as in the KJV. The Greek is literally "They are done" (gegonan). [^9] The plural stresses that all theevents John has seen are made complete through God. God is in charge. In him the future is secure. Those who have trusted him, who have followed his paths, who have overcome "shall inherit all things" (v. 7, KJV).

As the wonderful enthroned majesty speaks, his identity becomes known. He is "Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end" (v. 6, KJV). The title of the enthroned figure empha-sizes his supreme position. He is Alpha—the beginning, the initiator of all things. Everything proceeds from his will. He is also Omega—the end, the finisher, the one in whom all things take meaning and find completeness. Supporting this idea, Joseph Smith taught that God "contemplated the whole of the events connected with the earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it rolled into existence," that he "was acquainted with the situation of all nations and with their destiny," and that he "ordered all things according to the council of His own will." [^10] The last statement is arresting. That will determined that the faithful will be blessed, "and God shall wipe away alltears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away" (v. 4, KJV).

THE SECOND DEATH (v. 8)

Though on the very threshold of incomprehensible joy, God reminds John of those who suffer the horror inflicted by the great dragon. What is surprising is that those who lead the cavalcade of the hell-bound are the cowards and the unfaithful. Though few would ever dismiss these vices as unimportant, fewer yet would place them among the great sins. The reason the Seer may have placed them before all others grows out of the context of the revelation itself. John experienced the latter days in which Christ and the beasts would vie for the souls of men. He understood that opposition to goodness and virtue would constantly increase. The result would put ever greater pressure on people to abandon the ways of God. Under these excruciating conditions, courage and faithfulness would be the supreme virtues. Cowardice and unfaithfulness would become great sins. [^11]

John quotes the Lord as saying such sinners "have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the second death" (v. 8, KJV). The term second death as used here apparently refers to the punishment of the wicked before they are saved from the fires of hell. Latter-day revelation states that "these are they who are cast down to hell and suffer the wrath of Almighty God, until the fulness of times, when Christ shall have subdued all enemies under his feet, and shall have perfected his work" (D&C 76:106). They "shall not be redeemed from the devil until the last resurrection, until the Lord, even Christ the Lamb, shall have finished his work" (D&C 76:85). Such sinners are Lucifer's but only for a time. While they are under his power, his full wrath will be spent upon them. For a thousand years their tears, their torment, their misery will be his wine, and their scorched souls and burning consciences the butter of his bread.

Note that Doctrine and Covenants 76:31-39 tells us that only those who are sons of Perdition will suffer the second death. The suffering of the telestial souls under the power of Satan, though unimaginable, will not match that of Lucifer's sons. This idea is suggested from the statement that the sons of Perdition will go into "eternal punishment, to reign with the devil and his angels in eternity, where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched, which is their torment—and the end thereof, neither the place thereof, nor their torment, no man knows" (D&C 76:44-45).

THE NEW JERUSALEM (vv. 9-11)

Verse nine introduces a new vision that continues into the next chapter. One of the seven angels that once carried a bowl of wrath commands John, "Come hither, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife" (v. 9, KJV). The Seer's language is again deliberate. He places the virgin bride in marked contrast with the great whore. Note that in chapter seventeen this angel, or one of his brothers, commanded John, "Come hither; I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great whore" (v. 1, KJV). Then the Seer was taken into the wilderness to view the harlot and her beast. In the present vision he is taken to the top of a high mountain to see the bride. [^12] In both instances he sees a city. The former, he knows, will forever lie in ruins, while the latter will everlastingly bathe in celestial glory.

The imagery of the ascension to the mountain top is arresting. The idea conveyed suggests that John received an additional endowment of the Spirit such that his ability to understand was again magnified. Only through that ability and from that vantage point could he really "see" the holy city—a city that shines like jasper. The term jasper (Greekiaspis) anciently described a broad category of precious and semiprecious gems. The imagery of dazzling and scintillating colors is representative of the glory of the celestial kingdom. Many a Jewish apocalyptist likewise waxed rhapsodic over the splendor of the New Jerusalem, expressing the glory of God's kingdom in terms of a jeweled city with streets of gold and surrounded with splendor (see, e.g., Isa. 54:11-14; Ezek. 28:11-17). [^13] In Revelation 21, we get a feel for the resplendent power of God, which shines forth from the city to give life, light, and law to all things.

THE CITY—ITS WALLS AND GATES (vv. 12-27)

The great city has twelve gates—three to a side. Each gate is named in honor of one of the twelve tribes of Israel. In this aspect the city resembles the temple of Ezekiel (see 48:31-35). But there are differences. First, at each of John's gates stands an angel as sentinel. The prophet Brigham Young provided insight into the duty of these angels. Defining the endowment, he stated: "Your endowment is, to receive all those ordinances in the House of the Lord, which are necessary for you, after you have departed this life, to enable you to walk back to the presence of the Father, passing the angels who stand as sentinels, being enabled to give them the key words, the signs and tokens, pertaining to the Holy Priesthood, and gain your eternal exaltation in spite of earth and hell." [^14] Appropriately, these angels are placed at the gates of the celestial city, symbolizing that only those who have made and kept their covenants in God's holy house will enter his kingdom.

The second difference is that in Revelation the whole city is the sanctuary while in Ezekiel the temple alone is holy. Ezekiel's temple wall separated the sacred sanctuary from the profane city. The prophet was explicit in noting who could and could not come into the sanctuary (44:5-7). The wall marked the boundary line over which the unjustified could not pass. But with John, a dividing line would have been improper since all members of the city are holy. [^15]

Third, John's city sat on twelve foundation stones named after the apostles of the Lord, while no mention is made of the foundation in Ezekiel. Note that Paul in 1 Corinthians 12:28; Ephesians 2:20; 4:11 stresses that God's kingdom rests upon the quorum of Apostles. The repetition of number twelve in the stones and gates stands as a constant reminder of the priestly power that guards and envelops all aspects and operations of the holy city. This is seen especially in the measurement of the walls. John notes they are 144 cubits, after the measure of an angel. The size of an angelic cubit is unknown. What is important is the number—twelve squared—signifying the fullness of priesthood authority. This is what surrounds and stands as a great bulwark to the city.

John's knowledge of the dimensions of the city and its gates grows out of the measurements taken by an angel. The scene echoes Ezekiel 40:3-5 where an angel also does the measuring. John himself once performed a similar task under angelic direction. He was given a measuring rod to measure the temple (see chapter 11). The Seer's measuring of the temple's area signified that area's protection from judgment. Now he stands back and watches the angel do the work.

The golden rod of the angel, in contrast to John's rod of judgment, acts as a standard that demonstrates the city's purity. The city is four square, the same shape as the holy of holies, an exact cube, symbol of perfection and eternal stability. This suggests why the angel does the measuring. As great as John is, he is yet mortal and imperfect. The task of measuring the height, depth, and breadth of celestial perfection is beyond any mortal man's capability. This is emphasized by the city's size—12,000 furlongs (just short of 1,400 miles) in length, breadth, and (if it can be imagined) height. The term furlong (a distance of 220 yards) is used consistently in the KJV to translate the Greek stadion (a distance of 202.3 yards).

John uses the brilliance of precious stones to describe the limitless beauty of the city. The stones represent the twelve tribes of Israel. John's list of stones also corresponds to, but does not match, those found on the high priest's breast plate. Stones listed in Exodus are "first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this shall be the first row. And the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond. And the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst. And the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they shall be set in gold in their inclosings. And the stones shall be with the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet; every one with his name shall they be according to the twelve tribes" (Ex. 28:17-21; cf. 39:10-14).

The Seer's arrangement is euphonic and emphasizes the division of four sets of three. All the stones end in the "s" sound except three. These all end in the "n" sound and are the last element in the first three sets. Thus the Greek reads, iaspis [jasper], sapphiros [sapphire], chalkedon[agate] (first set ending with an "n"), smaragdos [emerald], sardonux[onyx], sardon [carnelian] (second set ending with an "n"), chrusolithos[chrysolite], berullos [beryl], topazion [topaz] (thirdset ending with an "n"), chrusoprasos [chrysoprase], huacinthos[jacinth], amethystos [amethyst] (last set ending with an "s").

In his description of the city, the Seer is following a well-established Jewish tradition. Two of his contemporaries, Philo and Josephus, use much of the same language when they write about the divine community and its association with Israel. [^16] Both of John's contemporary writers see symbolic meaning within the jewels. For them the gates are the tribal heads of Israel, the jeweled foundation stones represent the community itself, the gemmed pinnacles represent the established leaders. Such descriptions of jeweled cities are not unique with the Jews; they may reach well back into antiquity, touching man's first glimpse of the heavenly community. [^17]

An important part of the walls are the twelve gates. John describes these as huge pearls. A perfect pearl in the mediterranean world was worth more than its weight in gold. The Savior's parable about a pearl of such value that a wealthy merchant would have to sell all he had to buy it was not much of an exaggeration. [^18] But it was probably the pearlescent luster, rather than the value, that caused the Seer to use it as an example of the portal.

John has not been the only one to see and attempt to describe such a gate. "The heavens were opened upon us," exulted Joseph Smith, "and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire" (D&C 137:1-2). John notes that these gates never shut (v. 25). They do not need to. The city is never in danger for the glory of God is there (cf. Isa. 60:11-13; D&C 45:67). Harmony, peace, security, and joy dominate not only the city, but also the entire sphere in which it dwells.

What is surprising about the heavenly city is the Seer's statement that "I saw no temple therein" (v. 22, KJV). Both the heavenly tabernacle and temple have been center stage in a number of visions up to this point. Now, as John beholds the eternal and celestial realm, the temple is not to be found. Where did it go? Earthly temples will dot the lands during the millennial era preparing men and women for the celestial kingdom. "When that glorious goal is gained," states Elder McConkie, "heaven itself becomes a temple. The holy of holies in the Lord's earthly houses are symbols and types of the Eternal Holy of Holies which is the highest heaven of the celestial world." [^19] The lack of a visible temple emphasizes the idea that the work is completed and perfected. Nothing has been left undone.

To this universal seat of government, the exalted priest-kings of the celestial earth will bring honor and glory. From this seat will flow the power in which the heavenly nations will walk. [^20] Thus we see that the new earth, one of the imposing celestial suns, will have its own capitol whose glory the whole planet will radiate as a grand stainless mirror for all worlds to see and reverence.

CONCLUSION

John follows an Old Testament theme in which the ideal heaven is local and earthly. The celestial realm is not beyond this earth but is the earth itself in a sanctified state. A misunderstanding of this very principle was what fueled a number of politico-religious uprisings that occurred during and after the time of the Lord. Many of these are chronicled in Josephus' work on the Jewish wars. To this very earth, the Father will come, and from this very earth, the Son will direct the affairs of the cosmos.

Because Gods will dwell here, the whole must be pure. An angel made this point very clear to Enoch: "Teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, . . . for, in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name" (Moses 6:57). In this light, John's concluding statement can be appreciated: "There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but they which are written in the Lamb's book of life" (v. 27, KJV).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb. Ford, Revelation, 338 notes a tradition in whichthere are two springs, one of milk and the other of honey, which flow out of the city.
[^2] In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the river, was there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations. God himself appears to be the fountain of living waters in Jeremiah 2:13 and 1 Enoch 96:6.
[^3] And there shall be no more curse: but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him: For discussion, see Mounce, Revelation, 386-87.
[^4] And they shall see his face; and his name shall be in their foreheads. See, for example, 1 Enoch 25:2-7; 2 Enoch 8:3.
[^5] And there shall be no night there; and they need no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light: and they shall reign for ever and ever. Ladd, Revelation, 288.
[^6] And he said unto me, These sayings are faithful and true: and the Lord God of the holy prophets sent his angel to shew unto his servants the things which must shortly be done. Ibid.
[^7] Behold, I come quickly: blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this book.
[^8] And I John saw these things, and heard them. And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel which shewed me these things.
[^9] Then saith he unto me, See thou do it not: for I am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book: worship God.
[^10] And he saith unto me, Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this book: for the time is at hand.
[^11] He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.
[^12] And, behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be.
[^13] I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last.
[^14] Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city.
[^15] For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.
[^16] I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning star.
[^17] And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.
[^18] For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book:
[^19] And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this book.
[^20] He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus.
