Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 22

Blessed Are They That Do His Commandments

(AN ANALYSIS OF REVELATION 22)

THE TREE AND THE WATERS OF LIFE (vv. 1-5)

As the vision of the city continues, John's escort shows him a river of water, pure and crystal clear. The background imagery seems to be taken from Ezekiel 47:1-12 (but cf. Zech. 14:8). There is a close association between the Spirit and the living water in Ezekiel 36:25-26; John 3:5; and 1 John 5:6-8. Psalm 46:4 also speaks of this river that gladdens the city of God. [^1] John is given to understand that the stream represents the waters of life.

The source of the water is important. It flows from "the throne of God and of the Lamb" (v. 1, KJV), note, one throne not two. There is but one source of life—God. [^2] But sharing in the responsibility is the Son, who ever stands as "the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth, and all things which in them are" (Alma 11:39). In his gospel, John recorded the Lord's words: "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life" (John 4:14, KJV). Thus both God and Christ occupy the same throne, for life flows from God through the Savior to mankind.

But the water has yet another and more significant meaning. Nephi saw that the "waters are a representation of the love of God" (1 Ne. 11:25). Herein lies the power of the water. It bequeaths and sustains life because it is love—pure, and unaffected.

The Seer's attention is drawn next to the tree of life and the avenue in which it stands. The Greek of verse two is difficult. The relationship between river, tree, and street cannot be determined. If the first phrase in mes ts plateiasauts (literally "In [the] midst of the street of it") belongs to the preceding verse, then the stream divides the avenue. If the phrase belongs to what follows, the river and stream likely run side by side with not just one but many trees of life in between. There are also other possibilities. [^3] However, this in no way affects what John wants his readers to understand. The city is the new Eden, and in her midst stands the tree of life. Other prophets have seen that same tree and left descriptions. "I looked and beheld a tree," exclaimed Nephi, "and the beauty thereof was far beyond, yea, exceeding of all beauty; and the whiteness thereof did exceed the whiteness of the driven snow" (1 Ne. 11:8).

Note that the tree stands alone. It has no competition. The tree of good and evil has ceased to exist because the inhabitants of the city, knowing good from evil, have spurned all evil and eternally choose the good. In consequence the cherubim, placed to guard the tree of life, have been removed, allowing God's people to eat freely of the fruit. Jewish thought looked forward to the time when men would be free to partake of the wondrous tree. [^4]

Following Ezekiel 47:12, the Seer notes that each month the tree produces a different type of fruit. John conveys the idea that the tree does not follow the normal course of budding, blossoming, fruit setting, and ripening, with one harvest a year. The crops grow continually. The entire image, as one scholar notes, "expresses the absolute triumph of life over death." [^5] The very leaves of the trees hold healing properties. Where it stands, not a single blade of sorrow or pain can be found. All nations are healed, that is, made whole and complete, through the power of the tree.

But one must not overlook the meaning of the tree itself, for "it is the love of God, which sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men; . . . [which is] the most joyous to the soul" (1 Ne. 11:22-23). Thus, the tree and the water symbolize the same thing. The continuous flow of the water and the perpetual bearing of the tree emphasize the limitlessness of God's love. It flows from him forever and unconditionally. All who wish to partake may do so.

John sees that "there shall be no night there; and they need no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light" (v. 5, KJV). The whole city is alive with the light of love. The omnipresent power of God suffuses all. Isaiah had long ago promised, "The sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory" (Isa. 60:19, KJV).

John expressed the real blessing for those who, walking in the light, inherit the divine kingdom: "They shall see his face; and his name shall be in their foreheads" (Rev. 22:4, KJV). One of the tasks that Jesus was to accomplish during his mortal ministry was to reveal the power, attributes, and character of God (see John 14:7, 9; 17:3). Men beheld God through Christ. But it was a mediated vision, coming via the Lord through faith. In the eternal city, faith will give way to perfect knowledge, for the sons and daughters of God will know him. [^6] That knowledge does not come through the eyes. They know him because they are like him; in every one of their thoughts, in every one of their acts, he is revealed to them.

John shows the realization of Christ's earnest prayer, offered just hours before his death, for the lives of his people. In that prayer he pleaded, "Glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was." He prayed further that "all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us" (John 17:5, 21, KJV). Those who inhabit the eternal city shall have his name written in their foreheads because, as he is, so are they. John knew that oneness could be realized. He proclaimed: "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is" (1 Jn. 3:2, KJV).

EPILOGUE (vv. 6-21)

With the promise that men and women can truly become as God, the magnificent visions of John close. The sweep of his prophecy has been vast, stretching from the premortal existence to the postmortal worlds. He has placed all history in its cosmic setting and shown its movement to the end of time. But more grand than the historical review stands his powerful and pure testimony of his King and his God, whose power, judgment, and love he has shown none can escape.

The Seer emphasized both the truthfulness of the vision and the assurance of its accomplishment. By testifying of God's responsibility for the message, John legitimized the vision for his readers. God sent "his angel to shew unto his servants the things which must shortly be done" (v. 6, KJV). Doubly accentuating the point is God's own proclamation that "these sayings are faithful and true" (v. 6, KJV). The law of two witnesses has been satisfied: the angel and the Lamb have testified to John (see v. 16). In turn, John and the Lamb testify to the reader (see vv. 18-20). John even identifies another set of two witnesses: the Spirit and the bride, or the Church (see v. 17).

The vision stands true, established in the mouths of divine and mortal witnesses. Therefore, a curse is laid on any who might tamper with the words of the prophecy (see vv. 18-19). But the real thrust of the epilogue is in the beatitude expressed in verse seven: "Blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this book" (KJV). In powerful, poetic, and prophetic terms, John has spelled out the full measure of that blessing. Now it is up to his readers to actualize it.

CONCLUSION

The prophet Nephi stated, "I beheld that the rod of iron, which my father had seen, was the word of God, which led to the fountain of living waters, or to the tree of life" (1 Ne. 11:25). Note that in Nephi's vision the tree and the water represent the same thing, each image expressing but a different aspect. The same is true in Revelation. The heart of John's city is love—the pure love of Christ. John, as few others, understood the life-power behind that love. "For God so loved the world," he testified, "that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life" (John 3:16, KJV).

Christ was the Lamb slain before the foundation of the world. He became flesh so that "as many as received him," he could give the "power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name" (John 1:12, KJV). In another epistle the Seer had taught the Saints: "God is love," and "love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God" (1 Jn. 4:7-8, KJV). In the eternal city, all are free to partake of that love, which flows out of him and sustains and embraces all who have been transformed into his very image.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb. Ford, Revelation, 338 notes a tradition in whichthere are two springs, one of milk and the other of honey, which flow out of the city.
[^2] In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the river, was there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations. God himself appears to be the fountain of living waters in Jeremiah 2:13 and 1 Enoch 96:6.
[^3] And there shall be no more curse: but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him: For discussion, see Mounce, Revelation, 386-87.
[^4] And they shall see his face; and his name shall be in their foreheads. See, for example, 1 Enoch 25:2-7; 2 Enoch 8:3.
[^5] And there shall be no night there; and they need no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light: and they shall reign for ever and ever. Ladd, Revelation, 288.
[^6] And he said unto me, These sayings are faithful and true: and the Lord God of the holy prophets sent his angel to shew unto his servants the things which must shortly be done. Ibid.
