Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

CHAPTER 23

Conclusion

The book of Revelation contains, as John clearly stated in his introduction, the revelation of Jesus Christ. That revelation was given to him by God the Father. In it the Savior is revealed as the divine and visible Lamb; and the Father, as the omnipotent invisible God. But the invisible God is a God of action. For much of earth's history, he has chosen to act, as it were, behind the scenes. This has made it easy for natural men and women to attribute the course of history to political, social, or other causes. But this will not be the case for long. Already God is beginning to more openly direct the course of history and manifest more directly his control over the destiny of mankind. Soon he will personally disrupt the flow of history and set it upon a completely new course.

In the meantime, John's vision stands as more than a powerful testimony of God's prophetic abilities. It shows not only that the Almighty knew the end from the beginning and contemplated the whole of earth's history, but also that he arranged it. To say it more strongly, before the first soul was ever placed on the earth, God orchestrated the whole of earthly existence. Since that time, all things have moved in concert with his plans.

The issue throughout Revelation centers on sovereignty. Who is the God of this world, the Father or Satan? John's vision, focusing as it does on cosmic reality, clearly shows that it is the God of heaven, not the master of hell. Further, the Seerdiscloses that there is never a moment when the Father's supremacy comes into question. He has full power over all things, including death and hell. Nothing, though it may seem at times otherwise, moves independent of his designs—not even the host of Satan. Showing that God overmasters all things, John admonishes his reader to faith and patience. In the end, no matter how bad things may appear until then, righteousness will triumph, and the faithful will have their full reward.

In spite of this, there has never been the slightest interference with either human will or satanic machinations. Each individual stands as a separate player, creating his own lines, developing his own character, and freely producing the drama of his own life. Still, God shares the same stage. Further, he is not only the principle actor, but also the director. Though he may not select the cast, he alone has the power to determine when and where each soul will be played. His self-imposed rules dictate that he must use every person, no matter how evil or twisted he may become or how much good he may do. Each must have his chance. Still, God knows what each will do, how each will respond to any given situation and to life as a whole.

Some have asked, "If God knows the end of every soul, why doesn't he just judge people now and place them in their kingdom?" The question makes two false assumptions. The first tries to make a connection between what God knows and how a person behaves. I have used a simple illustration in some of my classes to show that there is no connection between the two. Taking a pencil, eraser-end down, and placing it roughly six inches above the center of a sloping table, I have asked my students to tell me what will happen when I release it. I stress that they may not guess and must tell me what they absolutely know will happen. They are uncanny in their ability to determine its course, predicting, among other things, that it will fall, bounce, produce a noise, roll, and come to rest. When I drop the pencil, everything happens exactly as they say. I then ask them how they get the pencil to do what they know it will. They assure me that they have nothing to do with what the pencil does. This simple exercise demonstrates that foreknowledge does not cause action: no connection exists between what God knows about us as individuals and our behavior.

The second false assumption is that God is a magician who, by the wave of some divine wand, can make us into creatures of celestial, terrestrial, or telestial glory. But God is not a magician, and he cannot make us into anything. He can protect, guide, and empower us. But we are the ones who make us into something, and we do it through the millions of choices, both big and little (but mostly little), that we make during the course of an entire lifetime. Thus, we shape our eternal character, and in the resurrection what we have shaped is what we become (cf. Alma 41:1-8).

Now to the point. God knows how each person will behave at any given time and under any given circumstance. By knowing what each person will do, he knows how the whole of any combination of people will behave. He shapes history by assembling the aggregate while at the same time allowing each individual free reign over his own destiny.

Thus, John's revelation testifies not only to the omniscience of God, but also to his omnipotence. The Seer appeals to both faith and faithfulness as he shows that everything moves in harmony according to the composition orchestrated by God. God even weaves the discord of Satan into the whole movement. The result becomes a magnificent hymn of praise to his power as both God and the Lamb. In the words of the heavenly choir: "Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest" (Rev. 15:3-4, KJV).
