Richard D. Draper, Opening the Seven Seals: The Visions of John the Revelator ( 1991)

APPENDIX B

Six Elements of John's Writing Style

Understanding certain elements of John's writing style and methodology is helpful in untangling the work's complexities. [^1] These elements are as follows:

1) Repetition. The vision emphasizes certain points through repetition; however, it does not necessarily use identical words to express the same ideas. Some of these are found within one verse, others in the structure of the whole. The repetition not only underscores the points God wishes to drive home, but also allows for further insight through the use of different perspectives.

Some examples from single verses are "His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow" (1:14, KJV); "who created heaven, and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the things which are therein" (10:6, KJV); "victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name" (15:2, KJV). Examples from the larger unit of the book include the repeated series of seven plagues (associated with seven seals and trumpets), and the seven bowls (see chapters 8, 9, 16); the repeated hymns of praise all containing similar themes (see, e.g., 4:8, 11; 5:9-10, 12, 13; 7:10, 12); and the repeated depictions of the Saints in triumph (see 7:9-11; 14:1-3; 15:2).

2) Expansion. John often introduces brief,indefinite expressions or statements, then expands them, sometimes after an interval. A few examples within closely connected clauses are "thy works," i.e., "thy labor, and thy patience" (2:2, KJV); "a stumblingblock," i.e., "to eat things sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication" (2:14, KJV); "my two witnesses" (KJV), characterized as standing before God, being able to seal the heavens, and to cause plagues (11:2-6); and "the camp of the saints," i.e., "the beloved city" (20:9, KJV). Examples of phrases made definite after an interval are "The woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place prepared" (Rev. 12:6, KJV) and "to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time" (v. 14, KJV); the beast in 13:1 is met again in 17:3; and the fall of Babylon noted in 14:8 is expanded in 18:2-19.

3) Interruptions. In the course of thought, John often pauses for explanation. Though this does violence at times to logical order, such interruptions are very Hebraic. The Greeks' strict laws of continuity did not bind the Near Eastern mind-set. (For examples, see the Psalms or the longer Pauline epistles.) The interruptions fall into two categories: a) displacement within a single paragraph, or interjections of brief explanations, and b) insertions of longer episodes—called "interludes" herein—disrupting the main scenario.

An example of category A is the reference to the war in heaven (see 12:7-12) sandwiched in the conflict between the Saints and the dragon (see 12:1-6, 13-17). An example of category B is chapter ten, which interrupts the flow between chapters nine and eleven. The previous chapters of this book assist the reader through these.

4) Prefaces. John systematically precedes visions or scenes with prefatory passages of varying length. One of John's purposes was to cheer and sustain his readers. Therefore, he often stops to offer reassurance before proceeding into the more disconcerting aspects of his vision. For example, the whole eschatological section of the book is prefaced by chapters 4-5. In these chapters God's will is shown to be the executing force behind all that happens. He is in charge. Similarly, before introducing the vision of the seven plagues (see chapters 8-9), John reassures his readers that God's people will be brought through in safety (see chapter 7).

5) Nonrealism. Readers of Revelation encounter abrupt changes, impossible combinations, and contradictions. Note, however, that a completely logical and clearly understood apocalyptic style is a contradiction in terms—including Revelation. [^2] The reader must be prepared for a trip along a surreal landscape. The prophet received his vision through poetic images free of any need for internal consistency and conformity to reality. The vision presents inconsistencies, sudden transitions, and unimaginable conceptions. But, as will be shown in the next section, this is what gives apocalyptic literature its special punch. The style allows God to communicate through the force of the images and movements he creates. He is not shackled with the need to make all things smooth and logical. An inconsistency can underscore a point.

A few examples will illustrate the writer's style. Three examples of contradictions follow: "Immediately I was in the Spirit" (4:2, KJV), when John had been in the Spirit from 1:10 on. The sanctified are to be pillars in the temple in the New Jerusalem (see 3:12), but later the text specifically states that there is no temple in that city (see 21:22). In 8:7 the grass is destroyed, but in 9:4 it is unhurt.

Examples of abrupt changes are the Lord holding seven stars in his right hand (see 1:16) that is then laid reassuringly on the prophet's shoulder (see v. 17); the beast with seven heads (see 13:1) suddenly having but one mouth, then becoming a personal ruler ("his seat"—KJV; v. 2), and finally being identified by but one of his heads (see v. 12). Examples of impossible combinations are viewing the writing inside a sealed scroll, a lamb taking a book and opening its seals, animal creatures playing harps (see 5:1-8), the description of the locusts as fabulous creatures that hurt only men (see 9:3-10), and a city twelve thousand furlongs high—which translates to about fourteen hundred miles straight up (see 21:16).

6) Symbolism. John uses symbols as the major means of communicating ideas. [^3] Through this means, the writer vividly represents transcendental and spiritual experiences. John employs symbols in almost every sentence of the revelation. But he does not create them ex nihilo; they come from God and are consistent with the Old Testament and Jewish apocalyptic literature. Indeed, in Revelation John uses the words, phrases, images, and patterns of the ancient covenant as a kind of language arsenal that undergirds and propels the message, which the Seer's contemporaries clearly grasped. [^4]

However, John does not bring unmodified a single Old Testament symbol (or even a scriptural reference) into his revelation, whole or complete. Shadows and echoes from the Old Testament abound in over half of the verses in Revelation. Images and figures come particularly from Daniel, Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Zechariah. But in the whole book, there is only one explicit reference to an Old Testament passage. Revelation 15:3, referring to the song of triumph sung by those who overcame the beast, states that "they sing the song of Moses the servant of God" (KJV), but what follows is neither the song found in Exodus 15 nor that of Deuteronomy 32. Rather, it is an amalgamation of several Old Testament themes. [^5] Old Testament symbols are modified, reworked, and shaped to meet the special needs of the vision.

In doing so the vision becomes a unique literary composition full of wonder and carrying John's special insights. Therefore, an understanding of Old Testament apocalyptic and prophetic material is helpful, but only to a point. For example, John's introduction (chapter 1) has the familiar ring of Daniel, chapters seven and ten. Daniel's four beasts that rise from the sea, two with wings and one with ten horns (see Dan. 7:3-7), bear a similarity to both John's single beast arising from the same place (see Rev. 13:1-2) and his four beasts surrounding the throne of heaven (see Rev. 4:6-9). His plagues shadow those vented against the Egyptians (see Ex. 7-9). The plague of locusts (see Rev. 9) echoes that found in Joel 1-2. And the little scrollreferred to in chapter ten is foreshadowed in Ezekiel 2-3. The preceding chapters show that, while many Old Testament images and allusions show up in John's work, in every case John alters the traditional text for his own purposes. [^6] However, those who feel comfortable with the images created in the Old Testament will probably feel at home with John.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The ideas used here follow Beckwith, Apocalypse,241-42.
[^2] Feuillet, Apocalypse, 34.
[^3] For a discussion, see Eugene H. Peterson, "Apocalypse: The Medium Is the Message," Theology Today, 26 (1969): 133-41.
[^4] G. R. Beasley-Murray in "The Contribution of the Book of Revelation to the Christian Belief in Immortality," Scottish Journalof Theology, 27 (1974): 76-93, writes about the recent recognition byscholars that John's symbolic images were drawn extensively from an ancient tradition. His language would have seemed clear to his contemporary audience.
[^5] Fiorenza, Revelation, 135; Beckwith,Apocalypse, 221.
[^6] Fiorenza, Revelation, 22; Hailey, Revelation,36; Beckwith, Apocalypse, 221. For a complete study, see Charles,Commentary, 1:lxv-lxxxvi.
