EARLY DAYS, 1816-1833.

A Fisherman.--Early Employment.--Noble Reflections.--Lessons in Reading.--Interest in the Bible.--Philo Woodruff's Strange Dream.--Mocking Deity.--Its Effects.--Peace of Mind.--Place of Prayer.--Happy Experiences.--A Baptism.--Reads of Mormons.--Notable Instance of Inspiration.--Removal to New York.--Azmon's Faith.

Much of the early life of Wilford Woodruff was passed in Farmington, Connecticut. He was a boy of great vitality and given to the sports incident to the community and the times in which he lived. He early developed a marked aptitude for fishing. In the stream which fed his father's mill there were spotted trout in abundance. These he learned to catch with great dexterity; and his brother, being likewise an adept with the hook, the two achieved the reputation of being the most successful fishermen in the village. The sports of fishing and hunting which he practiced in early boyhood were enjoyed by him throughout his entire life.

One is reminded in the story of his life that there were apostles of old who cast their nets for fish in the sea of Galilee. Like them, he too became a fisher of men. He was equally prompt in responding to the Master's call and equally ardent in promulgating the new word of life he was authorized to publish. We are not told how many converts were the result of their missionary efforts, but it is quite within the bounds of truth to declare that no apostle of the last dispensation succeeded better than Wilford Woodruff in planting the message of the new dispensation in the hearts of his fellow-men.

He attended the village district school in his early boyhood, a school located about two miles from his father's home. "In those days," he writes, "parents did not feel the importance of urging upon their children the advantages of education as they urge them today. In those times they felt that matters of education were wholly confined to the ideas and methods of the school teacher." Wilford was an industrious boy. His mind was filled with lofty thoughts, and his education as time went on took on a religious character. He was by nature a devoted son and  observed carefully the divine command which enjoined obedience to his parents.

Aphek Woodruff, father of Wilford, was a generous-hearted man. He rarely refused to grant a favor even when it seemed probable that the favor might prove a loss to him. The father by his industry and frugality had acquired a respectable competency for those days. His property, however, soon dwindled away when those for whom he became security left him to meet their obligations. His possessions consisted of a large farm well stocked with cattle, a flour mill, a saw mill, and a carding machine. These had cost years of toil and self-denial. Their loss to him saved his honor, but subjected his family to the hardships which the changed financial conditions brought about. These experiences of his father had much to do in the formation of his son's character, for the latter avoided debts and was scrupulously careful to make his word good in every business undertaking.

When Wilford was eight years of age, a strong religious revival took place in the town of Farmington. It was conducted chiefly by the Baptist Church; the elders of that Church, Brocket and Quishman, preached in his father's home. They baptized his stepmother and several other relatives. His brothers, Azmon and Thompson, made some profession of religion. Wilford attended meetings, prayed, and tried to feel as others felt, but all to no purpose. Whatever of enthusiasm worked upon his feelings in the excitement of the meetings soon passed away and left his soul unfed by the bread of life. The next elder brother, Thompson, was in a similar condition. His eldest brother, Azmon, continued his interest and devotion until several years later when he embraced the fulness of the gospel.

His father, having sold his property at Northington, moved back to Farmington where he was employed to run the flour mill owned by Cowles, Deming & Camp. This employment he continued for twenty-eight years. Up to the year 1816 Wilford remained with his father. He attended school in Farmington until he was fourteen years of age.

On the first of May, 1821, he went to live with Col. George Cowles with whom he remained two years. While there he attended school in the winter and worked upon a farm during the  summer months. It was while living with Mr. Cowles that Wilford again witnessed a religious revival which was conducted by the Presbyterians, who were at that time the only sect in Farmington. Of this second revival he writes: "I attended the meetings, inquiry, Sunday schools, and prayer meetings. I tried to get religion by effort and prayer, but my efforts created darkness instead of light and I was not happy in the attempt. They wanted us to give our hearts to God without telling us what to do or explaining any principle in a comprehensive manner. There were many young people at that time of my age who made a profession of religion. I did not wish to make a mockery of sacred things by professing light when I had received none, so I kept aloof from all professions."

At this time the Woodruff family was undergoing a severe struggle for a livelihood. Young Wilford lived out, first with one and then with another, working hard during the summer and fall and attending school in the winter. In the year 1823 while making his abode with Mr. Andrew Mills he underwent his first attack of homesickness. "Mr. Mills was a proud and austere man," he writes, "I had never before lived at a place where I did not feel free and sociable, and there was no conversation between us except to ask or answer a question. I ate and slept very little there for two weeks. Relief, however, came to me when I started to school and made the acquaintance of my fellow students. My homesickness left me and never came back.

"I returned home in 1825, soon after which my father made a contract with Mr. Horace Todd that I should work one year with him." The year, however, did not pass before the boy split his instep with an ax. This ended his service there, but his brother Thompson took the place there and worked the year out. "Thus we kept our contract." Wilford was crippled for nine months. At the end of that time he left home on horse back in search of work. Again misfortune overtook him. He was thrown from his horse and compelled to return home where he remained for some time. There was always a welcome in his home, because of the love and respect every member of the family entertained for him.

Part of the time up to April, 1827, he remained at home,  and part of the time he was engaged in working for other people. At that time he was twenty years of age and left his home never to return except as a visitor. He first went to live with his Aunt Helen Wheeler. He took her flour mill at East Avon on shares and worked it for three years. During that time he established himself in the trade of a miller.

Notwithstanding his youth at the time of leaving home, his soul was full of deep and serious thoughts. They were ennobling in their character and safeguarded the young man along the slippery paths of youth. Here are some of the reflections of those days: "This is an important period of my life. As I leave my father's home to enter upon the stage of life to act for myself, to be my own counselor, and to form my own character in the broad open world, my mind is filled with serious reflections. I am full of anxiety--an anxiety which is painful to me. Should I outlive my parents, how long will it be before I shall follow them to the grave? It will be said of them: 'They have gone the way of all flesh and their children will follow them into the same eternal world.' My age is an important period in the life of every man; for, generally speaking, at this period of life man forms much of his character for time and eternity. How cautious I ought to be in passing this landmark along the road of my early existence! I feel that I need care, prudence, circumspection, and wisdom to guide my footsteps in the path which leads to honor and eternal life."

Later on, referring to this same period of life, he says: "I reflected further upon the days of my youth which were gone, and upon the fleetness of time that had flown like an arrow to return no more. I reasoned thus: while walking through a rapid stream, we cannot tread twice in the same water, neither can we twice spend the same time. Then how ought we to prize the golden moments and measure time by our talents to the honor and glory of God and for the salvation of our souls; so that when the Lord comes, He may receive His own with usury.

"In trying to comprehend the fleetness of time, I have asked myself these questions. Where is the old world? Where are the millions of the earth's inhabitants, including my own ancestors? And where are the days of my youth? They are gone--all  gone into the boundless ocean of eternity where I shall soon find myself."

This remarkable state of his mind at that youthful period of life is so unusual in young men of that age that it is quite reasonable to suppose that he was undergoing a mental struggle on questions of right and wrong. It was not simply with him a question of good and bad; has conscience told him what his conduct ought to be in the presence of temptation. What he wanted to know, what he was yearning to learn was some positive rule of life that would govern and guide him in the formation of correct religious doctrines.

In those times it was thought no evil to indulge in card playing and pastimes of a similar character. He occasionally took a hand in these games, but soon withdrew from such recreation, since he believed card playing to be a vice. His journal shows that he understood the dangers that arise from the so-called respectability of companionship when such companions are thoughtless, indifferent, and self-indulgent. "The religious influence of such men," he writes, "where it is bad is most to be dreaded. The vulgar and dissipated will not have much influence over the man who intends to maintain a fair standing in society. On the other hand, the respectable man may lead him step by step into such evils that bring upon him, before he is aware of it, sorrow, disgrace, misery, and shame.

"If I was ever led to stake anything at the card table, I had the providential good fortune to lose. There was thus cut off the natural encouragement to engage in such a vice. In all these recreations there was a spirit working within me which drew my attention to inner thoughts of a nobler sort until I lost all desire for cards and the ball room and for the company of those who enjoyed that kind of pleasure. So much was this the case, that I felt like a speckled bird in the midst of my companions. Indeed, I learned by experience and by the workings of the spirit of the Lord within my own soul that the transitory pleasures of human life do not in any way constitute true and lasting happiness."

Before launching out in business for himself, he says: "I had not acquired much taste for reading. Having at my disposal each day several leisure hours, I felt impressed that I must not  squander time in idleness. I did not care for novel reading. I believed it to be useless. Nor had I much taste for history, having read but little of it. One day while reading a school book, I came across these remarkable words: 'He that will spend his life in that manner which is most exaltant will find that custom will render it most delightsome.'"

These words made a strong impression upon his mind. He at once began to read history. At first he read too much at a time to remember, to digest, and to profit by it. After a judicious regulation of this mental pastime, he read carefully histories of the United States, England, Scotland, Greece, and Rome. He read Rollin's Ancient History, Josephus, and other books. They became to him a delight, and from them he gained much that was helpful.

"By perusing history," he writes, "we hold converse with men of judgment, wisdom, and knowledge. I finally took up the Bible as a study of history and I never found any history equally interesting until later on I read the Book of Mormon. While reading these books we converse, as it were, with the Lord and with His holy prophets and apostles. In studying the Word of the Lord we learn truths which cannot be acquired from any other source. Those books which contain the revelations of heaven are of far more interest than books containing merely the opinions, theories, and doctrines of men."

During his further stay with his Aunt Helen, he encountered other religious revivals without any benefit to him further than to emphasize his convictions that the gospel in its purity was not among the people at that time and place.

At that time he was called upon to mourn the demise of his beloved brother, Philo. A few months prior to his death, Philo dreamed that an angel from heaven was going through the streets of the town with a roll containing a list of those who should die during the year in that town. The angel approached Philo and unfolded to him the roll, at the same time he informed him that on November 27th there would be a funeral at his father's house. Philo recorded the dream in his journal. On the very day named by the angel his own funeral occurred at his father's home. The fulfillment of this strange dream made a lasting impression on Wilford's mind.

The year following, another very remarkable circumstance occurred which was equally impressive to his thoughtful and spiritual mind. He writes: "I was called to sit up for the night with the remains of a young man named Henry Miller. He had been very wicked and profane. The day before his death, he attended a celebration of the nation's birthday, July 4th. The boy's father, who was a religious, God-fearing man, reproved the son for his profanity and wickedness. Shortly after this, he and his father were on the way to the field to get some hay when there suddenly arose a heavy shower accompanied by thunder and lightning. Henry made sport of the roaring elements and mocked God in the thunder. The next moment, while standing by his father's side, he was struck by a thunderbolt from heaven. I attended his funeral. The circumstances of his death made a lasting impression on me."

Like many, for whom there is in store a remarkable religious future, Wilford was called to suffer financial reverses that he might learn how uncertain are the goods of this world and that he might feel the full force of that divine fiat: "Cursed is he that trusteth in riches; cursed is he that trusteth in man, or maketh flesh his arm." He had earned considerable money while running the flour mill for his Aunt Helen, but lost much of it by lending it to an unprincipled man, and by helping others who were unable to repay him. These peculiar experiences, temporal and spiritual, fortunes and misfortunes, accidents and trials among people away from his own home filled his soul with grave reflections and brought him to take a stand relative to his own future course in life. He was high-minded, had no vices or bad habits, and his standard of purity and excellence was so high that he never indulged in light-mindedness or in trifling recreations. To him they were grievous sins in the sight of God; and he believed with the Prophet Joseph that they should be eschewed. He was constantly striving for a higher plane upon which he might firmly plant his feet.

"I was twenty-three years of age; and in reflecting upon the past, I became sincerely convinced that there was no real peace of mind or true happiness except in the service of God and in doing those things which would meet His approval. As far as my imagination would enable me, I brought before my mind all the  honor, glory, and happiness of the whole world. I thought of the gold and the wealth of the rich, of the glory, grandeur, and power of kings, presidents, princes, and rulers. I thought of the military renown of Alexander, Napoleon, and other great generals. I cast my mind over the innumerable paths through which the giddy world travels in search of pleasure and happiness. In summing up the whole matter in the vision of my mind, I had to exclaim with Solomon: 'All is vanity of vanities sayeth the preacher.'

"I could see that within a few years all would end alike in the grave. I was convinced that no man could enjoy true happiness and obtain that which would feed the immortal soul, except God was his friend and Jesus Christ his advocate. I was convinced that man became their friend by doing the will of the Father, and by keeping His commandments. I made a firm resolution that from then I would seek the Lord to know His will, to keep His commandments, and to follow the dictates of His Holy Spirit. Upon this ground I was determined to stand and to spend my future life in the maintenance of these convictions." It will be here easily seen that determination which led him through all the subsequent years of his life to do whatever he did for the glory of God.

In May, 1830, he was employed to run a flour mill for Mr. Samuel Collins of Collinsville, Connecticut. At first he went to board with about thirty young men. These being of a worldly turn of mind, he did not enjoy their influence and therefore took up his residence in the family of Mr. Dudley D. Sackett.

About this time, under the influence of a religious revival, his brother Asahel made profession of religion and seemed very devoted. Wilford became specially anxious to know the will of the Lord. "I prayed night and day, and the Lord blest me with much of His spirit. These began to be the happiest days of my life. I felt that the sun, moon, and stars; the mountains, hills, and valleys; and that all creation were united in the praise of the Lord."

"My work in the mill was very light and I passed much of my time in reading, in meditation, and in prayer. I read the Bible and it was like a new book to me. I received much light in perusing its sacred pages. If I was cast down, tried, or  tempted, I found in it relief in connection with the Spirit of God. The religious reformation continued in Farmington and a number of my relatives were actively engaged in the service of the Lord according to the best light they had. Among them were my Uncle Ozem Woodruff and his wife Hannah. They were good people and I was much attached to them, having lived with them a good deal in my early life. I enjoyed their society very much.

"A short distance from the mill was a beautiful island upon the top of which was a level field covered with flowers. The island was surrounded by a rapid current of water dashing over the rocks. The banks of the current were thickly studded by tall, waving pines. I chose this pleasant retreat on the top of the island as my place of prayer and supplication. I retired to it many times, both by day and by night and offered up my soul in prayer to the Lord. I never shall forget the happy hours I spent alone in mediation and prayer upon that solitary island. When sitting there alone, there would come to my mind the words of Robert Pollock:

  'In the wide desert where the view was large,
  Pleasant were many scenes, but most to me
  The solitude of vast extent untouched by hand
  Whose nature sowed herself and reaped her crop;
  Whose garments were the clouds; whose minstrels, brooks;
  Whose lamps, the moon and stars; whose organ choir,
  The voice of many waters; whose banquets,
  The falling leaves; whose heroes, storms; whose warriors,
  Mighty winds; whose lovers, flowers;
  Whose orators, the thunderbolt of God;
  Whose palaces, the everlasting hills;
  Whose ceilings, Heaven's unfathomable blue;
  And from whose rocky turrets battled high
  Prospects immense spread out on all sides in air,
  Lost now between the welkin and the main,
  Now walked with hills that slept above the storm.'

"The Lord blest me with joy and happiness such as I had never before enjoyed, doubtless because I was living up to the best light I had. I had no apostle or prophet to teach me the right way; so I had to do the best I could. In my zeal to promote  good, I got up prayer meetings in our village and prayed for light and knowledge. It was my desire to receive the ordinances of the gospel, as I could plainly see by reading the Bible that baptism by immersion was a sacred ordinance. In my eagerness, yet being ignorant of the holy priesthood and of the true authority to officiate in the ordinances of eternal life, I requested the Baptist minister to baptize me. At first he refused because I told him I would not join his church as it did not harmonize with the apostolic church which our Savior established. Finally after several conversations, he baptized me on the 5th of May, 1831. He also baptized my brother Asahel. This was the first and only gospel ordinance I sought for until I joined the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

Wilford continued with Mr. Collins for less than a year, but left him with the best feelings. The latter told Wilford that he would always be welcome at his home, and that as an honorable young man, worthy of trust, he would cheerfully give him any recommendations he desired.

Wilford held himself aloof from membership in any of the churches. He visited their meetings and conversed with their ministers. He wanted to know why there were no more apostles and prophets. He was told that they were done away with, because they were no longer needed. Such a statement only intensified his disbelief in sectarian churches.

On one occasion, after praying most earnestly to know about the people of the Lord, if any such there were on earth, he says: "The Spirit of the Lord said unto me: 'Go to my Word and I will there show thee my will and answer thy prayer.' I opened the Bible promiscuously, praying the Lord to direct me to that portion of his Word which would answer my prayer. I opened to the 56th Chapter of Isaiah. I was satisfied it was in response to my prayer. I felt that the salvation of God was about to be revealed and His righteousness come forth. I was also satisfied that I should live to see the people of God gathered. From this time on until the gospel found me I was contented and felt that I should trouble myself no more about the churches and the ministers. In our zeal my brother Azmon and I adopted the worship of the Lord on Saturday instead of Sunday. I felt that a change from the seventh to the first day of the week was likely  a perversion made by man without authority from heaven."

It was while staying with Mr. Cowles in the spring of 1832 that he saw for the first time an account of the "Mormons." These were described in a newspaper article as a new sect claiming to have new revelations and to be built upon the foundation of prophets and apostles the same as the ancient Saints. The editor of the newspaper ridiculed the Mormons, but Wilford was favorably impressed. From that time on he desired to see these new people; for if they enjoyed the gifts which were bestowed upon the ancient Saints, they were the very people for whom he was seeking.

Soon after this he made a settlement with Mr. Cowles and arranged his affairs with a view of moving to western New York. Of the circumstances leading up to this change in his life, he writes: "The spirit that was upon me day and night said, 'Go to Rhode Island.' My mind was greatly exercised over the matter for I could not comprehend what it meant. I went to live with my brother Azmon until our departure for New York. After saluting him, I said: 'I wonder what the Lord wants of me in Rhode Island! The spirit of the Lord has rested upon me for two weeks and said, "Go to Rhode Island."' In about an hour after this my brother Asahel arrived on a visit. After shaking hands with him, almost the first words he spoke were: 'I wonder what the Lord wants of me in Rhode Island! The spirit of the Lord has been upon me for two or three weeks and has told me to go to Rhode Island.' This caused us to marvel exceedingly. We had not seen each other for several months. My brother Azmon thought that as we were ready to go to New York, we better not go to Rhode Island. To this we consented with great reluctance. I felt sure it was our duty to go there, although at that time it was a mystery."

Later on when the gospel came to them in New York, Wilford learned that if they had gone to Rhode Island they would have met Elders Orson Hyde and Samuel H. Smith and would have thus received the gospel at an earlier date than they did by at least one year. Had they gone to Rhode Island and received the gospel there, they would have undoubtedly gone direct to Kirtland, Ohio. As it was, they stopped in New York where they purchased a farm.

This incident furnished an illustration of the safety of obeying the spirit of the Lord, even when the reason at the time is not apparent. The example of Adam is a further illustration of that same beautiful truth. "Adam, why dost thou offer sacrifice?" asked the angel. "I know not," was the reply, "save that God has commanded me." Such illustrations show the folly of basing one's conduct wholly upon experience, or upon the powers of human understanding. There are other lamps to guide our feet than that of experience or the wisdom of man. The incident is a striking illustration also of the untruth of that sometime infidel dogma which says: "We doubt all things in order to prove all things." It is better to hold with inspired men: "We believe all things from God in order to know all things."

Wilford Woodruff and his brother Azmon bade their father good-bye. With $800, and a tin trunk each, they journeyed to Richland, Oswego County, New York. There they purchased a farm of 140 acres and a good dwelling house at a cost of $1,800. They paid the amount they had with them, the balance at a subsequent date.

During their residence in Richland, the cholera made its appearance in the United States. Azmon was seized by the dread malady. Of this circumstance and the faith of his brother, Wilford writes: "Azmon was a very peculiar person from his childhood. He was very strict in reading the Bible and in attending to his prayers. He enjoyed much of the spirit of the Lord and had considerable light. I was greatly edified by his teachings and conversations. When he was sick, he did not employ a physician, but trusted in the Lord absolutely. In the fall of 1833 he had a very severe attack of the cholera. His wife and I laid our hands upon his head agreeable to his request and prayed for him. We asked the Lord to rebuke the disease and commanded it to depart from him. From that hour the cholera was checked. He was immediately healed. The next morning he was able to arise from his bed and walk. Such was his faith. He had passed through many ordeals of sickness and was always healed by the power of God and without medical aid."

This recital brings us to the winter of 1833 when the full blaze of the gospel light was about to shine in splendor upon the soul of Wilford Woodruff.
