FIRST MISSION TO FOX ISLANDS, 1837.

Troubles at Kirtland.--Mission to Fox Islands.--Evil Spirits Cast Out.--Healing the Sick.--Visits his Home Enroute.--From Connecticut to Maine.--Description of Fox Islands.--Begins Ministry in Vinal Haven.--A Minister Comes to Grief.--Baptisms.--Excitement.--Return to Scarboro.

The condition of affairs in Kirtland during the winter of 1836-7 was not at all to the liking of Elder Woodruff. To his mind there was no place in the Church for contentions, misgivings, and opposition. The work was of God--that was enough. There were the properly appointed authorities. Upon them the responsibilities of the kingdom had been placed. He was not therefore concerned about what others thought was a lack of wisdom in them. He was not avaricious; and financial reverses, to his mind, could never thwart the purposes of God; and he was not troubled about how much of this world's goods came to his possession. A glorious message had been given to the earth, and he wanted every one to know its value to the human family and to understand the blessings of salvation to those who yielded obedience.

Wilford Woodruff always felt out of place in the midst of contention. He shunned it, and never cared for the association of those who were given to fault-finding, criticisms, and personal griefs. He never saw the necessity for them. It was never hard for him to agree with his brethren. He was never unreasonable in his demands, never had private ends to foster, and never hesitated when there was something important to be done. He was loyal to the Prophet, true to his brethren; and as he was now a seventy, he wanted to magnify his office by service in the missionary field.

He felt impressed that he wanted to take a mission to Fox Islands, off the coast of Maine, although he was not at all familiar with the locality nor with the conditions there. To his impressions of the spirit of God, he found a hearty response in the minds of the apostles.

"Feeling," he said, "that it was my duty to start at once upon this mission, I did not tarry at home one year after having taken a wife as the law of Moses allowed. On the contrary, I started just one month and one day after that important event. I left my wife with a Sister Hale with whom she expected to stay for a season. I left Kirtland in good spirits, in company with Elder Jonathan Hale, and walked twelve miles to Fairport, where we were joined by Elder Milton Holmes. There we went aboard the steamer Sandusky, made our way to Buffalo, and proceeded thence to Syracuse by way of the Erie Canal. We then walked to Richland, Oswego County, New York, where I met my two brothers whom I had not seen for several years." The elder of these brothers had become, through trial and temptation, indifferent to the Church. This was a source of deep sorrow to Wilford, who warned him against opposing the truth, and faithfully instructed him in his duty to the gospel which he had embraced.

From Richland they proceeded to Sackett's Harbor, thence across Lake Ontario by steamer, Oneida, to Kingston, Upper Canada, and along the canal to Jones' Falls, whence they walked to a place called Bastard, Leeds County. There they found a branch of the Church presided over by John E. Page and James Blakesly. "We accompanied them to their place of meeting," said Elder Woodruff, "and attended a conference, at which three hundred members of the Church were present. Thirty-two persons presented themselves for ordination. I was asked to officiate in company with Elder William Draper. We ordained seven elders, nine priests, eleven teachers, and five deacons.

"We addressed the people several times during this conference, and at its close were called to administer to a woman who was possessed of a devil. At times she was dumb and greatly afflicted with the evil spirits that dwelt in her. She believed in Jesus, and in us as His servants, and wished us to administer to her. Four of us laid our hands upon her head, and in the name of Jesus Christ commanded the devil to depart from her. The evil spirits left immediately, and the woman arose with great joy and gave thanks and praise unto God; for, according to her faith, she was made whole from that hour. A child that was sick was also healed by the laying on of hands, according to the word of God.

"We walked thirty miles to visit another branch of the Saints at Leeds, where we met with John Gordon and a John Snider. There we held a meeting, and bore testimony to the people. A Sister Carns came to us and asked that the ordinance for the healing of the sick be performed for two of her children who were afflicted. One was a nursing babe which was lying at the point of death. I took it in my arms and presented it before the elders, who laid their hands upon it, and it was made whole immediately. I handed it back to the mother entirely healed. We afterwards laid hands upon the other, and it was also healed. It was done by the power of God, in the name of Jesus Christ, and the parents praised God for His goodness."

From Leeds they went to Schenectady, New York. On this journey they were accompanied by Elders Isaac Russell, John Goodson, and John Snider. In New York they expected to join Apostles Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde who were soon to leave on a mission to England. Elder Russell seemed to be troubled constantly by evil spirits. They were also troublesome to him while in England, where Apostles Hyde and Kimball had a severe contest with them, when administering to him.

After separating from the three brethren named, Elder Woodruff and his companions went by rail to Albany, and walked from there to Canaan, Connecticut, where they found a branch of the Church. Here they met Jesse and Julian Moses and Francis K. Benedict. They held a two day's meeting at Canaan, and Elder Woodruff ordained Julian Moses and Francis K. Benedict to the office of an elder.

At Colebrook, Elder Woodruff visited his half-sister, Eunice Woodruff, who taught school there. "I spent five hours," he wrote, "watching her in the performance of her school duties. Five years before, when I last beheld Eunice at our father's house, she was a child of only twelve years; but now I beheld her an instructor of the youth. As I looked upon her, my heart was filled with admiration for those accomplishments in her which adorn the female sex. Her spirit was blithe, and her step, as she moved among her pupils, showed the energy of youth. She handed me a bundle of letters from her brother Asahel. The teachings and instructions contained in those letters, if followed by the youth, would lead them past a thousand snares. As I read, I  smiled and wept, and prayed in my heart, 'O God, protect my brothers, my sisters, my wife, and my parents.'" Wilford's affection for his family and relatives was strong and beautiful.

From Colebrook he proceeded to Avon. "There I visited," he wrote, "many of my former neighbors, and my relatives, also the grave of my mother, Beulah Woodruff, who died June 11th, 1808, when she was twenty-six years of age. The following verse was upon her tombstone:

  'A pleasing form, a generous heart,
  A good companion, just without art;
  Just in her dealings, faithful to her friend,
  Beloved through life, lamented in the end.'

"At the close of the day I walked six miles to Farmington, where my father, Aphek Woodruff, was living, and I had the happy privilege of once more meeting him and my stepmother, whom I had not seen for seven years. They greeted me with great kindness. It was a happy meeting. After visiting with my father for a day or two, I returned to Avon, where most of my relatives lived, and held meetings with them. On the 12th of June, 1837, I baptized my uncle, Ozem Woodruff, his wife, Hannah, and their son, John, and we rejoiced together; for this was in fulfillment of a dream I had in 1818, when I was eleven years of age.

"On the 15th of July I had an appointment to preach at the house of my uncle, Adna Hart. While there I had the happy privilege of meeting with my wife Phoebe W. Woodruff, who had come from Kirtland to meet me and accompany me to her father's home in Scarboro, Maine. Those who had assembled to hear me preach were relatives, neighbors, and former friends. After meeting, we returned to Farmington, to my father's home, where I spent the night with my father, stepmother, sister, and wife. Elder Hale was also with us.

"On the 19th of July, Elder Hale left us to go to his friends in New Rowley, Massachusetts. The same evening I held a meeting in the Methodist meetinghouse in the town of Farmington. I had a large congregation of citizens with whom I  had been acquainted from my youth. My parents, wife, and sister attended the meeting. The congregation seemed satisfied with the doctrines I taught, and requested me to hold another meeting; but I felt anxious to continue my journey, and on the 20th of July I parted from father, stepmother, and sister, and, with my wife, took stage for Hartford.

"On my arrival there, not having money to pay fare for both of us, I paid my wife's fare to Rowley, Massachusetts, where there was a branch of the Church presided over by Brother Nathaniel Holmes, father of Jonathan and Milton Holmes. I journeyed on foot. The first day I walked fifty-two miles, the second day forty-eight, and the third day thirty-six miles, arriving at Rowley at 2 o'clock, having made the one hundred and thirty-six miles in a little over two and a half days. On the second day, when within a mile or two of my stopping place, I felt so weary and worn-out that every step was made with painful effort. Just then a gentleman came dashing along in his carriage. As he came up I prayed to the Lord that he would invite me to ride. Instead of doing this, he went by with great speed until about ten rods ahead, when his horse, without being spoken to, or reined up, and for some cause unknown to the driver, came to a sudden stop. It appeared as if a barrier, unseen by others, stood in his way. Instantly the gentleman turned and asked me to ride. The invitation I accepted gladly, and we sped on our way.

"I spent eight days at New Rowley, holding meeting and visiting with the Saints, including the Holmes family, and left there on the 1st of August. On the 8th of August, in company with my wife and Elder Hale, I visited my wife's father, Ezra Carter, and his family in Scarboro, Maine, it being the first time I had ever seen any of her relatives.

"We were received very kindly. My wife had been absent from her father's home about one year. I remained eight days with Father Carter, and household, and one day I went out to sea with Fabian and Ezra Carter, my brothers-in-law, in a boat to fish with hooks. We caught two hundred and fifty cod, haddock, and hake, and we saw four whales, two at a time. It was the first time I had ever seen the kind of animal which is said to have swallowed Jonah.

"On the 18th of August, 1837, I parted with my wife and her father's household, leaving her with them, and, in company with Jonathan H. Hale, started upon the mission that I had in view when I left Kirtland. We walked ten miles to Portland, and took passage on the steamboat, Bangor, which carried us to Owl's Head where we went on board a sloop which landed us on North Fox Island at 2 o'clock a. m. on August 20th.

"The town of Vinal Haven includes both North and South Fox Islands, in latitude 44 north longitude 69 10' west. The population numbered, at the time of my visit, about eighteen hundred. The inhabitants were intelligent and industrious, and hospitable to strangers. They got most of their living and wealth by fishing. The town fitted out over one hundred licensed sailing vessels, besides smaller craft.

"North Fox Island is nine miles long by two miles in width, and has a population of eight hundred. They have a postoffice, one store, a Baptist church and a meetinghouse, four schoolhouses, and a tide grist-mill. The land is rather poor, yet there are some good farms. The products are wheat, barley, oats, potatoes, and grass. The principal timber consists of fir, spruce, hemlock, and birch. Raspberries and gooseberries grow in great abundance, and some upland cranberries are raised. The principal stock are sheep.

"South Fox Island comes as near being without definite form as any spot on earth I ever saw. It would be difficult for any person to describe it. It is about ten miles in length by five in width, and is a mass of rocks, formed into shelves, hills, and valleys, and cut up into necks and points to make room for the coves and harbors that run into the island. The population is one thousand. The inhabitants get their living entirely by fishing. There is no chance for farming upon the island. There are a few garden patches which are cultivated at great expense. Some few sheep are raised there. Many of the inhabitants fish in the vicinity of Newfoundland, and bring their fish home, where they cure them on flakes and prepare them for the market. They supply the market with great quantities of cod, mackerel, and boxed herring. Upon this island there are two stores, three tide mills, six schoolhouses, and a small branch of the Methodist church presided over by a priest. What timber there is upon this  island, such as pine, fir, spruce, hemlock, and birch, and likewise whortleberries, raspberries, and gooseberries, grow mostly out of the cracks in the rocks.

"Great quantities of fish in almost endless variety inhabit the coves and harbors around the islands. The whale, blackfish, shark, ground-shark, pilot-fish, horse-mackerel, sturgeon, salmon, halibut, cod, polleck, tom-cod, hake, haddock, mackerel, shad-bass, alewife, herring, pohagen, dolphin, whiting, frost-fish, flounders, smelt, skate, shrimp, skid, cusk, blueback, scallop, dog-fish, mutton-fish, lumpfish, squid, five-fingers, monkfish, horse-fish, sun-fish, sword-fish, thrasher, cat-fish, scuppog, tootog, eye-fish, cunner, ling, also the eel, lobster, clam, mussel, periwinkle, porpoise, seal, etc., are found.

"I have given a brief description of Vinal Haven. It was quite dark when we landed, without a farthing of money. We made our way over the rocks and through the cedars the best we could until we found a house. We rapped at the door. A woman put her head out of the window and asked who we were and what was wanted. I told her we were two strangers, and wanted a bed to lie down upon till morning. She let us in and gave us a bed. We slept until quite late, it being Sunday morning.

"When we came out and took breakfast it was nearly noon. I asked her what she charged for our accomodation. She replied that we were welcome. I then asked her if there were any minister or church on the island. She informed us that there was a Baptist minister, named Newton, who had a congregation and a meetinghouse about five miles from there.

"We thanked her for her kindness, walked to the meetinghouse, and stepped inside the doorway. We stood there until a deacon came to the door. I asked him to tell the minister in the pulpit that there were two servants of God at the door, and that they had a message to give to the people and wished the privilege of delivering it. He sent for us to come to the pulpit, so we walked through the congregation with our valises and took a seat by the side of the minister, who was about to speak as we came to the door. He arose and delivered his discourse to the people, occupying about half an hour. When he closed he asked me what my wish was. I told him we wished to speak to the people at any hour that would suit his or their convenience; so he gave notice that there were two strangers present who would speak to the people at 5 o'clock that evening.

"We were quite a source of wonderment to the people, as they had no idea who we were. Mr. Newton asked us home to tea with him, and we gladly accepted the invitation. When we arrived at his house, I opened my valise and took out the Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, laid them upon the table, and took my seat. Mr. Newton took up the books and looked at them, but said nothing. I then inquired if there were any schoolhouses upon the island, and if so, whether they were free to preach in. He answered that there were four, numbered respectively from one to four, and that they were free. Mr. Newton and family accompanied us to the meeting-house, where we met a large congregation, none of whom knew who we were or anything about our profession, except the minister.

"Elder Hale and I went to the stand, and I arose with peculiar feelings and addressed the congregation for one hour, taking for my text Galatians 1:8, 9. This was the first time that I, or any other elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, had (to my knowledge) attempted to preach the fulness of the gospel and the Book of Mormon to the inhabitants of any island of the sea. I had much liberty in speaking, and informed the people that the Lord had raised up a prophet and organized His Church as in the days of Christ and the ancient apostles, with prophets, apostles, and the gifts as anciently, and that he had brought forth the Book of Mormon. At the close of my remarks Elder Hale bore testimony. I gave liberty for any one to speak who might wish to do so. As no one responded, I announced that we would hold meetings the next four evenings at the schoolhouses, beginning at No. 1.

"During the first thirteen days of our sojourn upon the island, we preached seventeen discourses, being invited by the people to tarry with them. I left a copy of the Doctrine and Covenants with Mr. Newton for his perusal. He read it, and the spirit of God bore testimony to him of its truth. He pondered over it for days, and walked his room until midnight trying to decide whether to receive or reject it. He and his family attended about a dozen of my first meetings, and then he made up his mind, contrary to the dictation of the spirit of God to him, to reject the  testimony and come out against me. However, we commenced baptizing his flock. The first two we baptized were a sea-captain, by the name of Justin Eames, and his wife. Brother Jonathan H. Hale went down into the sea on the 3rd of September, and baptized them; these were the first baptisms performed by proper authority upon any of the islands of the sea (to my knowledge) in this dispensation.

"Before we left Kirtland some of the leading apostates there had tried to discourage Brother Hale about going on his mission, telling him he never would baptize anyone, and had better remain at home. When Captain Eames offered himself for baptism, I asked Brother Hale to baptize him, and prove those men to be false prophets, which he did. On the following Sabbath I baptized Justin Eames' brother, Ebenezer Eames, another sea-captain, and a young lady.

"Mr. Newton, the Baptist minister, now commenced a war against us, and sent to the South Island for a Mr. Douglass, a Methodist minister, with whom he had been at variance for years, to come over and help him put down 'Mormonism.' Mr. Douglass came over and they got together as many people as they could, and held a conference. He railed against Joseph, the Prophet, and the Book of Mormon, and taking that book in his hand, with outstretched arm, declared that he feared none of the judgments of God that would come upon him for rejecting it as the word of God. (I never heard what his sentiments upon this subject were at the end of his term of fourteen years' imprisonment in the Thomaston penitentiary, for an outrage upon his daughter. The judgment was given upon the testimony of his wife and daughter).

"I was present and heard Mr. Douglass' speech upon this occasion, and took minutes of it. When he closed I arose and informed the people that I would meet them the next Sunday in the meeting-house and answer Mr. Douglass; and I wished him, as well as the people, to be present. I informed the people that Mr. Douglass had made many false statements against Joseph Smith and the Latter-day Saints, with whom he had no acquaintance; and he had misquoted much Scripture, all of which I would correct.

"We continued to baptize the people on North Island until we baptized every person who owned an interest in the Baptist meeting-house. I then followed Mr. Douglas home to South Island, and preached the gospel to the members of his church, and baptized nearly all of them.

"The excitement became great on both islands, and on Sunday, the 17th of September, I met a large assembly from both islands, and took up the same subject that Mr. Douglass had dwelt upon in his remarks against the Book of Mormon and our principles. I spoke two and a half hours, and answered every objection against the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith, or our principles. I had good attention, and the people seemed satisfied. At the close of the meeting Elder Hale administered the ordinance of baptism.

"Mr. Newton, in order to save his cause, went to the mainland, brought over several ministers, and held a protracted meeting. They hoped by this to stop the work of God, but all to no avail; for all the people would attend our meetings and receive the word of God, and we continued to baptize. We visited the homes of most of the inhabitants.

"Upon one occasion, while standing upon Mr. Carver's farm, on the east end of North Island, we counted fifty-five islands in that region, most of which were not inhabited. We also saw twenty ships under sail at the same time. We did not lack for food while upon the island, for if we did not wish to trouble our friends for a dinner, we had only to borrow a spade or a hoe and a kettle, and go to the beach and dig a peck of clams. These, when boiled, make a delicious meal, of which we often availed ourselves.

"One day Elder Hale and I ascended to the top of a high granite rock on South Island for prayer and supplication. We sat down under the shade of a pine tree which grew out of a fissure in the rocks, and Elder Hale read the sixteenth chapter of Jeremiah, where mention is made of the hunters and fishers that God would send in the last days to gather Israel. We were, indeed, upon an island of the sea, standing upon a rock where we could survey the gallant ships, and also the islands which were as full of rocks, ledges, and caves as any part of the earth. And what had brought us here? To search out the blood of Ephraim, the honest and meek of the earth, and gather them from these  islands, rocks, holes, and caves of the earth unto Zion. We prayed, and rejoiced together. The spirit of God rested upon us. We spoke of Christ and the ancient prophets and apostles in Jerusalem; of Nephi, Alma, Mormon, Moroni, in America; of Joseph, Hyrum, Oliver, and the apostles in our own day; and we rejoiced that we were upon the islands of the sea searching out the blood of Israel. While filled with these meditations and with the spirit of God, we fell upon our knees and gave thanks to the God of heaven, and felt to pray for all Israel. After spending most of the day in praise and thanksgiving, we descended to the settlement and held a meeting with the people.

"On the 6th of September we called upon Captain Benjamin Coombs, and visited his flakes, where he had one thousand quintals of codfish drying for the market. They had been caught mostly in the neighborhood of Newfoundland. While we were passing Carvey's Wharf, our attention was called to a large school of mackerel playing by the side of the warf. Several men were pitching them out with hooks. We also caught what we wanted and went on our way.

"We continued to labor, to preach, and to baptize. We organized a branch of the Church upon each island. Finally, on the 2nd of October, we parted with the Saints on North Island to return to Scarboro for a short time. We walked from Thomaston to Bath, a distance of forty-six miles in one day, and at the latter place attended a Baptist convention. I also preached there in the evening to a large congregation, and the people gave good attention and wished to learn more about our doctrines. On the following day we walked thirty-six miles to Portland, and the next day to Scarboro. There I again met my wife and her father's family.

"The time had come for me to give the parting hand to Brother Jonathan H. Hale. During the season we traveled over two thousand miles together, united in heart and spirit. He felt it his duty to return to his family in Kirtland, but duty called me to return to my field of labor upon the islands. On the 9th of October I accompanied Brother Hale one mile on his journey. We retired to a grove and knelt down and prayed together, and had a good time; after commending each other to God, we parted, he to return to Kirtland, and I to the Fox Islands.

"I spent fourteen days visiting the Saints and friends, and holding meetings among them. On the 28th of October I took leave of Father Carter and family, and, in company with my wife, rode to Portland, to the home of my brother-in-law, Ezra Carter. A severe storm arose, so we could not go to sea until November 1st, when we took steamer to Owl's Head, carriage to Thomaston, and sloop to Fox Islands."
