BRITISH MISSION, 1840-41.

Rapid Increase of the Church in Great Britain.--Mysterious Spirit Personage Attempts to Strangle Wilford Woodruff, and Wounds Him Severely.--He Is Relieved and Healed by Three Heavenly Visitors.--First Placard of the Church Posted in London.--Death of Wilford's Daughter.--Difficult Missionary Work in and around London.--Arrival of Lorenzo Snow To Take Charge of the British Mission.--All of the Twelve Called Home.--Attending Various Conferences.--Springing of the Spaulding Story.--Wilford Bids Farewell to the Saints in Fields Where He Had Labored.--General Conference of the British Mission, and Only Occasion of the Twelve Apostles Acting as a Quorum in a Foreign Land.--Wilford's Departure for Home, and Arrival at Nauvoo.--Made a Member of the Nauvoo City Council.

A general conference of the British Mission was held at Manchester, England, on the 6th of October, 1840, at which there were present six of the Twelve Apostles--Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Orson Pratt, George A. Smith, and Wilford Woodruff. The presiding officers in the mission represented twenty-seven conferences, besides other churches or branches not yet included in organized conferences. The Church membership in Great Britain was given as 3,621, being an increase of 1,113 members since the conference held the April previous. On the evening of October 7th, the first discussion of any note of Mormonism, held in Great Britain, took place at Manchester, between Elder Alfred Cordon and a minister of one of the denominations whom Elder Woodruff does not name. It was attended by the members of the Twelve then in England. The subject under discussion was the Book of Mormon; and although the view of the Latter-day Saints was upheld therein by an elder of less prominence than one of the Apostles, the result evidently was very satisfactory to the Saints, and their cause received further favorable impression in the minds of a great majority of the fifteen hundred persons present on the occasion.

"I left Manchester on the 14th of October," writes Wilford Woodruff, "to return to my labors in London; and on my way, with Elder Alfred Cordon, I visited the Staffordshire Potteries and Birmingham. On the 17th I arrived in London, where I found Elder George A. Smith, and we were glad to meet each other again. We hired lodgings, board, and sitting-room at No. 40 Ironmonger Row, St. Luke's. Everything was costly, and we found that with the greatest economy we could not do with much less than a pound per week each. What few Saints there were in London were very poor, and unable to assist us. Most of the means used in my labors in London was supplied by my converts in Herefordshire.

"The prospect in London at that time was the darkest it had ever been in since entering the vineyard; but the Lord was with us, and we were not discouraged. On Sunday we met with the Saints three times at Brother Corner's, read the Book of Mormon, gave instruction, and broke bread unto them. We had a good time, though there were only about half a dozen present. I felt the spirit bear testimony that there would be a work done in London.

"Having retired to rest in good season, I fell asleep and slept until midnight, when I awoke and meditated upon the things of God until 3 o'clock in the morning; and, while forming a determination to warn the people in London and by the assistance and inspiration of God to overcome the power of darkness, a person appeared to me, whom I consider was the prince of darkness. He made war upon me, and attempted to take my life. As he was about to overcome me I prayed to the Father, in the name of Jesus Christ, for help. I then had power over him and he left me, though I was much wounded. Afterwards three persons dressed in white came to me and prayed with me, and I was healed immediately of all my wounds, and delivered of all my troubles.

"During the following week we visited the British Museum and other notable places, also attended a Wesleyan mission meeting over which the Lord Mayor of London presided. While in the performance of our missionary labors we circulated and posted handbills. The following is a copy of the first placard of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints posted in England's great metropolis: '"He that judgeth a matter before he  heareth it is not wise." The Latter-day Saints meet for public worship at Mr. J. Barrett's Academy, 57 King's Square, Goswell Road (entrance door in President Street) every Sabbath at 3, and half-past 6 o'clock p. m.; also on Tuesday and Thursday evenings each week, at 8 o'clock. Lectures will be delivered by Elders Woodruff and Smith (late from America), who respectfully invite the citizens of London to attend. The first principles of the Everlasting Gospel in its fulness; the gathering of Israel; the second coming of the Savior; and "the restitution of all things" spoken of by all the holy prophets, will be among the subjects discussed. The Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star, published monthly, and other publications, can be had at 52 Ironmonger Row, St. Luke's. (City Press, Long Lane, Doudney & Scryngour.)'

"The following Sunday, at 3 o'clock, we preached for the first time in Barrett's Academy. There were present about fifty persons to whom I preached, and to whom Elder Smith preached in the evening; but it was the most difficult task I had ever found to awaken in the people an interest on the subject. There was so much going on in this great modern Babylon to draw the attention of the people, that it seemed to require almost the trumpet blast from heaven to awaken the attention of the inhabitants to our proclamation of the restoration of the fulness of the gospel. We were there like the apostles of old, without purse or scrip, to warn the city of London, where we had to pay high prices for everything we required, and to pay for a place to preach in; we were at this time about out of money, but still we felt to trust in God. Next day after this meeting, I received a package of letters from America, one from my wife announcing the death of my little daughter Sarah Emma.

"November 1st I preached at the Academy in the afternoon to about thirty, and in the evening to about fifty. We broke bread unto the Saints, and this evening there seemed to be some interest manifested by inquiry about the work. We preached again on the following Sunday. During the week we received counsel from our brethren of the Twelve for George A. Smith to go immediately to the Potteries, and spend his time with the churches there. After his departure I felt very lonely for several days, but Elder William Pitt came from Dymock  and labored with me a short time, after which he took a mission to Ipswich.

"Brother Hulme, a captain of one of the 'Pickford's Boats' on the London Canal, was present at my next preaching after the departure of Elder Pitt, and with him were two of his hands whom he had baptized. On the following day I dined with him and with the two brethren on board their boat.

"On the afternoon and evening of Sunday, the 22nd of October, I held a public meeting at the Academy, when four offered themselves for baptism; and on the following Sunday I again preached twice, and baptized three more applicants. These were the first fruits of my labors in London. Next day I took a very interesting walk with Dr. Wm. Copeland, through every part of the College of Surgeons at Lincoln's Inn Fields, and on my return home was joined by Elders Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, who had come to spend a week or two in London. This was the first time President Brigham Young was in the metropolis of England. We met for service on Wednesday evening, at the Academy, when Brother Brigham preached, followed by Brother Heber. We had a good time.

"In company with Presidents Young and Kimball, on the 3rd of December, I visited the Tower of London, without seeing which, the traveler would lose a capital page in the history of his travels in Europe. During the week we also visited St. Paul's, Buckingham Palace, Westminster Abbey, the Queen's stables, and many other noted sights of London.

"Sunday we held a public meeting at the Academy, at which there were about fifty present. Brother Kimball preached. An Independent minister invited me home to take tea with him. I accepted his invitation, had an interesting time, and preached the gospel to him. He received my testimony and offered me his chapel, which held eight hundred people. He said he thought he would be baptized, and would try and get his society to do the same. We met again in the evening, and had more at our meeting than ever before. Brother Brigham Young preached, and was followed by Brothers Kimball, Williams, Corner, Hulme, and myself. We had a very interesting time, and one person offered himself for baptism. There were present some of the Aitkenites, one of whom purchased a hymn book. They wished  us to call upon them, and thought they would be baptized. We then met at Father Corner's, and communed with the Saints and had a good time. I rejoiced at the prospect which was opening before us, for we had labored a long time and the work had gone slow; but now a wide opening was being made to roll on the work of the Lord in the metropolis of England.

"Having spent about ten days in London, President Young left for Cheltenham. On the same day I visited Mr. James Albion, a minister of the Independent order, who, with his household, believed our doctrine, and on the Sunday we found more than ever an interest being awakened in London; our prayer meeting the next evening was attended by the Reverend James Albion, who received our testimony. We walked home with him, and found his household growing in the faith and ready for the work of the Lord.

"Two days after, in the evening, we baptized four persons--Mr. and Mrs. Morgan, with whom we lodged, Christopher Smith, their apprentice, and Henry Corner, Jun. Dr. Copeland spent the afternoon of the following day with us; he received our testimony, and in the evening we preached at our meeting place.

"I visited Rev. James Albion several times, and gave him an account of the rise and progress of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He believed in our mission and offered me his chapel, which would seat about a thousand persons. On Sunday morning we accompanied our reverend friend and convert to his chapel, and were introduced to the committee, one of whom was a preacher who had traveled much in Russia and other parts of the world. At the close of the meeting the Rev. James Albion gave out an appointment for us to preach on the next Sabbath evening. In the afternoon we met with the Saints, had a full house, and confirmed four new members; in the evening we preached again, and a good feeling prevailed. After meeting, the Rev. James Albion called upon us at our room and told us that he had given out our appointment to preach in his chapel; he also had informed his congregation that he was a Latter-day Saint, and would be baptized and join our Church, and that they need not longer consider him a member of their body unless they joined the Saints with him. He told us this made a division among the  committee; some were for going with him, and some were against following their pastor into the true fold, which he had found.

"On the following Sunday evening we preached, by the appointment of its minister, in the Independent chapel, to the largest congregation we had ever before addressed in London. There were present priests and people of many denominations. I addressed them for the space of about one hour. A Wesleyan minister arose and opposed me; this had a good effect, for the congregation, seeing the spirit he was of, turned against him, and the committee refused him permission to speak there again. I was much bound by the opposing spirit; still the conduct of the enemy gave us friends. The next evening we attended what was said to be the largest temperance meeting ever held in London; and the next two days brought us to the close of the year.

"I give here a synopsis of my travels and labors in 1840: places visited or labored in--Liverpool, Preston, Manchester, Newcastle, Tunstall, Burslem, Hanley, Stoke, Longton, Stafford, Wolverhampton, Birmingham, Worcester, Hereford, Ledbury, Malvern Hill, Gloucester, Cheltenham, Oxford, London. I traveled 4,469 miles, held 230 meetings, established 53 places for preaching, and planted 47 churches and jointly organized them. These churches chiefly comprised the two conferences raised up in Herefordshire, consisting of about 1,500 Saints, 28 elders, 110 priests, 24 teachers, and 10 deacons. The baptisms of the year were 336 persons under my own hands, and I assisted at the baptism of 86 others. I baptized 57 preachers, mostly those connected with the United Brethren, also two clerks of the Church of England. I confirmed 420 members, and assisted in confirming 50 others; ordained 18 elders, 97 priests, 34 teachers, and one deacon; blessed 120 children, and administered to 120 sick, by prayer, anointing and the laying on of hands, and in many instances the sick were healed, and devils cast out. I assisted in procuring £1,000 for the publication of 3,000 copies of the Hymn Book, 5,000 copies of the Book of Mormon, for the printing of the Millennial Star, and to assist 200 Saints to emigrate to Nauvoo. I wrote 200 letters, and received 112.

"The new year, 1841," continues Wilford Woodruff, "found Elder Kimball and myself in the metropolis of England, in the enjoyment  of good health. We celebrated New Year's day by baptizing two persons into the fold of Christ. The Church in London now numbered 21 members. The next Sunday we held a meeting in the Academy, confirmed two, and partook of the Sacrament. During the week I baptized the daughter of the Rev. James Albion; the day after this, Elder Kimball started for Woolwich to break new ground. On Sunday he preached there for the first time, when four persons offered themselves for baptism. Next day they came to London, and we immediately repaired to our private bath in Tabernacle Square, where Elder Kimball baptized five persons, one of whom was Dr. Wm. Copeland. This was indeed an interesting occasion, and we felt thankful to God to see the cloud beginning to break; for we had struggled hard to do the little which had been done.

"On the 15th of the month we baptized three more of Brother Morgan's household, and on the following Sunday I preached to a full house and to many new hearers. Several offered themselves for baptism; during the week there had been seven souls added to the Church.

"Next day Elder Kimball received a letter from President Young, who wished us to be ready early in April to set sail for home. Several days later, I baptized the Rev. James Albion and Mr. Hender, and before the close of January I baptized three others into the Church. I visited Greenwich and Woodwich, where Elder Kimball had raised up a small branch of the Church, then I returned to London with Elder Kimball. On Sunday we communed with the Saints, and in the evening we both preached to a large congregation.

"On the 8th of February, having a package of twenty Books of Mormon and two dozen Hymn Books, Heber C. Kimball and I went to Stationer's Hall and secured the copyright of the Book of Mormon in the name of Joseph Smith, Jun. We left five copies of the book, and paid three shillings for the copyright. In the evening we baptized four persons, one of whom was the wife of the Rev. James Albion, who already had received the gospel.

"Elder Brigham Young, per letter, informed us of the large emigration of that season. There were to go on one ship 235, and on another 100. To the reader acquainted with the immense emigration  of the Saints in later years, the fact that we considered three or four hundred as a large emigration will be noteworthy.

"Elder Lorenzo Snow arrived in London on February 11, to take charge of the Church after our departure. I was truly glad once more to greet him, for I had not seen him since 1837. On the same day Elder William Pitt also arrived at our lodgings, and we had an interesting meeting in the evening. Brother Snow preached, and Elder Kimball and myself followed him; the next day Brothers Heber and Lorenzo went to Woolwich to give impetus to the work of God in that important town.

"I give here the minutes of the first London conference, held at the Academy, 57 King's Square, Goswell Road, February 14, 1841: 'There were present of officers of the Church, Elders H. C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, and Wm. Pitt, besides four priests. The meeting was called to order by Elder H. C. Kimball, at 2 o'clock p. m., Sunday, the 14th of February, 1841, when it was moved by Elder Kimball and seconded by Elder Pitt that Wilford Woodruff be the president of the conference. Moved by Elder Kimball and seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Dr. Wm. Copeland be the clerk. Carried unanimously. The meeting was then opened by singing, and prayer by Elder Kimball. The president then called for the representation of the branches of the London conference. The church at Bedford was represented by Priest Robert Williams, containing 42 members and one priest; seven removed, and two dead. The church at Ipswich, represented by Elder Wm. Pitt, consisted of 12 members, one elder, one priest, and one teacher. The church at Woolwich, represented by Priest John Griffith, consisted of six members and one priest. The church at London, represented by H. C. Kimball, consisted of 46 members, one elder and two priests; excellent prospect of continued increase. Moved and seconded by Elders Kimball and Woodruff, that James Albion be ordained an Elder; moved and seconded by Elders Kimball and Snow, that Thomas Barnes be ordained a teacher; moved and seconded by Elders Kimball  and Pitt, that Robert Williams be ordained an elder to oversee the church at Bedford; moved and seconded by Elders Robert Williams and Wm. Pitt that Wm. Smith, at Bedford, be ordained a priest; moved and seconded by Elders Kimball and Pitt that Richard Bates be ordained a priest in the Woolwich branch; moved and seconded by Elders Robert Williams and Pitt that John Sheffield be ordained a teacher at Bedford; moved and seconded by Elder Kimball and Brother Griffith that Brother A. Painter be ordained a teacher at Woolwich. These motions were carried unanimously, and those present were ordained under the hands of Elders Kimball, Woodruff, and Snow. Afterward, Elder Kimball moved, and Elder Woodruff seconded, that Elder Lorenzo Snow be appointed president of this conference, and to take the superintendency of the Church in London. Much valuable instruction was given by Elders Kimball and Woodruff in relation to the duties of official members, after which it was moved by Elder Kimball and seconded by Elder Snow that this conference be adjourned till Sunday, the 16th day of May, 1841; after which the conference closed. Wilford Woodruff, president; Dr. Wm. Copeland, clerk.'

"During this conference meeting, we also broke bread with the Saints, and confirmed four new members. At half past six in the evening we met again, and had the largest congregation which had assembled at our preaching place. One person came forward for baptism. This was a day which we had desired long to see; for we had labored exceedingly hard to establish a church in London, and at times it seemed as though we would have to give it up; but by holding on to the work of our Divine Master and claiming the promises of God we were now to leave an established London conference with a prosperous church planted in the metropolis, under the care of our beloved brother, Lorenzo Snow.

"Brother Kimball, on the 15th, received a letter from his wife, informing us that the Prophet Joseph had written for the Twelve to come home immediately. At this time there was a prospect of war between America and England, over the imprisonment of McCloud, a British officer, by the state of New York, and also over the northeastern boundary question. In consequence of this prospect, the Prophet Joseph wrote for the Twelve to come home, after first thoroughly organizing the British mission and calling out a number of native elders to send in every direction throughout Great Britain.

"I spent the 25th of February in visiting the Saints previous  to my departure, and in the evening preached in London for the last time before my return to Nauvoo. Next day I parted from Lorenzo Snow and the London Saints, and took train for Bristol, to visit the branch which had been raised up there by my convert, Elder Thomas Kington, who, it will be remembered, was the superintendent of the Frome's Hill circuit of United Brethren. Leaving Bristol, I visited the churches which I had raised up, holding conferences and bidding farewell to the Saints, hundreds of whom I myself had baptized.

"When I arrived at Monmouth I found that Elder James Morgan awaited my coming, and had given out an appointment for me to preach in the town at 7 o'clock, at the house of Robert Davis. There was a crowded meeting, and many were unable to get into the house. Four offered themselves for baptism. The spirit witnessed to me that there would be many embrace the gospel in Monmouthshire, and I said, 'the harvest is great and the laborers few.' I arose in the morning, refreshed by sleep, and having taken breakfast with Mr. Matton, I walked ten miles through mud and water, in a driving March rainstorm, to Sister Mary Morgan's, at Little Garway, where I found a pleasant family of the Saints. We were drenched with rain, but found a good fire, spent the day comfortably, and in the evening I had an interesting interview with Elder Littlewood; the next day I remained at Sister Morgan's, reading with much interest the history of Rome, and in the evening I met the officers of the Church there in council, and had a good time. Sunday morning I preached at the house of Brother Thomas Rood, and in the evening at the Kitchen, upon the Book of Mormon, and had the place full.

"On March 8, 1841, I met with the Garway conference, at the Kitchen. Elder Levi Richards was chosen president, and Elder James Morgan, clerk. There were present one of the quorum of the Twelve, one high priest, seven elders, eleven priests, two teachers, and one deacon. The meeting opened with prayer by Elder Woodruff, after which the churches were represented as follows: members 134, elders 4, priests 5, teachers 3, deacons 1. After the representation, it was moved that John Needham be ordained an elder, William Morris, priest, and Thomas Rough, teacher. These were ordained under the hands of Elders Woodruff and Richards. The meeting adjourned till 3 o'clock, and one person was baptized. In the afternoon, Elder Levi Richards spoke and I followed him. After meeting, the Saints contributed one pound sterling to help me, and I sold them three Books of Mormon and fifty addresses to the citizens of London. I then walked five miles with Brother Richards, to Brother Holley's, and spent the night. This was the first time I had seen Brother Levi for about two years.

"Next day, in company of Elders Levi Richards and Thomas Pitt, I walked to the city of Hereford, where Elder Ray and others had been preaching. On Sunday a preacher arose before two or three thousand people in the market house and informed the multitude that he had a fresh letter direct from America, showing the origin of the Book of Mormon. So he read the old Spaulding story. When he got through, Elder Levi Richards arose and informed the people that instead of its being a new story it had been published for seven years throughout the United States and England. This caused a great uproar, for while some were for driving the man out of the place for lying, others were crowding around Elders Richards and Ray to hear them preach. The crowd, however, was so excited that the elders left the ground with hundreds following them. There never was a time when the people were so much stirred up and so eager to hear the Latter-day Saints as at the present, and it was expected that we should not get through the city without having crowds around us. We did, however, and had a view of Hereford cathedral as we passed along and reached Sister Bufton's.

"There was at this time a small branch of the Church at Hereford, numbering seven members. We parted from Brother Pitt at Hereford, and continued to Lugwardine, where I met with the church there for the last time, and preached from the 24th chapter of Isaiah. On the morrow I walked to Shucknell Hill and had an interesting meeting with the Saints and preached upon the gathering to Zion and Jerusalem. It was my last meeting with them, and I bade them farewell. Next day I walked to Standley Hill and dined with Brother Ockey, whom I was truly glad to see once more. We went together through Standley Hill and called upon the Saints. Six months had passed since I had  parted from the churches in this region, but now I was again in the field where the Lord by His blessing and the power of the Holy Ghost had made my labors so abundantly fruitful. Next day I went to Greenway and preached, blessed a child, confirmed a member, and administered the ordinance of the gospel to five sick persons; and on the morrow continued to Turkey Hill. There, on the Sunday, I communed with the Saints and preached to a large congregation upon the gathering. I found the Saints in the region around very desirous to gather to the body of the Church, but they were poor and had not the means to emigrate to America.

"On the 15th day of March, 1841, the Bran Green and Gadfield Elm conference again assembled, this time at Gadfield Elm chapel, when the meeting was called to order by Elder Woodruff. There were present, one of the quorum of the Twelve Apostles, one high priest, ten elders, twenty-one priests, six teachers, and one deacon, besides the congregation of the Saints; there were represented, 19 churches, 367 members, 8 elders, 33 priests, 11 teachers, 1 deacon; removed, 41; died, 1; expelled, 2. Wilford Woodruff was president, and John Hill, clerk of the conference.

"We had a very interesting time at the conference. There was a large assembly of the Saints. It was the last time that I could attend in that part of my old and beloved field of labor during my present mission in England; and whether or not I should ever again meet there in a conference assembly of Saints was one of the secrets of my future life for time to reveal. We had held our meeting without disturbance from some mobocrats who were present, for these were kept quiet by police in attendance, in disguise.

"No sooner had the meeting closed than multitudes of the Saints crowded around me, and hands were presented on every side, to bid me farewell. Many called for me to bless them before I departed; others cried out, 'Lay hands upon me and heal me before you go.' One came with, 'Brother Woodruff. I am turned out of doors for my religion; what shall I do?' Another with, 'I am ready to go to Zion, but my wife won't go with me; shall I leave her, to gather with the Saints?' A wife in turn says, 'My husband beat me and turned me out of doors because I was baptized. I have money enough to carry me and the children to Zion; will you let me go without him?' 'Brother Woodruff, my mother is over eighty years of age and has willed me sixty pounds at her death, but will not emigrate with me; must I stay for her to die, or leave her now to go with the Saints?' One said, 'I have sold my little place and shall have thirty pounds tomorrow, but must go out into the street. I have not enough to carry my family to America; can you help me to a few pounds, or tell me what to do?' An elder cried out, 'How much longer must I preach in England before you will let me go to America?' From others of the Saints came such as this: 'Brother Woodruff, will you come and preach in Cheltenham?' 'My head is in great pain, will you heal me?' 'I want you to consecrate this bottle of oil before you go.' 'Will you write to me?' 'I have been waiting a long time to get a chance to speak to you; good-bye, remember me to Mrs. Woodruff, good-bye; God bless you!' Thus for more than an hour after the close of the meeting I was hailed with the affectionate outbursts and adieus, and a host of perplexities, of these Saints, who crowded around me as children around their father.

"Many of the Saints parted from me in tears, and many followed me to Turkey Hill, where I spent the night and they filled the house until a late hour, begging counsel and instruction of me. One of these was a Baptist minister who had just been baptized into the Church. On the morrow, in company with Elder Needham, I walked to Keysend Street, where I preached to a crowded congregation of Saints, and thence continued to Colwall. There I met with a large congregation of Saints, and preached to them upon the gathering.

"Next day, with Elder Levi Richards, I walked over to Malvern Hill and called upon Elder Samuel Jones; thence through Great Malvern to Crowcat; I held a meeting at Brother George Brooks's, and had an interesting time with a large number of Saints whom I had baptized about a year before. I went to Dunsclose the day after, visiting many of the Saints by the way, laying hands upon the sick, and blessing and counseling others of the flock. All were happy to see me; for I had baptized most of them when I first opened that field of labor. Next day we traveled to Frome's Hill, and visited the Saints by the way.

"At Frome's Hill I met with the Saints on Sunday morning,  and had a crowded house; in the afternoon we held a meeting at Standley Hill, where I communed with the Church. At the close of the meeting I had a busy time shaking hands with the Saints, and parting from them. Many of them wished me to bless them, and others to heal them. I spent the night with Brother Levi Richards, at Elder Edward Ockey's, and on the morrow we held the Frome's Hill conference at Standley Hill. There were present one of the traveling high council, two high priests, twenty elders, thirty priests, nine teachers, and two deacons. After calling the meeting to order, I moved that Elder Levi Richards preside over the conference, and he was sustained by the meeting. I was chosen clerk. After singing and prayer, the president called upon the officers for the representation of the various branches, which was given as follows: branches, 33; members, 957; elders, 24; priests, 68; teachers, 27; deacons, 8. Robert Gunnery, Edward Phillips, and John Spires were ordained to the office of elder under the hands of Elders Richards, Kington, and myself; Thomas Bishop, to the office of priest; and Wm. Rowley, to the office of deacon. In the afternoon, after speeches from Elders Richards and Kington, I delievered my farewell address, and pronounced the benediction on the conference.

"After the meeting was dismissed, I was almost three hours shaking hands with the Saints, healing the sick, and giving counsel to the multitude which surrounded me, many of whom were in tears when we parted. Nearly fifty came to ask me to take them to Zion, when I had not means to take myself. However, I gave Sister Foxal five pounds to help her and her husband and children to the land of America. She had made every exertion for six months, to save money to gather with the Saints, and had raised thirty pounds. The five pounds I gave to her was a donation from Elder Edward Ockey, who was parting with his substance to help the poor of the Church to gather.

"After bidding the multitude of Saints farewell, I went to Elder Ockey's to spend the night, accompanied by Elders Richards, Kington, and Ray. We had been in the house but a short time when three of Edward Ockey's brothers came in for the purpose of having a contest, because their brother and sister had embraced the gospel and were about to gather with the Saints.  They manifested much wrath against me, and, after conversing with me about three hours, they left the house and we were once more in peace. After conversing together until the third watch of the night, we retired to rest, closing one of the busiest days of my life.

"I arose in the morning, refreshed by sleep, and after conversing several hours with Elders Richards, Kington, Ray, Ockey, and others, I was under the necessity of parting with the Saints in this region. In bidding them farewell, we found in the memories of our associations many ties which bound us together. Among the faithful ones were the Ockeys. Brother Edward Ockey and his sister Ann were of a good and wealthy family. They had many trials to pass through to do the will of God and to gather with the Saints, for their brothers were set against them exceedingly. Brother Edward maintained his integrity like a man of God and was making every preparation to gather with the Saints, but his sister Ann had fears that her brothers would hinder her gathering.

"Having bidden farewell to the Saints of Standley Hill, I walked to Frome's Hill and conversed with the Elders until two o'clock, when I took the parting hand of Elders Richards, Kington, Ray, and others, and, with my carpet bag with about twenty pounds weight in it, walked fifteen miles to Worcester, in four hours. When I arrived there I was so very lame and weary with my heavy load and fast walking that I could scarcely walk at all. I then took rail and arrived in Birmingham at 10 o'clock at night, but was exceedingly lame and weary. I spent the night with Elder James Riley, 24 Park Street.

"I had now fairly ended my Herefordshire mission, and bidden a last farewell to that field of labor where the Lord had blessed me beyond all my expectations. I now left three conferences in the region which I opened one year before, on the 5th of the same month that I left this vineyard, now planted all over with churches, numbering fifteen hundred Saints. The minutes which I have recorded will show at a glance the rise and progress of the churches in Herefordshire, and the regions around.

"On Sunday, the 28th of March, the Staffordshire Conference met, and there were present of the Twelve, George A. Smith and Wilford Woodruff, with 1 high priest, 13 elders, 28 priests, 10  teachers, and 8 deacons. The conference was held in the Magistrate's Assembly Room. At the close of the conference it was voted that 'this conference grant Elders Woodruff and George A. Smith a letter of recommendation manifesting that the Church in this region accept of their labors and consider that they have filled their mission with honor and dignity.'

"We had a very interesting time on this occasion. The conference was held in a place which would contain 800, and it was crowded; but there was perfect order and much good feeling manifested during the day. There was prospect of a continued increase in the Potteries. George A. Smith was the president of the conference, and T. J. Fitcher and O. Shaw, clerks. Next day George A. Smith and myself met the officers in council at the Hanley meeting rooms, and gave such advice as we deemed wisdom; we then took our farewell. On the following day we also parted from the Saints at Burslem, took coach to Manchester, and called upon Parley P. Pratt, 47 Oxford Street; we found him and his family enjoying good health.

"On the 6th of April, 1841, the General Conference of the British Mission was held in Carpenter's Hall, Manchester, at which there were present nine of the quorum of the Twelve; namely, President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, and George A. Smith. The total membership of the British mission at that time was represented as 5,814, and 800 besides had emigrated to America under the transportation arrangements of the Church. At this conference the Twelve blessed and set apart Orson Hyde for his mission to Jerusalem, to which he had been called by the Prophet Joseph. This was the first and only time in this dispensation that the Twelve Apostles sat in conference as a quorum in a foreign land.

"Immediately after the General Conference, those of the Twelve who were about to return home hastened to Liverpool, and embarked for America on the 20th of April, on board of the ship Rochester. Next day, the wind being favorable, the ship weighed anchor. There were on board Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, George A. Smith, Wilford Woodruff, Willard Richards, and John Taylor, of the Twelve,  with Elder Reuben Hedlock and 120 of the British Saints. On our passage across the Atlantic we had some very tempestuous weather and became familiar with 'a storm at sea.' On the 20th of May we landed in New York, and on the next day George A. Smith and myself took up our abode for a few days at Brother Foster's. While there I met my brothers-in-law, Ezra and Ilus Carter, and also Dr. Charles Fabyan, my wife's relative.

"On the 22nd of May, at the house of Brother Foster, in New York, and in the presence of the quorum of the Twelve, I performed the service of marriage between Mr. Edward Ockey and Miss Eliza Brewer, both of them my converts of Castle Frome. This was the first marriage ceremony at which I officiated.

"On the 2nd of June I arrived at Scarboro by stage, and was permitted to embrace my wife, and also my first born son, Wilford, Jr., whom I had not seen before. After two years of separation from my wife, it was indeed a happy reunion. There I stayed with my father-in-law until the 5th of July, and then left for my native place, Farmington, Conn., where I arrived the third day after. While tarrying at my father's house I married my sister Eunice Woodruff to Mr. Dwight Webster. At my sister's marriage there were present between forty and fifty persons, mostly our relatives. This was on the 4th of August, 1841. A few days afterwards my aunt Beulah Hart was baptized into the Church, and on the 18th of the month I bade farewell to my father's house, after a stay of forty-one days. This was a longer visit than I had paid to any of my friends for the past ten years.

"On the 9th September, a little company, consisting of myself, wife, and son, and four others, started on board the boat Sandusky for Albany. Our ultimate destination was Nauvoo, where we arrived on the 5th of the next month. When I left Nauvoo, two years before, there were not more than a dozen houses in the place, but on my return to the city there were several hundred. We passed by the Temple, then building, and had a view of it; we then called at the house of Elder Brigham Young, and there spent the night. Brother Brigham was sick, and Heber
C. Kimball and Willard Richards were with him. We laid hands upon him
and he soon recovered. I saw many of my old friends and acquaintances,  and was informed that others of them were dead. I met with many friends on the day after my return to Nauvoo, and also sat in council with the Twelve, and was happy once more to meet with my quorum. I moved my things to Elder Kimball's. My wife and child were sick. On the 30th of October, 1841, the city council met, and in course of its business I was appointed one of the city council of Nauvoo."
