IN NAUVOO, 1841.

Prophetic Insight.--Teachings of the Prophet.--Baptism for the Dead--Hyrum Kimball.

The life of Wilford Woodruff is a remarkable example of the manner in which those who are pre-eminently qualified as preachers of the gospel are required to fill out a well rounded life of experiences, touching most important phases of human conduct in almost all the walks of life. Had Wilford Woodruff belonged to some religious denomination of his day, it is consistent to suppose that he would have been exclusively a preacher, as he loved to expound the Scriptures and speak of the goodness of God and His wondrous ways. Mormonism, however, made of him both a preacher and a man of affairs, and his service in life covered a wide range of useful activities. He was, in the days of Nauvoo's municipal glory, a member of its city council. The responsibility of such a position at that time when municipal government was little understood was one of special weight.

On the 7th of November, 1841, on the Sabbath day he tells us that he made a call upon the Prophet Joseph and from there went to the home of Brigham Young. Later he attended a meeting of the Saints and listened to an address of a certain elder who was reprimanded by the Prophet Joseph. That reprimand carried with it such prophetic insight into the character of the man who still lives, that the incident is taken from Elder Woodruff's journal as follows: "Brother Joseph rose and reprimanded him as pharisaical and hypocritical, and he was told that he had not edified the people by his two hours' talk. The man's life has ever since been in keeping with this characterization of the Prophet. He aims to be a fellow well met with all denominations. He occasionally visits the Saints, and while with them professes faith in the gospel and claims brotherhood with them. The Prophet then addressed himself to the Saints, told them that if they would not falsely accuse one another, the Lord would not accuse them; and if they had no accusers, they should enter  into the Kingdom of Heaven. He also spoke at some length upon the character of sin and declared that many things which the denominations of that day taught as sins were really not sins at all, that many things were done in the purposes of God to break down superstitions of men and loosen from them the fetters of traditions by which their souls were bound."

The 21st of November, 1841, was a red-letter day in the history of Nauvoo. Elder Woodruff says, "The Twelve met in council at President Brigham Young's home. Afterwards there was a general meeting of the Saints who were addressed by John Taylor and Hyrum Smith. The Twelve then returned to Brigham Young's home and were occupied in counsel until four in the afternoon when they repaired to the baptismal font in the basement of the Nauvoo Temple." Again quoting from Elder Woodruff's journal we read: "It was truly an interesting scene. It was the first font built in this dispensation for the glorious provision in the gospel which provided for the redemption of the dead. It was dedicated by President Joseph Smith and the Twelve. A large congregation assembled to witness the baptism of about forty persons by Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and John Taylor. Elders Willard Richards, George A. Smith, and myself assisted in confirming them. Afterwards I passed the evening with the quorum of the Twelve at the home of Heber
C. Kimball."

Along with these religious duties came the daily responsibilities of the material interests of the Church. At this time the Nauvoo House was in the process of construction. Elder Woodruff had charge of the provision store and through it took an active part in the construction of that important building. During these times, Saints were arriving in considerable numbers from England. Many of them had received the ordinance of baptism at his hands. They needed instruction, encouragement, and the sympathy of a brotherly love. They found in the messenger who had brought the word of the Lord to them as consistent a friend in their new home as he had been when an elder abroad.

On the 25th of November, 1841, about two hundred Saints from New York arrived in Warsaw. Their arrival was in the midst of a heavy snow storm. Elder Woodruff records the work of love at that time in providing for them every comfort that  could be found. He mentions in his journal the names of those whose integrity and love he cherished. Those early friendships were always dear to his memory, and it mattered not to him what station in life a man occupied if he was loyal to God and true to his brethren. He speaks of Kington, Benbow, Ockey, Bruitt, and Pitt.

The words of the Prophet fell upon Elder Woodruff's ears as the voice of Scripture. He puts them in the journal because he believes that some day they will contain enlightenment and guidance for those who faithfully read them. He says about this time that the Prophet spoke of those who complained of him because he did not bring forth more of the word of the Lord. To those who professed to be able to receive more of the word of God than had been given them, he said: "A man might command his son to do a certain thing and before it was done he might for good and sufficient reason require him to do something else. The exercise of parental authority in such a manner is considered quite proper; but if the Lord gives a command and afterward revokes it and commands something else, there are those ready to cry out, 'A false prophet!' Those who will not receive chastisement from a prophet and apostles are often chastised by the Lord with sickness and death. Let not any man publish his own righteousness, others can do that for him. Let him rather confess his sins, and he will then be forgiven and bring forth more and better fruit. The reason we do not have more of the secrets of the Lord revealed unto us is because we do not keep to our own secrets, but reveal them and make our difficulties known even to our enemies. What greater love hath any man than that he will lay down his life for his friends? Why not then stand by them unto death?"

Elder Woodruff's journal containing an account of the utterances of the prominent men of that day clearly indicates the deep anxiety which President Brigham Young felt for the completion of the Temple. His interest in the building was scarcely less than that of the Prophet himself. The responsibility of its completion weighed heavily upon his mind and he gave himself up heart and soul to the construction of that great edifice. In view of the fact that some years later after the Prophet's death the responsibility of its completion and the ordinances to be performed  therein rested most heavily upon him, one can appreciate his heart-felt admonition on the subject when he was constantly urging the Saints before the death of the Prophet.

On Christmas day of 1841 Elder Woodruff says that he and other members of the Twelve visited the home of Hyrum Kimball, who, before they left, presented each of the Twelve with a lot to which he gave them the deed. On the 26th and 27th the Twelve visited the home of the Prophet, and on one of these days Elder Woodruff says in his journal that the Prophet showed him and others for the first time the Urim and Thummim.

During that year the subject of this biography had visited London, Bristol, Liverpool, Manchester, Staffordshire Potteries, Wolverhampton, Birmingham, Worcester, Hereford, Ledbury, Malvern Hill, Gloucester, Cheltenham, Oxford, Woolwich, and Monmouth. In America he visited and preached the gospel in New York, Portland, Boston, Hartford, New Haven, Albany, Buffalo, Detroit, Mackinaw, and Chicago. He held 83 meetings, attended 10 conferences, baptized 21 persons and assisted in the baptism of 18 others, confirmed 46, and ordained 38 persons to offices in the priesthood.
