THE YEARS, 1852, '53, '54.

Discourse of Brigham Young on Sin.--The Descendants of Cain.--Edward Hunter Chosen Presiding Bishop.--Parowan Stake Organized.--David Patten.--Talk on Dancing.--Death of Willard Richards.--Jedediah M. Grant Chosen Counselor to Brigham Young.--Journey South.--Walker, the Indian Chief.--John Smith, Son of Hyrum Smith, Called To Be the Head Patriarch of the Church.--Visit North.--Legislature.--Philosophical Society.

The beginning of the year 1852 found Elder Woodruff actively engaged in the legislative business of the new Territory. There was much to be done. The foundation of a new commonwealth was being laid, and the principles of civil government were emphasized and kept separate from the religious organization. About three years and a half had elapsed since the pioneers entered Salt Lake Valley. In 1852 the census showed that there were all told in Utah, 11,354 souls. Counties were established with proper organizations, and judges appointed for the administration of laws therein.

Elder Woodruff kept in his journals the civil and religious movements of those early days. Extracts from prominent sermons were written, especially those delivered by President Young. The following is a partial extract of a discourse by him on the subject of Sin. "If you sin against God, go to Him for forgiveness, if that sin is not unto death. There is a sin unto death which we are told we need not pray to have forgiven. If you sin against your brother, go to him for forgiveness. Ask forgiveness at the hands of the innocent. If you sin against your family, your parents, your husband, your wife, or your children, seek forgiveness at their hands; for what is done in secret, He will forgive in secret. In seeking forgiveness for sins that are secret, go no farther than is necessary to be forgiven of God. But where sins are committed openly, forgiveness should be sought openly."

The Saints had not forgotten the troubles which their shortcomings and neglect of the things of God had brought upon them in days gone by. The leaders understood very well the necessity  of avoiding the troubles of the past by keeping themselves in harmony with God's will. They knew that sin meant trouble not only for the individual but for the Church. The authorities felt that if the people could be kept from sin there would be love and union and prosperity in the new homes which they were establishing in the Rocky Mountains.

The attitude of the Saints on the question of slavery had been a source of trouble to them in Missouri. There was naturally throughout the United States some interest in the position which the new Territory should take upon that question. In those days the influence of the South was predominant, and the pro-slavery party was asserting itself wherever possible. The lines were drawn more distinctly between the pro and anti-slavery communities. In those days men might have regarded it as good policy to keep friends with the South and the democratic party. To be pronounced for or against slavery was sure to invite the opposition of the North or of the South.

President Young felt it, however, to be his duty to make plain the attitude of the Mormon people in Utah on the subject. In an address to the legislature he said: "The Lord said I will not kill Cain, but I will put a mark upon him, and that mark will be seen upon the face of every negro upon the face of the earth; and it is the decree of God that that mark shall remain upon the seed of Cain until the seed of Abel shall be redeemed, and Cain shall not receive the priesthood, until the time of that redemption. Any man having one drop of the seed of Cain in him cannot receive the priesthood; but the day will come when all that race will be redeemed and possess all the blessings which we now have. I am opposed to the present system of slavery."

Elder Woodruff writes extensively in his journal of the teachings of the President. In one of his discourses the Prophet declares that God has passed through all the trials and experiences that we have, and the Savior likewise. On another occasion, he speaks of the responsibilities of parents; the desirability of a prayerful spirit that they may not only receive the noble spirits from the spirit world, but that they may enjoy the influence of the Holy Ghost which should be the inheritance of every child born into the world.

From a report of the tithing in those days it also appears  that from October 1848 to April 1852, there was paid in, $353,755.69, a creditable showing when the hardships of those times and the limited numbers of Saints are taken into consideration.

It was at this conference, April 1852, that Edward Hunter was chosen and set apart as the Presiding Bishop of the Church. Many people will remember the quaint words and sayings of Edward Hunter. When asked to select his counselors, on that occasion, he arose and said: "I select for my counselors Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball."

On the 23rd of April, 1852, Wilford Woodruff accompanied the First Presidency on a tour through the southern settlements as far south as Cedar City, which they had visited once before. On this trip they organized the Iron Company for the purpose of developing the iron deposits of that region. The rodometer showed the distance from Salt Lake to Cedar via Sanpete Valley to be 314 1/2 miles. It was on this visit that the Parowan Stake was organized, with John L. Smith as president, John Steele as first, and Henry Lunt as second counselor.

On the 28th of August, 1852, a special conference was held and about one hundred missionaries were called to Europe and other parts of the world. The following October witnessed the call of still other missionaries. In speaking of their blessings President Woodruff said: "The spirit and power of God rested upon us in a great degree. The heavens were opened, and our minds were filled with visions, revelations, and prophecy, while we sealed great blessings upon the heads of the elders and foretold what would befall them by sea and by land; that they would do a great work and gather many Saints and much wealth to Zion."

Before the close of the year, there were special meetings of the Council of the Twelve in which the importance of keeping a history of the Twelve was emphasized, and Elder Woodruff was at that time appointed to write a history of his Quorum. Speaking of the Twelve at this time he says: "There has not been a death in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles except that of David Patten, who fell a martyr to his religion, according to the special request he made of the Lord that he might die that death. I lament the fact that David Patten did not leave a record of his life, for he was a true prophet, an apostle, and a fine man. Many  miracles were wrought by him. He once told a rich man in Tennessee who fought the work of God, that he and his family would yet beg for their bread. Robert C. Petty saw that same man cry at a blacksmith shop because the blacksmith would not sharpen his plough on credit."

Speaking upon the principle of writing a history he said that since he had been a member of the Church he had been inspired to write not only of his own acts and life but to write the sermons, teachings, and prophecies of the Prophet Joseph, President Young, and Council of the Twelve Apostles as far as he was acquainted with their labors.

When the new year of 1853 opened Wilford Woodruff gave expression to those noble inspirations which characterized his life. In his journal he writes: "A new year in a new era! How time flies, and how wonderful, how magnificent are the events which are borne upon its wings! It is the opening of a dispensation that includes all other dispensations since the world began. The events of the one thousand years past pale into insignificance compared with the work of the present time."

On New Year's day Wilford Woodruff, with other members of his Quorum, all being present, except Orson Pratt, marched in a body to the homes of Presidents Young, Kimball, and Richards, and to the home of Father John Smith, the patriarch, in the order named and with loving respect wished them a happy and prosperous New Year. Each of the Presidency and Father Smith pronounced their blessings, and in return the Twelve blessed them. In the evening of that day, the Presidency and the Twelve dedicated the Social Hall for social purposes, and with about two hundred of the Saints joined in a dance with praise and thanksgiving to the Lord.

The 14th of February, 1853, witnessed the dedication of the site of the Salt Lake Temple. The Presidency and the Twelve broke the ground with a pick. It was an occasion of great joy among the Saints, as a temple meant so much to their hopes and faith. On April the 6th, the four corner-stones were dedicated, and speeches were delivered. Forty years thereafter, Wilford Woodruff, more than 86 years of age, presided at its completion and dedication.

On the 25th of August Elder Woodruff went with members  of the Twelve to locate a new Weber settlement. The people there were growing dissatisfied and changed their location several times. At the October conference, following, Wilford Woodruff and Ezra T. Benson were appointed to select fifty families to settle in Tooele Valley. The work in that valley engaged his time largely during the remainder of the year until the 12th of December, when he again took up his work in the House of Representatives.

The new year of 1854 dawned upon the Sabbath day. In the afternoon the Saints were addressed by Apostle Woodruff. On the evening of the 2nd there was a dancing party given in the Social Hall. The parties there were attended by the leaders, and an effort was made to give to those occasions an innocent joy and a high social quality that would uplift the dance and make it a suitable place for Saints, and not allow it to be the exclusive pastime of the sinners. In those early days there was a much greater opposition on the part of the different religious denominations of the world than there is today. This practice, from the outset among the Latter-day Saints of taking their religion with them into the social life was one of the alleged faults which the religious world condemned. In those times when there were so many difficulties, so many hardships different from those which the people had to encounter in the East, the dance was about the only sort of amusement which the Saints could enjoy.

The following are the words of President Young which give his views of the ball room, and which he gave on the evening of the 2nd: "I consider this a suitable place to give some instructions. The world considers it very wicked for a Christian to hear music and to dance. Many preachers say that fiddling and music come from hell, but I say there is no fiddling, there is no music in hell. Music belongs to heaven, to cheer God, angels, and men. If we could hear the music there is in heaven, it would overwhelm us mortals. Music and dancing are for the benefit of holy ones, and all those who come here to-night who are not holy and righteous and do not worship God have no right to come here."

Men and women were taught that in all they did on the week day as upon the Sabbath they should honor God. If,  later on, excesses in dancing and its improper practice were corrected by a Prophet of God, John Taylor, it was because of the excesses and the improprieties of certain classes, and not because of the ball room itself. To him, there was great objection in permitting the dance room to become a financial scheme.

In the year of 1854 President Willard Richards was suffering from palsy, and the attention which he received at the hands of Elder Woodruff was characteristic of the latter's tender regard and loving administration for those whom he esteemed. Besides giving his attention to the sick, he also began the work of teaching and preparing the young men for their duties in the office of the lesser priesthood. He was especially solicitous of the training of his young sons, especially Wilford junior.

Those were days of extreme sociability and neighborly love. In his journal Elder Woodruff writes of a visit to his home of Ann Whitney and Eliza R. Snow: "I read over several of the old sermons of Joseph that were not recorded anywhere except in my journal. We passed a pleasant evening together, and before they left they sang in tongues in the pure language which Adam and Eve spoke in the Garden of Eden. This gift was obtained in the Kirtland Temple through a promise of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He told Sister Whitney if she would rise upon her feet she should have the pure language. She did so, and immediately began to sing in tongues. It was nearer to heavenly music than anything I ever heard." This beautiful gift Sister Whitney retained throughout her life time, and upon appropriate occasions exercised it to the edification and joy of the Saints.

In those days Elder Woodruff found some time in the midst of public duties to devote to the reading of good books, among them was the first volume of the life of Benjamin Franklin, and into his journal he copied Franklin's rules of perfection. Whatever was high-minded, choice, or of value as discipline, Wilford Woodruff cherished.

On the 11th of January of that year President Willard Richards died. He had been a sufferer for many years, but through faith his life had been prolonged. Of him Elder Woodruff writes: "He is the first of the Twelve or of our Presidency who has died in the faith a natural death. All who have gone before in full fellowship have died martyrs." He and President  Richards had formed a strong attachment for each other, and they had traveled together quite extensively in their missionary labors and pioneer work. At the time of President Richard's death, President Young was too ill to attend the funeral.

The following month of March Elder Woodruff visited Tooele City, Grantsville, and other places in Tooele Valley, the colonization of which had been largely intrusted to himself and Elders Benson and Maughan.

On the 27th of that month, he returned to Salt Lake City and met with the Twelve at his home. Here, the missionaries who were going to England had been set apart, and Franklin D. Richards was called to preside over the European mission.

The April conference which followed was one of considerable importance. It became necessary to select someone to fill the place made vacant by the death of Willard Richards. President Young asked the Twelve to suggest some man for the place, but they considered it his privilege to choose his own counselor, and so informed him, at the same time promising to endorse his selection. When the authorities were sustained, Jedediah M. Grant was taken into the First Presidency of the Church. He had been a faithful and distinguished elder, and was loved by all the Saints.

It was at this conference that the question of Consecration was presented. Speaking of that subject, President Kimball said: "I want all I have to be secured in the Kingdom of God." They knew the dangers and temptations of wealth, the selfishness which it begets, as well as its destruction of brotherly love.

At the same conference, President Kimball spoke on Plural Marriage and declared its divine origin. "Many of you have fought it," he said, "you may continue to fight it until you go down into your graves, and it will still continue to be the work of God, and will still continue through all Eternity."

At that time Elder Parley P. Pratt was appointed to establish a stake of the Church at Horner's ranch in California. Erastus Snow was called on a mission to St. Louis, and Orson Pratt to Cincinnati. Joseph F. Smith, then a boy less than 16 years of age, was called upon his first mission to the Sandwich Islands.

On the 3rd of May, a party of the leaders, of which Elder Woodruff was one, started on a tour of the southern settlements.  Their first day's drive was to Union Ward, where the Saints had been counseled to build their homes within a fort, as a protection against the Indians. It appears that to some extent this counsel had been ignored by the people there. In speaking of that fact President Young said: "I am responsible for the counsel I give. If you want to know any more concerning it--do right; pray to the Lord, that you may have His mind revealed and may understand the truth and know for yourselves what lies before you--then you will not question these things, but will go to work and do them with all your might."

In those days there was a special anxiety to protect the people, who were scattering out to form new settlements, against the attacks of the Indians. The people noted the special supervision of their leaders who were constantly directing the settlements which were in time to come to be the strongholds of the Latter-day Saints. Every detail was thought out, and nothing escaped the vigilant watch-care of their Prophet. In his journal Elder Woodruff recorded the remarks of President Young spoken to the people of Pleasant Grove: "Your stacks are so placed that one Indian could fire the whole place, and others could shoot you down. While you were fighting the fire they could kill every man, woman, and child in this place."

The party continued the journey from here to Provo, Springville, and Payson. When they reached Payson they were approaching the Indian country, and the Indian question was discussed. President Young counseled the Saints to feed the Indians and treat them kindly. When the company reached a place about fifteen miles south of Payson an organization was effected: Robert T. Burton was made captain of the guard; W. Woodruff, historian; Parley P. Pratt and John Taylor, chaplains; Edward Hunter, chief bishop; and Dr. Sprague, physician and surgeon.

After leaving Nephi, Elder Woodruff makes this interesting record: "The next day, May 11th, we rode to Chicken Creek and spent the night near Walker and his band. President Young and council tried to talk with him, but he was sulky and not disposed to talk. When we first formed our corral within forty rods of his camp, he gathered all of his warriors and made quite a display, but we did not go to meet them, so they turned their horses out and went to their tents.

"When we called upon Walker, he lay down in the dirt and was averse to talking. Brother Young manifested great patience even when almost any other man would have been exhausted. He went to him and lifted him out of the dirt and finally drew from him a conversation. Walker said he had no spirit, he had no heart, he did not wish to talk. 'I want to sit still and hear President Young and others talk.' President Young gave him some tobacco. The chief said when he had plenty of tobacco all his friends would come and smoke with him, but when he had no tobacco they would stay away from him. President Young then said: 'I have brought some beef cattle for you. I want one killed so you can have a feast while we are here.' Walker then wanted the Mormons to sing before the parties took a smoke. The chief said, 'Ezra T. Benson came, and his heart was good. Diminick Huntington came, and his heart was running.' We then sang, and when this was done Walker said, 'I have not got the spirit of the Lord. If there is anyone here who can give me the spirit of the Lord I wish he would do it.' Speaking further, the old chief said, 'White people in heaven are happy.' An Indian by the name of Tulpidge then spoke amid much crying and tears. He was the Indian who had his wife killed. He said Diminick Huntington had been good to him, and he had not seen him since his child's death. He said: 'We now have good hearts and the Mormons who are now here have good hearts. We can lie down in peace without fear, and I want to live in friendship with this people.'

"We now left the Indian camp and returned to our wagons, but President Young had another talk with Walker the same day. On the following day we again visited Walker's tent, but the chief was still sulky and would not talk. He left his tent and went into the willows while the others talked. The Indians had a sick child which they wished the elders to administer to. President Kimball with Elders Benson and Wells did so, and Dr. Sprague left some medicine for the child and for others who were sick. The Indian said if his sick child died he would have to kill an Indian child or a Mormon child to go with it--this is their tradition. The interpreter told him he must not do it as that was wrong; that when a Mormon child died we did not kill another to go with it and they must not do it. The Indian said that  if the child got well, he would go with us. He said Walker was a great chief, and that President Young was a great chief.

"Peteetnet spoke and said they would be good and not steal, neither would they kill anybody, and that anyone could go alone and not be killed. Walker wished President Young to write a letter that he might show to the people and let them know that we were at peace with each other. This, President Young did. Dr. Sprague gave them some medicine, and after a talk of peace and good will from the old chief we shook hands and smoked the pipe of peace. Walker received his presents. We killed a beef and made a great feast for the Indians. They traded blankets for horses and bought two Indians who were prisoners. After making peace we left them and rode on to Sevier River. Walker, Squashead, and many others went with us and spent the night on the Sevier. We made a raft and took our wagons over in an hour and a half. Next day we reached Fillmore, a distance of thirty-five miles."

From Fillmore the party passed through Beaver and Parowan to Cedar City. Here they visited the Iron Works and saw some of the products. Erastus Snow was present and explained to them the difficulties to be contended with in the manufacture of iron, as they were so far from railroads. During this trip the company visited Harmony and then returned to the North, reaching Salt Lake the 30th of the month, having traveled a distance of 574 miles.

June the 27th, 1854, the anniversary of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum, was observed. The Church held a general conference, according to previous appointment. Elder John Taylor was called on a mission to New York, while other elders were called to different parts of the world. John Smith, son of Hyrum Smith, was on that day called to the position of presiding patriarch of the Church. He was the fourth to occupy that place in this dispensation.

During those busy times of travel and teaching, Elder Woodruff also found time to farm his land. He records that on that year he raised 369 bushels of wheat, 400 bushels of potatoes and 200 bushels of corn.

On November 27th, he set out upon a visit to the settlements in the north. On the 2nd of December, he paid his first visit to Ogden, where he found a large colony of Saints on the east side  of the Weber River. Here he counseled the people respecting the payment of their tithing, the Poor Fund, the establishment of schools, also the building of a wall around the city for protection against attacks by the Indians. At this time he also visited North Ogden, then called Ogden Hole, seven miles north of Ogden City. It was at that time one of the most flourishing settlements north of Salt Lake City. There were forty-seven families and a school with fifty pupils. The people here raised in 1854, 16,000 bushels of wheat.

On the 4th of December, Elder Woodruff visited Willow Creek, now Willard. From there he went to Box Elder, later known as Brigham City, which was then chiefly settled by Saints from Scandinavia and Wales. Returning, he reached home December 9th. On the next day he listened to Charles C. Rich, who gave an account of the rise and progress of the settlement of the Saints in San Bernardino.

On the 11th of December the legislature met. The Council then consisted of four members: Heber C. Kimball, Daniel H. Wells, Orson Pratt, and Wilford Woodruff. The House had nine members: Albert Carrington, Leonard E. Harrington, Aaron Johnson, Isaac Morley, John A. Ray, Geo. A. Smith, Lorin Farr, and Erastus Bingham. At that time there were only seven counties, viz., Salt Lake, San Pete, Millard, Iron, Davis, and Weber.

On Christmas day of that year, there was some excitement created by a drunken brawl among the soldiers who were quartered in the heart of the city. Some of the citizens became mixed up with it. Some of the soldiers fired upon the people who threw stones at them. The officers, however, with the aid of the marshal and mayor restored peace. In the evening, Col. Steptoe and Judge Kinney gave a ball and invited the Presidency and Twelve. Of the occasion Brother Woodruff writes: "It was a splendid affair. We had a good supper and a splendid dance."

In order to give some intellectual pastime, a Philosophical Society was organized to which the leaders gave special attention and encouragement to those who were anxious to improve their minds.

Closing his journal for that year Elder Woodruff notes that he traveled over 1,800 miles, attended 47 meetings, and preached 44 discourses. He also attended two general conferences, and passed twenty days in the legislature.
