WAR TIMES, 1857.

Deposit of Church Records in Temple Foundation.--Approach of the Army.--Present of a Team.--John D. Lee.--Visit of Captain Van Vliet.--Lot Smith.--Col. Alexander Writes President Young.--Communication from Governor Cumming to Governor Young.--Miraculous Escapes.--High Price of Salt at Army Headquarters.--Prediction of Calamity to the Nation.--A Poetic Tribute by Eliza R. Snow.

Apostle Woodruff was asked by President Young to notify the Twelve to meet at the Temple foundation, on August 13th. The purpose of the meeting was to deposit the works of the Church in the foundation of the Temple and to dedicate the corner-stone containing the deposit. About 7 o'clock in the morning, President Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Daniel H. Wells, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, also Elders Truman O. Angel, Alonzo H. Raleigh, Benjamin F. Mitchell, Jonathan Pugmire, Jr., Edward L. Parry, Henry Maiben, Jesse C. Little, Albert Carrington, John Lyon, Joseph A. Young, and Brigham Young, sons of Brigham Young, met on the grounds where President Young and Wilford Woodruff packed about 65 books, chiefly Church works, and a number of coins in a stone box, whose dimensions were as follows: length 2 1/2 feet, depth 20 inches, and width 19 inches. At 15 minutes to 8 o'clock the lid was put on, soldered with lead and covered with plaster of paris. The stone box was turned bottom side up and placed in the south-east corner. After this a dedicatory prayer was offered by President Young.

Three days later, President Young delivered a discourse to the thousands who had congregated for the purpose of receiving instructions with reference to the policy to be pursued respecting the approach of the so-called Johnston's army. There was naturally a great deal of anxiety and heartfelt prayer over a situation that seemed to forebode nothing but evil and misfortune to the Saints. The vast multitude, however, with uplifted hands pledged  their support to the President and the leaders of the Church. It was one of the most important days, says Elder Woodruff, ever witnessed in Israel.

On September 5th, a messenger arrived with the news that General Johnston was at Ash Hollow, with nearly 2,000 men who were traveling fifteen miles per day. The people were promised that, if they would follow counsel, they should never be driven from the Valleys.

The spirit of the times, and the willingness of men to make any sacrifice are well illustrated in a little circumstance which at this point Elder Woodruff records in his journal. President Young had sent for him and asked if he had a team, to which the latter replied: "'Yes, I have a pair of small ponies.'

"'Can you spare them?' he asked.

"I hesitated a moment and then answered, 'Yes, I can do anything that is wanted.'

"President Young then said: 'I have a pair of good horses which I wish you to have as you are laboring here in the Historian's Office.

"I was taken by surprise, but accepted them and felt very thankful. They were a fine, large team of sorrel horses."

The Saints now realized that though far away in the Valleys of the Mountains, they were nevertheless the objects of hatred by many throughout the nation. Men sought popularity among the masses by denouncing them. At this time, Stephen A. Douglas was receiving "honorable mention" for President of the United States. He had known President Joseph Smith in the early days of the Church, and had defended him against the injustice of his enemies, but he knew how unpopular the people were and sought the support of the masses in a bitter denunciation of the Saints. Elder Woodruff says that Sunday, August 30th, President Young, himself, and others were engaged in a discussion of the Douglas speech, which was answered by Albert Carrington.

Captain Van Vliet of the United States army reached the city on the 8th of September, and at once had an interview with Governor Young. The next day he met with the Presidency and the Twelve and presented a letter of introduction to Governor Young which was read to those present. Little, it seems, was said on  this occasion, but there was a deep-seated anxiety in the hearts of all those present. Later in the day, the President introduced the Captain to his wives and children. He then escorted him through his orchard and garden, and then went with him to Albert Carrington's orchard, where he introduced the Captain to Mrs. Carrington. He asked her if she was willing to destroy her beautiful orchard and leave it desolate for her religion's sake. She said she was, and would remain up nights to do so if it became necessary.

The Captain was much impressed by the thrift and industry of the Latter-day Saints, and in his interview with President Young said: "The Mormons have been lied about more than any people I ever knew." He admitted his belief that Judge Drummond's lies, charging the Saints with burning court records, led to the sending of the army to Utah. Governor Young thereupon told Captain Van Vliet of the impositions that had been heaped upon the Latter-day Saints, and said that the people did not wish to fight the United States. "If we are driven to it, we shall put our trust in God and do the best we can. He has set His kingdom upon the earth and it will never fail; and if they drive us to fight, God will overthrow those who do so. We are the supporters of the United States Constitution. We love the Constitution and the laws of our country, but it is the corrupt administration of these laws that we suffer from and not from the laws. If the laws had been enforced in Missouri, Governor Boggs would have been hanged and many of his friends who took part in killing and driving the Saints. The government officers who have been sent here have no interest in common with ours. They have sought to destroy us. Captain Van Vliet, we have treated all men who have been sent to us as government officials as well as we have you, and will treat them well; but if they drive us to fight, we shall put our trust in God and do the best we can."

The Captain, who was deeply impressed by the statement of Governor Young, felt thoroughly convinced that he meant every word he said. On the 13th he attended services in the Tabernacle and listened with attention to sermons from John Taylor and President Brigham Young. On the evening of that day, the Captain had another interview with the leaders, in the course of which he said: "If our government pushes forward this thing and  makes war against you, I shall withdraw from the army, for I will not take a hand in shedding the blood of American citizens."

Upon the departure of Captain Van Vliet, Elder Woodruff presented him with a box of peaches which he had raised in his own garden. The Captain was accompanied by Dr. Bernhisel. The two departed together for the East for the purpose of reporting conditions in Utah.

All the time these agitations were going on, the Saints pursued the even tenor of their ways, raising fruit and grain. There were home missionaries among them preaching home industry and self-support.

The purpose of the authorities was to impede the progress of the army and so delay it that the government might have an opportunity to make an investigation into the real condition of affairs in Utah, and after learning them, withdraw the army which was then approaching Salt Lake City. A body of men under the command of Daniel H. Wells and Lot Smith had been sent to the front to stop the progress of the army. This they did by stampeding the cattle and horses. They were enjoined by President Young to avoid the shedding of blood except in self-defense.

Those who had thus volunteered to act in the defense of their homes and their liberties were without sufficient equipments and provisions to sustain them in their defensive warfare. They had no well-equipped commissary like that with which an army is provided. The teams and wagons were a part of the equipment which belonged to the farm. They were needed at home. Very naturally in such an emergency they suffered great privations and were anxious that the difficulties and dangers might end as speedily as possible.

Before Captain Van Vliet had left, he promised to hasten to Washington and speak in our favor. President Young told him that the Lord would bless him in so doing, for he felt that He had sent him to Utah. On his return, the Captain endeavored to persuade the army to remain at Ham's Fork for the winter, but the Tenth regiment swore it would come on at all hazards. The Captain then informed them that if they did, they would get a different reception from anything they had ever encountered before.

Just at this time, when the advance of the army was the all-absorbing  topic and the dangers of its approach weighed heavily upon the leaders, John D. Lee added to their distress the news of the Mountain Meadow massacre. He had reached Salt Lake City from his home in Harmony on the 29th of September, 1857.

At this place in his record and at this time, Apostle Woodruff gives the account of the Mountain Meadow massacre which John D. Lee gave to President Young: "A company of California emigrants of about 150 men, women, and children, many of them belonging to the mobbers of Illinois and Missouri, had been massacred. They had many cattle and horses with them. As they traveled along south, they went damning Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and the heads of the Church, saying that Joseph Smith ought to have been shot long before he was. They wanted to do all the evil they could, so they poisoned beef and gave it to the Indians and some of them died. They poisoned the springs of water and some of the Saints died. The Indians became enraged at their conduct and surrounded them on a prairie. The emigrants formed a bulwark of their wagons, but the Indians fought them five days until they killed all their men--about 60 in number. They then rushed into the corral and cut the throats of their women and children, except some eight or ten children which they brought with them and sold to the whites.

"The Indians then stripped the men and women of their clothing and left them in the broiling sun. When Brother Lee found it out, he took some men with him to the place and buried their bodies. It was a horrible task. The whole air was filled with an awful stench. The Indians obtained all their property, cattle, horses, wagons, etc. There was another large company of emigrants who had 1,000 head of cattle. They were also damning both Indians and Mormons, but were afraid of sharing the same fate. Brother Lee had to send interpreters with them to the Indians to try to save their lives."

The foregoing statement from the journal of Elder Woodruff which was recorded at that time is of special importance in view of the fact that the enemies of the Church for years endeavored to fasten upon President Young some responsibility for that awful affair. There is nothing in the statement whatever which bears the least semblance of deception. It was one of those straightforward  records which characterize Elder Woodruff's journal from beginning to end. Then the character and integrity of the man are both guarantees of the truthfulness of the statement made by John D. Lee to President Young as recorded in Elder Woodruff's journal.

If President Young neglected at this time to give the report of John D. Lee as much attention as it perhaps should have received, and if an investigation was not immediately instituted, there is ample excuse to be found in the circumstances of those times. The army was pressing upon the people and uttering dire threats as to what would take place when it reached the Valleys.

Immediately following the record of John D. Lee's visit, Elder Woodruff says in his journal: "An express came in at night saying that the troops were near Bridger and had formed into three bodies while traveling. General Wells sent word to President Young to let them come on to Echo Canyon and there give them battle. At 6 o'clock on the morning of the 30th the drums beat, and an army of soldiers, some 400 in number, paraded the streets. They were in readiness to march at a moment's notice to the seat of war. We had at this time about 800 men in the mountains. It was a solemn time; for the armies of the Gentiles were making war upon us because of our religion, and we had to defend ourselves against a nation of 25,000,000 people, and the war had just commenced. We had to trust in God for the results. We resolved to do what we could and leave the work in His hands. All were anxiously awaiting the arrival of the express. I told President Young that I was on hand at any moment to go into the mountains when he would say the word. I went up in the evening to the President's office and learned that the California mail had arrived. I heard some letters read. One stated that the government had made arrangements to send light draft boats up the Colorado with men and arms against us from that point.

"Next morning, Oct. 1st, I arose early and looked for an express signal flag but saw none. There was a great deal of anxiety throughout the day while we were waiting, for the express had arrived late. Word came from General Wells respecting the conditions existing at the seat of war."

The time for conference was now approaching, but the agitation among the people about the approach of the army was so great, and there were so many of the men absent, that the meetings were not largely attended. The conference continued only two days, the time being occupied by President Young and members of the Twelve.

On Oct. 8th an express arrived with the news that Captain Lot Smith had burned up fifty of the government wagons, but gave to the teamsters all their arms and ammunition. One deserter from the army came in reporting that rations were short among the soldiers. To each man, he said, there was allowed only three biscuits, two cups of coffee and a small piece of beef per day. Elder Woodruff writes: "The enemy is in a close place. Their provisions are rapidly diminishing and there are prospects of starvation. We have prayed that the Lord would lead them into the pit which they had prepared for the Saints, and the Lord heard our prayers and our enemies are now in a trap and are suffering humiliation without us harming a hair of their heads."

The express which arrived on the 16th of October brought a threatening letter from Col. Alexander to President Young. He threatened extermination if the Saints resisted, and expressed confidence in his ability to carry out the orders of the government. Governor Young sent the Colonel a strong reply; wanted to know why he spent an entire month on Ham's Fork if he was confident in his ability to carry out orders. He gave the Colonel to understand that on our part there was no surrender. "We shall trust in God and go ahead."

The Sunday following, President Young addressed the Saints and declared his belief in their ability to keep the enemy back, and counseled the people to go on with their farming, fruit raising, etc. President Kimball arose and prophesied that if the Saints would hearken to counsel they would continue to live in their own homes in the valleys, produce crops, and remain until they returned to Jackson County, Missouri. President Young thereupon shouted out, "I believe it." At the same time, communications were coming in from the army, but they only received from him the same determined answer that the army should not enter Salt Lake Valley until conditions had changed and the sentiment of bitterness and hostility had been allayed.

About the same time Governor Cumming arrived at the headquarters of the army and sent a communication to Governor Young, in which he declared himself the Governor of Utah. At the same time he charged with treason all who opposed his and the army's movement. Mr. Cumming no doubt felt some misgivings from the fact that the horses and mules belonging to the army were dying by the hundreds, and the soldiers were short of provisions. The difficulty of the situation was rendered worse from the fact that there existed both among the officers and soldiers a pronounced division. Some of them openly declared that Governor Young was perfectly justified in his course in defending the rights of the people of Utah.

In December the Mormon soldiers were disbanded and allowed to return home for the winter, and the change was welcomed by them. Their provisions were not more than half their actual wants, and there were no comforts on the frontier. In summing up the condition of affairs at the close of the year Apostle Woodruff writes: "The expedition of the season is now entirely closed, and we have clearly seen the hand of the Lord made visible in our behalf. An army has been sent by the United States to make war upon us for the sole purpose of destroying the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Church has been driven from the confines of the United States into the Rocky Mountains, then a Mexican Territory, with the hope of the nation that we should perish; but as soon as they found that we were to live and prosper they became alarmed and resolved upon our destruction. As soon as this intention was known to us, the leader of the Church and Kingdom of God arose up in the strength of Israel's God and proclaimed Israel free. In this, his counselors, Heber C. Kimball and D. H. Wells, with the Twelve Apostles, sustained him, and all the people said, 'Amen.'"

Continuing, Elder Woodruff wrote: "From two to three thousand of the brethren, who went into the mountains under the command of Gen. D. H. Wells to hedge up the way of the enemy, have arrived. Our brethren made large entrenchments and ditches and piled up large masses of rocks above the narrow passes for the purpose of rolling them down upon the enemy; but the Lord has fought our battles and hedged up the way. When the army  reached Ham's Fork, 150 miles from our city, the storms and cold killed their horses, mules, and cattle, by the hundreds, so that when the whole army got together with the governors and judges, whom the government had sent to rule over us, they had not teams enough left to draw one-third of their train and were obliged to stop and pass the winter in the storms of the mountains. Their wisdom seems to be taken from them, and our brethren have been able to herd them like a herd of cattle. The soldiers shot grape and musket and many balls at our men from time to time, and those balls fell like hail around the servants of God, but not a drop of their blood has been shed, neither did the brethren return fire upon the enemy even in a single instance. Fear had so taken hold of the soldiers that they would flee into the main body of the army at the approach of a small number of our brethren.

"Through all this President Young has been as calm as a summer's day. The army of Zion is now returning to its home with the same spirit of composure and quietude that it carried with it into the mountains. As the men passed, on their return, by President Young, they gave him a quiet salute and went silently to their homes, while President Young gazed upon them with thanksgiving and praise to the God of Israel."

President Woodruff here relates the circumstance of a Brother Maxwell who had been in charge of a small scouting party: "After going into camp for the night, Elder Maxwell felt strongly impressed that danger confronted him and his companions, and so informed them. He said they would have to leave, but some were opposed to his recommendation and they retired to rest. The same impression, however, increased upon Elder Maxwell until he promptly arose from his bed and said they must all leave or serious trouble would befall them. His brethren quickly followed, and it was only a short time when a hundred men surrounded the place of their encampment with the expectation of taking them prisoners."

"At another time, Col. Allen of the Mormons, fell a prisoner in the hands of the enemy. Col. Johnston threatened to hang him. At the camp fire at night Col. Allen took off his boots and pretended to warm his feet. Suddenly, he leaped by the guard and ran into a herd of cattle. His pursuers became confused and he made  good his escape. He ran thirty miles to the camp of his brethren, in his stocking feet."

During these trying circumstances in the army, President Young sent some salt which they needed very much. One of the sacks of salt which was sent, however, was lost, and later picked up by a traveler who sold it to merchants for twenty dollars. They in turn sold it to the soldiers for two hundred dollars. Ben Simons, a Cherokee, took to the army nine hundred pounds of salt, which he sold for two dollars and a half a pound, or a total of two thousand two hundred and fifty dollars. He sold them service berries for one dollar a pound. It will be seen that the expedition was becoming a very expensive piece of folly.

As the year was closing, the legislature convened, and Elder Woodruff was again a member of that body. In his journal, speaking of these times, he prophecies: "The judgments of God will now begin to rest more fully upon this nation and will be increased upon it, year by year. Calamities will come speedily upon it and it will be visited with thunder, lightning, storms, whirlwinds, floods pestilence, plagues, war and devouring fire; and the wicked will slay the wicked until the wicked are wasted away."

His journal closes with a copy of the poem dedicated to him by Eliza R. Snow.

  POEM.

  "With true respect, and as a tribute due
  To friendship, Brother Woodruff, unto you,
  As one more blessed than most your fellow men,
  I now address the effusion of my pen.

  You were appointed, ere your mortal birth,
  To an apostleship upon the earth;
  The Lord our God has His eye on thee,
  With watchful care from earliest infancy.

  You were preserved, midst Babylonish night,
  From atheistic and sectarian blight;
  From manly rectitude you did not swerve,
  The Priest of Baal you never stooped to serve.

   From heavenly courts, the light that's shining now,
  Shone on your path, and mantled o'er your brow;
  Eternal visions opened to your view,
  You loved the truth and found salvation, too.

  You then with joy the Gospel banner bore
  To distant lands and on your native shore,
  In truth's defense most valiantly you stood,
  And cleared your garments of the Gentiles' blood.

  One of the chosen Twelve, who're called to stand,
  To turn the Gospel key for every land;
  Your name in honor, as a faithful one,
  To future generations will be known.

  With heart inspired, rich matter to indite,
  In Zion now your business is to write,
  With skill you wield the ready writer's pen;
  'Tis yours to immortalize the deeds of men.

  Full many a righteous act and gifted word
  By Saints performed from lips of prophets heard,
  Had slipped the mem'ries of judicious men,
  But for the promptings of your faithful pen.

  The Church historian's labors to divide,
  As his assistant coupled side by side,
  You write for Zion, where her history's known,
  Inscribing her's, perpetuates your own.

  Faithful to God, to your brethren true,
  Integrity has twined a wreath for you,
  Of never-fading laurels, which will be,
  A glorious coronet eternally.

  In that blessed world, where light and knowledge dwell,
  Your blessedness no earthly tongue can tell,
  Where heaven's effulgence will your head surround,
  And you with everlasting glory crowned.

   Filled with immortal majesty and might,
  Associated with the Gods of light,
  With gifts and powers of endless lives you'll be,
  Progressing on and on eternally."
