ARMY ENTERS SALT LAKE VALLEY, 1858.

President and Congress of the U. S. Memorialized.--Words of Brigham Young.--Arrival of Col. Kane.--Governor Cumming Reaches Salt Lake City.--Migration Southward.--Delegates from Nicaragua.--Want Mormons To Move to Central America.--Proclamation from President Buchanan.--Peace Commission.--President of the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society.--Indian War Threatened.--A Striking Dialogue.--The Mob Element.--Mogo's Deception.--Attacks on President Young.--Greeley Visits Utah.

New Year's day, 1858, was celebrated in the evening by a social gathering at Ballou's Hall, in the Fourteenth Ward. Brother Woodruff addressed the assembly, made reference to the critical conditions then confronting the Saints, but prophesied good for the future and declared the overthrow of all who fought against the people of God.

On the 5th of January he records a Memorial passed by the legislature in which the wrongs inflicted upon the Saints were set forth, and Congress was asked to investigate the condition of affairs in Utah. On the 16th of the same month a mass-meeting was held in the Tabernacle. Resolutions were adopted and a Memorial sent to the President and Congress of the United States.

About the same time Elder Benson and others returned from England and from the States where they had been on missions. They reported that persecutions were rife against the Saints, even in England, where the elders were assaulted with sticks and stones in the hands of street mobs.

On February the 3rd the California mail brought the news that President Buchanan recommended a strong force against the Saints. Later advices brought word that a steamer was to bring four thousand men by the southern route; four thousand more were to come from Oregon; and two thousand, from the Missouri River. There were then at Fort Bridger two thousand, making in all an army of twelve thousand men. In his journal, Elder Woodruff writes: "The trials and sacrifices the Saints may be  called upon to pass through, I do not know, but I pray the Lord to give us grace according to our day."

President Young and the brethren were busily occupied in preparation either to meet the foe or burn the city and leave it desolate. Grain was sent to the mill and ground, and preparations were made for caching it in the earth. While the Saints were preparing to fight, they were also engaged in prayer and in temple work. The Endowment House was visited by hundreds who came there to receive its blessings.

On the 15th of February he records this in his journal: "I walked up to the Historian's Office and then to the President's where I found President Young, D. H. Wells, Chas. C. Rich, and Chas. Wandell. President Young said: 'All our sufferings in this life are for our good that we may learn the contrast between good and evil. Jesus descended below all things that He might rise above all things. All men who receive the same glory must abide the same law. Some are alarmed because so many of my family are sick. I have as good a right to be sick as any body. I do not wish to escape affliction, sickness, pain, or sorrow any more than others escape them; for if we make a right use of them they will return to us in blessings. I made up my mind years ago to be governed by certain principles. I resolved that I would never be controlled by my passions, by women, nor by anger, but that I would govern myself. This resolution I have endeavored to carry out in my life.'"

These were times that tried mens souls, and it was quite natural that they should turn their eyes inwardly and examine their own hearts to see if they were true to God and His cause. Such remarks indicate the rich, deep, and beautiful spiritual natures of the men whom the world has misjudged and illy treated.

On February 15th Apostle Amasa Lyman reached the city, bringing with him a messenger direct from Washington. It was no less a personage than their old-time friend, Col. Thomas L. Kane. They had made the journey from San Francisco in twenty days. Col. Kane brought with him dispatches from national head-quarters to Governor Young and the army. President Young immediately called a council for 7 o'clock, and Col. Kane was presented to the brethren by Joseph A. Young. The Colonel was very weary from his long journey. He reached the  home of Governor Young at 8 o'clock, and after an introduction, addressed those present as follows: "Governor Young and Gentlemen: I come as an embassador from the chief Executive of our nation, and am fully prepared and duly authorized to lay before you more fully and definitely the feeling and views of the citizens of our common country and of the chief Executive towards you, relating to the present position of officers in this Territory and of the army of the United States now camped upon your borders. After giving you the most satisfactory evidence in relation to matters now pending and concerning you, I shall call your attention to the poor soldiers who are now suffering in the cold and snows of the mountains, and request you to render them aid and comfort. I shall ask you to assist them to come here, and to bid them a hearty welcome into your hospitable valley. Captain Van Vliet made a good report about you, and used his influence to have the army stop east of Bridger. He has done a great deal in your behalf. You all look very well. You have built up an empire here in a short time."

When asked if Dr. Bernhisel had taken his seat in Congress, he said: "Yes, he was opposed by the Arkansas members and a few others. They were foolish, for had he been refused his seat, it would have been a declaration of war." The Colonel conversed further on matters pertaining to the government and answered questions put to him by Governor Young.

Governor Young then spoke for some time expressing his gratitude for the visit of Col. Kane, and also occupied some time in speaking upon the principles of righteousness which control the actions of the Latter-day Saints. "They are in the hands of God. He will preserve His people." President Young then related to Colonel Kane how the Lord in a marvelous manner had placed means in the hands of himself, President Kimball, and other while on missions and elsewhere engaged in the work of God. These instances, he declared, were just as miraculous as those related in olden times by Peter and Paul.

After a late hour in the evening, the interview closed and all present felt that the visit of Colonel Kane was full of promise for the peace of Utah and the safety of the Saints. Elder Woodruff records several enjoyable visits which he had with Colonel Kane during his sojourn in the city.

March the 1st Elder Woodruff reached the fifty-first milestone in his life and celebrated the occasion by fitting out his son-in-law, Robert Scholes, to relieve the guards then in the mountains. He, himself, spent much of his time, however, in the Historian's Office in writing biographies of the leading men. They were called in to have read to them the history of their lives; and President Young, himself, often listened to many of the biographies and other items of Church history.

At this time he records the troubles that the Saints had with the Indians in the North in which two or three of the former were killed and many cattle were driven off. A little later trouble arose with the Indians in Rush Valley. Elder Woodruff sent his son Wilford with a team to help move the women and children of that locality to Tooele Stake for safety. During the son's journey he was lost in a heavy snow-storm and was compelled to plow his way through snow and mud nearly two feet deep to accomplish his mission. When the father heard of the son's predicament, he went on horseback to meet him but found him safe, he having been preserved from death by the blessings of the Lord.

Although the presence of Col. Kane greatly relieved the situation, the people, nevertheless, felt considerable anxiety as to the final outcome. They sent, however, relief to the United States soldiers and prepared to let them come peaceably into the Valley. In the event, however, that all hostility could not be eliminated from the army, the people prepared to burn the city, leave it desolate, and move southward. Throughout the city there was the greatest activity. People were packing up their provisions and such household goods as they could take with them with the view of moving to the south.

In the midst of all this excitement the 6th of April arrived. The annual conference of that year lasted only one day on account of the hasty preparations which the people were making for their exodus southward. Elder Woodruff's wives, Sarah and Emma, had already moved to Provo. Many others had left their homes and taken up their journey.

On April 6th he writes: "We shall evacuate the city of Great Salt Lake and leave it, if needs be, in the hands of our enemies. We may burn our habitations and lay waste everything we possess,  inasmuch as our enemies are coming upon us intent upon our destruction. We are determined to worship God and acknowledge His hand in all things. The roads are lined with men, women, children, teams, and wagons,--all moving south."

On the 7th of April Elder Woodruff loaded his wagons with goods and with records from the Historian's Office and began his journey to Provo in a heavy snow-storm. It was so severe that the people suffered, and some nearly perished by the way. The horses and cattle suffered intensely. Some unhitched their teams, leaving their loaded wagons in the mud, and made their way to various places of shelter. His first day's journey was twelve miles south to Union Ward, where he remained all night in the home of Martesia Smith. The storm was so bad the following day that he was compelled to remain in doors. The roads were so bad that he unloaded two of his wagons and returned to Salt Lake. On the 11th he attend services in the Tabernacle.

The 12th of April, 1858, witnessed the arrival in Salt Lake City of Governor Alfred Cumming, who was accompanied by Colonel Kane. Both were escorted to the city by a Mormon guard. The Governor expressed regrets that the people were moving, and begged them to discontinue their exodus. There were, however, some doubts as to the Governor's sincerity, especially in view of the fact that the Saints had been betrayed so many times, either by pretended friends or open foes. They decided, however, to carry out their program, and continued the work of moving to Utah Valley.

During the remainder of April, May, and June, Elder Woodruff and other Church leaders were busy in their preparations for the journey south and many trips were made to and from Provo. Council meetings were held and the work of evacuating the city went steadily on. Yet, they had faith that God would somehow bring about the fulfillment of those prophesies which declared peace and safety, and that they would, accordingly, in the end, remain in their homes.

Added to the troubles which they were under in consequence of the move southward, word came that the Indians at different points were making trouble for the people, and speculators thought they saw an opportunity to make money from the Saints by purchasing their homes in these the hours of their distress. Important  events followed in swift succession. Two delegates from Nicarauga called on President Young for the purpose of persuading him and the Mormons to buy land in Central America, and emigrate with the Saints to Nicarauga. Their efforts, however, were unavailing. President Young was firm in his conviction that it was God's purpose that the Saints should inhabit these Valleys of the Mountains. He further saw that there was a growing opposition to the policy of President Buchanan. General Houston had taken a bold stand against the action of the government and boldly defended the rights of the Latter-day Saints. President Young records it as his opinion at that time that Houston was the only man in the United States Senate who had the moral courage of his convictions.

The coming of other armies from different directions complicated the situation. They must be stopped. The presence of thousands of soldiers in Salt Lake Valley would make trouble even under the most favorable circumstances. Col. Kane hurried, therefore, to the East and succeeded by his prompt and faithful efforts in stopping the other armies until matters could be adjusted.

At this time there came a Peace Commission with the proffer of peace and a pledge that the army should not molest the Saints in any way by coming into the Valley. But with this Commission President Buchanan sent a proclamation charging the Saints with treason and other crimes, and then forgave them without an acknowledgement on their part, or a plea for pardon.

It was evident to all that President Buchanan had committed a blunder, and that he was anxious to extricate himself the best he could from a situation that was proving daily more embarrassing to him. Each step he took made him more ridiculous in the eyes of fair-minded men and more open to condemnation by those who opposed him. He had believed the lies of the federal officials, acted upon their falsehoods and squandered the nation's money without taking any steps to learn whether he had been imposed upon or not. Brigham Young said President Buchanan had manifested more folly in his official acts than any other man that ever occupied the presidential chair.

The Peace Commission sent out to adjust matters consisted of Senator elect Powell from Kentucky and Major McCullough  from Texas. After several meetings in Salt Lake City, they visited Provo and were treated as all had been before them, with the utmost respect and courtesy. They had an opportunity to witness the action of the Saints in moving from their homes and their preparations to destroy the city which they had founded. These concessions on the part of the government brought about a change of policy.

From July 1st to July 25th Elder Woodruff was occupied in moving his family back to Salt Lake City and in harvesting his grain. It was quite natural that this strain upon President Young should tell against his health. He had been poorly for some time and sought rest in Cottonwood Canyon. Brother Woodruff also found himself impaired in health. The relaxation after months of great strain resulted in something of a general collapse of their physical strength.

It will be remembered that Colonel Alexander of the U. S. army had formerly been arrogant in his demands on President Young. On the 9th of August he called upon the President and manifested toward him a friendly spirit--a spirit that breathed peace and good will. A great change had come over the Colonel.

The time of the leaders during the month of August, 1858, was taken up quite largely in entertaining the officers of the United States army and in receiving visits from them. Many strangers also called upon the authorities at this time. The situation, however, was more trying in one respect as the army had its camp followers. Along with it came adventurers, and drunkenness was common in the streets and several men lost their lives. Of these times Apostle Woodruff says: "Thus we have the fruits of civilization as manifested by the world, and introduced into our Territory. Until the army and its attendants came here, we had no such scenes enacted in our midst. For the first time we now have drunkenness and gambling, street broils, and murders are of frequent occurrence."

The Saints, however, made every endeavor to pursue again the even tenor of their way. President Woodruff returned to his work of compiling Church history. As the fall of the year approached, preparations were made for a State Fair. He was chosen as President of the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing  Society, and made special effort to put on exposition the fruits of the industry of the Latter-day Saints.

In the midst of peaceful prosperity, there was agitation among the Indians. Brother Josiah Call was killed by the red men in Sanpete County. The Indians had awakened within them a strong resentment toward the soldiers whom the Indians declared had treated them wrongfully. Aropene, the chief, who had formerly addressed the Saints in their public meetings, declared his intention to make war upon the army, and that no man could stop him in his determination to fight. The old chief had been outraged because the soldiers had killed one of his best men. Upon learning of the chief's wrath and intention, President Young immediately sent him a letter by a messenger, Jeremiah Hatch. In the letter he explained to Aropene how wrong it was to shed blood, and asked him to live in peace with all mankind. The letter evidently had a persuading influence upon the mind of the old chief, who was calmed thereby, and he accepted the counsel of his faithful friend, Brigham Young.

A circumstance at this time arose which had a tendency to create a misunderstanding between the Indians and the Latter-day Saints who had fed the Indians for ten years past without remuneration. Dr. Forway had been appointed Indian agent and a large sum of money was placed in his hands with which to care for the Indians. The temptation to use this money for personal advantages was so great that he insisted that the Saints should continue to feed the Indians as they had done before. To this request an exception was taken. The money belonged to the Indians, and the Saints insisted that the Indians should have the use of it.

Elder Woodruff records under date of November 12th, 1858, a conversation between Captain Woolf, of the United States Army and one of the elders, which breathes faith, integrity, and the spirit of those times. The captain asked: "Are you a Mormon?" "I am." "I suppose you are an out and in Mormon, just as it suits you." "I am a thorough Mormon and believe in all the principles of our religion." "What, polygamy and all?" "Yes." "How many wives have you?" "I have three wives and twelve children." "How do you suppose those children will look upon you when they are grown up?" "They will point to me and say:  'There is my father, who has raised me, fed, clothed, and educated me, watched over me through persecution, oppression and scorn, and I will honor and obey him.'" Continuing, the elder then said to Captain Woolf: "You have children at Fort Leavenworth, St. Louis, and other places, but you do not acknowledge them, and will not provide for them; and their mother will point you out to them with words of shame, and they will be taught to despise you." Captain Woolf replied with an oath, and at the same time scratching his head: "That is true. I never thought of it in that way before." "What would you think," continued the Captain, "if the government ordered your life destroyed if you would not put away your wives?" "I would go where I could enjoy my wives and children in some secluded spot of the earth, or give up my life rather than put them away." The conversation of Captain Woolf was then turned upon President Young. He said: "Governor Young, ought to be the next president of the United States for he is the brightest man in the nation, and I should vote for him."

Speaking of Lot Smith, the wagon master of the train that Lot had burned, said that Lot Smith and his men were gentlemen; and that it was one of the wisest and best things that Governor Young could have done, for it stopped the progress of the army until events so changed that peace came. It prevented the shedding of blood on either side and sent him back to the States, where he could escape the suffering of the soldiers who wintered in the mountains.

On the 24th of November, that year, Apostle Woodruff lost his little son, Hyrum Smith, who expired after several days illness. He was an infant, one year, one month, and one day.

It was quite natural in those times that differences should arise between the camp-followers and adventurers on the one side, and the Saints on the other. The latter were naturally strict in the observance of the rules of sobriety and morality. The social distinction became marked. This gave rise to bickerings and hatred on the part of those who opposed the Saints. On the night of the 22nd of November, the ruffians of the city created a great disturbance in what was then known as Kinkade's store. Their purpose was to challenge the police to arrest them. The latter, however, avoided as much as possible the spirit of retaliation until  they became too strong, when the leader knocked down several of the mob. Shots were exchanged, but no one was killed.

In these street broils and disturbances, Judge Cradlebaugh and other officials favored the mob element; but to the credit of Governor Cumming, be it said, he was disposed to deal justly and fairly with all parties. In an interview with A. O. Smoot, the Governor expressed his desire to support the police. The Governor also charged Judges Cradlebaugh and Sinclair that they knew very well that the people had not been treated very civilly or lawfully, and that it would be the better policy on their part to pursue pacific measures, and not to precipitate trouble.

During these trying times efforts were constantly made to drag President Young into court on every and any trivial charge that could be devised. There was also a disposition to assassinate him. He was often, therefore, obliged to place himself under the protection of a guard. On one occasion when he was requested to appear in court, anxiety for his safety became so great that his friends crowded the court room and left but little space for others.

On November 29th, Judge Sinclair harangued the grand jury for the purpose of inducing them to prefer a charge of treason against President Young, the Twelve, and others. The district attorney, however, took the ground that the grand jury had no jurisdiction in the matter, as the alleged offense had come before the Peace Commission, and by that official body the whole matter had been settled. The President of the United States had extended pardon, and the ground taken by the judge, he concluded, was untenable.

December 6th of that year Elder Woodruff occupied much of his time in legislative work. His journal for that month gave an account of the survey of roads made by Jesse W. Fox, from Salt Lake City to various places.

In closing his journal that year he points out the world's great achievements and its important history. The electric cable had connected America and Europe. The slaves in Russia had been liberated. There had been war in British India, and there were preparations for war among the nations. The year at home had been such as to create anxiety and disturbance, but the Saints were nevertheless full of gratitude; for better prospects awaited them.

On January 2nd, 1859, the Saints met for the first time in public assembly since May 30th, 1858. The approach of the army and the move south had disturbed very greatly the peaceful worship of God.

There were now more non-Mormons in Salt Lake Valley than there had been. Indeed, the city seemed to be over-run by speculators and adventurers. There was also a class of desperate men who undertook to terrify the citizens, and publicly to manifest their contempt for the Mormons and their local police authorities. A party by the name of Andrew Bernard attempted the life of policeman Christensen and was shot and killed in the fracas. Christensen, who was an officer, acted in self-defense. Every possible effort was then made to convict the policeman. When that failed the anti-Mormon element made an effort to implicate President Young and D. H. Wells.

On March 24th, 1859, trouble arose between a number of soldiers and Howard Spencer. They undertook to prevent him from entering his ranch house in Tooele County; and when he insisted in occupying his own premises, one of them beat him brutally over the head with a gun. His skull was fractured in several places, and for some time his life was despaired of. Such disturbances were encouraged by the action of Judge Cradlebaugh, who in Provo had been having leading men arrested on various spurious charges. By false pretensions he had induced a part of the army to leave camp Floyd and come to Provo. All these troubles the Saints bore with grace and warded off much contention and bloodshed by so doing.

Governor Cumming, however, maintained the attitude which he had first assumed and stood for the right. He condemned openly the course pursued by Judges Cradelbaugh and Sinclair. Naturally, these judges strongly opposed the Governor, and they were aided by the State Secretary, Hartnett, the Indian agent, Fornay, and other disreputable persons who sought the removal of Governor Cumming by circulating misrepresentations against him.

At this time Elder Woodruff records a somewhat humorous incident through which some of the officials and other adventurers were duped by a foreigner whose name was Mogo. This man, it seems, had a brewery in the southern end of the valley, which he  wished to sell at a high price. He brought together a number of merchants, Judge Sinclair, Secretary Hartnett, and other dignitaries. He represented that he had found gold in the hills near his brewery. Elder Woodruff gives the following in the language of Mogo: "'The Mormons have hunted all this country over for gold. They no find him, none at all, but I find him plenty. Heap more than in California. I 'fraid Mormons get him now. My friends, I want you to go with me and get him heap of gold.' The scheme proved too much for those who listened. The word gold was enchanting. It was what the Mormons could not get. The deception worked, and they agreed to buy Mr. Mogo's property, which he divided into thirty shares of one thousand each. His dupes invested. They bought up the shares, started out at night secretly so that the Mormons would not suspect anything. They camped that night at Mogo's brewery. He placed one on guard, while with the others he went in search of the gold. Mr. Brockie stood guard, cursing the cold weather while the others climbed the hills. At a certain point they dug up several bags of dirt and returned with them to the camp. They procured an old pan, and while they were washing out the dirt, one of them stood over the pan with a magnifying glass. The following account is given of their gold washing. Gilbert said: 'Brochie, what do you see?' 'Nothing but mud.' 'There, what is that?' 'Nothing but mud.' An oath followed; and so one bag after another was washed out, and each time they asked Brockie, 'What do you see with the magnifying glass,' and there came back the same withering answer, 'Nothing but mud.' Gilbert shouted out at the top of his voice and with an oath, 'We are sold.'"

In the meantime Mr. Mogo had made his way to Camp Floyd, while his dupes made their way back to Salt Lake City, the poorer if not wiser.

On the 28th of January, 1859, Elder Woodruff's eldest daughter, Susan Cornelia, was united in marriage by him to Robert Scholes; and on March 3rd President Young married the second daughter, Phoebe A. Woodruff, to Elder Lorenzo Snow.

On March 29th Governor Cumming issued a proclamation in which he protested against the act of the United States court in calling out troops to protect the courts when there was no occasion for it. "This," Apostle Woodruff says, "created stronger feelings  than ever among the anti-Mormon element. The action, however, was sustained by the better class of non-Mormons who did not acquiesce in the high-handed proceedings of Judge Cradelbaugh and others."

March 31st Elder Woodruff attended the funeral of Mrs. Mary Woolley, wife of Bishop E. D. Woolley, a woman he esteemed most highly. Her death was greatly lamented, and the authorities, generally, showed their respects by their presence at the funeral and by the discourses which recounted her noble and faithful qualities of mind and heart. Apostle Woodruff was always greatly attached to those who were devoted to the work of God. They were God's friends and he wanted their friendship. It made to him no difference that their station in life was high or low. If they loved the work of God, he loved and honored them. From the accounts given at this funeral, Sister Woolley had been a most exemplary woman. She had been valiant in the support of plural marriage and by her example and precept had sustained valiantly this practice. Perhaps the best testimonial that could be given to the woman, who at her funeral was so extolled, is the exemplary and faithful character of her descendants.

April conference came with its usual call for missionaries and its spiritual feasts which the Saints in those days so much enjoyed. About this time they found relief in the decision of Judge Cradelbaugh to leave the Territory and locate in California. It was an occasion for thanksgiving and gratitude. But the Saints were soon disturbed by a report which reached head-quarters that about two thousand of the troops were on their way to Salt Lake City from Camp Floyd, where they first located upon entering the Territory. They were accompanied by Judge Sinclair. President Young felt somewhat alarmed and at once began preparations to leave the city. He informed Governor Cumming that he would look to him for protection of his family. He said he had no objection to being tried by a respectable court, that he was guilty of no wrong, but that he would not allow himself to fall into the hands of a military mob. He knew very well what that meant. He and the leaders were determined to burn the city and leave it desolate if the soldiers made war upon the people. However, the affair passed by without disturbance and the trouble the Saints so much feared was warded off.

Elder Woodruff related in his journal that on the 1st of July Mr. Miller of the firm of Wardle, Russell, and Miller called upon President Young. It was a firm of speculators who were making money out of the conditions incident to the presence of the United States army. During the conversation Mr. Miller told President Young that Stephen A. Douglas would most certainly be the next president of the United States. Stephen A. Douglas had manifested his hostile attitude toward the Saints. It was like the prediction of a calamity. President Young, however, knew better. He remembered the words of the Prophet Joseph who had prophesied that Douglas should be defeated, in case he ever raised his voice against the Saints. Douglas was beaten and died a disappointed man.

The Fourth of July that year was celebrated with the same spirit of loyalty that had characterized the people in the past. In the early part of July there was organized a Chamber of Commerce for the purpose of protecting the citizens against the exorbitant prices demanded by those merchants who were taking advantage of the times. In his journal Apostle Woodruff reports these words from the lips of President Young: "If this community had done as much as I have to introduce sheep, the whole Territory would now make clothing for its people. I would make my own and wear sheep's gray. It is good enough for me and my family. I shall not stop my labor until we are able to make nails and iron. Now, had those who were intrusted with the business been controlled by principle, they would not have made a failure of this enterprise."

July 13th he records a visit of Horace Greeley and his interview with President Young, Mr. Greeley was very inquisitive about tithing, Church organization, and plural marriage; but to all his questions he received prompt and frank answers. His description of the distinguished visitor in his journal runs as follows: "Mr. Greeley is a singular looking man, fairly well dressed. He had a soft, groaning voice and feminine appearance and asked many questions. However, he was a learned man and his ability must be acknowledged."

On the 16th of July, when Mr. Greeley lectured, he expressed his surprise at seeing any women present. He said: "I had not expected to see a woman while I was here. Well, I do declare, I  am glad to see so many women here tonight." The following Sunday Mr. Greeley sat on the stand in the meeting while Orson Pratt preached on the evidences of the Book of Mormon. Elder Woodruff said: "Mr. Greeley took special notice of the women in the congregation, but fell asleep while the sermon was being preached."

As the year advanced and harvest came on, Elder Woodruff entered his field with cradle in hand. It was the first cradling he had ever done, but with the usual zest which characterized the man, he did the work well. He also worked hard during that summer and fall in teaching the people who came to Zion, and urged among the Saints the new home industries which had been started--the sugar mill and the nail factory.

He recorded in his journal the return of N. V. Jones from India, who brought with him the information which he had derived from a learned man in that country that there was in the Persian library a history in which an account was given of two families who left Jerusalem and set sail for the Western Continent.

On September 18th the elders departing upon their missions received instructions from President Young who is reported as saying in part: "When you labor until your mind is exhausted, stop. Don't overtax it. It is wrong. The way I get through with so much business is to dismiss from my mind the subjects on which I am occupied as soon as the discussion of them is finished. When I get through I think no more about them. I can lie down and go to sleep and let my mind and body rest. Don't fret, nor get in a hurrying spirit, for that wears out the body."

From October 18th, until December 1st, 1859, Elder Woodruff passed through a serious period of sickness, the worst he had ever experienced in his life. Much of that time his life was despaired of. On one occasion he gave his family parting instructions and prepared his mind for the other world. He was administered to by the authorities who were prompted to prophesy his recovery. This promise awakened his faith and he rallied and lived for nearly thirty-nine years.
