THE YEARS 1862-63.

Killing of Thieves.--John Baptiste, the Grave Digger.--Value of a Daily Journal.--Erection of the Salt Lake Theatre.--State of Deseret.--Foundation Stones of Temple Raised.--Indian Troubles on Bear River.--Visit of the Moquitches to Salt Lake City.--Their Customs.--Attempt To Arrest President Young.--Settlement of Bear Lake Valley.--Mining.

The new year, 1862, found Elder Woodruff in both a reminiscent and prophetic mood. He had closed his journal of the previous year by pointing out the fulfillment of prophecy. He still felt that the hand of God was in the affairs of this nation, even though he regretted the sorrow and suffering the war was bringing on. He wrote his predictions of still greater bloodshed, of pestilence, earthquake, and famine. "This," he said, "is a wicked generation, and the earth groans under its abominations, and because of these things, the Lord will pour out his judgments upon the wicked of the earth until the earth is cleansed from them." The spirit of the historian was upon him. His New Year's day he celebrated in the Historian's Office, writing the events of Church history. It was a great history. It would be greater as time went on; and in years to come, men would want to know even the slightest details of those events, which in their day seemed to be of passing consequence.

He speaks of Wood Reynolds, the stage driver, who gave the retiring Governor, John W. Dawson, "a good sound thrashing" at Ephraim Hanks' stage station, while the stage driver's horses were being changed. This he did because Dawson had grossly insulted the widow of Thos. Williams and other women.

January 6th he designated as one of the most important days in the history of the Church since its location in the Valleys. That day a mass-meeting was held, and nine delegates were elected to attend a Territoral Convention which was to frame a constitution, organize a provisional state government, and ask for admission into the Union. He was a strong advocate of the movement, even though he did not feel quite sure that the Saints  would obtain their full rights. They were at least pursuing a course that all true and loyal men should pursue under like circumstances. The experience of the people with federal officials had been a most unhappy one. The spirit and prejudice which had sent the army to Utah also sent its federal officials. They came with malice in their hearts, and of course were not prepared to do justice to an unpopular people. Elder Woodruff did not believe that men should sit supinely by and allow their rights to be trampled upon without a protest. He thought it was becoming in free men to assert their rights and demand justice that they might maintain their self-respect, even though their protestations were unheeded.

The delegates to this Convention were Daniel H. Wells, Albert Carrington, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Abraham O. Smoot, James Ferguson, Reuben Miller, Archibald Gardener, and Elias Smith,--all men of strong character and of great integrity.

From Elder Woodruff's journal, the people were tried, even exasperated, by the thefts and other depredations committed by men of unscrupulous character. In those trying times the people could illy afford the loss that came to them by the work of the cattle thieves. On the 17th of January he reports the killing of Lot Huntington, John Smith, and Moroni Clawson, who resisted the officers while the latter were attempting to arrest the former. The first named was killed in Rush Valley, the latter two in Salt Lake City, while attempting their escape.

On the 27th Elder Woodruff's journal also contains an account of John Baptiste's episode in the cemetery. This grave digger, after finishing his official duties exhumed the bodies, and robbed the dead of their clothing. The discovery of this grave digger's crime was made when the friends of Moroni Clawson obtained permission to remove his remains from the city cemetery to that of Big Cottonwood. His clothing was gone. The grave digger was at once suspected, and upon arrest, made confession. He had practiced his crime for years.

Baptiste was born in Venice, in 1814. He followed the occupation of a grave digger in Australia, where he also robbed the dead. From the proceeds of his criminal practice he built a house of worship and contributed it to the Methodist church in that land.

On February 12th, Elder Woodruff recorded a synopsis of a lecture he gave in the Seventies' Hall upon history and journalizing. The house was crowded. Among other things, he said: "I think it more profitable for the Saints to meet to hear lectures delivered on various principles than to spend so much time in dancing and light amusement. I would recommend Rawlins' Ancient History. This author gives a history of the ancient nations, describes their conditions, literature, and laws, and especially their wars. I also recommend the reading of Josephus, the great Jewish historian. It appears to me, that no man can read it with indifference. His account of the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans, in the light of fulfillment of prophecy, the destruction of the Jewish city and its temple, are of great interest to those who enjoy reading and gaining information that will be of lasting benefit. In order that history may be preserved for future historians, records and journals should be kept."

He went on to refer to the testimony which those who kept journals in ancient dispensations have left for the edification and faith of succeeding generations. "Men should write down the things which God has made known to them. Whether things are important or not, often depends upon God's purposes; but the testimony of the goodness of God and the things He has wrought in the lives of men will always be important as a testimony."

In those days the Seventies' Hall was the centre of an educational effort to uplift the people in learning relating to the arts and sciences. It was largely a work of self-improvement, of mutual aid. Elder Woodruff was always present when there was anything instructive or elevating to be imparted. He loved history. His spirit was the historian's spirit, and passing events, to his mind, should be carefully recorded that God might, if He would, give them importance according to the needs and history of His people.

The spirit of the leaders in those days was to be educational whether they were attending lectures, reading history, or enjoying themselves in amusement. Everything should be to the honor and glory of God. Their lives were strenuous, and there was need of relaxation. Anything that was elevating, or that could be made elevating, was to be for the glory of God and the happiness of His people. The theatre was thought to be desirable, and the Salt Lake Theatre was erected in 1861 and 1862, and dedicated  on the 2nd day of March in the latter year with the same fervent desire to recognize God in all things. D. H. Wells pronounced the dedicatory benediction. President Young upon that occasion offered remarks instructing the people upon the character of their amusement. One of the first plays to be rendered in the new theatre was "Pride at the Market of Versailles."

It is wonderful how Wilford Woodruff busied himself in a multitude of occupations. His journal furnishes evidence of a remarkably busy life. One moment he was recording stirring events in the history of the world; then he is writing Church history; the next moment tells something of a correspondence received from those who desire information concerning the Latter-day Saints. The next page contains an account of his orchard and the work of planting more fruit trees; later, he is found in the irrigation furrows; then he is addressing missionaries upon their duties and responsibilities; on the same page he opens a prophetic inspiration of his soul, and tells of things to come. In all he sees the glory and goodness of God. He listens to the words of the prophet and makes a careful record of them. Then he discourses upon the principles of a free government and the rights of the people under a constitution.

The State of Deseret had been formed. President Young was elected the first Governor of the State. He delivered his message to the legislature, and all went on in the spirit of sincerity and earnestness. They would do their part, even though they were denied admission to the Union. With them, the fulfillment of every duty, as they saw it, had a place in divine economy; and their acts, though apparently unavailing, were like bread upon the waters to return after many days.

Elder Woodruff records on January 8th, 1862, the following words from President Young: "Moses took the children of Israel out of Egypt into the wilderness, and there taught them the principles of their every-day life. It is the same with the Saints here. They gather to Zion so that they may be taught how to live. We cannot teach this in the world, for there, we preach the gospel of Christ; but when they come here to Zion, they should be taught in all the duties of every day life, including housekeeping, farming, work in the orchard, and on the farm."

In the spring of 1862, there was considerable destruction  through high water and floods, whose damage was witnessed in the destruction of mill-dams, fences, bridges, and grain fields. Elder Woodruff in these trying scenes was found at the front with his shovel in his hand, working strenuously to protect the fields from damage. He drops his shovel to devote himself to the ministry. He lays his hands upon the head of his sick and old-time friend, A. O. Smoot. He rebukes the disease and fever and notes an immediate change that takes place in the sick man's condition, and acknowledges the hand of God in it. He attends the funeral of Frederick Gadd, a man whose integrity and character won his admiration; for no matter how humble a man's position in the Church, Elder Woodruff loved and honored him, if convinced that he loved and honored God.

On June the 9th, Elder Woodruff wrote that the foundation stones of the Temple were raised because of the poor work done on it by the masons. The work was a disappointment to Brigham Young and the leading men.

Elder Woodruff recounts the trouble with the Morrisites in Weber County, an account of which is fully given elsewhere. He also gives a description of the grand celebration of the Fourth of July that year. There was a program consisting of speeches, songs, recitations, etc., and in the evening a ball was given at the Social Hall.

Of the war which was then going on, and which was watched by him with the utmost attention, he said: "There has been more bloodshed and lives lost in the United States in the battles between the North and South than there were in the Revolutionary War and that of 1812. In the ten principal battles, the number slain and wounded will not fall far short of half a million. Many have died the past year through pestilence. A vast amount of property has been destroyed by fire. The spirit of disunion seems to increase among the people. There has been a great want of breadstuff in England and France, caused in a great measure by closing the Southern ports against the exportation of cotton. France has opened war with Mexico. There are many widows and orphans and much lamentation and mourning throughout the land, but the end is not yet. While these troubles are going on, the Saints are gathering home to Zion to build up the Kingdom of God, that the Lord may rule over His Saints. Nearly five  thousand Saints have gathered to the Valley the past year. Many improvements have been made and the blessings of God have been with His people."

On the 4th of January, in the year of 1863, Elder Woodruff records the news of the Emancipation Message by President Lincoln, and the results of some of the great battles. His history, during those times, showed him to be a close student of current events which he interpreted in the light of God's revelations in this dispensation.

The Saints could not very well entertain much hope of admission into the Union, yet the Provisional State Government which had been organized continued, and met in its opening session, January 19th. Elder Woodruff was an active member, and by this time was becoming somewhat familiar with the duties of a legislator. Governor Young, under the State constitution, delivered his message, and two thousand copies were published for circulation. Not much work, however, was accomplished. "Many," said President Young, "may not be able to tell why we are in this capacity. I do not think you understand this matter as it is. Our constitution, which has been sent to Washington, has been closely scrutinized by the members of Congress. If we do not take care of ourselves, no one else will take care of us."

On February 3rd, 1863, Elder Woodruff recorded the birth of his son, Ashael Hart, who was named after his uncle. He was the son of his wife Emma, and is now bishop of the Waterloo Ward in the Granite stake of Zion.

On the same date, Elder Woodruff gave an extensive account of the trouble with the Bannock and the Snake River Indians north of Bear River. They had been killing miners and emigrants, who were on their way to Oregon. He says: "Colonel Connor sent a part of his command to the Indians to get a white boy that was among them. They got the boy but killed a number of the Indians and then returned to Camp Douglas, near the city. Thereupon, the Indians began killing more white men. Col. Connor then sent against them sixty infantry and fifteen baggage wagons. Later, he sent three hundred cavalry. They found the Indians encamped near Bear River, which they had to ford in order to get to them. The Indians were camped in a big ravine. The cavalry made a charge upon them, but were driven back. They then left the horses and made a charge on foot, and were again repulsed. The third time, they made a charge and rushed into their midst. They used their revolvers and shot as long as they could find anything to shoot at. The result of the battle, as reported, was two hundred and twenty-five Indians killed, four hundred horses taken. The loss of Col. Connor's command was seventeen dead, forty wounded, and seventy badly frozen. Two officers were also wounded, and it is reported that Lieutenant D. Chase, once a Mormon elder, was mortally wounded. He was ordained into the Quorum of Seventies on the corner-stone of the Temple in Far West, at the time that George A. Smith and myself were ordained into the Quorum of the Twelve. Chase went to California where he apostatized and joined the army."

About the same time he recorded a visit of three Moquitche Indians with Jacob Hamblin to President Young. These Indians were entertained part of the time, during their stay, at the home of Elder Woodruff who made them very welcome, and of course learned from them and from Elder Hamblin all that he could about their lives and customs.

"The Moquitche Indians live in New Mexico, one hundred and twenty-five miles southeast of the Colorado, and three hundred and thirty-five miles from St. George. They live in a walled city built upon top of the rocks as a protection from their enemies. They do not go to war nor fight except in extreme cases of self-defense. They never scalp an enemy and do not like to shed blood. They cultivate the earth, raise corn, beans, melons, pumpkins, squash, red pepper, and a large quantity of peaches. They also raise cotton, keep sheep and goats, and spin and weave their own cloth. They have seven villages. The largest town has about three hundred families. All told, they number about two thousand souls. They are very intelligent and light colored. There are some with blue and some with hazel eyes. They have never mixed their blood with any white man or other Indian tribes.

"They have a tradition that good men will come from the West and bring them the truth. They think we are the prophets, and they have come as ambassadors to see the people and to learn if we are the ones they have been looking for. They seem anxious that we should instruct and direct them in their affairs. Their forefathers  formerly lived west of the Colorado but their enemies drove them east of the river.

"Twenty-four men now went as a company to visit these Indians, and found them quite poor. They had been robbed by the Navajoes, they had few sheep, but a good crop of grain. During one of their drouths, Elder Woodruff recounts the fact that in answer to their prayers the snow fell to a depth of one foot."

Speaking of Elder Hamblin's efforts to bring the Indians North he wrote that when the Lamanites reached the Colorado, they were afraid to cross it; but upon being urged by Elder Hamblin to make the effort, they offered sacrifice in the following manner: "The Indians took some cotton thread of their own spinning, about eighteen inches long, and tied in each end a bunch of feathers as big as a man's thumb. They then placed it in the edge of the water, then they put some bread called 'piek' between the feathers. They also had some dried peaches which they put into the water. Afterwards, they sprinkled consecrated white cornmeal upon its surface, and later reached the opposite bank safely. They then proceeded to thank the Lord for bringing them over without harm."

On the 13th of February Elder Woodruff recorded the death of N. V. Jones of whom he says: "He has been a true and valuable man, always a minute man, ready to go at the call of the Presidency of the Church. From the time he was taken sick he felt that his hour had come."

At this time the leaders were greatly harassed by federal officers who sought to bring trouble upon President Young and other leaders of the Church. Those were exciting times and the people were often aroused to a spirit of determined resistance. On November 3rd of that year, Wilford Woodruff writes that a great mass-meeting was held in the Tabernacle to protest against the conduct of Governor Stephen S. Harding, and Judges Drake, and Waite, and to ask for their removal. An effort was then made to arrest President Young by military force on a charge of polygamy, but he opposed such an unlawful proceeding. Hundreds of men turned out to defend him, whereupon Col. Connor and his soldiers returned to the Fort. Excitement ran high, but there were no serious occurrences at the time.

As these events took place, they were recorded by Elder  Woodruff in the dispassionate manner of the historian who seeks diligently to record facts. It is wonderful how quietly and effectively he could turn from exciting scenes to the ordinances in the house of God, and then to his labors about his home. His faith was a constant quality, and his administration was sought by the sick and afflicted. Orson Pratt at this time was in a critical condition. In administering to him Elder Woodruff said: "I told him in the name of the Lord that he should live and not die, for he had not finished his work in the flesh." He began at once to improve, and in a few days was able to attend meeting.

That Wilford Woodruff had a true conception of the message and work of Mormonism, is evinced by the great pleasure which he took in the call of his son Wilford to a mission. It was something to which he had looked forward with great pleasure. No greater honor can come to a man than the privilege of carrying the gospel to the nations of the earth. To have sons was, of course, a great joy; but to meet the expectations of their father, they should fill honorable missions and maintain their integrity in the Church.

It was now time to divert his work from the Historian's Office to the farm and to the care of his sheep. In those days the warm sulphur springs were converted into a sort of dipping vat in which one hundred and twenty-eight sheep could be washed during the day. Whether dipping sheep, or sowing grain, or writing history there was the same enthusiastic devotion in all he did.

On June 12th he recorded the killing of two stage drivers coming from Camp Floyd; and on the 12th he also recorded the drowning of Albert Smith, in the Jordan River. He was the first male child born in the Church after the entrance of the Latter-day Saints into the Valley. He was a good youth, dutiful to his parents, and died in the faith.

When the mid-summer months arrived, and his fields and orchards could be left, he set out upon a journey in company with President Young to different parts of the Territory. Fruit growing was at that time the theme of many discourses. He stated in his record of July 31st that, "With J. V. Long. Thos. Bullock, Robert Campbell, and John Jacques, I visited in Provo the garden of Brother Hemingway. He has the best orchard, nursery, and flower garden combined in the Territory." A little later they returned  from the South and went on a visit to Logan. There, while addressing the Saints, he pointed to the hill east of the town and prophesied that a temple of the Lord would soon be built upon it. When President Young arose to speak, he said that Apostle Woodruff had spoken by revelation and his words would be fulfilled. As all know, President Woodruff lived to see that Temple completed and dedicated to the Lord.

It was on this visit to Cache Valley, in the latter part of August, 1863, that a decision was reached to form settlements on Bear River. Apostle Chas. C. Rich was placed in charge of those called to settle the valley east of Cache, which was subsequently known as Rich County.

On the return of President Young from Logan, a meeting was held in Ogden where the Word of Wisdom was preached with great force, and where President Young spoke strongly against the practice of some of the people in leaving their farms to become prospectors for gold and silver. In those times, the mining excitement in California was running high. If the Saints were to remain in the Valleys of the Mountains where they were to build up settlements by co-operative effort, they must not yield to the temptation of the mines in California. If they began mining here, it was the first step to the abandonment of the farm and a rush to the gold fields of the coast.

Elder Woodruff related in his journal the circumstance of a brother who went three times to President Young to secure his approval of a trip to California for the purpose of making money. Each time, the President counseled him to remain at home, but finally yielding to the man's entreaties he said: "Yes, go if you will against counsel. You will make money but you will lose it before you get home."

The man went. After remaining about a year and accumulating several bags of gold-dust, he was greatly elated by his success, and started home with his money; but the word of prophecy was against him, and when a few days out from San Bernardino, he was held up by a gang of robbers and relieved of all his gold-dust. The man returned to Utah with some remorse of conscience and a witness to the folly of treating lightly the counsel of his superior in a wild desire to obtain wealth.

In September of that year, in consequence of the agitation  that was going on against the leading brethren, and the efforts to try Presidents Young and Wells upon false charges, the brethren left their homes for a place of safety while the excitement lasted. Elder Woodruff reported at some length the circumstance of the death and funeral of Sister Ivins, the grandmother of Apostles Heber J. Grant, and A. W. Ivins. Her funeral sermon was preached by President Young who spoke in the highest terms of love and esteem for the deceased. "She was a woman," he said, "of faith and good works, worthy of the confidence and respect of all. We shall meet her in the resurrection. She has been well treated by her children and by all the family, and I feel to bless them for it."

During these times Elder Woodruff's journal contained frequent instances of the healing of the sick by the laying on of hands both in his own home and in the household of his friends. He often dwelt in a reminiscent mood upon the manifestation of God's power in the healing of the sick throughout the early history of the Church and during the early days in the Valleys of the Mountains. He spoke of the goodness of God, of His wonderful mercy and of His divine power manifested in behalf of the Saints. All that he said and all that he did he ascribed to the glory of God. To him, death, however, is nothing, if men and women die in the faith of the Lord Jesus. It is a wonderful faith which he recorded through every year of his life, and his daily record shows that he never abandoned his faith or felt desolate or despondent in the midst of the most trying scenes. He was no pessimist. Every page of his journal threw out hope, and revealed a spirit of grand expectations.

July 27th, Elder Woodruff recorded trouble with the Indians in Cache Valley in which Irwin Merrill was killed, and his brother seriously wounded.

He also recorded on a subsequent date a statement by President Young respecting the claim of Sidney Rigdon, in 1844. Of those times President Young said: "When I met with the Saints in Nauvoo the first time after the Prophet's death and defended the arguments of the Twelve against the claims of Sidney Rigdon, I had in mind then that there would be a presidency of three appointed, but I knew the people were not prepared for it at the time; and on our return with the pioneers to the Valley, I  broached the subject, first to Apostle Woodruff and then to the rest of the Quorum. They received and sustained it."

On the first of September, a large company of Saints, largely from Germany and Switzerland, reached the city. They were under the presidency of Elder James D. Ross. Elders Woodruff, George A. Smith, Lorenzo Snow, and F. D. Richards paid them a visit and gave them special instructions relating to their new homes and their duties and labors in Zion. Elder Bonnelli acted as their interpreter. Elder Woodruff recorded the following words from the mouth of Elder George A. Smith, by way of instructions to the Swiss and German Saints: "Be faithful. Repent of your sins and live your religion. Don't be in a hurry to marry men who profess to save women by the wholesale. Wait until you get acquainted and find out that men are worthy to be saved themselves, before you marry them. Be careful not to be cheated by speculators. Some who come here feel that everyone should be perfect. When they see the failings of men, they become dissatisfied, without looking at their own failings. Don't be in a hurry to get rich. Do right, and all will be well with you. When we first came here, we had nothing given us to eat. There was only that which we brought with us. You should turn your hand to any honorable employment. Don't be greedy to get too much land to begin with; what you get, cultivate well. Learn all you can of the work of God, for I know it is His work, and Joseph Smith was a true prophet."

Elder Woodruff recorded at this time a visit of Captain Burton of the British Army, whom he describes as a free, noble-minded man. President George A. Smith gave him a history of the troubles of the Saints for the past five years. Captain Burton had traveled extensively and threw off the yoke of prejudice and superstition.

September 9th, that year, in his address to the Saints in the Tabernacle, President Young spoke at length upon the conduct of those missionaries who accumulated money while on their mission with which to buy goods and establish themselves as merchants. Some of the money used for this purpose he said had been obtained from the Saints abroad. Such a practice was severely rebuked, and the missionaries, generally, were instructed thereafter to abstain from such a course.
