THE YEARS, 1872-74.

Judge McKean.--Journalizing.--Early Church Historians.--Holy Ghost.--Visit to San Francisco.--Funerals of Pitt and Player.--Thomas
L. Kane.--Garden of Eden.--Paralysis.--Earl Rosebury.--Fall from a Tree.

According to Elder Woodruff's journal, the year 1872 opened with a heavy snow-storm. The year also found the Saints considerably agitated over the indictments found against Brigham Young and leading men of the Church, on the charge of murder. These indictments had been largely the result of Judge McKean's well-known animosity toward the Mormons, and especially toward the leaders of the Church. He was styled "a judge with a mission." The conduct of Judge McKean was so full of bias, and his rulings so unjust in all matters touching the Mormon people, that he made himself, more or less, a terror to the Latter-day Saints.

In his journal at the opening of 1872, Elder Woodruff said: "Certain men in the nation, high in authority, have set themselves up against the work of God and are determined to destroy it if possible." Elder Woodruff began to predict the failure of such men as McKean to accomplish the ends they had in view. So far as McKean was concerned, his predictions were fulfilled. On the 20th he gave the synopsis in his journal that he made upon the subject of keeping a record of events in the affairs of the Church by those who had responsibilities resting upon them. "There is one subject I wish to speak upon and that is the keeping of a journal with respect to the dealings of God with us. I have many times thought the Quorum of the Twelve and others considered me rather enthusiastic upon this subject; but when the Prophet Joseph organized the Quorum of the Twelve, he counseled them to keep a history of their lives, and gave his reasons why they should do so. I have had this spirit and calling upon me since I first entered this Church. I made a record from the first sermon I heard, and from that day until now I have kept a daily journal. Whenever I heard Joseph Smith preach, teach, or prophesy, I always  felt it my duty to write it; I felt uneasy and could not eat, drink, or sleep until I did write; and my mind has been so exercised upon this subject that when I heard Joseph Smith teach and had no pencil or paper, I would go home and sit down and write the whole sermon, almost word for word and sentence by sentence as it was delivered, and when I had written it it was taken from me, I remembered it no more. This was the gift of God to me.

"The devil has sought to take away my life from the day I was born until now, more so even than the lives of other men. I seem to be a marked victim of the adversary. I can find but one reason for this: the devil knew if I got into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I would write the history of that Church and leave on record the works and teachings of the prophets, of the apostles and elders. I have recorded nearly all the sermons and teachings that I ever heard from the Prophet Joseph, I have in my journal many of the sermons of President Brigham Young, and such men as Orson Hyde, Parley P. Pratt and others. Another reason I was moved upon to write in the early days was that nearly all the historians appointed in those times apostatized and took the journals away with them."

"Another subject I wish to say a few words upon here is the spirit of God to men, the Holy Ghost which is given the Saints, the inspiration of the Almighty which giveth the spirit of men understanding. That spirit is the greatest testimony man can possess. His eyes and ears may be deceived in seeing the miracles such as the magicians wrought in the days of Moses, and such as false prophets will work in the last days, but when men receive the Holy Ghost they can not be deceived. It is not in the thunder or in the whirl-wind that we should look for the spirit of God, but in the still small voice.

"I give one instance in which I profited by the spirit. When I was bringing the eastern Saints to this Valley, I arrived in Pittsburg, and there I chartered a steamboat to take the Saints to St. Louis. As soon as I had done it the spirit said to me, 'Don't go on board of that boat.' The captain relieved me and I chartered another. The steamer that I first chartered, after starting down the river, soon took fire, burned the wheels and ropes in two, and  nearly all the passengers either burned to death or were drowned. Such an experience is given to many elders in this Church."

This year's journal also contains the accounts of the customary journeys, north and south, to the various communities of the Saints. In Payson, on the 20th day of July, he dedicated the new meeting-house. He was also busy that year on his farm and in his efforts to build up a home at Randolph, in Rich County.

On the 9th of September, in company with George A. Smith, George Q. Cannon, and A. M. Musser, he paid a visit to the Pacific Coast. His purpose was to attend the state fair of California, as he was President of the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society of Utah. His journal contains a long account of the things he saw and the things which greatly interested him.

The following excerpts are taken from it:

"This morning found us at Truckee, at the foot of the Sierra Nevada Mountains. We had a view of the lake where the company of emigrants perished in 1847.

"San Francisco is a very fine place. The city looks as though it were a hundred years old instead of twenty. It contains 175,000 inhabitants and a vast amount of wealth. We visited China's part of the city, saw the Chinese god and the temples where fires were continually burning. They are very numerous in that city. We visited Mr. Alston's princely palace and were received with all the attention that princes could expect. He had a telegraph line from his bank in San Francisco to his dwelling, twenty miles distant. He had telegraphed to the family to receive us kindly and make us happy, and they did so. His princely mansion did not cost less than a million dollars, and his wife spent a quarter of a million in furnishing it. The chairs were made of the finest ebony in China. Even the spitoons were carved out of the finest Parisian marble. The rooms were decorated with marble statuary and bronze. The chandeliers cost many thousands of dollars, in fact, the whole palace had more the appearance of a museum than of a private dwelling. It had its Turkish and Russian baths. There were scores of bath rooms, of baths connected with the bedrooms. He had a retort and made his own gas for the purpose of lighting his dwelling and barns. There were many mirrors, large and costly. The surrounding grounds of 100 acres were cultivated at great expense. I almost felt like spending the night in visiting the house and surroundings  instead of going to sleep. I became so dazed and bewildered with the scenery and attention of the last twenty-four hours, since our arrival in California, that I felt like asking myself the question: 'Am I an elder of the Church of Christ of Latter-day Saints? If so, what is coming over the world that such a great change is manifest towards us?'"

During this visit, Elder Woodruff and his companions received great attention from the leading men of San Francisco, and were given every opportunity of witnessing the growth of California as set forth in the exhibits of the State Fair. Elder Woodruff took a great deal of pleasure in the wonderful showing of fine animals, and witnessed the races with great pleasure.

Continuing the description of his visit, he said: "The Governor showed us on this visit to Sacramento every attention. We were escorted through the State House that had cost $2,500,000. We went to the top of it, 280 feet high. On the 22nd, a Sunday, we attended the Catholic Church and heard Father Calcham preach. His discourse was a very good, practical sermon. We attended the Methodist Sunday school in the afternoon. We endeavored also to attend the Baptist Church in the evening, but in consequence of the street cars, which delayed us, we were disappointed in that part of our program."

Apostle Woodruff was painstaking in recording all that interested and delighted him during this his first visit to the western coast. In later life, he paid several visits to California, and something like twenty-six years from that time laid down his life on the shore of the Golden Gate. He returned in time to attend the semi-annual conference of that year, and he recorded the fact that the mission of President George A. Smith and others to the Holy Land was considered at this time. The purpose of the mission was to dedicate the land of Palestine again for the return of Judah and of the Twelve Tribes.

The close of the year 1872 and the first of the year 1873 again found Elder Woodruff at his home in Randolph. He and his wife, Sarah, her children, and his son, Wilford and family, were among the earliest pioneers of Rich County. New Year's day 1873, found him busily engaged in putting floors in his house. That part of the state is a higher altitude, and being located well to the north, the climate there is more severe than in Salt Lake  Valley. Notwithstanding he was now sixty-five years of age, he faced the storms and severe winds and flying snow with as much pluck as a man of twenty-five. At intervals he enjoyed a hunt very much, from which he rarely ever returned empty-handed.

He spoke in the journal at this time of the special interest he felt in the Deseret News as a medium of instruction and of correct information to the Latter-day Saints. He felt that it was a proper guide to the people, if well edited, and would keep them in harmony with the elders. At one time he was appointed editor of the News, but being overburdened, he could not do justice to the call and was honorably released.

After his return to Salt Lake City on the 3rd of February that year, he, with others, started on a visit to Cache Valley by the Utah Central and Utah Northern Railroads. Although two engines were used to draw the one car in which the party rode, they were unable to plow their way through the snow-drifts, through Box Elder and Cache.

February 23rd found him again in Salt Lake City, where he attended the funeral of William Pitt, a man who had received the gospel from his teachings in Herefordshire, in the year 1840. His funeral was attended by hundreds of people and there were several bands of music in attendance. Elder Woodruff was one of the speakers on that occasion. He mentions a peculiar circumstance which took place at that time. Brother William Player, then eighty years old, was one of the pall-bearers. The handle broke in his hand, and turning aside he leaned up against a post. His son, who was anxious about his father's condition, went immediately to his assistance, and when asked what the trouble was, said: "My breath has given out, but I would like to follow my old friend to the grave, for I shall soon be in a similar condition myself. I wonder if as many will attend my funeral when I die?" The father was taken home in a wagon, and in about four hours was dead. Elder Woodruff also preached at his funeral.

On the 4th of March he gave an account of a visit of Thomas L. Kane and wife to Utah; and on that day, with President Young and party, he accompanied this old-time friend and wife as far as Ogden on their return home to the East. Colonel Kane had done much to defend the Latter-day Saints against their foes and to alleviate their sufferings in times of trial. Colonel Kane was also  pleased at that time at the failure of Congress to pass bills affecting the Latter-day Saints.

At a conference of the Sunday school children in the old Tabernacle, on the 30th of March, Elder Woodruff reported President Young as saying, "I thought while I was looking at the school children to-day that I should see a larger assembly of them in the spirit world, and I wondered if there I should see as large a percentage of grown people with them, that is, of teachers to direct their minds there as they are doing here. Joseph, the Prophet, told me that the Garden of Eden was in Jackson County, Missouri. When Adam was driven out he went to the place we now call Adam-ondi-Ahman, Daviess County, Missouri. There he built an altar and offered sacrifices."

At the April conference President Young chose five additional counselors because of the heavy labors devolving upon him. These were Lorenzo Snow, George Q. Cannon, Brigham Young, Jr., Albert Carrington, and John W. Young. President George A. Smith at that time was made trustee-in-trust with twelve other brethren as his assistants.

On the 12th of May twelve high counselors were selected for the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, and about that time William Hyde, William Budge, Elias Smith, and fifty others were selected to receive ordination to the office of patriarch.

June 1st he visited Provo in company with President Young. The latter, in speaking there of another temple, said that he had once asked the Lord what kind of temple we should build. The answer was that He did not make any two things alike, and we need not build two temples alike. On the 18th of the same month he went as far east as Evanston to meet George A. Smith and his party on their return from Palestine. The description of that country greatly interested Apostle Woodruff, whose familiarity with the Scriptures made those ancient scenes of prophets and apostles very sacred to him.

On the 9th and 10th of August meetings were held in the new Tabernacle, where President Young, Elder Woodruff said, chided the Saints for the too frequent claim on their part for the sacrifices which they made for the gospel's sake. Instead of making sacrifices, he said, they were only exchanging dross for gold. Apostle Joseph F. Smith at the time further remarked on the same  subject that it was almost a libel on the Lord the way some people talked about making sacrifices for the gospel's sake. He then pointed out to them the blessings they had received temporally, spiritually, and socially. Their circumstances were in every way more favorable than those which surrounded them in the land they had left.

About this time a party of editors from the East came to Salt Lake City, and in August Elder Woodruff escorted them to places of interest, including the Temple Quarry, at Granite, and Provo. The party also visited Lehi, American Fork Canyon, and on their return to Salt Lake City a feast was given them and they were treated in a most hospitable manner.

Elder Woodruff recorded in his journal that on the 25th of September, 1873, he was stricken apparently with paralysis; his condition was alarming to both himself and members of his family. To him it seemed that he could live but a short time. "A strange feeling came over me, I turned out my horses and went to bed. I felt as though I was stricken with death and should live but a short time. My blood, spirit, and life all seemed to be leaving my limbs, and death to be closing around my heart and vitals. I sent for my wife, Phoebe, and Brother George Q. Cannon. I also sent for my neighbor, Brother William Wagstaff, who came and administered to me. I suppose he came quickly, but it seemed to me it was an hour before he reached the bedside. When he came I felt as though I was about to give up the ghost. He laid his hands upon me and rebuked the affliction and I was instantly liberated. Soon, Mrs. Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, and Brigham Young, Jr., arrived. These brethren also blessed me, and returned home." For a time his limbs were affected with numbness and he was generally feeble; however, he lived, subsequent to this, twenty-five years and three days. Speaking of his condition at the time he wrote: "I feel the effects of the paralytic stroke, and unless there is a change in me, my journal writing in this life is about done; but should I not live to finish my biography, it is my desire that the historians of the Church or some friends do it for me."

It was only a short time after this that he found himself again active in his ministerial duties. On the 14th of October he visited Provo, where he took part in the dedication of the Utah County  Court House. It was an occasion of special public interest and attended by prominent men in the County as well as in the Territory. Elder Woodruff mentioned the visit of a distinguished Scotch earl who subsequently became Lord Rosebery, at one time Prime Minister of England. "He was a young man then, quite unassuming, free, easy and sociable," said Elder Woodruff. He had come from England to Salt Lake City to see President Young and the Latter-day Saints. The young earl conversed about an hour with the Church leaders and after taking supper with them went to the ball in President Young's party. The next day the party visited the seminary, factory, Z. C. M. I., and other places of interest about the town.

President Woodruff was again taken to Provo on the 25th of November to celebrate with the citizens there the beginning of the Utah Southern Railroad. It was perhaps the greatest assemblage of people the town had ever known. The progress of the railroad was always a source of special pride to Elder Woodruff, who realized how much the development of the Territory depended upon improved means of transportation.

It was a practice of Elder Woodruff to record the death of his friends, especially those who had been devoted to the cause which he represented and who were faithful to the end. He gives in a general way the characters of the men and the work they performed, when he pays tribute to them at the time of their death. On the 2nd of March he made special record of the death of Bishop William Hyde of Hyde Park, Cache County. Bishop Hyde was a brother of his old missionary friend, Heman Hyde. William, he speaks of as a member of the Mormon Battalion and refers to him as a leading spirit in building up Cache Valley; mentions the fact that he was probate judge and prominent in the Territorial militia. He also mentions on the 11th of April, 1874, the death of an old associate, Robert L. Campbell, a man, in his estimation, who was tried and true. A summary from his journal of many of the grand characters in Church history, who bore the burden in the heat of the day, would be interesting were it not beyond the scope of this biography. Elder Woodruff had a high sense of appreciation for those honored Saints of God, who were true to themselves and true to the Church.

Conference of that year was postponed until May 7th, in consequence  of the prolonged stay of President Young that winter in St. George. On his return, President Young gave out as a key-note of the conference, the subject of the United Order, a subject that had evidently weighed upon his mind during that winter. When free from all strife, from his struggles and contentions, he enjoyed the communion of the spirit, which opened to him the great duty that rested upon the Saints to put in operation God's purposes with regard to the United Order, by the consecration of the private wealth to the common good of the people. The underlying principle of the United Order was that there should be no rich and no poor, that men's talents should be used for the common good, and that selfish interests should make way for a more benevolent and generous spirit among the Saints.

Wilford Woodruff, before closing his biography for the year 1874, recorded one of those accidents with which his life was peculiarly beset. He fell from a tree, a distance of about ten feet, and was quite seriously hurt, especially in his side and hip. One naturally wonders what a man at his time of life was doing up a tree. In the first place, with Elder Woodruff it was never a question of age when he saw something he thought ought to be done, provided it was possible for him to do it. He was everywhere. It never required any length of time for him to change his surroundings or labors, he was ready for any emergency at any time. If he saw a limb in the top of an apple tree that should be sawed off, the thought barely took possession of him before he was in the top of the tree, and it was always hard for him to ask anybody else to do a thing that he could do himself.
