ST. GEORGE TEMPLE DEDICATED.

Visit to Randolph.--Governor Axtell.--Visit of President Grant.--Visit of Dom Pedro, Emperor of Brazil.--Dedication of St. George Temple.--A Grand Birthday Celebration.

On January 6th, 1875, Elder Woodruff accompanied by his son-in-law, Jesse Moses, left for Randolph, Rich County. Although the winter there was very cold he hauled wood from the mountains for the use of his family. He records that on the 17th of the month three men, while on their way from Evanston to Woodruff, had their feet badly frozen. With Bishop Lee he went to visit them and did all he could to save the unfortunate persons from the necessity of having their feet amputated. While in that section of the country he visited the Saints in Bear Lake as far north as Paris. On his return to Salt Lake City he met on the train, and became acquainted with the new Governor of Utah, Samuel B. Axtell. "I was much pleased with his sentiment and spirit," writes Elder Woodruff in his journal. Axtell was so honest and fair with all parties that the anti-Mormon element, whose tool he refused to become, by their opposition succeeded in obtaining his removal in about one month after he reached Utah. He was then made Governor of one of the southern territories. While in Utah, he spoke one night in the Liberal Institute, and related some of the iron-clad laws of the Medes and Persians. "God grant," he said, "that such a rule may never come to Utah." He was a man of good education and of refinement, and was fairly opposed to the corrupt methods of Judge McKean, as well as to those of other Federal officials.

On the 19th of February he went to York, terminus of the Utah Southern, where he met President Young and George A. Smith on their return from St. George. On the anniversary of Washington's birthday, February 22, that year he records the fact that he sealed for time and eternity the first Lamanite receiving the celestial marriage ceremony in this dispensation.

It was during this year that President Young was subjected  by Judge McKean to the latter's court indignities in consequence of Ann Eliza's divorce suit; and on the eleventh day of March 1875, President Young was sent to the penitentiary for contempt of court for one day because of his refusal to pay her alimony. Elder Woodruff went to the penitentiary with President Young and asked the privilege of spending the night with him, but was denied his request. However, D. H. Wells and Doctor S. B. Young were allowed to remain with the President. "This was the first time," says Elder Woodruff, "that President Young was ever confined in prison by order of any court." A few days later, March 17th, word came that Judge McKean had been removed and his successor appointed. "Glory Hallelujah, the Lord has answered our prayers and Judge McKean is removed out of his place!" Elder Woodruff wrote. Some time before this Elder Woodruff had written in his journal a prophecy of his in the name of the Lord, that Judge McKean would have his downfall and his disgrace. His words were literally fulfilled; the Judge became almost a cipher in the community. His health was shattered and he died of typhoid fever a little less than four years later in Salt Lake City. There is, perhaps, no more interesting study in Mormonism than the fate of those who have been conspicuous in the oppression of the Saints. Since the days of Joseph Smith men have sought popularity and honors by their bigoted efforts to solve the Mormon problem. To one of these so-called reformers has come obscurity, to another misfortune, to another disgrace, some have been handed over to the buffetings of Satan, and others have died in obscurity and unmourned.

Going back in the early history of the Church we find such names as Boggs, Hinckle, Bennett, Law, Foster. They are remembered only in association with Church history. To more than three hundred thousand people they have become a hiss and a by-word. Those not of the Mormon faith have no reason as they have no desire to do them honor. They are therefore left to the judgment of the Mormon people.

On the 6th of April, conference convened in the midst of a heavy snow-storm. The Church had grown from its membership of six to something like one hundred and fifty thousand souls. This conference was full of interest and lasted six days. At one of these sessions a Hawaiian brother spoke. After conference  Elder Woodruff and Erastus Snow went to Provo, where they held meetings and visited Provo Woolen Mills.

On his return from Provo he took up his work again on the farm; and on the 31st of May he recorded the return of his brother, Azmon, and wife to the body of the Church. The two brothers had not met for thirty-eight years, they therefore hardly knew each other. The light so long dimmed within him left him blind to the most important progress of the Church; although he had returned to the fold, there was a striking difference in the character of the two brothers. However, Wilford Woodruff was happy to receive Azmon and cheerfully assisted him in building a house in his own field, where now, Waterloo is located. In his journal of June 25th that year he wrote, that with Orson Pratt, Charles C. Rich, and Albert Carrington he assisted in laying the corner-stone of the new Z. C. M. I. building, and offered the dedicatory prayer. The co-operative movement, then inaugurated throughout the Church, received a great impetus from the establishment of this wholesale mercantile house, which has given a large measure of stability to all the mercantile institutions of the state.

On the 10th of July he went to Ogden and escorted some seventy eastern editors to Salt Lake City. Elder Woodruff's frequent selection by President Young to receive the strangers was largely due to the fact that he was a man of social instincts and friendly feelings towards all. Again, he was so sincere and so devoted to his faith that his words always created a strong impression of his integrity. Strangers liked him. There was nothing affected in his demeanor, or unnatural in his address.

The party on this occasion was escorted to the Tabernacle, where about three thousand children were assembled in a singing practice, preparatory to Pioneer Day of that year. He also escorted the editors to Clinton's Hotel on Salt Lake. Here a steamboat ride was given them.

On the 13th of July, in the evening, according to his journal, there was a priesthood meeting held in the old Tabernacle, where the subject of renewing covenants by baptism was discussed. The whole assembly voted to renew their covenants, and later the Presidency, the Twelve, the Seventies, and the Presiding Bishopric were baptized and entered into a special covenant to observe the rules of the United Order. Among them was this: "We will  sustain home industry and patronize our brethren who are in the Order, as far as possible." This movement became general throughout the Church.

On the 24th of the month there was a celebration in which twelve thousand people, mostly children, took part in the Tabernacle. "It was the grandest sight I ever witnessed in my life. The Tabernacle was adorned with one hundred and fifty thousand artificial flowers, and roses strung upon some three miles of cord. Mr. McCornick, late member of Congress, and wife, and other strangers were present. They were much astonished at what they saw." The Saturday and Sunday following, Elder Woodruff visited Provo, where a two days conference was held. At that time, August 1st L. John Nuttall was ordained the bishop of Kanab; George Halliday, bishop of Santaquin; Harvey H. Cluff, of the fourth ward, Provo; and John B. Maiben, of Manti, Sanpete.

On September 1st, 1875 Elder Woodruff recorded at some length the death of President George A. Smith. Concerning this counselor of President Young, Elder Woodruff, in his journal, wrote: "Time and death are thinning the ranks of the First Presidency, and the Twelve Apostles, and first elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. No man has ever lived in this Church who has left a cleaner and brighter record for both time and eternity than the Apostle George A. Smith. No man has been more diligent, virtuous or valiant in the testimony of Jesus Christ than he has been. He was an apostle foreordained before the foundation of the world to come forth in the last dispensation and fullness of times. He has well and faithfully filled his mission. He drew the first load of stone for the erection of the first Temple ever built by command of God in the last days, the one in Kirtland, Ohio. In all the trials of life, like Caleb and Joshua, he never murmured, he labored diligently to build up the work of the Lord to the day of his death. We were together in Zion's Camp; we traveled together on missions in the United States; we were ordained apostles on the same occasion on the corner-stone of the temple in Far West, Caldwell County, Missouri, in 1839. We traveled together in England, built up a church in London with Brother Heber C. Kimball. We returned together in the same ship, sleeping in the same berth. We have labored together for fifteen years as historians of the Church in  the same office. For many years we labored as members of the legislature. I can bear testimony that in all these labors and associations with Brother George A. Smith, under all these circumstances, an unpleasant word never passed between us."

On the 3rd of October that year he wrote: "President Grant is expected in this city, at 10 a. m. to-day. The city council appointed a committee to meet him. President Young and several of the Twelve Apostles went to Ogden in President Young's car to meet President Grant. Governor Emery and several non-Mormons went ahead as far as Echo to meet the President. When he arrived in Ogden the Utah Central Engine was attached to President Grant's cars. At this place President Young was introduced to President Grant by George Q. Cannon. As they shook hands Brigham Young said: 'President Grant, this is the first time in my life that I ever had the pleasure of seeing a President of the United States and of shaking hands with him.'" This was also the first time Apostle Woodruff had ever seen a President of the United States.

"Upon reaching Salt Lake City, the distinguished visitors were taken to the Walker House. Thousands of people lined the streets. Among them were several thousands of children. As they rode up the street, President Grant said to Governor Emery: 'Whose children are these?' The Governor replied: 'They are Mormon children.' The President, in a tone of serious meditation, said: 'Then I have been deceived respecting these people.' On the 4th President Grant, wife, and son visited the Temple Block where they went through the Tabernacle. Mrs. Grant and son remained in the building and listened to the organ while President Grant rode on to the hill above the City where he could view the valley. While the organ was playing, Mrs. Grant prayed for the people."

At the October conference that year, President Young presented in printed form his sermon on the resurrection, which was read by Elder George Q. Cannon. On the 9th of the month Elder Taylor offered the dedicatory prayer for the new Tabernacle. On the evening of that day twenty-five hundred men bearing the priesthood met in the old Tabernacle, where there was read to them the rules of the United Order. On this occasion Elder Woodruff in his talk to the priesthood said: "I see in my mind's  eye forty thousand men in these mountains bearing the Holy Priesthood, foreordained to come forth in this dispensation. Then I see in the vision of my mind's eye forty million devils gathered to make war against these forty thousand priests of the Lord. We have many bishops and elders who have but one wife. They are abundantly qualified to enter the higher law and take more, but their wives will not let them. Any man who will permit a woman to lead him and bind him down is but little account in the Church and Kingdom of God. The law of Patriarchal marriage and plurality of wives is a revelation and commandment of God to us, and we should obey it; but one says, 'If you do, Judge McKean will be after you.' What has given us a future in these Valleys of the Mountains? It is because we have obeyed this part of the Celestial Law of God."

On the 11th of October Elder Woodruff assisted in setting apart seventy-five missionaries. At that time eleven Lamanites were ordained to the priesthood. Closing his journal for that year, he said: "The future is before us and great events await us in this generation. The redemption and establishment of Zion, the fall of Babylon, the gathering of Judea and all the tribes of Israel, and the second coming of Christ, are all near at hand.

"This is the commencement of the Centennial year of the American Independence. One hundred years ago the nation was composed of an honest, industrious, Christian people, and the chief men of the nation were poor, honest statesmen, who lived to promote the welfare of the whole people. They established a constitution and laws, which were a glorious legacy to their descendants. By January 1st, 1876, a great change has come over the American government. To a great extent, virtue has departed from the land, and honesty has been driven from the various departments of government. Men seek office to aggrandize themselves rather than to serve the interests of the people. Death and destruction are sown in the land which is ripening for the harvest."

On the 22nd of April, Emperor Dom Pedro of Brazil arrived in Salt Lake City. He was the first emperor to visit the Saints. In the evening he went to the theatre, and on the 23rd attended a meeting in the 14th ward meeting-house, but left before the close of the services to take the train.

During the summer of the year 1876, Elder Woodruff traveled through the various stakes of the Church. In Provo he wrote that he blessed Father Samuel Vincent, one hundred and one years old, and his wife ninety-nine. He also assisted in blessing Vienna Jacques, who is spoken of in the Doctrine and Covenants. At that time she was ninety years old. Much of the summer was also occupied in Temple work, a work in which Elder Woodruff always took a supreme delight, it was so in harmony with his spiritual nature.

In the early part of November that year, President Young and a large number of elder of the Church left for Saint George, whither they went to dedicate the Temple. This was the first Temple erected in Utah. During their stay in Saint George, preparatory to the completion of the Temple, President Young was in poor health, as he was nearing the last months of his life. The completion and dedication of the House of God in Saint George was to Wilford Woodruff a most joyful event. He saw in it opportunities which the Saints in earlier days had not been permitted to enjoy. In later days it became to him a haven of rest and spiritual strength.

There was perhaps no duty or labor in the Church more pleasing to him than the ordinances performed in the Temple of God. Its completion was a matter not only of special pleasure but of great pride to him. He had looked forward to its dedication and prepared his mind to participate, on that solemn occasion. He writes: "This is a very important day to the Church and Kingdom of God on the earth. President Brigham Young and members of the Twelve, with some two thousand Saints assembled within the walls of the Temple in St. George to dedicate certain portions thereof, that we might commence to administer the ordinances ordained of the Lord for the salvation of the living and the dead. President Young was ill and could not stand upon his feet."

At 12:30 on the 1st of January, 1877, Wilford Woodruff stood upon the upper step of the font and called the attention of the people to whom he spoke as follows: "We are this day blessed with the privilege which very few since the days of Adam have enjoyed. We assemble in a Temple built by the commandment of the Lord for the salvation of the human family. We have met to dedicate certain portions of this building. I realize that  this assembly is too large and too crowded to bow upon their knees, but all are asked to bow their heads and hearts unto God. All who are here are Saints, or should be, for none others ought to be in this holy Temple. I want the Saints assembled to repeat the words in secret that our prayers may ascend to the Lord of Sabbaoth, that they may be answered upon our heads."

Mrs. Susa Young Gates, daughter of President Young, was requested to take in short-hand the proceedings of the dedication. The room was so thickly packed that there was no place for a table. She, therefore, laid her book upon the back of one standing in front of her while she made a stenographic report of the proceedings, which included the dedicatory prayer that was offered by Apostle Wilford Woodruff. After placing in remembrance before the Lord the Temple grounds, the building with its furnishings, and the organization of the Church, he concluded his prayer as follows: "May the blessings of God rest upon all the elders of Israel in all the world. We pray Thee to remember in mercy the Aaronic Priesthood, with its bishops, priests, teachers, and deacons, who are appointed to be standing ministers unto the Church. Bless their wives and their children. Bless, we ask Thee, Thy aged servant, Edward Hunter, who is called to preside over the Bishopric of Thy Church. Thou hast seen his labors and Thou knowest the integrity of his heart. Clothe him with Thy Holy Spirit; fill him with the spirit of counsel and with consolation for his brethren. Preserve him in the flesh, as long as he shall desire life; and when he shall sleep with his fathers, may he rest in peace and may the works of righteousness follow him. Bless all the organizations of Thy Church and Kingdom. May Thy people accomplish the work unto which they are ordained, build up the Zion of God, and prepare the earth for the second coming of the Son of Man. Bless the female Relief Society throughout the land of Zion. May that organization accomplish fully the object of its organization, which was effected through the Prophet Joseph. May the society influence the daughters of Zion to deeds of virtue, holiness, righteousness, and truth. May the blessings of Sarah, Huldah, Hannah, Anna, and Mary, the ancient prophetess, and of the holy women rest upon them. O God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, remember, we pray Thee, the covenants which Thou hast made with all the house of Israel:  remember them in their abidings in these last days. We pray that in this Temple of our Lord Thou wilt make bare Thine arm in the preservation and salvation of the small remnants of the Lamanites that are left in the land. Deliver them, we pray Thee, from the hands of the Gentiles who are bringing about their threatened annihilation from off the earth. Inspire their hearts with Thy spirit, that they may receive the Gospel of the Son of God, that they may be prepared to build up Zion, and to fulfill the covenants and promises made to them by their forefathers who inherited this land. Remember, O Lord, Thy covenant people in the north country; hasten the day when they shall come in remembrance before Thee, when their prophets shall smite the rocks and the mountains of ice shall flow down before them. May the highways speedily be cast up in the midst of the great deep, that they may come over dry shod. May the everlasting hills tremble at their presence and their enemies disappear before them. May they come forth unto Zion and bow the knee, that they may be crowned under the hands of Ephraim, Thy servant. We hold in remembrance before Thee the sons of Judah; wilt thou show unto them mercy, since the blood of Jesus Christ has rested upon them for more than eighteen hundred years. They have been trampled under foot of the Gentiles and have been made a hiss and a byword in the fulfillment of the words of Moses, their law giver, and of Jesus of Nazareth. We pray Thee, O Thou great Eloheim, that their past sufferings may suffice. Inspire their hearts to return home to Jerusalem, the land of their fathers, and to rebuild their city and temple. Prepare them for the coming of Shiloh, their king.

"O hear, O hear us Lord in these our petitions and answer us from heaven, Thy holy habitation, and we will ascribe all honor, glory, and thanksgiving unto God and the Lamb both now and forever, amen and amen."

After this a dedicatory hymn, composed by Elder Charles L. Walker, was sung. The vast audience then moved on to the main room above the font, where a prayer of dedication was offered by Apostle Erastus Snow. The sealing room was dedicated by Apostle Brigham Young, Jr. In the assembly room President Young, who had been carried from one apartment to another because of rheumatism, now arose before the vast assembly and spoke in part  as follows: "I cannot consent in my feelings to retire from this house without speaking to this people. Perhaps it would not be prudent to say all I have it in my heart to say to those assembled. I will say a few encouraging things to the Latter-day Saints. We are enjoying to-day a privilege which but few have enjoyed since the days of Adam. Solomon built a temple for the performance of certain ordinances, but through apostasy little was accomplished therein. I will not say that Enoch had not temples in which he officiated. His people became so perfect that the Lord took them to another place that removed them from the presence of the wicked.

"The Latter-day Saints have been laboring for over forty years in accordance with the revelations of the Lord to Joseph Smith, who was commanded to establish the kingdom by gathering the Saints, by building temples, by organizing the people as a heavenly family upon the earth. We built a temple at Kirtland and one in Nauvoo. Joseph located the site for one in Jackson County and for another in Far West, Missouri. From these we were driven by ruthless mobs; now we have a Temple which will be completely finished in a few days. There is enough now completed to commence work. Those who can see the spiritual atmosphere can see that many are still glued to the earth. They are lusting and longing for the things of this world, in which there is no profit. While we ought to look after temporal things, we should devote them all to the Kingdom of God. Where are the hearts of this people; where are their forefathers? What are they doing for their own salvation and for that of their forefathers? If we were awake to this great truth, this house would be crowded from Monday morning until Saturday night. This Temple has been built in a warm climate, where the people, including the Lamanites, can come in the winter and labor for their salvation and that of their progenitors. What do you suppose the fathers would say if they could speak from the dead? Would they not say: 'We have lain here thousands of years in this prison house, bound and fettered in the association of the filthy and corrupt.' If they had the power the very thunders of heaven would resound in our ears. All the angels in heaven are looking to this little handful of people. When I think upon this subject  I want the tongue of seven thunders to awaken the people to action. When we closed the Endowment House many of the people of the north came to us crying. They begged the privilege to be baptized for their dead. They can now come here, do the work and bid the prisoners go free. I shall never be satisfied until Satan is conquered and driven from the face of the earth." When he made this last remark, he struck the pulpit with a hickory cane and drove the knots of it into the wood. The indentations of the cane still remain upon the pulpit.

Upon the close of the dedication, Wilford Woodruff was appointed to preside over the work in the Temple. This appointment was a most fitting one in view of the spirit of Elijah which had always rested upon him. He worked for many years in the Endowment House in Salt Lake. He was familiar with the ordinances and instructions which belong to the House of God. His whole soul was wrapped up in the temple work for both the living and the dead. Within the walls of a sacred edifice, such as a temple, he found comfort, joy, and consolation. Such work was more important in his mind than public honors, and the station and honors that come from the world. The first to be baptized and confirmed in the new Temple was Sister Susa Young Gates, who preserved for the pages of history in stenographic report a voluminous record of the dedication.

The opening day, two hundred and twenty-four baptisms were performed. Those whose services as administrators in the Temple were given, were Elders John D. T. McAllister, Alonzo Raleigh, and Henry W. Bigler.

March 1st of that year witnessed his seventieth anniversary. On that occasion one hundred and fifty-four maidens and mothers in Israel assembled in the Temple to receive endowments for the dead female relatives of Wilford Woodruff. The address delivered to those gathered on that occasion is given in his journal as follows: "My beloved sisters, I present myself before you this morning, not only with prayer and fasting, but with a heart filled with praise and thanksgiving to my Heavenly Father, for His many mercies and for His kindness to me this day. I am thankful to you also, my sisters, for a blessing of such magnitude as you are bestowing upon me. I do not suppose such a scene as this was ever before enacted upon the earth. Ever since I have been working in this Temple, my mind has been exercised in behalf of the dead. I have a great desire to see my dead redeemed before I pass away.

"A few days ago I went before the Lord in this holy Temple, where I often go to pray. There is no more acceptable spot on this earth to the Lord than this Temple. While in humble prayer, with the subject of temple ordinances resting upon my mind, I prayed the Lord to open the way for the redemption of my dead. The spirit of the Lord rested upon me and gave me the following testimony: 'Let My servant Wilford call upon the daughters and mothers in Zion, and let them enter into My holy Temple on the 1st day of March, the day that My servant Wilford shall see the time allotted to man, three score years and ten. There let them receive their endowments for his dead kindred, and this shall be acceptable unto me, saith the Lord. The dead relatives of My servant shall be redeemed in the spirit world and be prepared to meet My servant at the time of his coming, which shall be at the time appointed unto him, yet not revealed to man in the flesh. Now, go to and perform this work and all shall be accomplished according to the desires of thy heart.'

"This was merely a key to me, a light burst upon my understanding, and I saw an effectual door opened to me for the redemption of my dead. When I beheld this I felt like shouting, 'Glory hallelujah to God and the Lamb.' I did not pursue this course, however, without first making known my testimony to President Young. Upon consulting him, he said that my course was proper; what I did was right; and what I received came from the Lord. He offered to provide several persons himself. In the assembly on this occasion were three of his wives and five of his daughters. I feel thankful to you, my sisters, for this manifestation of your kindness to me. Had you sought the world over you could not have found a birthday present so precious to me as this. If I can redeem my dead and save myself and family I shall be highly gratified. I feel that when we get into the spirit world, we shall see the importance of this day. I pray that we may meet with our kindred dead in the Celestial Kingdom of our God."

Late in the afternoon, at the close of the Temple services, Apostle Woodruff was escorted to St. George Hall, where he was greeted by the large assembly of more than one hundred, who were to join with him around the tables spread with the luxuries of life. The chief ornament of the tables was a three story cake adorned with suitable trimmings. On it were pieces of satin, containing poems composed for the occasion by home talent, Mrs. A. Randall, and Mrs. Emily B. Spencer.

Those were truly his brothers and sisters who in common with him enjoyed the spiritual life within the sacred precincts of God's house. Such manifestations of their love and confidence naturally touched him deeply and awakened within him the joys and satisfactions of the sincerest friendship.

Henceforth his temple work took on new pleasures and brighter hopes. He gave to the work his undiminished and undivided love. He felt the honor of his new calling and nothing that ever came to him in life gave him more supreme satisfaction.

During his life time three other temples were finished, in the dedication of which he took a leading part. As the April conference of 1877 approached, he looked forward to the occasion as something out of the usual. It was convened that year in the St. George Temple. There were present, President Young, Daniel H. Wells, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Charles C. Rich, Erastus Snow, F. D. Richards, and Brigham Young, Jr. Following this conference April 6th, President Young left for Salt Lake City. Elder Woodruff recorded in his journal that this was the last time that he and President Young ever met in the flesh. They had long been closely associated in the ministry. They had traveled thousands of miles; they had rejoiced and had suffered persecution together. President Woodruff, after the parting continued his labors in the Temple. President Young and party, on their way home, stopped at Manti, on the 25th of April, where they dedicated the ground for another Temple. On the 18th of the following month, ground in Logan was dedicated for a similar purpose. There was thus brought about the fulfillment of God's purposes wherein He declared, "I always command My people to build a temple."

On the first day of June, that year, Brigham Young reached his 76th birthday. Apostle Woodruff, in behalf of himself and associate Temple workers, wired President Young, as follows: "Dear Brother: All officiating in the Temple join with me on this your 76th birthday, in wishing you health and happiness, and that you may live to see wickedness swept from the earth and righteousness triumph. Wilford Woodruff."

President Young's response read as follows: "Salt Lake City, June 1st, 1877. Wilford Woodruff. My thanks and blessing for the words of kindly greeting contained in your dispatch. I desire nothing more anxiously than to see wickedness swept away and righteousness prevail. My health is good. I leave at six o'clock for Provo, where we hold a local conference, commencing to-morrow. May peace, abundant blessings, and great joy attend your lives and labors. Brigham Young."
