FUNERAL SERVICES.

(From the Deseret News.)

After more than ninety-one years of incessant activity and immeasurable usefulness upon the earth, the mortal tabernacle of President Wilford Woodruff was to-day laid to rest in the silent city above the metropolis that he helped to found and to build. The final offices associated with the consignment of his remains to the plain and substantial tomb in which they were deposited were most kindly and reverently administered. Never was a great and good man more loved by his people than he, and perhaps a people never exhibited the love and respect they held for a leader to a greater extent than did the tens of thousands who attended his obsequies and witnessed the funeral cortege as it passed through the streets to the cemetery. Bared and bowed heads were everywhere in the multitude upon the streets. When words were spoken it was with subdued voices, and all that was said was said with respect and honor for the departed pioneer, builder, and statesman.

Probably not for years to come will such a spectacle as that which was presented this morning be again witnessed. Long before 8 o'clock anxious throngs had congregated in groups around the Temple square, awaiting the opening of the outer gates that seats might be obtained; for well was it anticipated that mighty hosts would throng the sacred precincts of the Tabernacle to pay by their presence the last sad token of respect to the dead leader in Israel. Therefore the scene was a remarkable one. Nothing, however, occurred to mar the solemnity of the great occasion. The hush of expectation was felt by all as they stood in the shade of the Temple block walls, and all around under the sheltering trees, and one could not but feel that, with the deep solemnity prevailing and the tremor of sunshine that some sweetly solemn thought brought to mind as the moments passed, he was standing on the verge of the valley of Death.  Not, however, with any feeling of gloom, because of the great bereavement the people felt that they sustained in the demise of their beloved President, but because of the joy that emanated from their hearts and beamed from their eyes.

It was more than an hour and a half before the services in the Tabernacle began. When the doors were opened the great auditorium was almost filled. The people continued to pour in by every door; nearly every seat was taken before ten o'clock, except those reserved for the family of the deceased and the families and friends of the highest officials of the Church. These, however, were all occupied before the appointed time for the services to begin.

Outside the building, while the crowds were pressing forward, Marshal Burton and his aids, mounted on magnificent horses, were busy directing the movements of the attendant hosts. Without and within, the scene was the same, and when all who could obtain sitting or standing room in the great building were at length in position, one could not help but revert in his mind to similar occasions in the past. Perhaps no similar scene ever surpassed this of to-day even in the camps of ancient Israel, or in the gatherings that have been depicted by historic pen from the days when Greece and Rome paid tribute to their dead. There was no pageantry or panoply of strange device; no pomp of show or bombastic sorrow; nothing but united homage and love.

It was just 10 o'clock when the body of President Woodruff was borne into the confines of the square and thence carried down the north aisle of the Tabernacle to its central position on the dais before the stand. As the procession entered, fully ten thousand people with uncovered heads, rose in respect, as the casket passed along its way, and so quiet was the rising that it seemed like the gentle rustling of autumn leaves.

Thousands unable to gain admittance to the Tabernacle thronged and pressed around the entrances and walls in hope of hearing a word of sound from the hallowed precincts within, that would touch a sympathetic chord in their responsive hearts, while thousands more lingered for hours under the kindly shelter of the numerous trees that ornament the spacious grounds within the square, that they might, when opportunity arrived, join in the procession to the grave.

FROM THE HOME.

The scenes around the late home of the venerable President were such as are usual in the presence of death. The family of the deceased and the general authorities of the Church were gathered around the bier, and gentle, loving hands bore the casket to the waiting hearse. Woodruff Villa was left by the cortege at twenty minutes past nine, and the procession wended its way from Fifth East to Sixth South, thence to State Street, thence north to South Temple, thence west to East Temple, and proceeding round the Temple block reached the north gate of the square at five minutes past ten. The casket was then borne into the Tabernacle by six bearers, whose names are as follows: Dr. L. W. Snow, Dr. M. W. Snow, Wilford S. Woodruff, James Woodruff, Jr., Georges Scholes, and Wilford Woodruff Beatie. The family of the President followed immediately behind and then came the general authorities of the Church, the Twelve Apostles, and others, and the casket was placed upon the dias in front of the stand where it could be seen by the assembled thousands, who rose en masse during the proceeding.

CEREMONIES AT THE TABERNACLE.

At 10:35, the Tabernacle being then crowded to its utmost capacity, Professor Joseph J. Daynes rendered on the organ a march composed especially for the occasion. Its rendition was the signal for reverential attention, all seeming to feel to the greatest extent the utter solemnity of the occasion.

Of the general authorities, there were present on the stand:

Counselors to the late President Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, and Joseph F. Smith.

Of the Twelve Apostles: Lorenzo Snow, Franklin D. Richards, Brigham Young, Francis M. Lyman, John Henry Smith, George Teasdale, Heber J. Grant, John W. Taylor, Mariner W. Merrill, Anthon H. Lund, Matthias F. Cowley, and Abraham O. Woodruff.

Presiding Patriarch, John Smith.

Of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies: Seymour B.  Young, Christian D. Fjeldsted, B. H. Roberts, George Reynolds, and J. Golden Kimball.

The Presiding Bishopric: Wm. B. Preston, Robert T. Burton, and John R. Winder.

The Presidency of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion.

President George Q. Cannon announced the opening hymn, on page 357 of the L. D. S. Hymn book, commencing as follows:

  "Thou dost not weep, to weep alone;
     The broad bereavement seems to fall
  Unheeded and unfelt by none;
     He was beloved, beloved by all."

The hymn was sung with much pathos and feeling by the Tabernacle choir, after which Elder F. D. Richards, of the Quorum of the Apostles, offered prayer. It was a fervent offering, replete with thankfulness to God the Father for His many blessings unto the Latter-day Saints; for His having raised up such a faithful and devoted servant as President Wilford Woodruff, and for the great good that he was enabled to do while sojourning here upon the earth. Elder Richards invoked the blessings of God upon the bereaved family and especially upon President Woodruff's son Owen, who had been called to the holy Apostleship, and asked that he might be a man of God, like his father, unto the family.

Elder George D. Pyper and the choir sang the hymn:

  "O my Father, Thou that dwellest
     In the high and glorious place,
  When shall I regain Thy presence,
     And again behold Thy face?
  In Thy holy habitation
     Did my spirit once reside,
  In my first primeval childhood
     Was I nurtured near Thy side."

During the musical exercises, the inscription, "Being Dead Yet Speaketh," was displayed by means of electric lights, the same appearing just over a life-size likeness of President Woodruff, and having an excellent effect.

PRESIDENT JOSEPH F. SMITH

was the first speaker. He said in substance: It would be superfluous for me to attempt to enter into an historical relation of the great events of the life of our own great President, Wilford Woodruff. It would also seem unnecessary for me to attempt to eulogize his character, and labors as a husband, a father, and a servant of God, because his life was so well known to the people. President Woodruff was the fourth in succession who has occupied the exalted position of President, Seer, and Revelator to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints upon the earth. It was my privilege, when a child, to witness the funeral services over the remains of the first President, Joseph Smith, and to know him as a child may know a man. He was absent in England on a mission at the death of President Young, and was unable to attend the services of John Taylor. But he was glad to be present on this occasion, and to have the privilege of mingling his words and tears with those of his brethren over one of the late Presidents, whose labors had been so blessed to the people of God. He was thankful for the privilege of associating from his youth to his manhood with the four Presidents of the Church. He was intimately associated with Brigham Young, and had the benefit of his wise counsel; and in his intimate associations with Presidents Taylor and Woodruff, he had experienced great joy, and had found them to be all that the people of God held them up to be before the world. Those who thought that these men had sinister motives and were not actuated by the purest desires, had been greatly deceived, or exceedingly ignorant. No men with whom he had been associated had lived purer lives. They had not sought to build themselves up, but to save souls and to establish truth in the earth. They had been sincere in their convictions, and in the inspiration they had received from God. He was a living witness that Joseph Smith had been raised up to usher in the dispensation of the fulness of times. President Woodruff had shown his greatness in giving out  his life's labor for the establishment of this testimony in the earth. The day would soon be passed when infidel tongues would ridicule the claims of the Church of Christ, and the work of such men as President Woodruff would soon be established and acknowledged in the world; for he had exemplified all its truths and principles in his life, manifesting his faith and knowledge by his works. He had recognized the fact that in the light of this knowledge his whole trust and duty was to show his faithfulness to it.

Joseph Smith, the Prophet, was misunderstood by the world, and was not permitted to live beyond his young manhood, but his name was worthy of all honor; for he was raised up of God, and was not an imposter, a deceiver, or deceived. Men might imagine what they would, but there were many thousands of people who could testify of their own knowledge, through the testimony of the Holy Ghost, that he was raised up by the Lord to usher in the glorious coming of the Kingdom of God. This he did in order that men might be enlightened; for the glory of God is intelligence, that men and women might be brought to a knowledge of the truth. This perfect knowledge was to be brought to their souls through the ministration of the Holy Spirit, which bears record of the things of God; by which even the ignorant fishermen who followed our Lord, might know that Jesus is the Christ. Only by this means could such a knowledge be obtained.

The speaker paid a strong tribute to President George Q. Cannon, Lorenzo Snow, and Franklin D. Richards, and their faithfulness to the Presidents who had passed away. Of President Woodruff, he said he did not think he had any feeling in his heart to injure any man, but he had labored to do good in the world. No greater work had he done than in the exemplification, in his life, of all the principles he had espoused, and in his integrity to his brethren in all conditions. He was made of the material of which martyrs are made; for he faced death many times for the sake of his brethren and the cause of Zion, and never quailed in the face of danger, no matter who of his associates may have proved themselves traitors.

President Smith hoped that he and all others might follow in all their lives the path marked out by the deceased President.  He prayed for the blessings of God on the bereaved family, that they might follow the life work of their great leader, in which case their salvation would be sure.

A solo and chorus entitled, Beautiful City, was then sung by Sister Maggie C. Hull and the Temple choir, under the leadership of Professor
C. J. Thomas.

PRESIDENT SNOW SPEAKS.

President Lorenzo Snow then spoke. He said he was very much pleased and delighted to see such a vast multitude assembled for the purpose of honoring President Woodruff. He had been acquainted with President Woodruff sixty-two years, a good portion of the time quite intimately. All that has been said of him was fully worthy of the life which he had led. President Snow did not feel as some perhaps felt, that the passing of one into another sphere of action was a disaster. Such a change had been decreed from the beginning. There were periods in the lives of people that were highly important and one was the preparation for entrance upon this sphere of action. President Woodruff had fulfilled his calling. His sojourn here upon earth had been as near perfection as it was possible for mankind to make it so. It was the duty of every individual to do all he could to rectify the mistakes common to humanity. All were born subject to error and therefore perfection could not be expected of the human family. It was possible for mankind so to order their lives as to gain for themselves an exaltation in the Kingdom of God, and to be proud of the record made when they were called into another world. President Woodruff had had such an object in view from his early manhood. He had become acquainted with the gospel of Jesus Christ, and sought to live a life such as would entitle him to all the blessings in store for the faithful. This was a satisfaction to his family, as he had left behind him an example that would make of them honored and useful instruments in the hands of God, if they followed it.

President Snow spoke of the vacancy in the Presidency caused by the death of President Woodruff. Many people, said he, had been led to wonder and imagine how the affairs of the Church were to be carried on. The gospel in its completeness,  said the speaker, made provision for these changes. The work would roll on uninterruptedly as it had done, succeeding the death of the Prophet Joseph and the death of President Brigham Young and John Taylor. On the death of the President of the Church, the responsibility fell upon the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and so it would, on this occasion. The Quorum of Apostles, said President Snow, was never as able to handle such a responsibility as it was at the present time. It was fully organized, and the brethren were in perfect union and accord with one another, and faithful and devoted to the trust reposed in them. Presidents Cannon and Smith were men of God, full of faith and devotion to the cause, and their work in rolling on the kingdom would be greatly appreciated and felt. There was no danger as to the outcome of the work of God. It had been established for a purpose, and that purpose would be accomplished, and the Church progress and increase in the earth, no matter how many of the authorities were called to another sphere.

ELDER FRANKLIN D. RICHARDS

of the Council of the Apostles, followed. So far as one man could enter into the feelings of another, he felt to adopt as his own the words of his brethren regarding the greatness and goodness of his late President. He spoke of the first time he met Wilford Woodruff, and stated that he was impressed very strongly with the directness and simplicity of his character, and his prefect guilelessness. He had been a great exemplar of the work in which he had been engaged, by his implicit obedience to the dictates of the spirit. This had been one of the great features of his life. Another had been the keeping of a diary of his actions and the history of the Church, from his first connection with it to the day before his death, which would be most valuable as a compendium of the progress of the work. Elder Richards urged the elders to follow the example of President Woodruff in this regard. His healing power had been strongly manifested on many occasions, one striking instance being related by the speaker.

Although at the death of the three former Presidents not all the Apostles had been permitted to be present, yet on this occasion, the speaker was pleased to announce, all the members of the Quorum were present.

President Woodruff's enemies had been led to become his friends. He had assisted in the building and dedication of the temples, had established an honorable family in the earth and had performed great missionary labors in different parts of the world. He had been a mighty fisher of men bringing into the Church almost two thousand persons. He and Heber
C. Kimball had established the greatest records, in this respect, in
the Church. The speaker closed expressing the hope that the Saints would emulate the worthy example of the departed, and that their works might be as honorable and their end as blessed as his.

PRESIDENT GEORGE Q. CANNON.

President George Q. Cannon began his remarks by reading a portion of the 76th section of the Doctrine and Covenants concerning the resurrection of the just. In standing up to address the Saints, said he, it was only because he knew he would have the faith and prayers of those assembled. In the passing away of President Woodruff, a man had gone from our midst whose character was probably as angelical as that of any person who had ever lived upon the earth. We shall ever miss him, said President Cannon. His family will ever miss him, as to them he was the all in all, an honored and respected husband and father.

In the death of such men, said President Cannon, it was a consolation to know that they left behind them the keys of the priesthood which they held, thus permitting the rolling on of the work of God. President Woodruff was an unassuming man, very unaffected and childlike in his demeanor. He did no man an injury, nor was he too proud, even in his Apostolic calling, to toil as other men toiled. His traits and characteristics were ennobling, and so energetic was he that nothing was too burdensome for him even in his advanced years.

President Cannon felt that too much could not be said in praise of President Woodruff. He was of a sweet disposition and possessed a character so lovely as to draw unto him friends in every walk of life. He would no more do a wrong than he  commit suicide. He was straightforward in all his dealings with his fellow man, and never shirked an obligation. He was free, sociable, and amiable in every respect. No jealousy lurked in his bosom. He looked upon all mankind as his equals and was one who cherished the most profound respect for all with whom he associated. He was gentle as a woman and his purity was like unto that of the angels themselves. In spite of his high and holy calling, he displayed no dignity, was unpretentious, unassuming, and his character and life were as transparent as glass. He hid nothing from his brethren, but was candid, outspoken, and free to all.

President Cannon spoke of a remark made by President Woodruff some time ago. In his office one morning he remarked. "I'm growing old," the statement being occasioned through the greater ability of a strong, wiry grandson in hoeing potatoes. So industrious was President Woodruff, that he felt he was growing old because those stronger and younger could outdo him in cultivating the garden. President Woodruff labored freely and gratuitously in the ministry. With him it was a labor of love, his only hope of reward being in the hereafter when he would be called upon to give an account of his stewardship. For years he lived on his 20-acre farm and took pleasure in beautifying his surroundings and wresting from the earth, the elements to sustain life. He was a great correspondent, and his children and grandchildren loved to write to him. He kept a complete account of his life's doings, and even up to the day he was stricken down, his journal told of his work of the day before.

In the ministry, said President Cannon, President Woodruff had accomplished a great deal. He had traveled thousands of miles, preached the gospel to thousands of people, and succeeded in bringing a great many into the Church. He had left behind him a monument of good that time could not efface or obliterate. His was a life well spent, fraught with good deeds, actuated by a noble purpose.

President Cannon referred to the last days of President Woodruff on the earth. He was pleasant and cheerful to the end. With the speaker he attended a banquet given by the Bohemian club of San Francisco to one of its members. At it he was asked  to speak and did so. This was on Saturday, the 27th inst. On Sunday he attended meeting in San Francisco, and Monday went out riding. Tuesday and Wednesday he spent writing, and on Thursday the fatal attack came on, which ended in his death on Friday morning. His end was calm and peaceful. He passed away as one sleeping.

Referring to the death of President Woodruff away from home, President Cannon stated that it was his desire to go away. He was so concerned in the speaker's health that he thought such an outing was necessary. He himself had been benefitted previously in going to the seacoast, and it was his desire to accompany President Cannon on this occasion. His passing away, though quite unexpected, was a gradual sinking into an eternal sleep.

President Woodruff was a man of God. He had finished the fight and had been called hence to mingle with his brethren, and to receive his well-earned reward. He was a heavenly being. It was heaven to be in his company, and his departure from this sphere of action, robs the community of a great and good man, and one who fully merited all the blessings promised to those who remain true and steadfast unto the end. The speaker had been privileged to witness the departure from earth of Presidents Young and Taylor. They, too, were righteous men, entitled to a full bestowal of heavenly blessings.

Concluding, President Cannon invoked the blessings of God upon the Twelve Apostles and upon all who held responsible positions in the Church, that their lives might be fraught with good deeds and noble examples, such as those characterizing the life and labors of President Wilford Woodruff.

The choir sang President Woodruff's favorite hymn:

  "God moves in a mysterious way."

The closing prayer was offered by Elder Brigham Young of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and the immense audience dispersed to take up their places in the order of procession, the congregation marching out in order to a selection on the organ by Professor J. J. Daynes.

THE FUNERAL CORTEGE STARTS.

The ceremonies in the Tabernacle ended, the great audience filed out into the street and, diverging in all directions, a vast host, mingling with those who had lingered outside, sought their carriages and other conveyances ready to fall into line when the procession to the grave should be formed. Thousands thronged the streets in anticipation of witnessing the departure, and yet everything was orderly and all arrangements skilfully carried out. The marshal of the day, with his numerous efficient aids, and the detachment of police, rendered signal service in executing the plans so carefully arranged. Hundreds of conveyances lined the adjacent streets and were brought up in line in seemly order, and, in fact, everything attested the prevalent reverence in which the occasion was held, so that nothing might occur to mar or delay the marshaling of order out of seeming chaos. The services in the Tabernacle being finished at 1:30, the formation of the procession was begun on the west and north sides of Temple square, and at 1:45 p. m. the order was given to advance on the way to the beloved President's last resting place. Slowly and impressively the journey to the grave was begun.

As the procession passed into public view, many an eye became dim with tears, and a last farewell was breathed from many a life-time friend and brother pioneer. Thousands stood with uncovered heads as all that remained of him whose life and work had crystallized into the brightest gem of immortal setting passed them by, and yet thousands more made up the cavalcade and retinue which followed at the shrine of death. This was the order formed and maintained on the way to the grave:

ORDER OF PROCESSION.

1. Marshal of day and aides.

2. Held's band.

3. Harmony glee club.

4. Pall-bearers.

5. Hearse.

6. Flowers.

7. Carriages one to twelve inclusive--family.

8. Carriages thirteen to eighteen inclusive, General Church Authorities.

9. Ogden band.

10. Presidents of Stakes and counselors.

11. General organization Relief Societies.

12. Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement associations.

13. Young Men's Mutual Improvement associations.

14. Deseret Sunday School Union.

15. Primary associations.

16. Church Board of Education.

17. Faculty and students of Brigham Young academy and representatives of different Church colleges and academies.

18. First Regimental band and Utah National Guard.

19. State and city officials.

20. General public.

THE LINE OF MARCH.

The line of march all along South Temple Street was densely packed with a mass of humanity, as far as M Street, and from there to the cemetery people were out in hundreds awaiting the approach of the procession. Thousands of people also accompanied the remains of the dead Prophet to the place of interment, and it was a spectacle long to be remembered. "The Dead March in Saul," by Held's band, and other funeral dirges, were played, while the Ogden and First Regimental bands discoursed their sweet, sad music all the way. A wave of harmony rolled down the line from beginning to end, and surely it must have arisen as sweet incense to the spheres above. Slowly and stately the procession moved on its solemn way, and when the cemetery was reached a great concourse of people was already there. The various organizations and representative bodies disbanded at the gates of the cemetery and the simple white hearse bearing the remains of the departed leader was driven to the side of the grave, where it was followed by the private carriages of the members of the deceased's family and the general authorities of the Church. At 2:45 p. m. the casket was taken from the hearse and carried by the pall-bearers to the grave into which it was consigned while  all the people stood with uncovered heads. Countless flowers in bouquets and designs of exquisite beauty were laid upon the sward by sorrowing friends, and when all was ready the members of the President's family and other friends gently laid some floral tokens upon the departed's bier in last farewell. Then the authorities of the Church, who had gathered on the northwest corner of the plot of ground signified that the final ceremonies begin, and the Harmony glee club sang with exquisite pathos and tenderness, the selection: "Not Dead but Sleepeth." President Cannon then called upon Apostle F. M. Lyman to offer the dedicatory prayer.

In opening his invocation Apostle Lyman asked that grace and strength be vouchsafed to those who were bereaved, to bear up under the burden of grief their loss had entailed, and asked the blessings of the Almighty in the duty which had devolved upon him in dedicating the last resting place of him, who for so many years had been identified with the work of the Lord in the earth. He prayed that President Woodruff's life and record might stand as an example to the hosts of Israel throughout the world, one which they would emulate if possible; and further asked that the widows and children might be comforted in the knowledge that their beloved father had gone to a glorious reward. It was his desire that the Almighty bless the ground where so many had tender hopes and affection laid away, that it would ever be sacred and holy to the people. He prayed for the prosperity of the work of building up Zion in the earth; for the blessings of the Lord to rest upon the Church and the authorities upon whom its guidance would now devolve, and in conclusion asked that the dedication might be accepted of the Almighty in the name of Jesus Christ.

At the close of the prayer, flowers were laid upon the grave by loving hands, and the vast concourse of people dispersed to their homes and various pursuits, feeling that this day would be accounted, while time and memory should last, as one of the most notable in the present dispensation, and would be hallowed forever.

WHERE THE GRAVE IS.

The place where the body of President Woodruff will rest until the day the grave shall give up its dead, is situated near the original entrance at the old stone gate through the antiquated  wall that formed the western boundary of the city cemetery, and is about half way up on the western side. The seventh cemetery avenue forms the northern boundary of the plat, which lies about seventy-five yards from the old stone wall. On the south, is the plat of the late Apostle Erastus Snow, whose monument, entwined with honeysuckle, towers over the new-made grave. Over on the hill a stone's throw distant, the granite shaft that marks the resting place of the late President John Taylor, points silently toward heaven. Just to the west, across the drive, is the Noble plat, where rests Lucien Noble, who was born the same year as President Woodruff, who, too, lived to a great age, dying in 1891. President Woodruff's grave is in the extreme south-eastern corner of the plat, and is made alongside of his wife, the late Phoebe Carter Woodruff. Just across, in the Snow plat on the south, rest the bodies of two children. The Woodruff plat is simple and plain; a substantial stone wall raises it above the drive and the closely cut green grass covers it over. The open grave this morning was dug into the hard soil of the mountain which was as solid in its formation as the character of the man whose body it was to contain, only a few planks were placed to keep the loose earth from falling in, and a plain box of white wood at the bottom to contain the casket. Nothing about the grave was intended for ornament or show; all was plain and substantial as the dead President wished it to be. From the grave where he rests there is a fine view of the city he helped to found, and the valley stretched away to the south in its beauty until shut in from the sight by the September haze. Around him rest those who fought the battle of life with him, but who laid the burden down, wearied before the load fell from his own shoulders, and who will welcome him in death as they honored him in life.

TABERNACLE DECORATIONS.

Promptly at 7:30 a. m., by a prearranged signal with the janitors, a News reporter was admitted to the Tabernacle to view the work of the committee on decoration. Silence brooded over the vast auditorium, and also a spirit of awe, which is the invariable accompaniment of solitude in the midst of vastness.

"The primeval desert is slumbering. Only on the eastern  and western peaks are seen the signs of awakening day. In the Valley the shadows are beginning to lift and dissolve. What is it that the eye beholds? A vast expanse of sun-browned sage and yellow bunch grass. For a moment, we listen and catch the musical ripples of a stream hidden beneath an irregular line of willow and squaw bush, extending from the north of the canyon to the Lake. The sun now breaks over the eastern range. A breeze is stirring down the canyon. Ah, there is that same, never-to-be-forgotten perfume of the desert--so full of freshness, so suggestive of freedom!

"What! the bark of a dog? Surely it is. And now a half-mile distant, in the shadow of a gnarled and crooked grove of cottonwoods, the eye catches sight of a dozen campfires, which send curling wreaths into the morning sky. The sunlight is playing fantastic games with the strands of smoke as they weave themselves into finer fabrics, and finally disappear as gauze. Beneath this spreading halo, we get glimpses of an irregular village of wick-i-ups, smoke-begrimed and tattered, but otherwise quite in harmony with the scene; as if they were in fact so many grotesque plants that had sprung out of the native soil.

"Now, from out these rude habitations, through many a rent and flapping door, the children of the desert are pouring--a curious lot of black-headed, squatty-figured little women and children. Sublime picture of blissful indifference! You do not know that this is your last day of undisputed reign--if your sleepy existence can be called a reign. Before the sun shall have reached the zenith, he, the great white Chief, accompanied by that other great man, young and vigorous then; but since grown old by toil and works of righteousness and today renewed in youth forever--he the leader whose life among us we shall soon meet to commemorate."

But the vision fades. The present has come back. There is still the faint odor of sage-brush and desert flower in the room. The sun has lost none of his old-time splendor, but his rays pour down, not upon the primitive herbage of a desert, but through the dome of a building which might well be taken to epitomize the progress of a jubilee. The eastern half of the auditorium is sombre and unrelieved by a single touch of the artist; but the  western half is all aglow in hangings of white and fills the soul with a glory as of a better world.

If the departed leader should be present in spirit at his own funeral, according to his own wish, these are some things he would see.

The most prominent object is his own portrait, life-size, as painted by the well known home artist, Mr. Will Clawson. It is a striking likeness of President Woodruff at the full vigor of his manhood. It is placed in front of the great organ against a background of the Stars and Stripes. Above the picture, in brilliant electric light, is the legend:

"BEING DEAD YET SPEAKETH."

The front of the organ is so draped as to represent two golden columns, one on each side, surmounted by domes, and joined by a festoon of white cashmere, the folds of which fall down on each side of the organ in graceful curves. Below the portrait is a semicircle of white drapery, forming a frame for the centre piece, which is no less symbolic than beautiful.

"We desired," said Bishop Winder, chairman of the decoration committee, "to get up something unique to distinguish President Woodruff's life--something not used before."

The committee has certainly succeeded. On each corner of the organ stand out in bold figures the date, 1847.

Immediately above are large bunches of sage-brush intermingled with sun-flowers. Further up are the tops of the rugged pine, while below, between the dates, and representing the expanse of valley, are the yellow tops of furze and rabbit-brush. Nothing could give a more realistic idea of Utah as the dead Pioneer found it.

On the right and left of the picture are sheaves of wheat and oats, symbolic both of what Utah is to-day, and of the ripe age of our departed President. But that which is most touching is a bank of flowers all around President Woodruff's feet, which, whether it be taken to symbolize the love of his people, or the new home to which he has gone, is equally effective. When the electric display shall enhance the beauty and harmony of this centerpiece  it will make an impression on the audience never to be forgotten.

The stand next attracts attention. All the seats are draped in white; the pulpits, one above another, are gracefully festooned in cream cashmere and white ribbon. The posts at each end, also in white drapery, are each surmounted by a magnificent bouquet. The semi-circular railing on each side the stand has a background of white crape against which, at regular intervals, are folds of cream cashmere, tied by silk cord and tassels below, and fastened above with sprays of oak containing acorns, and with evergreens and sunflowers. A similar method of decoration is followed with the balustrade which crosses the auditorium. The impression of the whole is that of a mighty pair of white wings about to hover over the audience.

The casket and floral decorations come last, but by no means least into consideration. Below the stand on a table slanting east and west, are the last remains of the late beloved leader. The coffin in literally embossed in a tapestry of flowers bearing these words:

       "IN LOVING REMEMBRANCE
  BY THE CHILDREN AND GRANDCHILDREN OF
     PHOEBE CARTER WOODRUFF AND
       MARY JACKSON WOODRUFF."

On the top of the casket is a bank of carnations, roses and lilies, on which the single word "Father" appears, while at the head is a crown of flowers, the gift of the Relief societies, and at the foot a gigantic fern palm leaf covered with magnificent cut roses, the gift of F. Auerbach and Co. A sheaf of ripened barley is also on the casket, and festoons of smilax unite the whole.

On each side of the casket is a floral column inscribed, "In loving remembrance of the President of Z. C. M. I." Near by is a large circle of cut roses and others flowers, bearing the motto on its face, "The glory of God is intelligence." The circle symbolizes eternity, and a band or bridge crossing it and evidently intended to symbolize time, bear the inscription "Y. M. M. I. A." A large harp of flowers, significant of the divine harmony of President Woodruff's life, is the gift of the Tabernacle choir.

Other gifts of flowers are a basket of asters and cut roses by the Primary association, a basket of flowers by the City Council, a harp by A. C. Brixen, a wreath by Annie Hoglund, an anchor by Mr. and Mrs. John Beck, beautiful floral designs by Mrs. M. M. Barratt, and also by Mr. and Mrs. James C. McDonald, an unusually beautiful bouquet of golden-banded lilies of Japan and cut roses by R. C. Evans, besides many offerings without names.

The effect of the whole is that of simplicity and purity, the distinguished traits of the departed President. While the committee on decoration deserve great praise for the planning of the whole, F. G. F. Huefner and his assistants, Sisters Sarah A. Gill, and Lizzie Ashton, who executed the plans, are not to be forgotten.
