CHARACTER SKETCH.

By Dr. J. M. Tanner.

"To the law and to the testimony; and if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them." If the whole religious life of Wilford Woodruff could be summed up in a single sentence, it would be in that Scriptural statement by which the truth of God's purposes was made evident. The Scripture was his safe guide in every walk of life. To him it was a living fountain. Its promises gave him assurance, its warnings restrained him, its proverbs gave him wisdom, its psalms attuned his soul, its more sure word of life was to him conclusive of all that God had done and that He would yet do many great and marvelous things among the children of men.

He was a devout student of the Bible, and that book accounts not alone for the spiritual quality of his life, but for the peculiar workings of  his mind. There was nothing in life that he could not measure in terms of Holy Writ. It is doubtful whether the Bible ever brought a human soul more perfectly within the circumference of its teachings, promises, rewards, and inspiration than it brought Wilford Woodruff. He was what is sometimes called a man of one book; that is, a man whose predominant characteristics are marked by a single book. He knew his Bible. It was the companion of his youth, the joy of his early manhood, and the solace of his old age. Whatever did not square with its teachings was to him insufficient. It brought him discernment and made him wakeful and watchful for the new light its promises contained. It was a watch-tower on which he stood looking for new evidences of a new dispensation and of glorious promises of a day to come. In his youth, his contact with religious denominations brought him no spiritual satisfaction, because the sects of that day did not conform to that standard of truth, the Holy Writ, to which he had pledged his allegiance.

A man whose life the Bible so completely permeated could be naught else than a spiritual-minded man. To no man's mind was God ever a more potent reality in the affairs of men than to his mind. To him He was not a distant being whose mysteries obscure and overawe. To Wilford Woodruff God was a companion, a kind and loving father, a protector, a guide. That God spoke with men face to face was no metaphor to him, was no spiritualized conclusion, it was a commonplace, though profound, truth. He regarded himself as a child of God to whom and with whom he had a right to speak. There was nothing in life which a man might not disclose to his Maker, and he aspired to commune with God as one man speaketh to another.

His conceptions of God made religion a simple thing, as simple as it was wonderful. He seldom argued religion, he never proved the existence of God, he rarely explained obscure meanings of Holy Writ. To him God was the same yesterday, to-day, and forever. The relationship of man to his Maker was set forth on the first pages of the Bible. God made man in his own image; male and female created He them. That God had talked to Adam in the garden of Eden was no myth, was no mystery. He had talked to others. He would talk to men again. Nothing satisfied his spiritual cravings short of an actual communication between heaven and earth. For such a communication he was looking, hoping, praying. When it came, it was as clear to his understanding as the rays of light at noonday sun. His whole being was illuminated by the new revelation. However, he put it to the test; he measured it in the light of Scripture; tested it by individual experiences, and it was in perfect harmony with his spiritual and intellectual being; and when once he put his hand to the plow, he never looked back. No doubt ever troubled him; no misgivings ever dampened his ardor. Thenceforth he never questioned the truth of a divine call to the children of this age any more than he questioned his own existence.

It is difficult in such a man to draw a line between his spiritual and his physical life. Certain it is, he made no distinction. Everything that touched divine purpose was to him a part of his religion. If he preached, he preached in the name of God; if he dug ditches and tilled the earth, it was equally in obedience to a divine command. He was just as devout with the scythe or the sickle as he was with the hymn book or in the pulpit. When one therefore speaks of the spiritual characteristics of such a man,  he speaks of the whole man; and if Wilford Woodruff's spiritual nature were merely a characteristic, religion might have been thought of in him as an incident, a part of his life. It was his whole life; for it was measured in terms of his relationship with his God--that relationship he recognized everywhere throughout a remarkable and unique life.

Those best acquainted with the life and habits of Wilford Woodruff will find it difficult, if not wholly impossible, to call to mind any circumstance of unoccupied moments in all their acquaintanceship with him. He was a man of medium height, of a robust nature, heavy set, and of unbounded nervous energy. Those who glorify work and exalt its importance in the divine economy of man find in him an example of the highest type.

He loved work, not alone for its own sake, but because it was associated with divine command. Nor was it to him merely a means of getting on in the world, of adding conveniences and comfort to his own life as well as to those dependent upon him; to him it was a blessing, a privilege, an opportunity which he always availed himself of whenever his calling would permit. Nor was he discriminating in the kind of work he did. He took up whatever was at hand to be done. His toil in the canyons, his sweat in the harvest field, his travels upon the plains were all important parts in divine economy and he performed every labor of life with as much zeal as he was wont to exercise in promulgating the word of God. He was not a worker in the ordinary sense of the word; for in work he always set himself about to accomplish extraordinary tasks.

Those who remember him in the pioneer days of Utah call to mind his unusual physical powers when compared with other men. "I have seen him," said John A. Woolf of Cardston, Canada, "feed a threshing machine with bundles from a stack, when three ordinary men complained of the task. He was never particular where he worked, usually he got in the most disagreeable place about a thresher in order to favor those with whom he worked. When he might have chosen his place, he went to the chaff-pen where the smut and dirt were almost unbearable. I never knew a harder worker than Wilford Woodruff."

He could turn from one occupation to another without the  least apparent effort. He would toil assiduously in the harvest field, and with scarcely a moment's notice be ready to receive the dignitaries of the nation that might happen to visit Salt Lake City while he was thus engaged. To sweat, was a divine command as much so as to pray; and in his life he exemplified in the highest degree that simple Christian life that makes for the physical, mental, and moral well-being of man. He believed sincerely in the moral supremacy of manual toil. He loved it and enjoyed it.

Whenever in the midst of his public ministries there came to him an opportunity to retire to his farm, he went to it with all the energy of his marvelous physical endurance. His love of toil produced in his life what it does in the lives of most men of similar habits, a simplicity, a democracy, and the spirit of universal brotherhood. To him there were no commonplace tasks. All that he did was important to his own exaltation in this life and in the world to come. His love of labor penetrated the veil and admitted him to the world beyond wherein he saw God-given opportunities to work. An idle, self-sufficient life in the next world was as abhorrent to his nature as the ordinary conceptions of purgatory. The thought that in the great beyond men should have an unwaning and an undiminished endurance in the industry of an eternity was glorious to his mind.

In this age when men are shirking physical tasks in the industrial world in pursuit of occupations that are as free as possible from bodily exertions, his life stands out as a beautiful example of simplicity and vigor. No man ever did more in the Church to exalt work and put upon it the impress of divine command than Wilford Woodruff; and he was as unostentatious in physical toil as he was in every other occupation which he honestly and faithfully pursued.

In the broadest and highest sense of the term, Wilford Woodruff may be designated as truly the friend of mankind; but within that broader friendship there were intimacies and confidences which he carried with him from his earlier days through the remainder of life. He, like most men of a strong character and loving disposition, had his special friends--friends whose spirit and  manner of life were congenial to him--friends whose religious practices and thoughts were in harmony with his own aspirations.

With him, however, friends were not selected because of their station in life; they were among all classes, the humblest as well as the highest; indeed, it is doubtful whether Wilford Woodruff ever recognized any class distinction whatever. If he ever made a distinction, it was a distinction between the good and the bad. He was never governed by considerations of wealth, rank, or public honors. His friendships belonged to that old-fashioned type wherein men were actuated by a spirit of brotherhood and unaffected love for one another.

Nor was he one of those who boasted of friendships with the selected few. Every stake of Zion, if not almost every community, contained some special friend or friends, time-honored and true. He loved to throw off the formalities of social restraint and indulge in those heart to heart talks that brought up reminiscences of earlier days. Like others, he was especially attracted by those whose view-points of life were similar to his own, whose spiritual natures reveled in the things of God and ascribed to Him both the honors and the glories of this world.

His friendships were both sincere and lasting; even when friends deviated from the paths of the highest rectitude, he preferred to think of them as they once were, in the enjoyment of divine favor. The good in others was uppermost in his judgment of men, and his friendship was all the more lasting because it was accompanied by a spirit of charity and good-will to all.

It would perhaps be here a little discriminating to speak of any individual friendships of his life. There is one, however, that was so strong and lasting that it illustrates with great clearness the character of the man. Ezra T. Clark of Farmington was a man of simple habits and devoted to industrial life. He loved the soil whose very particles awakened within him a satisfaction and an enthusiasm. These two men developed throughout many years of intimate association a loving regard for each other that was as striking as it was beautiful. Whenever Elder Woodruff could steal away from the duties and responsibilities of life some leisure hours, he sought an evening's pastime in the home of his  friend. Their devotion to each other grew with years; and it may be truthfully said that nothing ever came up in life to disturb their confidence and love.

Elder Woodruff was throughout all his life an ideal neighbor. His interest in those about him was one of helpfulness. He was quick to see the needs of a neighbor and generous in his impulse to give and to help. His high regard for the privileges of others never permitted him to trespass on the rights or the property of those about him. The property of others was as sacred to him as his own and its safety elicited his careful attention. He was generous in the contribution of his time and knowledge.

His selection in the early days of Utah as the head of organizations intended to place within the reach of all the best methods of farming and manufacture illustrates the esteem in which he was held by those who intrusted to him matters of such welfare to the people. He was therefore the highest type of a missionary of good deeds as well as of good counsel.

There was never in him a spirit of condescension. He never thought of obligations under which he was placing his fellowmen while doing them a service. He served others because he enjoyed the spirit of helpfulness and found it a part of his God-given nature to be of use in every possible manner to those it was his joy to help on in the world.

The missionary spirit of Elder Woodruff which manifested itself so zealously in the welfare and happiness of others did not permit him to pursue life in the interest of any selfish ambitions or personal aggrandizement. His journal reveals the pride he felt in bringing home to the lives of men the great truths of Mormonism. He was always more interested in what others derived from his services than what came to him. In counsel, therefore, he was never actuated by selfish aims, and he was free from suspicion that the things which others advocated could have any ulterior purpose than that which appeared upon the surface.

By nature he was an unsuspicious man and that made his life free from the jealousies, envies, and misgivings so destructive of human happiness. That nature made him an optimist.  He went about life not only looking for the good, but with ability to see it. He had nothing to conceal, nothing to disfigure, therefore the shades and colorings of life with him were true to nature.

Whenever in his judgment it became necessary to offer any criticism upon the lives or conduct of others, it was for the purpose of warning those whom he criticized against the dangers that would befall them, if they pursued such a course. Often throughout his journal he speaks of the apostasy of prominent men and old-time friends. What he wrote is in a spirit of charity; his words are words of regret, and his sentiments are full of brotherly consideration, even toward those who ceased to entertain convictions in harmony with his own.

Though he was a man of a gentle spirit, it must not be supposed that he was wholly incapable of pronouncing judgment upon the wicked or the ungodly. But even his judgments were not accompanied by personal antagonisms. He was both forgetful and forgiving. He was not a man of marked prejudices, and there is no evidence that he ever pursued with malice those in whom he had lost confidence. He was, perhaps, as free from prejudices as any prominent man in his day. This beautiful quality of life made him tractable, easily persuaded, especially when the influence about him was one of brotherly love or kind consideration.

In the minor affairs of life, and in the details of administration, he was not very particular how things were done, provided they could be accomplished without friction and in a spirit which conformed to the principles of the gospel. He was never insistent, nor was he persistent in having his own way in his association with his fellowmen. He had so completely surrendered himself to the will of God and to the leadership of his brethren that nothing ever menaced his ambition or aroused a spirit of resentment within him, provided he was not required to sacrifice principle or subordinate his manhood. Instances are revealed in his journal where he took a strong stand when questions of right and wrong were at stake; and he manifested the fire of righteous zeal whenever any question arose not in harmony with his conceptions of God's message to the children of men. Dislike, envy, or jealousy  had so little effect upon his hopeful nature that those ordinary prejudices common to mankind rarely troubled him. He rejoiced in the good fortune of others, and praised God.

The study of the life of Wilford Woodruff constantly reminds one of Nathaniel of whom Jesus said: "He is an Israelite without guile." The evil conditions of mankind, people's shortcomings, and even their vices were not matters which rested upon his conscience or aroused a spirit of denunciation or judgment within him. It was not easy for him to think of evils or to associate them with his fellowman. He looked upon the bright side of life and had a keen appreciation of the good there was in others.

Whenever he uttered words of condemnation or prophesied the judgments of God, it was in pursuance of divine manifestations to his heart and mind. Whenever he spoke words of reproof, it was because he conceived it his duty to do so, not because it was his nature to criticise or to find fault. When he spoke of the wickedness of the world, or the wrong-doings of his fellowmen, it was as a rule in a spirit of testimony, and not because of the things which he saw or heard. No man was ever more willing than Wilford Woodruff that the sentiments of his heart and the thoughts of his mind should be read as if in an open book. The dividing line of his inner life and the expression of his words and conduct was never marked. He was therefore free from that secret life which is constantly struggling against the revelations of its real truth. The Saints will always think of him as a man like Nathaniel--without guile.

One of the highest evidences of a truly religious nature is the sincerity of life that characterizes it. It is also that quality of the human soul which gives zeal to missionary life and makes the testimony borne carry conviction to the hearts of others. The sincerity of Wilford Woodruff never left any room for doubt as to his convictions upon everything which he advocated. His earnestness commanded the respectful attention of all who heard him, even though they were not convinced by the evidences of his word or the force of his arguments.

In all matters of religion, an earnest demeanor is necessary for the assurance of others as well as one's own self-satisfaction. It was easy for every man--Mormon, Jew, or Gentile--to believe  that Wilford Woodruff believed himself, and sincerely to believe oneself is the highest evidence of that inner conviction which removes misgivings and doubts from the human soul. It was this peculiar quality of life that made him a model missionary.

Possessing the highest qualities of sincerity, he naturally became an earnest advocate in his teachings and an indefatigable worker in everything he set his hands to do. There was never anything about his life, never any diversions from the path of duty or surrender to the spirit of a pleasure-loving age to disturb the zeal that came from the sincerity and earnestness of his soul. In many there is often a strong desire to surrender themselves to that spirit of pleasure that deadens the conscience and gives self-justification after wrong doing. With him, as with others, a consistent earnestness and a heartfelt sincerity were a safeguard against a spirit of disbelief. Those qualities of life never permitted him to shirk responsibility or be indifferent to the obligations every man should feel with respect to his Maker. He was, therefore, like the prophets of old--zealous for the things of God.

There was a steadfastness of purpose in all that Wilford Woodruff set his hand to do. He was as devoted in action as he was in thought and feeling. His standard of life was a religious standard, and it was supported by a constancy that was peculiar to his nature. From the beginning to the end of life, his religious convictions were strictly adhered to. He was never drawn into subordinate considerations. He never ran off at a tangent, never allowed minor matters to absorb him. His loves, his hopes, his aims in life were all subordinate to the great central truth of God's revelation. He might be misinformed about details; facts might be distorted; events might be wrongly stated; but he had a guiding star from which his eyes were never taken; and sooner or later, he set himself in harmony with the true spirit of the age in which he moved.

His devotion always made him reliable and true. Friends never doubted his friendship, nor troubled themselves about its continuance. He had that perfect regard for the friendships of life which bound him to men. The qualities that made him devoted to men and to duty came from the larger devotion which he always felt for the things of God. He truly loved his God. Whatever  that love might mean to others, to him it meant a willing service, a confiding heart, a life of steadfast devotion to the obligations which he felt the Lord had laid upon him. His devotion made him intensely earnest, sincere, and guileless. It helped him to see the best there was in life. The true and beautiful filled his heart with admiration. Devotion gave to him a simplicity that left no place for pride and vain ambitions. There came to him out of a devout life the enjoyment of all God's revelations in nature and in word.

His family life was devoid of every show of ostentation. He enjoyed the companionship of the youngest child, and kept in touch with the sorrows and joys of family life. He could not stand aloof from the family life which he had done so much to create. The responsibilities of his home he shared with every member of his household. He loved his wives and children, and in their midst was free, easy, and approachable. His discipline never carried with it any severity. In his home he found relaxation and rest from the strenuous life he led. His children loved him. They were free to reason or persuade. They felt no barriers between him and them. Their conscience might be troublesome to them, but his sternness never was. He belonged to that class of fathers styled indulgent. His own example called for an industrious and obedient life in his home. It was easy for his children to understand what they should do by what they saw him do. Goodness was the quality he most extolled; and if his family would only be good, they were to his mind best prepared to fulfill any responsibility God might place upon them. They would learn their duties by doing them. He considered one duty well done the best means of learning and doing new ones. The family life it was his earnest endeavor to create and beautify is reflected in the joyful spirit that comes to descendants who meet annually on his birthday, March first, to do honor to his name.

Appendix A.

SIDNEY RIGDON.

(Millennial Star, Vol. 5, p. 109).

To the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints:

I deem it to be a duty which I owe to God and His Church, to express my feelings and bear my testimony unto you, concerning certain things that are presented to you for your consideration, especially the claims of Elder Sidney Rigdon to the exclusive right to lead and govern the Church of Latter-day Saints. I have carefully examined the trial which Elder Rigdon has had before the authorities of the Church in Nauvoo, as given in the Times and Seasons, Vol. V, No. 17, and I am satisfied that a righteous decision has been given in his case. I do not make these remarks without my reasons, and I will here give those reasons.

I will commence by asking where has Elder Rigdon been since the days of Far West? Has he stood by the side of the Prophet and Patriarch as a true friend, to assist in carrying them through their trials, tribulations, and persecutions? Has he walked up into his place as a man of God, and stood beside the Prophet as his counselor? Has he in any way been a pillar or support to the Church from that day until this? Has he sustained the cause, and used an influence to spread the work abroad since the persecution in Far West? Has he in any way sustained the priesthood with dignity and honor for the last five years of his life? Or, has the Prophet, in any point of view, leaned upon him as a counselor, a staff, or support, for the last five years? Or has the Prophet Joseph found Elder Rigdon in his councils, when he organized the Quorum of the Twelve a few months before his death to prepare them for the endowment? And when they received their endowment, and actually received the keys of the Kingdom of God, and oracles of God--keys to revelation--and the pattern of heavenly things; and when he declared to the Twelve, "Upon your shoulders the Kingdom rests, and you must round up your shoulders  and bear it, for I have had to do it until now," where was Sidney Rigdon? Has Elder Rigdon shared this responsibility in any way? No, no, verily no; but the reverse, until he had become like a millstone upon the neck of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator. And I hereby bear my testimony that I heard Joseph Smith declare that Elder Rigdon had become like a millstone upon his back--a dead weight--and he had carried him long enough, and must throw him off; and in my hearing requested one of the Quorum of the Twelve to bring him up before the Church, that he might be dealt with according to the law of the Church, that he might be cut off as a dead branch, and no longer encumber the tree, as there was sufficient testimony against him. But through the pleadings of Brother Hyrum Smith and others he was spared. Elder Brigham Young has been his friend, spoke in his favor, in consequence of his age and former standing, hoping that he might reform, get the spirit of the work, and magnify his calling. He has been patiently sustained until the branch became twice dead, and necessary to be severed from the tree. Elder Rigdon, for the last five years of his life, has been mostly shut up in the post-office; has confined himself mostly to his own temporal affairs, manifesting but little interest in the affairs of the Church; and when any alarm or report was in circulation unfavorable to the cause, if we could judge at all from the course he pursued, it had a tendency to increase trouble and disturbance, instead of decreasing it. It is true, that Elder Rigdon attended some of the councils that President Smith held with the Twelve and others, before his death, while giving them instructions; but I heard President Smith say that he came in without his wish or invitation, as he had no confidence in him. Elder Rigdon and his friends would now claim, before the Church and the world, that he holds the keys of the Kingdom of God of the last dispensation, above the Twelve, the Church, etc. I am ready to admit before the whole Church and the world, that he does hold one key different from that held by the Twelve; one that they do not hold--one that God never held, nor Jesus Christ, nor any true prophet, patriarch, or apostle; Joseph and Hyrum Smith were utter strangers to it.

We are judging according to the words of his own mouth according to the testimony given on his trial. We suppose that Lucifer, who made war in heaven, was the author of that key; and  that it had been handed down unto the present day, and with it Elder Rigdon has unlocked his heart, and portrayed before our eyes what it was. What is it? Hear it, all ye Latter-day Saints! Listen, O earth, and judge the fruits of this key. He threatens to turn traitor, publish against the Church in public journals. He intimates that he would bring a mob upon the Church, stir up the world against the Saints, and bring distress upon them, etc. (Times and Seasons, Vol. V, pp. 650-653.) This ought to be a sufficient reason for any true-hearted Latter-day Saint to turn away from him with disgust, and treat men like him according to their desert, which is, to let them entirely alone; for a more despicable principle never existed in heaven, earth nor hell, than to prove a traitor to our God, our cause, and our friends, and bring distress upon the innocent, and that, too, by turning against the very cause that he spent a portion of his life to build up, and declared, while in the faith, that it was true and righteous. This same principle was manifest in the case of Lucifer, Judas, Arnold, and many apostates in this Church, who, when they could not get their own ends accomplished, threatened to bring mobs upon the Church, and in some instances they have done so. I would ask, has Joseph or Hyrum Smith ever held such a key as this, or manifested such a spirit as this? No, never; they have despised it in their hearts. President Smith seemed to be sensible that such a feeling was growing in the breast of Elder Rigdon; and if he had accomplished what duty appeared to present to his mind upon that subject, Elder Rigdon would have been severed from the Church before the Prophet's death; but through mercy he was spared until he manifested the evil that is in him, and he has become dangerous to the welfare of the Church and Kingdom of God.

I would again ask, has Elder Brigham Young ever manifested any knowledge of the key above spoken of, or any spirit or disposition to turn against the Church in any time of trial or persecution from its commencement? Has he ever deserted Joseph, Hyrum, his brethren, or the cause, in one instance, since the foundation of this Church? No, never, not in one instance. He has always been ready to go and come at the bidding of the Lord. He has not said go; but he has always said come. He has set the example and led the way, until he has traversed sea and land, at home and abroad, native and foreign countries, until he has borne off the keys of the  Kingdom of God, in connection with the Twelve, with honor and dignity, since they were committed to his charge. He has followed President Smith's footsteps closely for the last twelve years of his life, and especially the last five years; while Elder Rigdon has, at the same time, been confined to the post-office, apparently manifesting no interest in the welfare of the Church and building up of the cause. The spirit of wisdom and counsel has manifested itself in the course and deliberations of Elder Young. He has not only had much experience with President Smith, but he has proved himself true and faithful in all things committed to his charge, until he was called to hold the keys of the Kingdom of God in all the world, in connection with the Twelve. He, in connection with the Twelve, was the first to receive his endowment from the hands of the Prophet and Patriarch, who have leaned upon him for years. The Twelve have acted with honor, laboring both day and night, making every sacrifice required of them; leaving their homes, families, and country, to establish the work of God, and lay the foundation for the deliverance and redemption of Israel. And I can say with every sentiment of my heart, and feeling of my soul, as President Young has said, "that if there be but ten men left, who hang on to the truth, to Joseph and the Temple, and are willing to do right in all things, let me be one of that number." If it cost me my life to defend the truth of the everlasting gospel of the Son of God, and to build upon the great and mighty foundation which God has laid in this last dispensation and fulness of times, through the instrumentality of His servant Joseph, the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, I am willing to make the sacrifice. I am ready to follow the example of those who have gone before me. When my work is done, I am ready to be offered, if necessary.

I would rather see ten men seal a righteous testimony with their blood than to see one man turn traitor, shed innocent blood and damn his own soul. The object in living and laboring in the cause of God is to secure a part in the first resurrection, eternal life, and immortal glory. A religion that is not worth maintaining at the expense of life is not worth having, "for he that will seek to save his life shall lose it, and he that will lay down his life for My sake, the same shall find it." And again, "I will prove you, whether you  will abide in My covenant, even unto death, saith the Lord." Many of the patriarchs, prophets, Jesus, the apostles, David, Joseph, and Hyrum, and many others, have sealed their testimony with their blood.

Shall we, then, as elders of Israel, or Latter-day Saints, back down, fear, tremble, or give up the work, because Elder Rigdon threatens to turn traitor or bring mobs upon us, because he cannot made the Church bow to his notion of things? No, God forbid! It shows very clearly that he has not the spirit of Christ; for neither the Lord nor one of His followers ever did such a thing; and it is sufficient to open the mind of every Saint to see where he stands. As far as my faith, prayers, influence, and labor will effect anything, they will go to sustain President Young, and in connection with him the Quorum of the Twelve, in holding the keys of the Kingdom of God, as they have been delivered unto them by revelation of Jesus Christ.

And I wish to say to all the elders of Israel, and to the Saints of God, that the time has come, when we need a double portion of the spirit of Joseph's God to rest upon us. We should gird up our loins, watch and be sober, maintain the priesthood with dignity, have the cause of God fully at heart, labor faithfully for its promotion while the day lasts; for night will soon come when no man can work. We should practice virtue and holiness before the Lord and shun the very appearance of evil. We should enter our closets, and call upon God for wisdom to direct us in every duty in life. Our object should be to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ to this generation, and present those principles that will save the souls of men.

If there is any man in this Church that does wrong, that breaks the law of God, it mattereth not what his standing may be, whether among the Twelve, the high priests, seventies, or elders, or in any other standing, there is a tribunal that will reach his case in process of time. There is authority before whom he can be tried. Therefore, let no one turn against the cause of God, and take the road to destruction, on the plea that somebody has done wrong. It is no excuse for you or me to do wrong because another does. The soul that sins, alone must bear the consequence. Should I step aside from the path of duty it would not destroy the  gospel of Jesus Christ, or even one principle of eternal truth; it would remain the same. Neither would it be any excuse for you to commit sin.

Therefore, let me exhort all elders of Israel and Saints of God to rise up in the majesty and dignity of their calling, and make full proof of their ministry and covenant. Sustain by your works the authorities, keys, and priesthood; the eyes of God, angels and men are over you, and when the work is finished, you will receive your just recompense.

W. WOODRUFF.

Appendix B.

(Millennial Star, Vol. 6, p. 113.)

To the Officers and Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the British Islands, Greeting:

Beloved Brethren, whom I love, for the truth's sake that dwelleth in you. It is with no ordinary feelings that I reflect upon the responsibility that is resting upon me, as I enter upon my duties as a servant of Jesus Christ, and a counselor to His Saints, in endeavoring to fill so important a station as is required at my hands. Trusting in that God who has sustained His servants in every age of the world, from the death of righteous Abel to Joseph, and has enabled them to accomplish every work which He has required of them, I feel moved upon by the spirit of God to join again my brethren in this land, for the purpose of assisting them in their labors in every good word and work. I hope I shall share in their fellowship and confidence, and be sustained by the prayer of faith, that when called upon I may be enabled to render a satisfactory account of my stewardship, both unto my brethren, and to God to whom I am accountable for all my actions.

Impressed with a realizing sense that you desire a true statement of facts concerning the present position, prospects, and intentions of the Church in America, I will endeavor to make one in this epistle.

Many important events have transpired in America since I took the parting hand of the Saints in this land, and, in company with six of the Quorum of the Twelve, and Elders Hedlock and Burnham, set sail in 1841 for our native country. Recent events have brought both joy and sorrow to our hearts. They have brought joy unspeakable because of that light, intelligence, and glory which have been made manifest in the revelation of Jesus Christ, through the mouth of His  prophet, for the salvation and exaltation of the sons of men. They have brought sorrow in the loss of our beloved Prophet and Patriarch, who have sealed their testimony with their blood, under the threat that though the laws of the land could not reach them, powder and ball should.

Beloved brethren, think not that any new or strange thing has happened in this nineteenth century; because saints, apostles, patriarchs, or prophets are slain for the word of God and testimony of Jesus Christ. The same thing has happened to the ancient patriarchs, prophets, and apostles of God. The Lamb of God Himself was no exception. Whenever such men have been inspired by the Almighty to lay the foundation of any dispensation for the salvation of men, or for the benefit of the generation in which they lived, or have come in contact with the notions, traditions, and superstitions of the inhabitants of the earth, the people have driven them into the wilderness, or into caves of the earth, and persecuted them even unto death, however careful the prophets may have been to keep the laws both of God and man. This was the case with Jesus Christ who held the keys of salvation, not only of the Jews but of the whole world. He was persecuted from His baptism to the cross. All manner of evil was spoken against Him falsely, and in His last hour, when no testimony could be brought against Him, Pilate was convinced of His innocence, and found no fault in Him. As a testimony he washed his hands in their sight, declaring himself to be innocent of His blood. Yet the multitude cried out, "Crucify Him, crucify Him; His blood be upon us, and upon our children." Accordingly His blood has been upon that nation from generation to generation. His blood brought upon them condemnation for eighteen hundred years, during which time they have had to suffer for shedding the blood of the Lord's Anointed.

In like manner it may be said of the Prophet of God in this dispensation. He has had to flee into the wilderness, to the mountains and caves of the rocks from time to time, to evade the pursuit of his persecutors, that he might finish the work committed to his charge. He suffered many trials and hardships, was stoned and mobbed, was often put in chains and  prison. He was tormented by upwards of forty vexatious lawsuits and trials; yet he was not in one instance condemned by the laws of the land. Under the pledged protection of the Governor and State of Illinois, Joseph, the Prophet, and his brother, Hyrum, the patriarch, were basely murdered by something like two hundred American citizens, painted like Indians.

I acknowledge, my beloved brethren, that I blush for my native land, and for the name of freemen. I blush for the name of Christianity and civilization. Such deeds the wild savage of the woods would despise in his heart. I have the consolation of believing that the innocent blood of the Saints, which has dyed the American soil for truth's sake, will cry in the ears of the Lord of Sabbaoth, until the abettors and perpetrators of such horrid tragedies will have to pay the price of the blood of those righteous men whom they have martyred.

Should any of the Saints have formed an opinion that the apostles, prophets, or saints of God in the last days would not seal their testimony with their blood, I wish to mark it as an error by citing testimony upon the subject. John the Revelator, while wrapped in the visions of the Almighty, saw events that were to transpire in the last days, before the second advent of the Messiah; and in the opening of the fifth seal, he "saw under the altar the souls of them that had been slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held; and when they asked how long before the Lord would judge and avenge their blood on those that dwelt on the earth, they were informed they must rest for a little season until their fellow-servants and brethren should be killed as they were." Rev. vi. 9, 10, 11. Again, John said, in pouring out the plagues upon the earth, xvi. 3, that "he poured out his phial upon the sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man, and every living soul died in the sea; and the third angel poured out his phial upon the rivers and fountains of waters, and they became blood; and the angel said the Lord was righteous in so doing, for they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink, for they are worthy."

Some may say, it was in the days of Jesus Christ that this was fulfilled, but it was not so; for John lived after, and saw things that should come to pass in the future; and that in the last days the waters were to be turned into blood, because they had shed the blood of prophets and of saints. John also speaks of two other witnesses in Judea that were to be slain; and how many others of the servants of God may be called to seal their testimony with their blood before the coming of Christ, it is not for me to say.

The Book of Doctrine and Covenants conveys the idea that the Prophet, Joseph Smith, might be called to lay down his life. t of the first paragraph; also page 159, fourth paragraph, "Behold, I will give you eternal life, even if you should be slain." Page 237, third paragraph, "I have decreed in my heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether you will abide in my covenant even unto death, that you may be found worthy." Hence, instead of the death of the Prophet being contrary to the word of God, it is evidently in fulfillment of prophecy and the revelations of Jesus Christ.

The Prophet Joseph was fully aware, for months before his death, that his work was about finished on the earth. I draw this conclusion from the testimony of his own mouth, in his addresses both public and private. On the 16th of April, 1844, while delivering an address in the Temple in Nauvoo, upon the death of Elder Lorenzo Barnes, whose body lies interred at Idle, near Bradford, Yorkshire, he remarked that when he died he wished to have an honorable burial with his father and the Saints in Nauvoo. He plainly declared that he wished his body to lie beside his father in Nauvoo; for he considered Nauvoo would be a burial place for the Saints.

Again, months before he made the above request, while delivering an interesting address before the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo, he said, as he had this opportunity, he was going to instruct the Society, and point out the way for them to conduct themselves, that they might act according to the will of God. He said that he did not know that he should have many opportunities of teaching them, as they were going to be left to themselves; that they would not have him to instruct them; that the Church would not have his instructions long; that the world would not be troubled with him a great while, nor have his teachings;  that he would deliver the keys to others; and that, according to his prayers, God had appointed him elsewhere.

The Prophet called the Quorum of the Twelve together several months before his death, and informed them that the Lord had commanded him to hasten their endowments; that he did not expect to remain himself to see the Temple completed; that he wished to confer the keys of the Kingdom of God upon other men, that they might build up the Church and Kingdom according to the pattern given. The Prophet stood before the Twelve from day to day, clothed with the spirit and power of God, and instructed them in the oracles of God, in the pattern of heavenly things, in the keys of the Kingdom, in the power of the priesthood, and in the knowledge of the last dispensation of the fulness of times.

In his last charge to the Quorum of the Twelve, he rose up in all the majesty, strength, and dignity of his calling, as a prophet, seer, and revelator, out of the loins of ancient Joseph, and exhorted and commanded the brethren of the Twelve to rise up, and go forth in the name of Israel's God, and bear off the keys of the Kingdom of God in righteousness and in honor in all the world. They were instructed to walk in all holiness, godliness, faith, virtue, temperance, patience, and charity; to do honor to the cause of God in this last dispensation and fulness of times; and when their work was finished, to follow his example by boldly sealing their testimony with their blood, for the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, if necessity required it, that they might be prepared for the reward, which is beyond the veil.

Those who were present on those occasions cannot forget the teachings that fell from the lips of that noble, but now martyred Prophet of God. Though his body sleeps in the tomb, his testimony lives, not only in the hearts of men, but is on record and will remain in force, while his persecutors will reap a just reward for all their works. And I hereby bear my testimony unto all men into whose hands these lines may fall, that I have been acquainted with Joseph, and Hyrum Smith, the Prophet and the Patriarch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; have attended their private and public counsels from time  to time, during the last ten years of my life; and notwithstanding their enemies have caused the earth to be deluged, as it were, with lies, slanders, and fabrications, with the intent to injure their character and destroy their influence among men; that I have never heard either of those men teach, counsel, or advocate, or practice any principle that was contrary to the word of God, virtue, or temperance, or unbecoming men standing in their high and holy calling. On the contrary, I have been astonished at the patience, forbearance, long-suffering, philanthropy, and charity manifested in the lives of those men. I have been filled with joy by the beauty, order, knowledge, principles, intelligence, and glory manifest in the teachings, counsels, and revelations of Jesus Christ given through those servants of God, for the benefit of the children of men in this last dispensation.

Soon after the Quorum of the Twelve received their endowment, according to the counsel of the Prophet, they left Nauvoo (except two) on a mission to the Eastern States. They had not been long gone ere the persecutors of the Saints were exceedingly mad against them, and sought to find accusation against the Prophet, that they might put him to death.

At length the Governor and officers of the State of Illinois having pledged themselves to protect from violence the Prophet and his brother, Hyrum, the latter gave themselves up in answer to the charges of their enemies.

They took the parting hand of their aged mother, bid adieu to wife and children, and left in the lovely city of Nauvoo a circle of many thousands of friends who were ready to lay down their lives in the defense of their leaders. They went without either warrant or officer, accompanied by two of the Twelve, and a few other friends. They rode nearly twenty miles into the camp of their enemies, to the town of Carthage.

Before entering the town, the Prophet exclaimed: "I go as a lamb to the slaughter, I am innocent of the crimes whereof I am accused, I die with a conscience void of offense towards God and towards men."

I need not enter upon the details of the horrible tragedy committed against our lamented brethren, as you have had all  the particulars laid before you; suffice it to say that then fell two as noble men as ever dwelt in flesh in this generation; thus were broken the pledged faith and the honor of the Governor and of the State of Illinois; thus were the laws and institutions of America disgraced in the eyes of the nations of the earth; and the cup of her iniquity filled that she might be prepared for judgment.

When the report of these things reached the Quorum of Twelve, most of whom were in the Eastern States, some fifteen hundred miles from the city of Nauvoo, we came together in the city of Boston, and made preparations for an immediate return to our homes in Nauvoo. Any portion of a veil that remained over our eyes concerning any sayings of the Prophet about his being taken away from us, etc., was now taken off, and we not only saw clearly, but felt deeply in our hearts, the meaning of many of his sayings, while in our midst. We started together, and in about twelve days, we were again on the soil of Nauvoo. But how great the change, now many thousands of the Saints were in mourning for their lost friends, who had as it were, laid down their lives for them; and even the heavens over our heads seemed brooding with gloom over the spilt blood of the Prophets. We ourselves would have been glad of the opportunity to set our houses in order, to mourn for the martyred Prophets for thirty days, as Israel did for Moses, and then to rise up, wash our faces, anoint our heads, and go about our Master's business. We were even deprived of that privilege; for aspiring spirits, who are ever ready to rise up on such occasions, were already active. The most conspicuous was Sidney Rigdon. The history of his claim you have already had laid before you in the Times and Seasons, and in the Star. His course was such that of necessity we had to commence Church business the day following our arrival in the City.

Many spirits have gone out into the world of late. One of them was plainly manifested in the editors who predicted that as the Prophet was dead, the work of the Latter-day Saints was ended. They thought the Saints would disperse, and the cause fall away and die. They might as well have said the same thing after the crucifixion of Christ, have declared that because He was dead, His testimony would die, and His apostles desert the  cause, and the work fall to the ground to rise no more. His testimony just began to be in force. His apostles, having the keys of the kingdom, walked up into their calling, and magnified the work, three thousand souls uniting with them in one day, while the work spread far and wide.

So will it be in this case; the testimony of the late martyred Prophets will now be in force; the principles of light, knowledge, and glory that have flowed from their lips, are too firmly established in the hearts of thousands of the Saints to die, but on the contrary must live and bring forth fruit to the honor and glory of God.

The fires of eternal truth have burned too long and too deep into the flesh and bones of the Twelve Apostles of this dispensation to be quenched by anything but death, neither will they permit them to turn from their course, to spend their time in the vocations of merchandising, farming, or fishing. A double portion of the spirit of God, and the power of the priesthood will rest upon the elders of Israel as they go forth into the vineyard, until tens of thousands will rejoice in the fulness of the gospel of the Son of God.

We found this kind of spirit and feeling resting upon the Saints upon our return to Nauvoo. Truly they were called to mourn, but they had by no means lost their faith. On the contrary, they were united, if possible, with a stronger tie. As with the heart of one man, they were ready to carry out every measure of the work of God, according to the pattern and foundation laid by the Prophet who had sealed the work with his life. On the second day after our arrival, August 8th, 1844, we met in a special conference all the quorums, authorities, and members of the Church, that could assemble in Nauvoo. They were addressed by Elder Brigham Young, the President of the Quorum of Twelve. It was evident to the Saints that the mantle of Joseph had fallen upon him, the road that he pointed out could be seen so plainly, that none need err therein. The spirit of wisdom and counsel attended all his teachings, he struck upon a chord, with which all hearts beat in unison.

He was followed by a number of the Twelve and others, who spoke to the point in an edifying manner, and at the close of  the conference, a number of resolutions were adopted. The following proposition was then submitted: "Do the Saints want the Twelve to stand at the head, as the First Presidency of the Church, and at the head of this kingdom in all the world, and next to Joseph, walk up into their calling, hold the keys of this kingdom, and preside over all the affairs of the Church of Jesus Christ, of Latter-day Saints in all the world?" All that are in favor of this in all the congregations of the Saints make it manifest by holding up the right hand. At once there was a sea of hands, a unanimous vote. A contrary vote was called, and not a hand was raised in a congregation of about fifteen thousand Saints. Sidney Rigdon, himself, who was present, did not vote against it, but, I think, in favor of it. Confidence and order were firmly established from that hour. The two oldest bishops were appointed by the Twelve as trustees-in-trust for the Temple.

The walls of the Temple arose much faster than ever before. The laborers upon that house manifested a determination not to leave it until it was finished, even if they obtained nothing but their daily bread for their reward. The Quorum of the Twelve immediately entered upon their duties by organizing all the quorums of the Church according to the order of God, and carrying out all the views and principles of the Prophet and Patriarch, according to the pattern given them in laying the foundation of this great and mighty work. They have organized the churches in North America into districts and conferences similar to the organization which they formed with the Saints in Great Britain. They have organized twelve quorums of the seventies, seven presidents to each quorum, who will be prepared after the endowment to go forth unto all nations, bearing glad tidings unto the children of men.

When the Quorum of the Twelve met in council, it seemed wisdom in God, that some one of them should visit the churches in Britain; the lot fell upon me, as you will see from the recommendations of President Brigham Young to visit the churches of Europe. And according to appointment, after passing with my family through all the fatigues and dangers of a journey and voyage of six thousand miles, I am again in your midst; and I am happy to be able to inform you that the progress of the work of the  Lord, and the welfare of the Saints, have never been in as prosperous a condition as at the present time, in the United States generally. All letters and papers up to the latest date from Nauvoo confirm this statement; peace, union, order, and industry prevail. Great exertions are made by the Saints to establish manufactures in various branches, that all may be employed, and have their wants supplied. The Temple is being rapidly completed.

Perhaps some may think that I ought to embody in this address a minute account of the thousand stories and rumors that have been put in circulation by our enemies against the Prophet, Patriarch, the Twelve, and the Saints at large. In answer, I say, that if it were the first time that the followers of God were spoken evil of, and every wicked slander that could be devised put forth against them, I should consider it to be a new thing under the sun. I would spend more time in writing about it; but as every man (according to the Scriptures) that will follow Christ will be hated by the world, and have all manner of evil spoken against him, and as the Saints may look for it, I will give it a passing notice. John C. Bennett, and many other enemies and apostates have counseled together in order to get up those stories and falsehoods that would have a tendency to injure the Saints, and to prejudice the minds of the community against them, without any regard to truth. In this way thousands of reports and stories have been set afloat, many of them so ridiculous and foreign to reason or to common sense, that none could believe them; and one would think that the devil himself would be ashamed of such agents.

As to the career of Mr. Sidney Rigdon, I would say, that his late views, opinions, and course, have been so foreign and diverse from that of the late Prophet, and from the faith of the Saints, that he has had but very little influence, except with a few uneasy spirits who were aspiring after something else than doing the will of God. If we have been rightly informed, even that influence is dying away; and I have no doubt that when Mr. Rigdon comes to reflect upon the course he has taken, he will deeply regret having entertained those measures which will end like air castles, in disappointment.

But, beloved brethren, you may rest assured that the Quorum of the Twelve is determined to carry out the order and  principles of the Church, according to the law of God. They will take a decided stand against every principle or practice manifest in the Church contrary to the law of God, of reason, revelation, virtue, or holiness. They are men who have taken upon them the name of Christ with full purpose of heart. They have labored diligently and faithfully all the day long, from the beginning, to establish the foundation of the fulness of the gospel, and plant the principles of eternal truth among the nations. Many of them have been in your midst, their labors and their diligence you have witnessed. They have spared no pains or sacrifice in planting the work throughout this realm. They are still willing to labor and spend their lives in the cause. They desire greatly that the Temple shall be finished, that the Saints may receive their endowments, and save themselves and their friends; and that the elders of Israel may go forth clothed with the power of God.

The Twelve are not alone in their feelings in this important work. The high priests, seventies, elders, and Saints, as one body, throughout America, are inspired by the same spirit, and are ready as one man to sustain the Quorum of the Twelve by their faith, prayers, confidence, and works, and carry out those glorious principles and measures, the foundation of which was laid by the martyred Prophets of God.

While union is strength, knowledge is power; and while the work is in the hands of such men, whose motive is to build up the Kingdom of God, promote the gospel of Jesus Christ in its purity, and save the souls of men, we have no fear that the work will not prosper; that light and truth will not prevail; the name of God will not be glorified; and that the Saints will not be prepared for exaltation beyond the veil.

Having thus far dwelt upon the cause in America, I will now turn my attention to the officers and Saints in this land. It has been a source of much consolation to me since my arrival, to hear the report of the union, faith, and determination of the Saints in general, in the various conferences, scattered abroad through the British Islands. I rejoice, beloved brethren, to learn that the same spirit is animating your bosoms, that manifests itself amongst the Saints in Nauvoo. I am fully persuaded that those who were appointed as your presidency in this land; viz, Elders  Hedlock, and Ward, have had much of the spirit of wisdom, prudence, and counsel in all their measures in your midst; they have had grace and strength according to their day, and have been faithful over those things committed to their charge. I am also happy to learn that the work is in a prosperous condition in London, under the wise and faithful teachings of Elder Davis; also of its prosperity in Scotland, under the superintendence of Elder John Cairns, who is now gone to America. I also find Elders Stratton, Sheets, Meynell, and a number of other elders well employed. Elders Clark, Jones, Holmes, and Hardy, who accompanied me from America, are now in the field. Elder Jones has gone to Wales both to preach and to print in the Welsh language, and with the grace of God and united exertion of all the laboring elders throughout the land, I expect ere long we shall reap a rich harvest of souls.

It is my intention to visit the various conferences throughout the kingdom as soon as circumstances will permit.

Beloved brethren, there are several subjects which weigh upon my mind, and I beg your attention while I present them before you.

The first that presents itself is the Temple of God, which He has commanded His Saints in all the world to build unto His holy name. I believe all that it is necessary for the Saints in Europe is to understand this subject in its true light, in order to bring forth their tithes and offerings unto the storehouse of God, in such a manner that He will open the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there will not be room enough to contain it. I am not zealous in urging this matter upon our friends in this country, because I have any fears that the Temple of God cannot be built; for I verily believe that if there should not a farthing be sent from this land, or even the United States, that the Saints in Nauvoo would never cease their work, diligence, and labors, until they saw the finishing stroke adorn that Temple; but, why, O ye Saints of God in Europe, should we stand still, withhold out tithes and offerings, and see our brethren in Nauvoo build that Temple, and then like Jacob, of old, secure alone unto themselves the promised blessings! May God forbid, rather let all the Saints throughout the  world send up their tithes, with their names to be recorded in the Book of the Law of the Lord. By so doing they will not only keep the commandments of the Lord, but will own their share in the House, and have a right to all the promised blessings, ordinances, oracles, and endowments which will not only benefit them, but their posterity to the latest generation.

I trust, therefore, that all the presiding elders will make an exertion to have all the churches continue their tithes. Send the name of each individual with the money to us in Liverpoool, that we may record the same in a book, and keep a copy with us, and also send a copy of the same with the money to Nauvoo, that it may be recorded in the book of the Law of the Lord.

I wish the Female Society, in all the branches, to continue their subscriptions for the Temple until it is finished. Let their money and names be brought together the same as all other tithes and offerings, that, when the Temple is finished, the whole amount they have paid may stand opposite their names in the Book of the Law of the Lord, that it may be known who are the owners of the House.

I wish it to be distinctly understood, that collections of every description for the Temple, in this land, whether from Church, individuals, or from the Female Society, should be brought with their names to us here in Liverpool, that it may go through the proper channel, that our records may show that all things are done according to the order of God.

The circulation of the works published by the Latter-day Saints is also a subject I deem of importance. I hope the officers and members will use their influence in circulating the Star, and all other works, as widely as possible. It is wisdom for all the Saints that can, to secure carefully all the numbers of the Star, and at the end of the volume get them bound. I here wish to remark that we have on hand at 36 Chapel Street, Liverpool, several hundred copies of the fourth and fifth volumes of The Times and Seasons, sent here by Elder John Taylor. These volumes contain many precious and important documents--the history of the persecution, the trials and acquittals of the Prophet before the courts of Illinois; many letters and teachings of the Prophet; also, a full account of the late murder of our brethren. In them will be found  also much of the history connected with the rise and progress of the Church. It is not expected that they will ever be reprinted, and when these copies are disposed of they cannot be obtained. I hope the Saints, as far as they can, will secure a copy of this work, that they may leave with their posterity an account of the rise and progress of the Church, which has been attended with so many scenes of vast interest.

We shall probably publish the "Book of Doctrine and Covenants" in England, as soon as circumstances will permit.

Emigration will continue to Nauvoo, or other parts of America, according to the circumstances and desires of the Saints. We shall endeavor to establish an agency in New Orleans, and also in New York, and no pains will be spared to make the Saints that wish to emigrate as comfortable as possible.

That all may understand alike and act in unison in Church matters, among all the conferences throughout this country, I would say, that whenever any member of the Church is to be tried for any transgression or difficulty, after he has been dealt with according to the laws of the Church, that the accuser present his charge in writing in a comprehensible manner, before the council of the officers of the branch to which the accused belongs. The presiding elder of the branch will sit as president, and decide the case according to the testimony given and according to justice and righteousness before the Lord. The decision should afterwards be presented before the members of that branch, and they be called upon to sanction the decision. Should there be any dissatisfaction with the decision given, an appeal can be made to the quarterly conference, by presenting an account of the testimony and decision accompanying the appeal. The presiding elder of the quarterly conference will preside, and decide the case according to the testimony given.

If an elder, presiding over any branch of the Church should transgress, charges can be brought against him before the quarterly conference, and he can there be tried. If either party be dissatisfied there can be an appeal made to the general or yearly conference, by presenting the testimony, and the decision given, and the president of all the conferences in the realm will sit in judgment on the case, and decide according to testimony, which  will be an end of controversy concerning the matter. If a presiding elder over a quarterly conference shall transgress, charges can be preferred against him before the general conference, and he can be tried. If the president over the whole Church in any realm shall transgress, he can be tried before the general authorities of the Church assembled in Nauvoo, or wherever they be assembled; so that there is no member exempt in all the Kingdom of God. All these decisions must be made in all lowliness of heart, in righteousness and truth before God.

I would earnestly exhort all the elders or other officers of the Church that stand up to teach the people, not to forget the first principles of the gospel; and to seek by faith, prayer and humility, to obtain wisdom, and the spirit of God to dictate in all your labors. Wisdom is one of the greatest gifts of God, and the voice of wisdom will not tell us to spend our time in warring against the sects of the day. Opposing the opinions of men; ridiculing the religions that surround us, thereby closing the ears of the hearers; and closing up the understanding of men against light and truth, are not wisdom. The opinions and religions of other men are as dear unto them as ours are unto us. Oh ye elders of Israel! let salvation be your text in meekness and humility. Let the power of eternal truth, wisdom, light, and knowledge that are hidden in the first principles of the gospel of the Son of God be brought forth. You can be instrumental in saving the souls of men, and they will rejoice with yourselves that they have beheld the light. We should never get away from the gospel, or leave it to preach something that is foreign to our calling, or be contentious about words to no purpose. Every tree is known by its fruit. If we are faithful before the Lord, pursue a wise and prudent course, good fruit will be sure to follow our labors.

And lastly, I wish most strongly to urge upon all officers and members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints throughout this realm, that they strictly observe and abide by the laws of the land. So long as the government protects our lives, persons, and property--guarantees unto us the rights of conscience in common with its subjects, it is perfectly right that we should be submissive to the laws of the same. We should  honor and respect the Queen of the Realm, with all the officers of government in their respective stations. We shall then be following the example of our Lord and Master, who was ready to render unto Caesar the things that were Caesar's, and unto God things that were God's; and any course of conduct contrary to this cannot be sustained by the authorities of this Church.

I wish the Saints generally to understand that I have made choice of Elders Hedlock and Ward as counselors in presiding over and conducting the affairs of the Kingdom of God in this portion of the vineyard; and I hope, in conjunction with them, to be able to visit most of the conferences as early as possible.

By way of conclusion I would exhort all the Saints that they unitedly observe the sayings of the Lord, as recorded in the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth verses of the fifteenth chapter of John. If we love one another as Christ loves us, we can easily settle all difficulties that may arise in our midst, forgive one another, and be filled with mercy, and light, love, joy, union, peace, and fellowship. There will then be the stability among us, and we shall be much better in the sight of God, angels, and men, than when pettyfogging over the faults of our brethren. I especially desire that all the officers of the Church may rightly consider their calling, and make full proof of their ministry; bear off the priesthood with dignity and honor; be wise shepherds that will feed the flocks; prove a blessing to thousands of the human family; and clear their garments of the blood of all men. I desire that they prove themselves true and faithful; and be approved in the sight of heaven; be acknowledged the sons of God; and be prepared for all those blessings that await the friends of God both in time and eternity. This is the sincere prayer, before God, of your servant and fellow laborer in the new and everlasting covenant.

WILFORD WOODRUFF.

Appendix C.

STORM ON LAKE MICHIGAN.

"We left Manitou Island, Lake Michigan, at 4 o'clock p. m. September 25, 1841, on the steamer Chesapeake, which contained three hundred passengers, six of whom were members of the Church, a large quantity of freight and coal, eighty cords of wood, eighty mules, besides pigs, chickens, geese, ducks, etc.

"We continued our journey towards Chicago without any interruption, until half-past eleven p. m., when we were overtaken by a tremendous storm of wind and rain; it blew a hurricane, and the lake became as rough as it could be by the force of wind, and such a scene as quickly followed I never before witnessed in my travels, either by land or sea. The captain, officers, hands, and most of the passengers expected to go to the bottom of the lake. To have judged from outward appearances I should think there were twenty chances of being lost to one of being saved, yet I did not once expect to be lost, for I believed the Lord would by some means save me and my wife and child, who were with me, from a watery grave.

"We were some forty miles from land when the gale struck us, and I was awakened from a sound sleep by the cry, 'We are all lost.' The first thought that entered my mind was, 'No, we shall not be lost.'

"I immediately leaped out of my berth and went to the upper deck. I saw we were in imminent danger of being wrecked; the bow of the boat was heavily laden, and frequently engulfed by the heavy waves that washed over her; there were judged to be fifty tons of water at a time on her bow; at one time her bow ran under water, and some thought she would never rise; the water set the mules and all the live stock afloat; washed away the partition; and the mules, pigs, chickens, ducks, and geese, were all hurled in one mass down into the steerage cabin, mixed pell mell with sixty Irish passengers, men, women, and children; at that moment the roaring of the wind, the rush of the waters the peals of thunder,  the flashes of lightning, the braying of asses, the squealing of pigs, the quacking of ducks, geese and chickens, the praying, screaming, and swearing of men, women and children, created a confusion of sounds which rent the air, and sent a gloomy thrill through the heart.

"We immediately went to work, and helped all the passengers out of the water, and from among the beasts, upon the deck, so their lives were preserved, while all the fowls, pigs, and part of the mules were drowned or killed; many tons of water rushed through the boat, until the water stood nearly to the boilers; it drove the firemen from their places.

"About this time, when the boat was laboring against the wind and tide one of the wheel chains broke, and the boat rolled over to one side. I again heard the cry that 'all was lost,' but about thirty of us caught hold of the two detached pieces of chain and held them together until the engineer mended them with wire.

"It took three strong men to manage the wheel; while the boat lay upon her side, it washed away a part of the state rooms; orders were given to clear the boat of everything that was movable; all the wood was fastened with stanchions; on the side that was down, the stanchions were knocked out by the passengers, and forty cords of wood tumbled into the sea at one surge; this caused the boat to right up, and we expected every moment our state room would be washed away. I left it three times with my wife and child, and stepped upon the main deck, expecting to see it washed away; and to add to the horror of the situation we were wrapped in darkness, as all the lanterns were dashed to pieces.

"The men at the wheel labored hard for five hours to turn the boat round before they accomplished it, so that they could run before the storm. At length daylight appeared, and with it a cessation of the storm in a measure. We returned to Manitou Island at four o'clock, being twenty-four hours out, mostly in the storm."

Appendix D.

RATIONALITY OF THE ATONEMENT.

(Millennial Star, Vol. 6, p. 134.)

A pamphlet has lately made its appearance in Glasgow, published by a member of our Church holding the office of priest, containing 28 pages, headed "A Treatise on the Atonement, Proving the Necessity of Christ's Death for Man's Redemption Neither Scriptural nor Reasonable. By T. S. Barr."

We are sorry to be under the necessity of occupying our time and pages in noticing a pamphlet bearing such an introduction, as the production of a member of the Church of Christ. We are sorry that any man, bearing any portion of the authority of the holy priesthood, should have his mind so much overcome by the powers of darkness, as to stray so widely from the order and counsel of the Kingdom of God. It is not pleasing to present, for the investigation of the public, a heresy so much opposed to the revelations of God and to every principle of holiness.

Our object in the present article will not be so much to refute the heretical doctrine advanced, as to introduce a portion of the testimony in favor of the principle of redemption through the blood of Christ, with which the revelations of God so much abound, in order that our views on the subject may be rightly understood by all, and that the Saints of God may be prepared to withstand the assaults of the grand enemy of man's salvation, and to set the matter forever at rest in the minds of those who believe in the revelations of God.

We had fully expected that our repeated cautions against individuals publishing things without our sanction would be sufficient and save us the trouble of repeating the warning. The neglect of the author to observe this counsel causes him to forfeit his authority and standing in the Church of God, until, at least, he has repented of his error.

In our perusal of the pamphlet, we endeavored to find out the object of the author, and the only reasonable conclusion we could  arrive at was, that it was a strained attempt on his part to display some talent and learning. He is ambitious to make quotations from history, heathen mythology, and from the Hebrew language. But it would be far better for a man to be entirely divested of talents, than to use them in endeavoring to prove the inefficiency of the atonement of Christ, and striking at the fundamental principle of salvation, as he has done.

The author introduces himself to his readers by lamenting because of having "to labor under great disadvantages while propounding what he conscientiously believes to be a correct solution of this very important subject, as the views which he holds are diametrically opposed to those entertained by Christians of almost all denominations; at least (he says) since the foundation of the Romish Church until now, the belief has been tenaciously adhered to amongst professors of religion, that Jesus Christ came into the world to suffer an ignominious death for, or instead of, Adam and his posterity."

We would remark that he would have labored under equal disadvantages, as far as professors of the religion of heaven were concerned, had he lived contemporary with the Messiah Himself and His apostles, or at any period, however remote, subsequent to that time; and that this doctrine was not one of the many false fabrications or dogmas of men introduced to make void the designs of God, or lead the minds of the people away "after seducing fables and doctrines of devils;" but that it was not only a theme on which the ancient prophets and servants of God delighted to dwell, but the mainspring of all their hopes, and the source from which they drew strength and support, when called to pass through trials of an overwhelming nature; to substantiate which we will make a few quotations from Scripture.

The Apostle Paul, after treating at some length on the faith with which the ancient worthies were endowed, speaks of Moses refusing the honors which Pharaoh's daughter sought to confer upon him, and "esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt; for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward"--Hebrews xi: 26. And after enumerating the sufferings of others, he informs us that their reason for not accepting deliverance was, "that they might obtain a better resurrection" (Hebrews xi: 35), which could only be brought to pass  through the redemption wrought out by the Son of God, as we shall be able fully to prove.

The same apostle, in writing to the Galatians, endeavors to impress this doctrine upon their minds, by proving that the law given through Moses was introduced because of transgressions, and was inadequate to accomplish their salvation, but merely served as a schoolmaster to bring them to Christ, and that it could not disannul the covenant that was made before of God in Christ (Galatians iii: 17); thereby proving that Abraham and his successors were conversant with the gospel of Christ and the doctrine of redemption through Him. And Job, while suffering under extreme agony, seems to have been supported by this hope, when he exclaims, "I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that He shall stand in the latter day upon the earth" (Job. xix: 25). It is also evident that the faith of which they were in possession was efficacious, for we are informed by Matthew xxvii: 52, that many of the Saints which slept arose with Christ at His resurrection, who must of a necessity have been some of the prophets and saints who had lived prior to His coming. Moreover, we would remark that unless this doctrine had been believed in by the ancients, they were without the means of obtaining salvation; for Peter says (Acts iv: 12), "there is none other name under heaven given among men whereby we can be saved." In fine, the continuation of sacrifices from the days of Abel to John was typical of the great and last sacrifice offered up in the person of Jesus Christ.

After this introduction, the author labors to show the absurdity and unrighteousness of the doctrine that the Almighty should require "the very heart's blood of His own well-beloved Son Christ Jesus, to satiate His thirst for vengeance." As far as we or our principles are concerned, he might have saved himself this trouble, as we do not believe that such was the object of God in the sacrifice of His Son. The Scriptures are too explicit on this point to be misunderstood. We are informed by the Savior Himself, what object His Father had in view in His coming into the world. "For God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life; for God sent not His Son into the world to condemn the world: but that the world through Him might be saved." (John iii: 16-17.)

The revelations that God has given to man abundantly prove that God and the eternal worlds are governed by a celestial law; and in order that man might enjoy the same glory with Himself, it was requisite that he should keep the same law, "that which is governed by law is also preserved by law, and perfected and sanctified by the same," etc., etc. (Doctrine and Covenants, Section 7, Par. 8); but man, having transgressed the law of God, justly entailed upon himself the curse of this disobedience, from which he was incapable of redeeming himself, neither could any less than infinite sacrifice atone for his fall. The effect of his disobedience, it is well known, was death, and this curse has been hereditary to all the posterity of Adam. Let it be borne in mind that man, while submitting to this punishment, does so without any inherent power, independently in himself to accomplish his resurrection and restoration to the presence of God and His glory. He is now under the jurisdiction and within the dominion of death, and to achieve a victory over death it was necessary that some one more holy and pure than the being who had become the transgressor should enter into his dominion, in order that he might thereby have that dominion destroyed; and unless this be done, the control which death will hold over mankind must be eternal. It will require little argument to prove that the Son of God was, in every way, competent to perform this task, being pure, holy, and unspotted; and that he was the individual appointed to accomplish this, is fully substantiated by the testimony of John concerning him, "Behold, the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world" (John i: 29), that "as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (I Corinthians xv: 22.)

The next step taken by the author is to prove that it was unnecessary for Jesus Christ to shed His blood, or that He came into the world at all to atone for the transgression of Adam. To use his own language--"Now, seeing that death, misery, pain, and privations have been the legacy handed down in the human family from generation to generation, I for my own part, could not see any justice on the part of Deity did He demand a victim in our stead. Can any person, possessed of his reason, after recounting the sufferings that Adam and his children have undergone because of his and their own sin, avoid coming to the conclusion that man has indeed suffered for himself." And then, after endeavoring to  prove that because death has followed all men, the atonement of Christ was incompetent, and did not accomplish the end for which it was intended, he sums up by stating that the mission of Messiah was, merely to be a Savior of men by becoming a preacher of righteousness, and that He fell a martyr to the truth only, as did the prophets who were slain previous to His coming. With all his learning and self-sufficiency to attain to what he calls "correct views of real heavenly theology," he has proven himself, through taking the foregoing stand, either entirely ignorant of the Scriptures, or wilfully unacquainted with them, as the following quotations will fully prove. "For this is my blood of the new testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins" (Mat. xxvi: 28). "Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain" (Acts ii: 23). "Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which He has purchased with His own blood" (Acts xx: 28). "Being justified freely by His grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus; whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in His blood, to declare His righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forebearance of God" (Romans iii: 24-5). "In whom we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of His grace" (Ephesians i: 7). "For it pleased the Father that in Him should all fulness dwell: and having made peace through the blood of His cross, by Him to reconcile all things unto Himself: by Him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven" (Colossians i: 19, 20). "So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that look for Him shall He appear without sin unto salvation" (Hebrews ix: 28). "Then, said I, lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God; by the which will we are sanctified to the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all" (Hebrews x: 7-10). "Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without a blemish and without a spot. Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you;  who by him do believe in God that raised Him up from the dead and gave Him glory; that your faith and hope might be in God" (I Peter i: 18-21). "And he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world" (I John ii). "And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the kings of the earth. Unto Him that loved us and washed us from our sins in His own blood" (Rev. i: 5).

Having made the foregoing quotations from the New Testament, we shall next introduce a few, on the same subject from the Book of Mormon (first European edition).

"And he also spake concerning the prophets, how great a number had testified of these things, concerning this Messiah of whom he had spoken, or this Redeemer of the world. Wherefore, all mankind were in a lost and fallen state, and ever would be, save they should rely on the Redeemer" (Page 19).

"And I looked and beheld the Lamb of God, that He was taken by the people; yea, the Son of the everlasting God was judged of the world; and I saw and bear record. And I, Nephi, saw that He was lifted up upon the cross, and slain for the sins of the world" (Page 23).

"And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time that He may redeem the children of men from the fall. And, because that they are redeemed from the fall, they have become free forever" (Page 66).

"Behold, my beloved brethren, I speak unto you these things, that ye may rejoice and lift up your heads forever, because of the blessings which the Lord God shall bestow upon your children. For I know that ye have searched much, many of you, to know of things to come; wherefore, I know that ye know that our flesh must waste away and die: nevertheless, in our bodies, we shall see God. Yea, I know that ye know, that in the body He shall show Himself unto those at Jerusalem, from whence we came; for it is expedient that it should be among them; for it behooveth the great Creator that He suffered Himself to become subject unto men, in the flesh, and die for all men, that all men might become subject unto Him. For as death has passed upon all men, to fulfill the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a  power of resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto men, by reason of the fall; and the fall came by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen, they were cut off from the presence of the Lord; wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement; save, it should be an infinite atonement, this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And, if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot, and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more. O, the wisdom of God! His mercy and grace! For, behold, if the flesh should rise no more, our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more. And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devil's angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself: yea, to that being who beguiled our first parents; who transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light, and stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder, and all manner of secret works of darkness. O, how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth the way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit. And because of the way of deliverance of our God, the Holy One of Israel, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the temporal, shall deliver up its death: which death is the grave. And this death, of which I have spoken, which is the spiritual death, shall deliver up its dead; which spiritual death is hell: wherefore, death and hell must deliver up their dead, and hell must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of men shall be restored one to the other; and it is by the power of the resurrection of the Holy One of Israel. O, how great the plan of our God! For, on the other hand, the paradise of God must deliver up the spirits of the righteous, and the grave deliver up the bodies of the righteous; and the spirit and the body is restored to itself again, and all men become incorruptible and immortal, and they are living souls, having a perfect knowledge like unto us, in the flesh; save, it be that our knowledge shall be perfect; wherefore, we shall have a perfect knowledge of all our gilt, and our uncleanness,  and our nakedness; and the righteous shall have a perfect knowledge of their enjoyment, and their righteousness being clothed with purity, yea, even with a robe of righteousness" (Pages 80-81).

"For, behold, my beloved brethren, I say unto you, that the Lord God worketh not in darkness. He doeth not anything, save it be for the benefit of the world; for He loveth the world, even that He layeth down His own life, that He may draw all men unto Him" (Page 112).

"For, behold, and also His blood atoneth for the sins of those who have fallen by the transgression of Adam, who have died, not knowing the will of God concerning them, or who have ignorantly sinned" (Page 169).

"For, behold, as in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins, and, moreover, I say unto you, that there shall be no other name given, nor any other way, nor means, whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ the Lord Omnipotent. For, behold, He judgeth, and His judgment is just; and the infant perisheth not that dieth in His infancy; but now men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children and believe that salvation was, and is, and is to come in and through the atoning blood of Christ the Lord Omnipotent" (Page 170).

"For, were it not for the redemption which He hath made for His people, which was prepared from the foundation of the world, I say unto you, were it not for this, all mankind must have perished. But, behold, the bands of death shall be broken, and the Son reigneth and hath power over the death; therefore, He bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead" (Page 198).

"Yea, concerning that which was to come, and also concerning the resurrection of the dead, and the redemption of the people, which was to be brought to pass through the power and the sufferings and the death of Christ, and His resurrection and ascension into heaven" (Page 202). "And He will take upon Him death, that He may loose the bands of death which bind His people" (Page 256).

"Now, there is a death which is called a temporal death, and the death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death, that all shall be raised from this temporal death" (Page 270).

"Now, Aaron began to open the scriptures unto them concerning the coming of Christ, and also concerning the resurrection of the dead, and that there could be no redemption for mankind, save it were through the death and sufferings of Christ, and the atonement of His blood" (Page 303).

"Behold, I say unto you, that I do know that Christ shall come among the children of men, to take upon Him the transgressions of His people, and that He shall atone for the sins of the world; for the Lord God has spoken it; for it is expedient that an atonement should be made; for according to the great plan of the eternal God, there must be an atonement made, or else all mankind must unavoidably perish; yea, all are hardened; yea, all are fallen and are lost, and must perish except it be though the atonement which it is expedient should be made; for it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice; yea, not a sacrifice of man, neither of beasts, neither of any manner of fowl; for it shall not be a human sacrifice; but it must be infinite and eternal sacrifice. Now, there is not any man that can sacrifice His own blood which will atone for the sins of another. Now, if a man murdereth, behold, will our law, which is just, take the life of his brother? I say unto you, nay. But the law requires the life of him who hath murdered; therefore, there can be nothing which is short of an infinite atonement, which will suffice for the sins of the world; therefore, it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice, and then, shall there be, or it is expedient there should be, a stop to the shedding of blood; then shall the law of Moses be fulfilled; yea, it shall be fulfilled every jot and title, and none shall have passed away. And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law; every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice shall be the Son of God; yea, infinite and eternal; and thus He shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on His name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance" (Pages 341-2).

"Now the work of justice could not be destroyed; if so, God would cease to be God, and thus we see that all mankind were fallen, and they were in the grasp of justice; yea, the justice of God, which consigns them forever to be cut off from His presence.  And now, the plan of mercy cannot be brought about, except an atonement should be made, therefore, God Himself atoneth for the sins of the world, to bring about the plan of mercy, to appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also. Now, repentance could not come unto men except there were a punishment which also was eternal, as the life of the soul should be affixed opposite to the plan of happiness, which was as eternal also as the life of the soul. Now, how could a man repent except he should sin? How could he sin if there was no law, how could there be a law except there were punishment?" (Pages 362-3).

"And it came to pass that He stretched forth His hand and spake unto the people, saying: Behold, I am Jesus Christ, of whom the prophets testified shall come into the world, and behold I am the light and the life of the world, and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning" (Page 513). "And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross, and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross I might draw all men unto me" (Page 547). "And because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ, they are brought back into the presence of the Lord, yea, this is wherein all men are redeemed, because the death of Christ bringeth to pass the resurrection, which bringeth to pass a redemption from an endless sleep, from which sleep all men shall be awakened by the power of God when the trump shall sound; and they shall come forth, both small and great, and all shall stand before His bar, being redeemed and loosed from this eternal band of death" (Page 578). "Behold, I am He who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people" (Page 587). "And again, if ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not His power, then ye are sanctified in Christ, by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father, unto the remission of your sins, that ye become holy without spot" (Page 634).

To conclude our evidence on this subject, we shall make a few quotations from the Book of Doctrine and Covenants.

"I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who was crucified for the sins of the world, even as many as will believe on my name, that they may become the sons of God, even one in me, as I am in the Father, and the Father is one in me, that we may be one" (Sec. xi: Par. 1).

"And verily, I say even as many as have believed on my name, for I am Christ, and in my own name by the virtue of the blood which I have spilt have I pleaded before the Father for them" (Sec. xii, Par. 1).

"Listen to Him who is the advocate with the Father, who is pleading your cause before Him, saying, Father, behold the sufferings and death of Him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed--the blood of Him whom Thou gavest that Thyself might be glorified" (Sec. xi, Par. 1).

"Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God; for behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh wherefore He suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him." (Sec. xliii, Par. 3), "For, behold, I God, have suffered these things for all that they might not suffer if they would repent, but if they would not repent, they must suffer even as I, which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit, and would that I might not drink the bitter cup and shrink--nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men." (Sec. xliii; Par. 2).

It is written, "that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established." As we have quoted from many witnesses out of three records, we trust it will have a tendency to enlighten, not only the mind of the author of the pamphlet, but all those who doubt the doctrine of atonement through the blood of Christ. It will have been fully established beyond all controversy, from the flood of testimony, which we have brought from the revelations of God, given in various dispensations and ages of the world, and in different parts of the globe, that the object of Christ's mission to the earth was to offer Himself as a sacrifice to redeem mankind from eternal death, and that it was perfectly in accordance with the will of the Father that such a sacrifice should be made. He acted strictly in obedience to His Father's will in all  things from the beginning, and drank of the bitter cup given Him. Herein is brought to light, glory, honor, immortality, and eternal life, with that charity which is greater than faith or hope, for the Lamb of God, has thereby performed that for man which he could not accomplish for Himself. As justice in the first place has had its claim, and the words of God have been verified--"In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die"--so, on the other hand mercy has been extended, and the love of God manifested in breaking the bands of death, whereby the spirits and bodies of men are re-united, the spirits of the just received in exaltation in the presence of God and the Lamb--in the same tabernacles in which they toiled, labored, and suffered while on earth, without which union it is impossible for the souls of men to receive the fulness of glory. There is a glory connected with this that will be an eternal source of joy to every citizen of the celestial kingdom. The spirits, on the other hand, of those who reject the gospel of Christ and slight His proffered mercies, must return to their bodies in the last resurrection to receive a fulness of their punishment in the same tabernacles in which they dwelt while warring against God. We would hereby warn all men who may hear the sound of the words to repent of their sins and obey the gospel of the Son of God, that they may escape the punishment of those "who have trodden under foot the Son of God, and have counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy thing, and have done despite unto the spirit of grace" (Heb. x: 29), and that they may have a part in the first resurrection, and have their names "written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world" (Rev. xiii: 8), and be prepared to join in chanting the new song, saying, "Thou art worthy to take the book and to open the seals thereof, for thou wast slain and hast redeemed us to God by Thy blood, out of every kindred and tongue, and people, and nation; and hast made us unto our God kings and priests, and we shall reign on the earth" (Rev. v:9, 10).

We will now close with the words of Jacob, from the Book of Mormon, page 147: "Behold, will ye reject these words? Will ye reject the words of the prophets? and will ye reject all the words which have been spoken concerning Christ, after so many have spoken concerning Him; and deny the good word of Christ and the Power of God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and quench the  Holy Spirit, and make a mock of the great plan of redemption which has been laid for you? Know ye not that if ye will do these things, that the power of the redemption and the resurrection which is in Christ will bring you to stand with shame and awful guilt before the bar of God."

WILFORD WOODRUFF,

President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in the British Isles.

WIVES OF WILFORD WOODRUFF.

+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|NAME                             |WHEN BORN    |WHERE BORN                        |WHEN DIED    |WHERE DIED            |FATHER'S NAME    |MOTHER'S MAIDEN NAME   |WHEN MARRIED  |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+  |Phoebe Whittemore Carter Woodruff|March 8, 1807|At Scarboro, Maine                |Nov. 10, 1885|Salt Lake City, Utah  |Ezra Carter      |Sarah Fabyan           |April 13, 1837|  |Mary Ann Jackson Woodruff        |Feb. 18, 1818|Liverpool, England                |Oct. 25, 1894|do                    |William Jackson  |Elizabeth Lloyd April  |April 15, 1846|  |Emma Smith Woodruff              |March 1, 1838|Adam-Ondi-Ahman. Daviess Co., Mo. |             |                      |Samuel Smith     |Martisha Smoot         |March 13, 1853|  |Sarah Brown Woodruff             |Jan. 1, 1834 |Henderson, Jefferson Co., New York|May 9, 1909  |Smithfield, Utah      |Henry Brown      |Rhoda North            |March 13, 1853|  |Sarah Delight Stocking Woodruff  |July 26, 1838|Canton, Hartford Co., Conn.       |May 28, 1907 |South Cottonwood, Utah|John Jay Stocking|Catharine Emilie Ensign|July 31, 1857 |  +--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

CHILDREN OF WILFORD WOODRUFF.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|NAME                           |WHEN BORN     |WHERE BORN               |WHEN DIED     |WHERE DIED               |FATHER'S NAME   |MOTHER'S MAIDEN NAME    |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+  |Sarah Emma Woodruff            |July 14, 1838 |Scarboro, Maine          |July 17, 1840 |Nauvoo, Illinois         |Wilford Woodruff|Phoebe Whittemore Carter|  |Wilford Woodruff, Jr.          |March 22, 1840|Montrose, Lee Co., Iowa  |              |                         |do              |do                      |  |Phoebe Amelia Woodruff         |March 4, 1842 |Nauvoo, Illinois         |              |                         |do              |do                      |  |Susan Cornelia Woodruff        |July 25, 1843 |do                       |Oct. 6, 1897  |Sioux City, Iowa         |do              |do                      |  |Joseph Woodruff                |July 18, 1845 |Liverpool, England       |Nov. 12, 1846 |Winter Quarters, Nebraska|do              |do                      |  |Ezra Woodruff                  |Dec. 8, 1846  |Winter Quarters, Nebraska|Dec. 10, 1846 |do                       |do              |do                      |  |Sarah Carter Woodruff          |Oct. 28, 1847 |Council Bluffs, Iowa     |July 22, 1848 |Illinois                 |do              |do                      |  |Beulah Augusta Woodruff        |July 19, 1851 |Salt Lake City, Utah     |Jan. 13, 1905 |Salt Lake City, Utah     |do              |do                      |  |Aphek Woodruff                 |Jan. 25, 1853 |do                       |Jan. 25, 1853 |do                       |do              |do                      |  |James Jackson Woodruff         |March 25, 1847|Florence, Nebraska       |              |                         |do              |Mary Ann Jackson        |  |Hyrum Smith Woodruff           |Oct. 4, 1857  |Salt Lake City, Utah     |Nov. 24, 1858 |do                       |do              |Emma Smith              |  |Emma Manella Woodruff          |July 4, 1860  |do                       |Nov. 30, 1905 |Vernal, Utah             |do              |do                      |  |Asahel Hart Woodruff           |Feb. 3, 1863  |do                       |              |                         |do              |do                      |  |Ann Thompson Woodruff          |April 10, 1867|do                       |April 11, 1867|Salt Lake City, Utah     |do              |do                      |  |Clara Martisha Woodruff        |July 23, 1868 |do                       |              |                         |do              |do                      |  |Abraham Owen Woodruff          |Nov. 23, 1872 |do                       |June 21, 1904 |El Paso, Texas           |do              |do                      |  |Winnifred Blanch Woodruff      |April 9, 1876 |do                       |              |                         |do              |do                      |  |Mary Alice Woodruff            |June 2, 1879  |do                       |              |                         |do              |do                      |  |David Patten Woodruff          |April 4, 1854 |do                       |              |                         |do              |Sarah Brown             |  |Brigham Young Woodruff         |Jan. 18, 1857 |do                       |June 16, 1877 |Smithfield, Utah         |do              |do                      |  |Phoebe Arabella Woodruff       |May 30, 1859  |do                       |              |                         |do              |do                      |  |Sylvia Melvina Woodruff        |Jan. 14, 1862 |do                       |              |                         |do              |do                      |  |Newton Woodruff                |Nov. 3, 1863  |do                       |              |                         |do              |do                      |  |Mary Woodruff                  |Oct. 26, 1867 |do                       |Feb. 15, 1903 |Provo City, Utah         |do              |do                      |  |Charles Henry Woodruff         |Dec. 5, 1870  |do                       |Feb. 2, 1871  |Salt Lake City, Utah     |do              |do                      |  |Edward Randolph Woodruff       |Feb. 2, 1873  |Randolph, Rich Co., Utah |Feb. 8, 1873  |Randolph, Rich Co., Utah |do              |do                      |  |Marion Woodruff                |June 1, 1861  |Salt Lake City, Utah     |              |                         |do              |Sarah Delight Stocking  |  |Emeline Woodruff               |July 25, 1863 |do                       |              |                         |do              |do                      |  |Ensign Woodruff                |Dec. 23, 1865 |do                       |              |                         |do              |do                      |  |Jeremiah Woodruff              |Aug. 29, 1868 |Fort Herriman, Utah      |Dec. 16, 1869 |Salt Lake City, Utah     |do              |do                      |  |Rosanna Woodruff               |April 17, 1871|Salt Lake City, Utah     |Oct. 22, 1872 |do                       |do              |do                      |  |John Jay Woodruff              |Aug. 14, 1873 |do                       |              |                         |do              |do                      |  |Julia Delight Stocking Woodruff|June 28, 1878 |do                       |              |                         |do              |do                      |  +-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

"Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord. * * * Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them: they shall not be ashamed, but shall speak with the enemies in the gate."--Psalm 127.

"He poureth contempt upon princes, * * * yet setteth he the poor on high from affliction, and maketh him families like a flock."--Psalm 107.
