Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

EDITOR'S PREFACE

SEVERAL THOUSAND persons who now have connections with or roots in Colonia Juarez will be grateful to Nelle Spilsbury Hatch for preparing this account of a unique pioneer endeavor. The story is seen through a woman's eyes—a woman of superior intelligence and wide experience; of courage and patience. Not only was the material often difficult to secure or verify but the author faces the sure and natural reaction of some persons who will consider the account inadequate insofar as doing justice to their own relatives or family. It is not as they themselves remember or always thought. The editor urges all readers to appreciate the great problem that faced the author in keeping the work down to a publishable volume.

Any account of Colonia Juarez falls quite naturally into four parts—the visissitudes of founding and settling, the prosperous times before the Exodus, difficult revolutionary days, and the Colonia Juarez of today. The first three phases of the town's history urgently required writing before primary source materials became impossibly scarce and memories completely faded. The major part of the book, therefore, is devoted to the first three periods. The author has, however, given us an exciting glimpse of the conditions and promise of the town as of today. Colonia Juarez does seem to be entering on a new phase of its history.

This promise together with the accelerated tempo of life in the town invite some reflection on the quality of living in Colonia Juarez as it was, particularly during the first two periods when the reputation of the town was being built, and as it is at present or may be in the future.

The excellence of both community life and individual living attained in the town at the height of its prosperity just before the Exodus were remarkable for such an isolated small place. Those physical comforts and spiritual satisfactions most needed by man to give him contentment, security, and happiness were in evidence and fully enjoyed. There was a maximum of human association of the kind needed by people to give a sense of belonging and of spiritual fulfillment. There was well-distributed ownership of land and property with few power-centered individuals; general participation in community activities of a cultural and intellectual kind and creative reliance on home-grown ideas for entertainment. Great pleasure and satisfaction came from things that did not cost much—in the simple and plain whether of food, or clothing or entertainment.

The people loved the blue skies, the green fields, the moonlit nights, the hills close by and the mountains in the distance and took time to get out and enjoy these things. They went on outings "up the river to Walnut Grove" "up the Tinaja Wash" "over to Square Top" or "up to the mountains." They spent evenings around the camp fire and nights under the stars. Young people of Colonia Juarez were brought up with a knowledge of living things including horses, cattle, pigs, chickens, pigeons, and captured wild creatures from snakes to coyotes. Over the town hovered an atmosphere of exceptional quiet and peacefulness, and the air was clean to breathe. There was a spirit of close cooperation and a feeling of group solidarity. True, the project and conditions of existence almost demanded these.

Now, if these genuine rural things and ways are no longer a part of the pattern of life in Colonia Juarez, at least the hope may be expressed that the things and the ways which will replace them there will be equally creative and satisfying to the spiritual and social life of the people who have inherited the town. Certainly the supply of modern appliances has made for more time, particularly for the women folk, to enjoy things of the spirit. Wider contacts, whether by trips to El Paso, to Salt Lake City, to Los Angeles, to Mexico City or even to New York City, now possible to everyone there, should have resulted in less isolation and in broader sympathies, appreciation, and tolerance. It may even be possible that whereas the young people of Colonia Juarez always looked beyond Mexico to the United States for careers of outstanding leadership some may begin to re-orient themselves and see opportunities in a land crying out for leadership in every field of endeavor. It gives one pause to realize that to date possibly not a single major contribution to Mexican leadership has come from one of the most promising spots in the country—Colonia Juarez. Because the town has supplied much more than its proportion of leaders elsewhere, the conclusion is inevitable—once Mexico, the home country, is regarded as a legitimate field for highest endeavor the youth of Colonia Juarez, trained to be leaders, will go out and be such in their own land.

H. W. B.
