Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

FOREWORD

COLONIA JUAREZ, a Mormon hamlet nestling among the rolling foothills of the Sierra Madre Mountains, occupies an inconspicuous spot on the map of northern Chihuahua in old Mexico. Yet perhaps few towns of its size are better known. From it have gone those who carried its name to all parts of the world.

A stranger sighting it for the first time from the brow of the hill is surprised. The green, compact mass of trees, half hiding neat homes; the glinting glimpses of river waters through them, is a startling change from surrounding desert and dusty roads, mesquite, sand, and chaparral. Wondering who could have founded a village in this out-of-the-way little valley, the traveler drops down the winding road, along a shady street to the heart of the town. He is at once impressed by the personality of the place and charmed by its spirit of friendliness and hospitality.

To those who live there, Colonia Juarez is a loved spot, a place to which to return expectantly and eagerly. To those who once lived there but left, it is an unforgettable spot, remembered as a symbol of peacefulness, of neighborliness, of unity, bringing nostalgic longings for a return of old times.

Today, there is nothing in its appearance to indicate the sufferings that accompanied its first settlement and growth, and its decline, to tell the story of revolutionary commotion that uprooted and scattered its inhabitants to all parts of the United States, nothing to indicate the hazards which beset the few stalwarts who returned and tenaciously preserved the spirit of the town during searing years of revolution and rehabilitation. Its present affluent atmosphere, its neat modern homes, give little hint of ruthless tearing down and resolute remodeling to wipe out traces of dilapidation and remove signs of war disintegration.

It is these things that this story tells in hopes of preserving a record of the characters and personalities of the founders and capturing the spirit of the place itself. Basically the sketches are true. They have been gleaned from journals, diaries, letters and biographies of early settlers, from personal observations and recollections. The urge to preserve between the covers of a book remembrances of conditions, of personalities, and of experiences through years of residence became so insistent that it required accomplishment. Imperfect as the effort is, appreciation compelled the attempt.
