Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

I

"AND A PLACE SHALL BE PREPARED"

THE FIRST DAY of the year 1885 seems to be an appropriate moment to begin this account and the place St. David, Arizona. There Moses Thatcher, apostle in the Mormon Church, had called a regional conference of his people for the purpose of considering moves that would relieve these harassed Mormon frontiersmen of what by them was regarded as religious persecution. The relentless zeal of United States marshals in seeking out violators of the Edmunds-Tucker Law [^1] had put nearly all of them in danger of prison sentences. Something had to be done. The president of the Church had comfortingly promised that a place of refuge would be prepared and in fulfillment of this promise Alexander F. MacDonald, president of the Maricopa stake of Zion in Arizona, and other official scouts, had already made several exploration trips into northern Sonora, Mexico. MacDonald was now appointed to continue exploring in northern Chihuahua where, through negotiation by Elder Thatcher, valid prospects had been opened to them.

The meeting dispersed and the word was passed to all who were in need of its comforting tidings. By mail or by messenger, it was grapevined to remotest hamlets in the Rocky Mountain region. In St. Johns, Snowflake, Sunset, Luna, Smithville in Arizona, in Savoy, Socorro and other localities in New Mexico and even in many towns in southern Utah troubled men heard the message and were moved to go in search of the promised place. A migration began that was to last for many years and as a result of which eight colonies were established in Mexico. [^2]

First to reach the international boundary was William C. McClellan, Mormon Battalion veteran. Choosing those who were to accompany him, [^3] he equipped his wagon for desert travel of indefinite duration and undertermined destination. He meticulously followed route directions, circling north and west into the San Simon valley and then south through country criss-crossed by Geronimo's trails. [^4] He thus spent twelve anxious days in transit whereas, by passing south through Silver City and Deming, he might have reached the same destination in half the time. Even so he reached the designated port of entry a full ten days ahead of those who were to follow. Except for one small party [^5] which had preceded him, McClellan was the first of the Mormon colonists to undergo the ordeal of crossing the border, the first to feel the bewilderment of endless inspections, and the first to submit to what seemed needless formalities which continued to irritate through the years no matter how often endured.

Mesquite Springs, the port of entry, was but a camp and the guards protecting it mere line riders with instructions to escort immigrants to the custom house at La Ascension farther inland. This they did with McClellan, thus establishing precedent that was adhered to until the official port of entry, from necessity, was changed to Deming.

At La Ascension, ninety miles south of the border on the Casas Grandes River on February 22, 1885, after submitting to rigid inspection, he paid the duties imposed on wagon and team and specified articles carried with them. Watching for signs of those who were to meet him, wondering why no message had been left telling him where to go or what to do, he made camp on Lake Federico and shot ducks and fought mosquitoes for the next ten days.

March 1, Elders Moses Thatcher and A. F. MacDonald arrived; MacDonald fresh from the exploring mission given him at St. David, and Thatcher who had been sent from Salt Lake City to meet him and officially close the deal Church leaders had advised them to accept. Both were surprised to see McClellan and astonished at his quick action. And McClellan, sensing that in his eagerness for relief from a personal problem, and in his haste to reach a haven from persecution, had taken no stock of the many hazards that could delay land purchases in Mexico, was chagrined. His hot impatience cooled as he listened to MacDonald's recital of a circling trip from St. David through San Jose on the Mexican Central Railway, across northern Chihuahua and back over the rich array of lands presented to him for purchase.

He was cheered to learn that "the place prepared" had been selected, that Thatcher with MacDonald and Lot Smith were on their way to El Paso to meet with Senor Garcia to complete negotiations for a tract of land. Until such transactions were completed, McClellan was instructed to establish a central camp at which others could settle while waiting. He obtained permission to do this on property of Jose Maria Holguin, two miles north of La Ascension and across the river.

Soon by wagon train, in companies large and small, others arrived. [^6] A campsite for one party had hardly been laid out until others must be made ready. All came in strong wagons drawn by sturdy teams. And whether the wagons openly spouted stovepipes and plowshares or carefully protected their contents, they carried the prime essentials for colonizing in a new locality and represented the entire possessions of the colonists. Each chose his particular campsite, stretched a tent or used wagon box for living quarters and settled into camp life.

Camp life was carefully organized. Jesse N. Smith was named camp director and under him committees assumed charge of essential camp responsibilities—an interpreter to explain conditions and to welcome La Ascension officials who, unable to handle the rapid influx of immigrants, came at specified intervals to check on uninspected wagons; a purchasing committee to buy advantageously corn, beans and beef from the natives; a wood committee to gather driftwood, mesquite roots and cottonwood logs for fuel; and a forage committee to secure grazing privileges for horses and cows.

Other representative men met with Smith each morning to discuss problems constantly arising, to provide place for new arrivals and in every possible way to strengthen camp morale. Problems most often confronting them concerned immigration regulations. These became more involved as further restrictions were imposed and officials at the new port of entry, Deming, N.M., faced a system as new to them as to the immigrants. This system required that each dutiable item be listed separately and provided with a stamped document in Deming. Livestock, listed separately, had papers made out carefully describing each animal. Wagons were branded on both the box and the axle, but duties were payable only in La Ascension. Mistakes made in Deming and detected in La Ascension required a return to Deming for correction. A brand misplaced or missing on the wagon, a word blurred in the document, a listed animal missing which may have died on the way, were errors demanding correction. Adjustments were a constant need and morning consultations were largely concerned with finding ways and means to forestall errors and irregularities. In comparison with these immigration problems all others seemed minor. Even the capricious spring weather with its occasional drizzle and one high tearing wind that confined women to wagon boxes and tents were slight beside them.

Every effort was made by the captain to build camp morale and to quiet growing restlessness. Camp members, in appreciation of these efforts visited his tent on his birthday shouting "surprise" and carrying with them whatever meager delicacies the camp afforded, then clamored to spend the evening in dancing.

Yet, as days passed into weeks with no word from the land conference in El Paso, restlessness became hard to control. It was spring. It was planting time, a dangerous season to neglect if winter were to be provided for. Peach trees in full bloom in La Ascension and fields green with growing wheat stirred inhibited desires. A constant increase in camp membership intensified grazing problems and increased the worry of providing winter protection. Land to them was the source of life.

The "place" on which they were supposed to settle when negotiations were completed was but six miles up the river. Not many camp members but had looked it over speculatively, visualizing both individual and community possibilities. They chafed for word to begin settlement. Not one but saw clearly in his mind's eye the city of refuge that could be built on its spreading acres, clean and beautiful, and close to the international boundary line as President Taylor had specified. Some perhaps outlined mentally the establishment of a United Order. [^7] All were eager to use strength and energies in realization of visualized projects and fretted over the necessity of merely dreaming of the glorious fulfillment.

On March 26th even this dream was shattered. Lot Smith returned alone, looking the part of disaster, and with slow words told them the land deal had failed to materialize. After days and days in session, he reported, with closer inspection of land titles making the situation more intense, Senor Garcia had suddenly gathered up his papers, withdrawn his offer, and left. MacDonald and Thatcher had gone to investigate other offers, and had sent Smith to report and to plead for patience yet a while.

But restlessness could no longer be curbed. Group after group called on Smith for permission to found other and smaller camps. Isaac Turley, Ernest L. Taylor and Peter N. Skousen came with such a request. Smith recommended that they organize and proceed in order, and commissioned Isaac Turley to lead the group. When they left next day, he waved them off smiling his blessing on their move.

The men heading this group of some twenty-five families made their way fifty miles south on the Casas Grandes River and settled Camp Turley in the outskirts of the town of Casas Grandes.

These were the original settlers of Colonia Juarez.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] On March 17, 1885 the Jefe Politico of Casas Grandes wrote the Secretary of State at Chihuahua that an armed force of Mormons had come into the state without declaring their intentions. In reply to this, Edwardo Delhumea, the Secretary of State, wrote to the Jefe Politico April 1, 1885 that the Mormons must be ordered out of the country at once. Agreeable to this, on April 9, 1885the following was addressed to Senor Alexander F. MacDonald, representative of the Mormons.
[^2] The phrasing used here refers to Elder Thatcher's dream which took place in Mexico City while he was there on his first missionary assignment following his appointment as one of the quorum of Twelve Apostles of the L.D.S. Church in February 1879. The dream occurred when he had gone to bed most discouraged. He not only was unacquainted with crucial men to contact, but unfavorable newspaper publicity had closed doors of many prospective agents through whom help might come. "In my dreams I was with a party embarked in an unwieldy flat boat on a turbulent stream. Our oars were gone and we were drifting toward rough waters where dangerous rocks raised threatening heads, any one of which could capsize or crush our boat and plunge us into the swirling stream. Just as we had resigned ourselves to a hopeless fate, a knotty and splintered floor board floated near. We seized it as a drowning man grasps at a straw and drew it aboard. In our hands it seemed almost as useless as the proverbial straw, for a large piece had been splintered from opposite corners of both ends. It was a forlorn hope, but using it both as an oar and a shield, we steered clear of the dangerous rocks and made a safe landing for our little craft.
[^3] Letter from Elder Moses Thatcher to A. F. MacDonald April 27, 1885: "On my suggestion to President Taylor he had communicated by letter and wire with Heleman Pratt at the City of Mexico asking him to request a stay of proceedings until Elder Young and I can reach there more fully prepared to represent our side. I expect to join Bro. Young at Salt Lake City on Thursday and leave for the Mexican Capital on Friday, May 1st. Should this reach you in time, meet us at San Jose on May 7 or 8 to give us fuller particulars of the situation. Write me fully at Mexico City in detail. I shall go with all the faith I can muster, and if the unwieldy 'flat boat' can again be landed safely by means of the shattered, knotty, worn and splintered 'floor board,' the praise, honor and glory due to no man but God, who can accomplish his purposes without reference to the frail and seemingly worthless means used. If he prosper our enterprise, we will try hard to secure the mountain country we saw. After all that has happened, would it not be a marvel and a wonder if the Lord Almighty should give us that land for a place of refuge and show us that his spirit prompted the naming by us of certain striking natural objects. I have little time to write for matters of importance as well as these crowd upon me and in the midst of them I often long for rest of body and mind. But it is better to wear out than to rust out. Pray for me always, please, and for the ultimate success of our mutual mission, and may God bless you. Remember me to Bros. Teasdale, Jesse N. and Lot Smith.
[^4] By April 7, 1885 there were approximately 350 persons in camps scattered up and down the Casas Grandes River—two camps near the present site of Diaz numbering about 25 families, one at Corralitos numbering about 15 families, and about the same number in Camp Turley on the west bank of the river, while four or five families were located farther south. A small camp was being formed on the east bank of the river also near the present site of Colonia Dublan which consisted of 60 men, 35 women, 67 children, 111 horses, 33 mules, 30 cows, 4 calves, and 44 wagons.
[^5] 5. November 1884 Joseph K. Rogers, Peter H. McBride, Andrew Anderson, Joseph Jorgensen, Lyman Wilson and John Loving entered northern Chihuahua, passed through La Ascension and settled in Corralitos. January 12, 1885 James Gale and Mons Larsen passed through La Ascension and joined those at Corralitos. Elizabeth Gale and Laura Lewis McBride, wives of men in the first party, were with them, and were the first Mormon women to enter Mexico. They passed through the custom house February 16, 1885. The party rented land from the Corralitos Company and were allowed to live in an old grist mill. March 8, 1885 Elder George Teasdale gave them a branch organization and a Sunday School with James Gale as superintendent. It was the first L.D.S. Sunday School to be organized in Mexico.
[^6] 6. The largest company to arrive consisted of twenty-five wagons and was the only one which effected an organization. It originated in Snowflake, was augmented by others joining it at Luna, and then being considered a caravan of too conspicuous length to be able to travel unmolested, they made Ed Noble captain, Sextus Johnson chaplain and had both an advance and a rear guard. The first was to scout them through Indian-infested territory and the second to guard against surprise approach of U.S. marshals. They traveled to a set schedule, sometimes at night. In camp they sang and prayed, and at times even danced and played, and arrived at Camp Diaz feeling like one large family.
[^7] 7. The United Order or Order of Enoch (Doctrine and Covenants, Sec. 104) required all property to be consecrated to the Church. Each member of the order was then assigned property which he, as steward, employed for his maintenance as long as he was in good standing in the Church.
