Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

II

CONSPIRING MINDS

CAMP TURLEY, a picturesque spot on the west bank of the Casas Grandes River, was in the heart of the rich farming lands of San Jose. Under spreading cottonwoods camp life was resumed with the proviso that it was to be endured only until the return of Elders Thatcher and MacDonald when, God willing, permanent foundations would be laid. A tentative search for lands to rent at once became a major concern as a safeguard against the future. But before any planting could take place MacDonald returned, and alone. "No luck," he reported. Second-choice land deals in Corralitos, Galeana and in the Acuna tract had not materialized. Questionable ownership or unfavorable locations had forbidden purchase. Elder Thatcher had returned to Utah to report unexpected disappointments, and Elder George Teasdale had arrived in Camp Diaz to resume leadership in Thatcher's place. Under Teasdale's direction search for lands would be resumed. Scouting parties composed of able frontiersmen from all camps would be organized. After naming possible scouts from Camp Turley, and suggesting immediate and continued resumption of seeding plans, MacDonald passed on to other camps.

On April 9, 1885 while hopeful preparations were at their height, a Casas Grandes official entered camp carrying a letter addressed to A. F. MacDonald. MacDonald was in Corralitos and while W. W. Roundy carried the letter to him there, not one but speculated apprehensively on the contents of the letter. The manner of the bearer had inspired dire forebodings.

MacDonald returned the next day and confirmed their worst fears. It was an order of expulsion according to which [^1] they were to be out of the country in fifteen days. Comfortingly he explained it was not as serious as it seemed. The order was of local origin and proper contacts with key officials in Mexico City might gain a revocation. General Pacheco, governor of the state, was in Mexico City on business relating to the interior. Through him colonization permits were obtained, and revocation of this expulsion order by him would be inevitable. General Fuero, acting governor and author of the ejection order was to be approached by Teasdale and MacDonald to gain a stay in the proceedings in case the fifteen days he so grudgingly gave were not sufficient time. A delegate to intercede with Sylvestre Quevedo, Presidente at Casas Grandes, and the one through whom the order was delivered would offset opposition on home grounds. The case, so it seemed, might be won.

MacDonald philosophically explained that the order should not have been a great surprise. Emigrants had poured into the country so rapidly that local officials had taken alarm. Intentions of the Mormons had been declared only to government officials in Mexico City. Evidently the permits had not been properly relayed to local officials. After all, he explained, they did resemble a military encampment more than peaceable homeseekers, with tents, covered wagons and tethered animals stretching over a fifty-mile area, much like an invading army. With assuring words MacDonald left on horseback for Camp Diaz to consult with Elder Teasdale.

When the two returned the next day, a team manned by Joseph Moffett and Isaac Turley was ready to carry them to San Jose station on the Mexican Central Railway, a delegate appointed to intercede with the Presidente in Casas Grandes was ready to report that only direct orders from General Fuero could revoke the order, and that a special day for fasting and prayer had been set for the following Sunday. Teasdale and MacDonald then reported their plan to telegraph Elder Thatcher, and follow it with a detailed letter and then entrain for Chihuahua City to personally interview the acting governor. The success of the plan depended on the speed with which action could be secured, and the first impediment to that—the hundred and ten miles of slow team travel to the railway station—was begun as the party rode off with reassurances to bolster the growing faith in a successful outcome.

At San Jose station two days later they sent the telegram, wrote a letter, then consulted their legal advisor, Dr. Samaniego, who confirmed their suspicion that the order was of local origin, and reiterated his promise to serve them in the crisis.

They arrived in Chihuahua City April 15, and through the legal assistance of a young lawyer, Jose Maria Gandara, gained immediate audience with General Fuero in the governor's palace. There, to their surprise and chagrin, their pleasant and cheerful approach was met with stony reserve, and the introduction to their plea with uncompromising disdain. Fuero shook his head, shrugged off every proposal, reducing them to all but abject despair before he said with tight lips, "Americans colonizing on Mexican lands has already cost us the state of Texas."

"But our case is different," MacDonald hastened to repeat. "We're not filing claims for land concessions, but merely asking permission to colonize."

MacDonald's explanation brought the first softening touch to the General's hard exterior, and the beginning of an advantageous compromise that ended with the promise to consider their petition if it were submitted in writing.

This sent them again to the brilliant Jose Maria Gandara for the help they needed. To assist him in formulating a fetching document, they recited to him a short history of their homeless condition and their desperate need of a place to settle. What began as a simple narrative soon became a human appeal, flaming and eloquent. Its contagious glow was caught by Gandara and under its influence he went to work, with the result that the document he handed them next day reflected it. Their request had been phrased in pleasing, legal terms, their case was pleaded so eloquently that as soon as they read it, they knew in their hearts it would win. Triplicate copies were made, one for General Fuero, one for President Porfirio Diaz, the other for their own use. Then they returned to Camp Turley to report.

A telegram awaiting them in San Jose from Moses Thatcher said, "On my way to Mexico City as fast as train can take me." A letter of the same date which overtook them at camp a few days later read, "I'm praying for divine guidance and intervention as I go. Am full of faith that the Lord will prosper our enterprise. And if the 'unwieldy boat' can be landed again by means of the 'knotty and splintered floor board' and the Lord will give us a place of refuge, we will give the honor and glory to Him." [^2]

"The 'flat unwieldy boat' Elder Thatcher mentions," explained MacDonald, "refers to a dream related to me on one of our trips together. In it General Pacheco proved to be the 'knotty and splintered floor board.' He is the crucial man to rescue us now from the danger ahead of us."

Details of the progress of their case in Mexico City reached them in letters from Apostles Brigham Young, Jr., and John W. Taylor, one of which quoted General Pacheco's glowing praise of the Gandara document. "An excellent state paper," he had said. "I have it here before me. As long as your people abide by its principles and sentiments, we will stand by you." Other letters reported interesting interviews with key officials and the favorable legislation set in motion. [^3]

But encouragement was not victory, and as the time limit grew closer, suspense mounted and speculation was tense. What if the papers do not arrive on time, what will then be the alternative? Can we retrace our steps over roads where bridges are burned behind us?

On the eleventh hour of the fifteenth day the revocation papers were placed in Presidente Sylvestre Quevedo's hands, and the expulsion was definitely stayed.

General Fuero, however, tacked a second ultimatum onto the revocation papers forwarded by him which read: "for the sake of equity the Governor of the State consents that you remain only until crops now planted are harvested. After which you still must leave the state."

The swift exchange of letters and telegrams to get the business retransacted, the repeat emergency trip imposed upon Church leaders before the solution to this anticlimax was reached resulted in both loss and gain—the loss of time and the expense involved was equalled by the gain to them of General Fuero's summary removal from office. An additional gain was a definite settlement of the business and firsthand evidence of General Pacheco's leadership. "I am the Governor of the State," he thundered darkly when the action of General Fuero was reported. "I am grieved that you have received treatment so abusive when my orders were to the contrary. Please address me personally for matters of redress in the future."

This gain was further augmented by a personally dictated letter from President Diaz indicating that the Mormons were not only welcome in Mexico but were also urgently invited to stay and help develop the resources of the country. [^4]

Footnotes

"The Secretary of the Supreme government of the State writes officially under date of April 1, 1885 as follows: 'The executive government, not having received any official notice in regard to the motives with which the Mormons have immigrated into the country (as referred to in your note of April 17), the Governor orders the chief of the Mormons, that they leave the state immediately, allowing them only a reasonable length of time in which to comply with the order.' According to the foregoing, which I have transcribed for your information, I hereby command you, together with the other families which you represent, to leave the State within a period of fifteen days from this date, April 9, 1885.

"Sylvestre Quevedo,

Liberty and Constitution

Casas Grandes, April 9, 1885."

"The very next day we gained audience with General Carlos Pacheco, Secretary of Foreign Relations, and the Governor of Chihuahua. As I looked at him I knew he was the floor board of my dream, for the General, a victim of the Battle of Puebla in 1867, had lost both his right arm and left leg. No sooner had we explained our mission to him than we received a promise to help us in any way he could."

In subsequent interviews he gave Elder Thatcher access to lands over which he had rightful jurisdiction, even going so far as to say that if the Saints would settle northern Chihuahua, he would promise them complete religious liberty.

Another contact with General Pacheco is recorded in article to the Deseret News written by A. F. MacDonald. "On the 14th of last January 1891, in company with Mr. L. F. Maillefert, Mexican consul at Deming, New Mexico, having business with General Pacheco at the Capital he set a day to meet us as he had business to arrange on his estate in the State of Vera Cruz. We telegraphed him and he suggested we meet him at his Hacienda on January 29. Arriving there, the General received us very kindly, and invited Maillefert and myself to go with him on horseback to see his sugar plantation. Horses were provided, but the General rode a mule. I was surprised to see the vim and energy with which he led the way and kept ahead in traveling. His right leg was in a stirrup and the stump of his left leg strapped to the saddle. He guided the rein of his animal with his left hand, the right arm being gone above the elbow. . . . The same kind and thoughtful consideration seemed ever present with him in his attentiveness to the welfare of those around him. In the expression of his eye and the quick comprehension of every detail or surrounding condition, he reminded me of President Brigham Young. On our journey to the Capital, we were requested at Cordoba to ride with the General in his car, as up to this time not a word had been said about the business for which we had come. After we had passed through the mountains toward the Capital, he called Mr. Maillefert and myself and on the way, all the points necessary to be understood and the terms of the contract of Colonization were talked over and noted down by his secretary. They were afterwards completed at the Capital. His great liberality, kindness and unpretentious manner won the good feeling of all. We felt the acquaintance thus formed.

(Colonia Pacheco was named for General Pacheco who died shortly after this article was published.)

"Ever your brother, Moses Thatcher."

Letter from B. Young, Jr., and Moses Thatcher to A. F. MacDonald:

Humboldt Hotel, May 15, 1885

Pres. A. F. MacDonald, Dear Brother,

We arrived here last Saturday, of which fact you are aware already. We were much disappointed at not seeing you but felt our time was so limited that we passed without stopping. We met Bros. Heleman Pratt, Franklin R. Snow and Isaac J. Stewart here who are well and quite hopeful of the future for Mexico and her people. We found that your application for stay of proceedings was acted upon, and the document highly spoken of by the Federal officials. Bro. Pratt had also been very busy and we experienced the good results of these labors. We have met the Secretary of State, Mariscal, who received us very warmly and manifested an honest desire to forward our interests by his influence with the Presidente and cabinet. We have had two interviews with Don Senor Carlos Pacheco, Secretary of Public Works and Governor of Chihuahua. He expressed a personal regard for our people and in all our conversations when opportunity offered, expressed the hope that the Mormons would conclude to colonize within the Mexican border. Both of the gentlemen thought we would find more religious liberty in Mexico than in the United States.

July 12, 1885

Elder A. F. MacDonald, dear brethren,

This morning at 7 o'clock a.m. Elders Brigham Young, Heleman Pratt and myself called upon General Pacheco at his residence and presented him with the notification for Mormons to leave the State of Chihuahua. After reading the same he said he was astonished and that he could not understand why we had received such abusive treatment, as he had given orders to the acting governor exactly contrary to the above. He explained he was the governor of Chihuahua but had not had time to go to Chihuahua and give this matter his personal attention, but had sent orders to the acting governor instructing him to allow our people to remain in the State unmolested. Elder Brigham Young said he was pleased to hear that such was the case . . . said our people had been driven about so much in the U.S. that such an official document ordering them to leave the State caused many to leave and many others were uneasy and dissatisfied and it was hard to induce them to remain.

(Signed) John Whittaker Taylor

---
Notas:
[^1] On March 17, 1885 the Jefe Politico of Casas Grandes wrote the Secretary of State at Chihuahua that an armed force of Mormons had come into the state without declaring their intentions. In reply to this, Edwardo Delhumea, the Secretary of State, wrote to the Jefe Politico April 1, 1885 that the Mormons must be ordered out of the country at once. Agreeable to this, on April 9, 1885the following was addressed to Senor Alexander F. MacDonald, representative of the Mormons.
[^2] The phrasing used here refers to Elder Thatcher's dream which took place in Mexico City while he was there on his first missionary assignment following his appointment as one of the quorum of Twelve Apostles of the L.D.S. Church in February 1879. The dream occurred when he had gone to bed most discouraged. He not only was unacquainted with crucial men to contact, but unfavorable newspaper publicity had closed doors of many prospective agents through whom help might come. "In my dreams I was with a party embarked in an unwieldy flat boat on a turbulent stream. Our oars were gone and we were drifting toward rough waters where dangerous rocks raised threatening heads, any one of which could capsize or crush our boat and plunge us into the swirling stream. Just as we had resigned ourselves to a hopeless fate, a knotty and splintered floor board floated near. We seized it as a drowning man grasps at a straw and drew it aboard. In our hands it seemed almost as useless as the proverbial straw, for a large piece had been splintered from opposite corners of both ends. It was a forlorn hope, but using it both as an oar and a shield, we steered clear of the dangerous rocks and made a safe landing for our little craft.
[^3] Letter from Elder Moses Thatcher to A. F. MacDonald April 27, 1885: "On my suggestion to President Taylor he had communicated by letter and wire with Heleman Pratt at the City of Mexico asking him to request a stay of proceedings until Elder Young and I can reach there more fully prepared to represent our side. I expect to join Bro. Young at Salt Lake City on Thursday and leave for the Mexican Capital on Friday, May 1st. Should this reach you in time, meet us at San Jose on May 7 or 8 to give us fuller particulars of the situation. Write me fully at Mexico City in detail. I shall go with all the faith I can muster, and if the unwieldy 'flat boat' can again be landed safely by means of the shattered, knotty, worn and splintered 'floor board,' the praise, honor and glory due to no man but God, who can accomplish his purposes without reference to the frail and seemingly worthless means used. If he prosper our enterprise, we will try hard to secure the mountain country we saw. After all that has happened, would it not be a marvel and a wonder if the Lord Almighty should give us that land for a place of refuge and show us that his spirit prompted the naming by us of certain striking natural objects. I have little time to write for matters of importance as well as these crowd upon me and in the midst of them I often long for rest of body and mind. But it is better to wear out than to rust out. Pray for me always, please, and for the ultimate success of our mutual mission, and may God bless you. Remember me to Bros. Teasdale, Jesse N. and Lot Smith.
[^4] By April 7, 1885 there were approximately 350 persons in camps scattered up and down the Casas Grandes River—two camps near the present site of Diaz numbering about 25 families, one at Corralitos numbering about 15 families, and about the same number in Camp Turley on the west bank of the river, while four or five families were located farther south. A small camp was being formed on the east bank of the river also near the present site of Colonia Dublan which consisted of 60 men, 35 women, 67 children, 111 horses, 33 mules, 30 cows, 4 calves, and 44 wagons.
