Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

III

THE TEST OF ENDURANCE

ALEXANDER FINDLAY MACDONALD'S appointment to explore northern Chihuahua in search of colonizing lands was a continuation of a mission given him by President Taylor when persecutions incident to the passing of the Edmunds-Tucker Law began. This mission had led him three times into Sonora where prospects had been uncovered, but lack of water to go with available land forced abandonment of the first two, and Yaqui Indians in revolt against the government had forbidden acceptance of the third mission.

With Christopher Layton, president of the St. Joseph stake, as companion and John Campbell as interpreter they left St. David and by team and train reached El Paso. There they crossed into Mexico and met land agents in Cuidad Juarez hardly taking time to rest on the way.

Owners of or agents for owners of large tracts of land in northern Chihuahua, as well as others controlling minor claims, were awaiting them, and they spent the day studying claims and listening to propositions. Senor Garcia's foursquare leguas of land between Janos and La Ascension, and Senor Acuna's 40,000 acre tract near the Sonora border both offered inviting prospects, and the Mormon scouts left the same night on the Mexican Central Railway to look them over.

At San Jose station, where they spent the latter part of the night, they sought the help of a legal advisor, one who could assist them in their choice of purchases, and also guide them in completing transactions according to business regulations in the country. They found this in Dr. Samaniego, a lawyer and practicing physician, to whom they were directed. He was a kind, mild man in his early sixties, and was at once cooperative and interested, listening to their problem and signifying his willingness to help.

Both by nature and training he proved a valuable asset. His background as a three-term ex-governor of Chihuahua met their need for direction in the choice of lands to buy. A wide practice in his medical profession gave them, through conversation, an invaluable insight into both Mexican and Indian nature. And as a landholder, he knew where available lands could be had. Continued conferences with Samaniego discovered qualifications compatible with their own hopes and beliefs, which beside being helpful, bound them together as friends.

A wide choice of lands, he confided, was to be had, and if the right kind of people could be induced to settle, special privileges and grants might be obtained. He was a personal acquaintance of General Fuero, acting governor of the state, and promised to write for friendly concessions from him, though he warned that the general was unfriendly toward foreigners and might prove a formidable barrier.

For the next twelve days MacDonald and Layton gave every foot of ground over which they traveled most careful consideration. In the Galeana district they found 200,000 acres of available land, beside great tracts in the Carrizal and Santo Domingo areas. The Santa Maria River running through the valley and miles and miles of good grass on level plains and low hills made this a most propitious prospect and one they passed by with reservations.

They spent a day or two going over the Corralitos claim in the Casas Grandes valley, becoming more and more enthusiastic as they proceeded. It covered a tract of land 1,600 square miles in extent, in the center of which was the well improved "Hacienda of Corralitos." It was a New York owned tract of land, was operated by Mr. Menzenburger with an American named Slocum for foreman, and was a city in miniature. Surrounding the hacienda and dotting the major surface were buildings that not only housed the hundreds of hired laborers but were factories where practically all they ate, wore, and used was manufactured. There were warehouses and stores selling imported goods; there were dairies where good cheese was made; shops where saddles, bridles and harnesses were manufactured, and soap factories as well. There were tracts of grazing land sustaining 1,000 head of cattle, 800 sheep, 100 horses, and there was a mine and smelter operating on the place. When MacDonald found the whole concern could be purchased for $800,000, he wrote glowingly of it to Church leaders, adding that "If we don't make a stand in this country now while we have a chance, others will come in and pick the best fruit."

But, reluctantly as he left the Corralitos tract, he was even more satisfied with the Garcia claim when he reached it a week later. This, he decided, suited their purposes even better. It was within easy access of the custom house at La Ascension, had a spring-fed river running through it, a vast acreage of grazing land and timber, and all close enough to the international boundary line to fulfill stipulated requirements of Church leaders. "The best land in the state," he said in his report to President Taylor, and after including maps and drawings of lands described in his compiled reports, he finished it with a personal letter urging them to act at once, and take advantage of offers made by officials anxious and willing to make special concessions.

These reports were forwarded by President Layton, who at this point was sent for, and MacDonald and Campbell passed from there into the mountains to continue explorations. In the little valley of Corrales they found another pleasing prospect and camped for the night. The river running through the grass carpeted valley bed, and surrounded by pine and oak-clad ridges, was an intriguing picture from their campsite. While Campbell cooked the supper, MacDonald, weary, fell asleep. "We will go no farther," he told Campbell on awaking. "A manifestation in my dream told me we had gone far enough."

At St. David he met Moses Thatcher who, commissioned by President Taylor, had come to investigate the Garcia claim and buy it if it measured up to his description of it. Both had become aware of a general migration set in motion by the conference at St. David. Realizing the need of haste to keep ahead of the rush, they returned at once to Mexico, reaching La Ascension on March 1, 1885. There they found an encampment already begun with William C. McClellan, Lot and Jesse N. Smith and companies and others, anxiously awaiting the results of the Garcia purchase. Taking Lot Smith with them they hurried on to El Paso to meet Senor Garcia, pay him the required $10,000 and close the deal.

For three weeks they sat in session with Garcia, his agents and their own advisors, going minutely into details that became more questionable as they proceeded. When too close investigation of titles revealed faulty claims, Sr. Garcia suddenly withdrew his offer, gathered up his papers and hastily made an exit.

Keenly disappointed yet valiantly hopeful, they turned to other optional prospects, the Acuna tract first of all, and found that questionable ownership was a forbidding deterrent there. Still hopeful, they turned to the Corralitos offer and found that a similar objection made it a dangerous venture. Swamps in the Galeana and Santa Maria district made malaria too virulent a menace to risk settlement in that vicinity. Other claims, considered only as minor issues, proved unavailable, and before they could realize it they were in a dilemma not anticipated nor foreseen. In the space of a few days they made the rapid transit from the crest of high hopes to the trough of dismal doubt. All their bright prospects had faded, and they found themselves like a bird in flight with no place to land.

Following close on the heels of this shock came the order for expulsion, a writ that snapped numbed faculties into action, and put disappointments into the background. It was an edict that forbade remaining in the country even if lands on which to settle could be found, an order that prohibited voluntary exile and sent them back to a land from which they had fled, that withdrew colonization privileges in Mexico and forced a return to intolerable conditions in the United States, and one which took no stock of their impoverished condition and their economic inability to return even with political barriers removed.

Landless and homeless, they turned to the revocation of the order. The process involved time, expense, and patience. Even when it was accomplished, they still were where they had been when the political battle began—homeless and landless. A battle lost almost before it began.

Before a month had passed, restricted camp monotony was biting too deeply into morale to be ignored. Continued failure of the land scouts brought discouragement too close to be comfortable. Poignant longing for home and loved ones left in the hurried flight filled wakeful hours of the night, while loneliness and uncertainty dogged every action by day. Even Fast Day observance with its usual spiritual uplift failed to carry over through the week. Many were secretly discussing the possibility of returning to conditions which now somehow seemed the lesser of two evils. Some were even secretly packing, convinced they could endure no more.

Then Elder Thatcher visited their camp and in a firm, kind voice which vibrated to their very souls, spoke to them in Church of their being a people of destiny with a promising future.

A re-echo of his words sustained them through the remaining months of waiting and gave them fortitude to endure exposure to the seasonal rigors of an unpredictable climate, and patience to meet any exigency. Patience to patch torn wagon sheets and tent flaps ripped by tearing spring winds, to tie down bedding and camp furniture or retrieve them when tipped over or blown away! To withstand blistering summer heat which curled crops and dried up the water in the river! To take the soakings of summer rains which poured through their sheds drenching foodstuffs and clothing, soddening their camp ground, and terrifying them with zigzag lightning and deafening thunderclaps! Patience to still hold on when autumn deepened and driftwood piled on blazing fires gave feeble protection from the biting cold of early winter! Courage to watch and wait while MacDonald and scouting parties combed the country trailing down prospects, alluring and otherwise, and following every lead exposed! Self-restraint to understand the wariness with which he speculated on offers made by Ignacio Gomez del Campo to buy lands along the Piedras Verde, near Camp San Francisco and in the Corrales basin! Faith was also bolstered by Church leaders who rendered all assistance possible, even sending key men from headquarters to lead important expeditions and officially inspect offers.

Only those who have hoped and waited can know the anxiety with which these pioneers looked for the announcement that the anticipated purchase of land had been finally concluded. Only those who have left former homes with little property and found themselves in a new country where a laboring man could earn but fifty to seventy-five centavos a day, and all other means of support, except manual labor, exhausted, can fully appreciate their predicament.

And only those whose hopes have been dashed again and again can appreciate the reserve—almost skepticism—with which news that Church leaders had advised acceptance of del Campo's offer (August 5), was received. Nor can it be wondered that when authentic news was telegraphed that 50,000 acres on the Piedras Verde had finally been purchased, along with 60,000 acres each in Diaz and Corrales, and permission given to take possession at once, that they joyfully accepted.

December 4, 1885, a letter from Church leaders, read in camp by Miles P. Romney, appointed George W. Sevey presiding elder to direct the move that at once was feverishly under way.
