Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

IV

REFRESHING INTERLUDE ENDS

MONDAY MORNING, DECEMBER 7, 1885, Camp Turley was abandoned. Without a backward look the pilgrims filed out, George Sevey in the lead. [^1] They passed through Casas Grandes, then turned southwest and followed the river as it wound through the hills above Casas Grandes. Where the San Miguel and Piedras Verdes rivers unite, they turned north traveling for six miles before coming to rest on the western bank of the Piedras Verdes river.

They climbed from their wagons and looked with mingled emotions at the place that marked the end of their pilgrimage. The low black hills skirting both sides of the river were friendly. The timber-covered mountains outlined against the western sky behind them offered strength, and the long, level valley, free of mesquite, or sacaton or boulders, promised productivity if there was sufficient water. For the first time they felt rooted, that they owned the soil on which they stood—that they had at last found "the place." Already in their minds was a picture of the homes they would build, and the community they would create. If only a kind Providence would multiply the waters to bless the soil, they would build and build well.

Committees appointed to prepare winter quarters decided that dugouts were most feasible for temporary use, and before the day ended a row of spacious holes lined the riverbank. It didn't take long to make these first shelters—a little digging with pick and shovel, a few swings with their axes and the cottonwood limbs for a ridgepole and support were cut and the stripped branches draped over to make a shed in front. Each family moved into a dugout, built a fire in the foreground, made a bed against the back wall, and was at home in comparative comfort. Families from other camps swelled the number until the row of dugouts along the riverbank extended half a mile.

With families sheltered the next step was to plan the township, place families permanently and allot field property to each one. Details for this move and for public welfare were worked out by the men in regular and special priesthood meetings. At the first special meeting Senor del Campo, the agent from whom land purchases had been made, repeated his offer to sell them all the land they wanted and promised water concessions. Del Campo also suggested that someone go to Mexico City to legalize the land trade and have documents properly made out and stamped. Alexander F. MacDonald was selected by unanimous vote and a committee appointed to raise funds to defray his expenses.

While waiting for MacDonald's return three important committees were named. Committee number one was to lay out the townsite with drawings to indicate the division of land for the town proper and for the fields adjoining it. Boundaries for individual fields were to be indicated and the streets enclosing each city block were to be marked. Elder Teasdale assisted this committee and by January 10, 1886 the job was completed. "First time I ever helped lay out a townsite," he said as he complacently viewed lines and markings on the paper. "A new experience for me, and one of which I shall write President Taylor."

Committee number two was to select a site for a meetinghouse and take the initiative getting it built. This committee was composed of Peter Neilsen, Isaac Turley and Joseph A. Moffett. The work of this committee, however, was soon halted by the death of Peter Neilsen of pneumonia.

The first birth took place January 27, 1886 with the arrival of James Skousen.

By January 30, 1886 the stockade meetinghouse was completed. It had taken twenty-three days to set up poles, weave willows between them to be chinked with mud, top it with brush-supported sod and harden a dirt floor. This structure served as church, school, social center and civic meeting place. It filled their first urgent need. A two-day conference was called to celebrate its completion. As they filed into the thirty by forty foot room, took seats on split logs with pegs for legs, looked at the speakers facing them on similar seats, and made note of provisions made for heating and lighting, hearts filled with gratitude. Here was a symbol of security, concrete evidence that anchoring roots were going down and assurance that from this crude beginning more fitting structures would follow. All agreed that "it was a credit to those who had built it." Faith in the ultimate success of the mission on which they had embarked was renewed. Resolutions to partake worthily of the sacrament, to be exemplary before the people among whom they had settled, and to be faithful in their call to Mexico were made.

This crude building was used for parties, special programs and festivities. Among the special social events was solemnization of the first marriage to take place in the community. The entire community turned out to the reception for Orson P. Brown and Mattie Romney. On weekdays school sessions were held to which were added entertaining spelling matches, song fests and other activities. To this shelter as a civic center community leaders gathered to discuss common problems, to work out policies and to reduce friction to a minimum. It was here the town representatives met with A. F. MacDonald, upon his return from Mexico City to report President Diaz's verbal message that he heartily approved of their city plot. This quieted rumors that they had settled on San Diego property.

It was here that Elder Erastus Snow on his return from Mexico City in mid-March 1886 assumed official control and gave instructions. Here he appointed A. F. MacDonald to take charge of business affairs of the colony and George Sevey to be the ecclesiastical head. Here also under his direction, and after a motion by A. F. MacDonald, the men decided to "hold all land with all upon it as a company or corporation, and that no titles pass to individuals, but that our choice be to unite in a common agreement for mutual protection and benefit." Here also Erastus Snow gave the admonition "to plant all you can, for by July there will be plenty here to help you eat it." As a result William C. and S. E. McClellan, Robert Vance, Mons Larsen and others went into the mountains with pack mules loaded with plows and seed potatoes to plant and raise crops in the Strawberry valley without waiting for water to be brought by canal to the new townsite. Here also matters of special concern such as the presence of a gentile in their midst were considered. The undeclared intentions of this stranger had aroused suspicions that he had come to get information which could be used against them. "If we want to be by ourselves, we have a right to do so," declared Elder Teasdale. "We have been damaged by trusting too far those with harmful intentions who have come among us." To relieve this situation, E. L. Taylor was appointed to be official host for passing guests, and given the responsibility of seeing that they be given correct impressions of life among the exiles. "Let us all mind our own business also," continued Elder Teasdale, "and cease writing to friends about our movements."

Of the three committees appointed, number three was to select a damsite and mark a canal course to carry water to the townsite. George Sevey worked with this committee and its duties were not considered discharged until the dam was built, a mile length of canal was dug, and water was on the ground in time for spring planting. By March tenth it was completed. Gardens had been laid out and holes for shade trees lining both sides of the one street were ready. With the first gush of water bringing potential life to the productive soil, new life came to the colonists. Signs of budding spring in the cottonwoods along the river bed, green shoots of grass coloring the hillsides and valley awoke a general feeling of gratitude. The people looked for a way to express thanks to their host country. This could be done best through a fitting celebration, and the birthday of Benito Juarez on March 21st offered an appropriate time for grateful hearts to do honor to the man for whom their town was to be named and thus express their appreciation for blessings received. Accordingly intense preparations for celebration began. Invitations were sent to political leaders in Casas Grandes. A lofty liberty pole was hauled from the mountains and set up in the schoolhouse yard. Seamstresses began work on a red, white and green flag to wave from its top. The best talent began preparing a program, and the best cooks were detailed to serve a banquet to climax the celebration.

On the morning of March 21st, marshal of the day, Miles P. Romney, met the approaching officials from Casas Grandes and escorted them ceremoniously to the flagpole where the honor of raising the flag was given to Senor Zubia. As he alighted from his carriage, the rope was placed in his hand. As he pulled up the red, white and green banner, it straightened in the breeze, and came to rest at the top of the flagpole. Cheers broke from all who excitedly looked on and a salute of gunfire was made. The marshal led the congregation around the pole waving his plume and flashing his sword which added to the mounting spirits. At a signal from him they marched into the building and took seats for the program. Music by the choir and a prayer by the chaplain were followed by an oration by Miles P. Romney who held the audience spellbound as he eulogized the virtues of Benito Juarez, whom he termed the Abraham Lincoln of Mexico. Speeches from both the jefe and the visiting padre were interspersed with recitations and songs. Periodic salutes from a booming cannon kept patriotic fervor to the bursting point. With the concluding number of the townnaming ceremony, all came to their feet and shouted. Viva Colonia Juarez! Viva Colonia Juarez! Viva! Viva! and Viva Mexico! que viva! Then the marshal led the congregation to a table spread with the best food in camp. Later they escorted the departing guests well on their way, and returned glowing with the genial spirit the occasion had prompted.

All spring and summer they worked to convert the bare valley into a living community. Dugouts were abandoned for adobe houses lining both sides of the street. Yields from gardens thriving, new shade trees, and prospects of winter food from corn, potatoes, cane and turnips growing in the fields repaid in full measure the toil exacted. The future loomed prosperous and bountiful.

But when optimism was at its highest another blow fell. The rumor that they were on San Diego property was confirmed! The shrugged-off warning had proved true! A mistake in the boundary line of their purchase had been made! Instead of putting down roots on the del Campo purchase, they had improved a part of the old San Diego ranch! Worse still their rightful purchase lay two miles to the north and between the narrow hills through which the Piedras Verdes river trickled.

How could they leave this fertile valley where so propitious a start had been made and move into a rocky, narrow canyon? To leave the occupied favorable location and face what seemed starvation on rocky limited acreage, to start over again after such a promising beginning was the severest test they had yet faced. Resolution, born of a knowledge that bridges were burned behind them, gave strength to accept this turn of fate. Within a week surveyors were busy on the new townsite, and before the winter had set in the town was laid off and a two-mile canal site had been marked along the foot of the eastern hills. By January of 1887 the townsite was ready for dedication, and families, a few at a time, began moving to the new location.

Then came the earthquake. Sudden tremors followed by violent shakings startled the people from the apathy of despair. Dishes rattled in the cupboards and crashed to the floor. The inhabitants rushed from their houses lest they be buried. Terrified they rushed over the heaving ground to the school to care for frightened and bewildered children. There they watched the convulsions of nature as shock after shock rocked houses and tumbled chimneys. A fire like a volcanic eruption spurted from the impact of jostled rocks against hurtling boulders and set the mountainside aflame, as trees were touched off by fiery darts. There appeared to be a general holocaust of destruction with panic and terror among the animals as they fled to escape a burning death. At night when convulsions had ceased and fears had quieted, they watched the magnificence of the event as it brightened the heavens and lit up the countryside—marvelous display of nature's fireworks.

When they discovered that nature's gigantic spasms had opened new fissures and springs of water all along the river's course, they could only exclaim "God moves in a mysterious way."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The only serious attempt to establish a saloon in Colonia Juarez was made after the Exodus when the town had lost its self-government status. This opened the way for an out-of-town businessman to open a saloon, notwithstanding local opposition. He built a small adobe structure on the sandy lot east of the wagon bridge. Shortly after the saloon opened it was surrounded by flood waters and damaged. When flood waters damaged the building a second time the next year the proprietor removed his business to Casas Grandes. The building was completely destroyed by flood waters the following year.
