Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

V

THE PLACE—DEJECTION TO TRIUMPH

THE HEAVY CLOUD of depression that settled on the spirits of these valiant colonists when they inspected the new townsite seemed impossible to disperse. That this narrow, rocky valley, little more than a river bed, should be regarded as "the place prepared" for them was too much for their imagination. Thus depressed they gloomily bowed their heads at the first gathering to join in a prayer of dedication by Moses Thatcher.

But with the first words of the prayer pulses quickened—something stirred within them as they heard that low pleading voice lay their problems before their Maker and ask for strength and wisdom to solve them. As Apostle Thatcher's fervency warmed and details of their problems were laid bare, it seemed that a conversation was taking place, that the quiet firm voice was speaking to a divine parent. Their spirits were lifted and a new vision opened before them. The "Amen" was chorused and they looked out on a changed world. Problems somehow seemed vastly shrunken; barriers seemed but challenges which if taken one by one could be hurdled and be the means of gaining additional strength.

With new eyes they studied the surveyor's map, knowing that what appeared as a spacious townsite included hills, river, and all—that streets running at right angles, level, long, and properly named on paper, in reality ran up and down an uneven valley, over the hills and through the river. Still, as a blueprint it gave hope and each could picture himself in relation to his neighbors.

"On this point," they said, locating a block reserved on a high spot, "we will build our church and schoolhouse, where from every part of town, eyes can be lifted to the learning and uplift it will symbolize. Here, will be the hotel, there the co-op store. The public square will front the natural depression on the river bank where a park can easily be made. Well placed terraces will control flood waters, we will fill in the ugly washes, and build the stones into foundations and rock walls. Trees massed and strategically placed will provide windbreaks and add beauty; sand banks can be leveled and fertilized. "What's more, they exulted, looking into each other's faces, "it's ours. It's permanent, for no one will want it badly enough to push us off. On it we'll build a society with management in our own hands. None will buy, sell, or trade except by permission from those in charge. Nor may one become unworthy and retain rights and standing in the community. The brotherhood we'll build will be founded on honesty and proper regard for the rights of others. Joy and happiness, the natural outgrowth of righteous living, will be a goal toward which all will strive."

"One word more," added Elder Thatcher as they prepared to disperse, "as long as saloons are banned, and profanity kept off the streets, this spot will remain a place of refuge for all who need it." [^1]

Building sites had been drawn by lot and with the map in hand, families were moved one and two at a time from the Old Town, each to the spot it had drawn.

But poverty sat close that first hard year. Food was scarce, clothes and shoes wore thin, and cold, heat, and sweeping winds made mock of their rude shelters. Death visited them too, through an epidemic of smallpox. Before they were aware of its ruthless approach, Almon Johnson, brother of Sextus Johnson, the first settler on the new townsite, his wife and two children lay low. This danger periling the lives of the stricken, even if its spread were confined, and threatening annihilation if it were not, dwarfed hunger fears, silenced raiment and shelter worries and set all to a concerted fight for plague immunity.

An isolation or "pest house" was hastily erected in the fields above town, patients were carefully removed to it, runners were dispatched for vaccine and a call for volunteers to do nursing duty was issued. This call was answered by Agnes MacDonald and her son who had become immune by weathering a siege of the dread disease. They were heroically assisted by Annie Johnson Hilton and Aza Johnson who fearlessly risked contagion to aid a stricken kinsman even though they lacked immunization. But, owing to the violence of the plague, their nursing duties were soon over, as one by one the patients died. Graves were dug in the Johnson field property, and the bodies were laid to rest at night. After the entire town membership had been vaccinated and the incubation period had passed with no new cases, fears subsided and normal work on township was resumed.

By dint of resourcefulness and indomitable courage, times became better and conditions materially improved.

Much had to be done at once, with public projects receiving first attention. Water for the townsite was project number one, provision for which had been made along with the town survey. Getting timber in the mountains within easier access was project number two while a dugway passage over the eastern hills was third. To these "firsts" manpower was distributed so that maximum service could be exacted, and work on them all was begun. Between times, and while the major tasks were being furthered, minor projects and individual buildings went forward too. Fences of one sort or another were put around the lots; simple homes replaced tents and wagon boxes; ditches were plowed in anticipation of the canal's completion; the land was "de-stoned" and loose rocks piled for terracing the park, buttressing a flume over the wash and for building foundations and fence walls. Within a few weeks many forbidding aspects of the townsite had been softened, unrealized assets had been uncovered, and the barren valley had begun to look like a community.

A lumber millsite had been found in the mountains west of town up San Diego Canyon but building the San Diego Canyon road required blasting through solid cliffs, gouging out steep hillsides, and buttressing a narrow ledge through the canyon. Work continued through the spring and summer, when a formidable barrier was encountered, one against which they were still struggling when the sawmill machinery, purchased and sent in by Elder Thatcher, arrived. John Campbell, Peter N. Skousen and other helpers, trailing the machinery on stretchedout running gears, added engineering skill to the struggling manpower in a combined attack on this point of resistance. But dynamite drilled into its flinty bed and set off in blast after blast shattered off only contemptuous piles of shale rock. Winter set in before a passable road was made, and for three months the machinery waited for "Campbell's hump" to be flattened and a safe passage made through to the selected millsite. But with the shrill whine of the sawmill, the chuckle of wagons carrying the mill's prodigious output which was soon going up into buildings, the foresight of Elder Thatcher was appreciated and the perseverance of the road builders was rewarded.

Work on the church—schoolhouse had pushed steadily forward. While adobes for walls were being made, wagons were dispatched to Deming, New Mexico, to fetch window sash and glass, joists, paint, shingles and nails. When a neat shingle roof was on, the walls plastered and whitewashed inside and out and the woodwork painted, the building on the rocky point fulfilled church, school, and recreation needs and justified the manifest pride the colonists felt. The crowning feature was a belfry over the eastern entrance for the church bell. From the first peal, this bell became a thing of importance in the community life. It rang twice for every formal activity that took place in the building, once as a reminder and thirty minutes later to announce time to begin. All Sunday services, all week-day activities, and all school-day beginnings were announced by two rings. The bell was also rung for special occasions: to begin and end the "breakfast water" hour, to call the people together if danger threatened, and when death struck it tolled the news to a saddened community. It pealed out the old year and joyously rang in the new. Every public occasion was announced or regulated by this church bell. [^2]

Custodian and bell ringer, John Allen, through the years was faithful and devoted.

While building for public benefit was of first concern, contriving ways and means of making a livelihood for the impoverished group in an unpromising area was a major challenge and occupied many hours of serious consideration by community leaders. Orchards had to replace farms and home industries had to furnish commodities. It was comparatively easy to fill lots and adjoining fields with trees and wait patiently for yields but it was another matter to devise ways and means to meet the immediate needs of families and individuals in a spot so barren of resources. Capitalizing on natural resources and recognizing individual aptitudes for developing them was the answer. It was not long until the community could boast of a sawmill in the mountains, a gristmill below town, a cattle breeding business with butcher shop, tannery, shoe and harness shop, and dairy as by-products, a co-op store, a tinshop, and a hotel, besides various minor concerns. Employment was furnished to all qualified workers. Industrialism on a small scale gradually changed the aspect of the little town to that of a prosperous, thriving and happy community.

Miles P. Romney, a skilled carpenter and joiner, established a lumberyard on his lot, thus furnishing a market for freighters who made regular trips to the sawmill. He also made his service available to building projects and in spare time made tables, cupboards, stools, benches, school desks and other simple household furniture. He superintended the building of the schoolhouse, the gristmill, and other public projects as well as many private homes. Drafting his family of boys into the trade, his business soon flourished and the whole town benefited as building pushed forward. [^3]

The craftsmanship of William C. McClellan was passed on to his son Ed who became a master builder and contractor and to his son Dave who became a skilled mason, stonecutter and builder of chimneys. A natural engineer and surveyor, the elder McClellan originated ways of overcoming leveling problems long before trained engineers equipped with improved instruments were available. He located a site for a gristmill and sold the idea to William Rogers Rufus Stowell who came to town in February 1889. On the river bank near his rock house in Old Town, McClellan had shown how easily water power could be generated by making use of the canal already dug and capitalizing on the high river bank as a millsite.

Stowell returned to Utah, sold his property in Ogden, attended the April conference, obtained a blessing on his enterprise from the first presidency, bought a mill and arranged for Peter N. Skousen to haul it in, and was back again in Colonia Juarez by June 1st ready to begin building. With Orson P. Brown making the adobes, Louis Cardon and John MacFarlane laying them into the walls, and Miles P. Romney doing the carpentry and joining, the roof was on before the summer rains began. By November John Campbell had every bur and cylinder in place; by December Stowell was grinding corn, and by the New Year he was grinding flour. In ten months hand-ground corn bread was replaced by white bread made from fine, nourishing flour. A new market for wheat was thus provided and a keen incentive for increasing wheat acreage created. With James Memmott as miller and James Scott as helper Stowell received wheat from all parts of the valley and from remote parts to the south. His yard filled with wheat-loaded wagons after threshing time was evidence of the readiness with which wheat farmers turned to him for a market. His wiry frame darted from overseeing the weighing and storing of wheat to superintending the exchange of wheat, bran and shorts. His ability to watch every operation with an eye to good business and yet leave every wheat farmer a satisfied customer was the key to his success.

The habits of thrift and industry and the maxims by which he had shaped his own life were respected by customers. "Haste makes waste" curtailed unnecessary spilling of grain. "Shake it over the bran pile," stopped others from cleaning grain bags in the open. "Take care of the pennies, and the dollars will take care of themselves," he observed with a wink to induce tolerance for unasked advice.

Stowell fattened his pigs on unavoidable waste and kept his cows at high production with by-products of his mill. With a fat and glossy team drawing him in his white-topped hack to and from work every day, stopping en route to inspect dams, headgates, water supply, and fields of growing grain, he became a model of successful enterprise in the town and an example of what diligence and wisdom could accomplish.

About 1900 Daniel Skousen purchased the Stowell mill, and with John Black as miller, carried on the milling business until the Exodus and subsequent conditions curtailed further operations. Following the methods of its diligent founder he made milling a lucrative and substantial business and established Colonia Juarez as a center of the milling industry.

Leaders in the cattle business with affiliated enterprises were Brigham Stowell on the lower Tinaja, Edward C. Eyring and father on the upper Tinaja and Ernest L. Taylor and Orson P. Brown operating cooperatively on a tract of land near Temoche Pass and Square Top Mountain. While Stowell and Taylor with imported bulls were breeding whitefaced Herefords, Eyring with his Durhams was breeding high grade beef and dairy stock and from them producing butter and cheese in quantities, and shipping carloads of cattle to eastern markets. Taylor with imported stallions also up-graded high class riding and driving horses from the cayuse pony.

By-products from the cattle industry were meeting community needs and furnishing lucrative employment for the many engaging in its various fields. A butcher shop was established by Brigham Stowell with slaughter grounds by the gristmill below town. He killed his beef in the evening and early next morning made delivery. Cut in convenient serving pieces, fresh and cool, it passed into the hands of housewives who, warned of his approach by the tinkle of a bell, met him with their pans. This "butcher shop on wheels" continued only until John C. Harper, taken into partnership, built a little shop under the cottonwood trees in front of his home. Here he sold beef in all cuts and quantities in the early morning hours. Often the entire beef was dispensed before breakfast. Always the purchase included a piece of clean suet, carefully rationed but given freely along with chatty advice about how to use it for chapped hands and lips, to grease harnesses, saddles and shoes or for soap grease.

Manufacturing leather from hides of slaughtered beeves developed into a profitable business for John Jacob Walser and sons when in February 1890 he took residence in Colonia Juarez. A building to house a tannery was provided by Bishop Sevey and was located on a back lot just outside city limits in the upper end of town. Beginning with but one lime vat, one tan vat and one oak, and initiating his sons John Jr., Henry and George in turn, his business grew until before five years had passed he was turning out 2000 sides of leather a year which in turn was manufactured into shoes, harnesses, saddles, and kindred products.

Nathan Clayson, using the front part of his home as a shop, made harnesses, new and shining with buckles, repaired collars, tugs and breechings. Teaching the trade to his sons William and Archer and George, and later Jesse and Ed, and using a large percentage of the Walser tannery output, he filled a basic need through the years.

Shoemaking and repair evolved more slowly, though it was perhaps one of the first needs. George A. McClellan, seeing needless discarding of good shoes for want of a cobbler, and sensing the discomfort of many children and adults going bare-footed, attempted to relieve this condition by learning from the natives to make a rawhide-bottomed mocassin, the tegua. Finding he liked this type of work, he secured a set of cobbler's tools and with his cousin, George Bailey, opened a repair shop that soon outgrew his quarters and called for a partner and a larger building. Edson Porter, a trained shoemaker from Orderville, Utah, then added his tools and skill, and shoe repair work expanded into a shoemaking industry. Many sides of leather were converted into a coarse and heavy but durable grade of footwear. Later when J. C. Peterson moved in and set up a shop equipped to make "fine" shoes, George A. and his cousin, George Bailey, rather than face competitive losses from this Danish trained shoemaker, sold out to Porter who moved to Dublan, and applied at once for work with Peterson, determined to learn the business from the bottom up. Peterson had operated under the Z.C.M.I. and Solomon Bros. in Salt Lake City, and was equipped with tools to do professional work. He trained the boys, allowing them to do piecework in every division of the business until each detail was mastered. He then sold them equipment with which to go in business for themselves. For eight years these boys serviced the community, the business expanding to meet the growing needs, until it was finally merged with the Juarez Tanning and Manufacturing Co., and became part of a firm that widened the market and carried the name of Colonia Juarez products to all parts of the Republic.

The Juarez Cooperative Mercantile Institution had been planned when the town was founded. Henry Eyring had been selected by Erastus Snow while Eyring was still a prosperous merchant in St. George, Utah. "Rather than be hounded by U. S. marshals," said Elder Snow, "and have your business suffer while you evade arrest or endure imprisonment, I'd say go to Mexico, establish a mercantile business there, better yourself, and help the community grow." "But first," he added, "you should become acquainted with the Spanish language, know the Mexican people, their laws, and the technicalities of doing business in a foreign country."

To give him this training he was called to succeed Horace H. Cummings as president of the Mexican Mission. He was set apart in January 1887, and was in Colonia Juarez before the concerted move from Old Town had been made. There he remained long enough to haul timber from the mountains to build the community's first log house for his wife Deseret, then continued his journey to Mexico City to begin missionary work in June 1887.

Twenty-eight months later, in October 1889, he was released to return to Colonia Juarez and begin the business for which he had been appointed. During those months, and while carrying on his missionary activities, he had acquired a knowledge of the Spanish language, become versed in commercial law, had learned the details of doing business with Mexican officials and commercial houses, and had located the merchandise with which to stock his store. He shipped his thousand dollars worth of goods to Colonia Juarez where a neat frame building, equipped with shelves, bins and warehouse space was ready, and began the long planned merchandizing business.

He organized the cooperative on the pattern of the Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution in Salt Lake City with a president and board of directors, a community of stockholders, and with himself as manager to conduct it on a profit-sharing basis. At that time it was the only institution in the nation so organized and said to be the first of its kind attempted by Americans in a foreign country. Its success was watched with interest by businessmen in the nation and the Southwest and by Church leaders of Utah. It was a humble beginning but success came rapidly. Before the year had ended, he required office assistance and additional clerks in order to dispatch customers who came from an ever widening circle—remote points in the state and even from Sonora. At the end of the first year he was able to declare a 25% dividend. Subsequent years never recorded a loss. The number of stockholders was increased and profits according to investments were spread over an ever widening area.

The time he spent in Mexico City brought returns through the varied services he was able to dispense to customers and town members. Knowing the needs of the people he served, and where to get the goods to supply them, his stock was never depleted and goods such as brass kettles, copper boilers, and farm implements were made accessible that otherwise would not have been. Acting as medium between manufacturer and consumer, he promoted home industry. He kept tin in stock for Thomas Hawkins' tinshop and sold from his shelves the cups, plates, buckets and cans Hawkins made. He supplied scrap iron for blacksmiths Ben L. Croff and Isaac Turley and sold branding irons, horseshoes, nails, etc., they made. He issued a standing invitation to initiators of any industry to rely on him for needed supplies. He urged planting of trees and flowers as the quickest means of beautification and kept nursery stock, flower and garden seeds seasonally in stock. He kept stamps for legal documents. He not only urged strict compliance with the law but taught the people how to make out legal documents and avoid conflict with the law.

Punctiliously prompt in meeting his obligations, habitually punctual in beginning his day's work, and painstakingly careful that his books were accurately kept in the Spanish language, he was such an example of downright honesty and undeviating integrity as to make a lasting impression on the lives of ambitious young men and women who worked with him. Subsequent business success of his more capable trainees pointed back to the training and impetus he had given them. His kindliness, consideration for rights and feelings of others and his courtesy to all business associates were extended to his employees, and impelled willing service from them. Likewise his treatment of native people and keen understanding of and sympathy for their condition were repaid in confidence and trust. His educational qualifications led him to offer his teaching services to both young people and their parents in night classes where he taught fundamentals of the Spanish language, and basic elements of Mexican law, stressing always the importance of knowing and keeping the laws of the land. The confidence of Erastus Snow in his choice of a man to manage the cooperative mercantile institution was more than justified. The Co-op operated for the public benefit, materially raised standards of living and gave prestige to the town.

After twelve years of service as a merchant, failing health induced Henry Eyring to merge the business with the Union Mercantile at Colonia Dublan. During his later years in business he walked back and forth to his store every day, doing only as much as his strength permitted, but gratified to find that none of the younger men could keep ahead of him in figuring. He died February 1902.

Place for a house of entertainment had been reserved when plans for the townsite were made. The site was sold to John C. Harper in 1891 and the two-story brick building built on it became the center for hospitable entertainment for transient guests. Harper had housed his family in a one-roomed mudtopped rock house, the first one built (by Helaman Pratt) in the new townsite. It stood on a high bank overlooking the river. During his eight years of residence in the town he had become an important fiber in the community fabric by taking over the Public Square and demonstrating what rich yields in garden stuff a sandy lot could be made to produce, by accepting the responsibilities of district watermaster, by giving one Saturday afternoon a month to perform baptisms and lending himself to any and every cause needing a forward push.

His hotel was an immediate success. The comfortable and clean rooms, the wholesome and attractively served meals, and the genuine hospitality dispensed won for him a patronage that soon made his accommodations inadequate and an addition necessary. With this completed he served traveling salesmen, news reporters and journalists, business representatives from all parts of the Republic and western United States, families from border towns who made reservations for the summer months, as well as hundreds who applied daily for short order service. Guests reveling in the abundance of vegetables from his garden, feasting on fruits and berries grown on his lot, relishing milk, butter and cream from his Jersey cows and fresh cuts of meat from his butcher shop all pronounced the Harper hotel an inexpensive and refreshing change from city life and an interesting place for a vacation. It gave prestige to the town and did honor to the Harpers, for sharing honors with J. C. was his wife, Fannie Coombs Harper, whose culinary skill produced the meals and whose contagious laugh and keen wit complemented her husband's southern drawl and social nature.

With no doctors among them the colonists developed a self-reliance that comes only when home remedies must be depended upon to cure minor illnesses. Every shelf contained a bottle of castor oil and turpentine for "summer complaint," home made liniment for bruises and sprains, a camphor bottle to whiff away the headache, and epsom salts. Every mother knew the virtue of mustard plaster for inflammation, of a bread and milk poultice for localizing infection, of a hot onion pack or "chamber lye" for earache, of sulphur and molasses to thin the blood, of a lard and turpentine pack for chest congestions, and numberless other means of relieving pain and suffering. They also developed an abiding faith in the power of a divine Being when all human efforts had failed and no cupboard was without a bottle of "consecrated oil" for use in administrations. Mothers stood ready to render day or night emergency service to neighbors with illnesses, while "Aunts" Elsie McClellan, Jane Croff and "Grandma" Hawkins and other motherly nurses were on call always. Wherever sickness was found they were ever there, willing to stay until danger was passed and their services no longer needed.

When contagious epidemics occurred each home became its own quarantine officer, isolating the patient to the extent crowded quarters permitted, and standing guard at the door to prevent accidental entrance of a neighbor, or an unwitting exit of exposed family members. When these individual precautions were ineffectual mutual aid was lent to the extent necessary. For broken bones and general diagnosis John McNiel was called. His homemade splints held bones and strengthened sprains, and his homeopathic remedies often effected quick cures. For one year Dr. Walter Keat took residence in Colonia Juarez and dispensed professional help. Always, in extreme emergencies, Dr. Roberts in Casas Grandes was within call.

But for confinements, baby deliveries, and general maternal supervision Avelina E. Saville gave the longest and most consistent service. She had been called and set apart for this work by Apostle Teasdale in the Salt Lake Temple in 1896. But she was also a "certified doctor of obstetrics," had passed the Utah State Medical Board examination, and had practiced for three years with Drs. Van, Wright, and Seymour B. Young in Salt Lake City. "Doctor" Saville came to Colonia Juarez well prepared with knowledge and experience as well as a large stock of drugs and surgical equipment with which to begin her work. With great confidence in her calling she enjoyed almost miraculous success during her seventeen years of medical service. Elder Teasdale, when he set her apart, assured her that if she would put her trust in the Lord and call upon Him for aid she should always know what to do in the hour of need. More than eight hundred babies were delivered by her.

"Sister" Saville with her black bag was a familiar sight on the streets of Colonia Juarez. She was untiring in her service, often answering calls when she was more physically ill than the patients who sought her service. Her confident, soothing way, her cheerful assurance that all would be well, made her an angel of mercy in a sick room and a long remembered friend by all who came under her care. She performed many emergency operations, including some removals of cataracts from the eyes of natives.

For toothache, Peter C. Wood was the remedy. He was not a dentist, but an ulcerated root often made his forceps seem the lesser of two evils. Knowing that only pain and desperation had nerved the sufferer to brave his torture he met them with tactics all his own. Jollying them, telling distracting stories until his forceps were clamped on the tooth, he then held the patient in place with the weight of his knees on floundering legs. The tooth extracted he held it up for loving inspection with "Best cure in the world for toothache is to carry a root in your pocket—the root of the tooth."

With children his technique was a sympathetic approach. Always he agreed with them that toothache was the worst pain in the world. Then he would talk of something else, clowning, pulling faces, anything for a laugh until he was ready for the yank. "There, honey," holding the forceps with the tooth in one hand, while he wiped tears and blood away with the other, "there's the old fellow that kept you awake last night. Uncle Pete will bury it so no dog or hen will eat it. Because if they do you would have a hen's tooth or a dog's tooth come in its place." Young and old he sent home smiling, chuckling, or laughing outright. What pain is so hard to endure or so soon forgotten as toothache!

These phases of the growth and development of the town are but typical examples of the new life which rose from the ashes of burned hopes in Old Town.

The people kept their covenants, and permitted no saloon to operate within town limits, and profanity was ever held to be an infraction bordering on crime. It was seldom heard in Colonia Juarez.

Footnotes

The Romneys later purchased from Joseph Jackson a large adobe mill building in the northwest part of town and converted it to a furniture manufacturing concern with a market beyond local needs.

---
Notas:
[^1] Shade trees, such as weeping willow, poplar, ash, catalpa, Chinese umbrella, etc., were brought in from California by Franklin Spencer in 1888. Fruit trees, berries, grapes, and roses were ordered from Mr. Clough.
[^2] This powerhouse was a three-story adobe building just below the "Bend" in the river and on lot 102. The lower floor contained dynamo and water wheel to furnish power for machinery on the second floor. The third floor stored articles of furniture when made. In 1923 it was converted into a fruit packer by a company of apple growers, Ernest I. Hatch, Miles A. Romney, and Brigham Pierce. It is now under the sole management of Mennell Taylor.
[^3] By 1953 deep-water wells from strategic locations throughout the town had replaced the cisterns and the "ditch" water they supplied the town. One privately owned well drilled on property (lot 51) of Ernest I. Hatch supplies homes below the bridge on the east side of the river. A company owned well drilled against the hill on the old Alonzo Taylor property, now owned by Leland Martineau, supplies the remaining homes on the east side, while from the well drilled on the Academy grounds all the homes on the west side are supplied. Further use of well water was discovered in a surprisingly rich flow tapped by Jay Whetten on the mill property below town.
