Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

VI

HOW THE DESERT SHALL BLOSSOM

THE PIEDRAS VERDES RIVER, sole water supply for Colonia Juarez is but a short tributary of the Casas Grandes River and is only about fifty miles long. Though little more than a creek, it also serves Colonia Pacheco on its way from Meadow Valley to its end at San Diego. Furthermore, it changes with the seasons, running full when late summer rains are plentiful, but dwindling to a mere trickle the rest of the year. At times it entirely ceases to flow. The river bed then becomes a series of pools infested with moss and polliwogs. The green moss probably gave the stream its name,—Green Rocks. During the few weeks of heavy rains flash floods rush through the town dividing it and suspending activities one side with the other. Great volumes of water sweep by and are lost. Reservoirs were beyond the economic power of the early colonists. Thus they were forced to let the water sweep on its way to enrich lands far removed, and leave them nothing with which to battle water scarcity problems through the months. Only the sport of watching lariat experts snake in a season's supply of fuel as timbers and driftwood floated by, and the age-old fascination of watching angry waters tear their way through obstructions were afforded.

Yet from this scanty source canal after canal was diverted. The first which carried water to the Old Town was abandoned when a move was made. The second was begun as soon as the new townsite was laid out. Committees to begin work on it were named and plans for organized work on it proceeded even before the move to the new townsite. To hasten its completion work was divided into sections and work on all sections began simultaneously. During the winters of 1886 and 1887 the ring of pick on embedded stone, the rattle of loosened gravel and stone as it was hurled from the canal bed could be heard through all the working hours of the day. The shouts and songs of men echoed from hill to hill, lightening the task as crew competed against crew. The zest of rivalry speeded up the race with the season and gradually pushed the canal to completion. With completion there were visions of grains, vegetables and orchards growing on the lots. Seeds and nursery stock were ordered generously from samples shown by a Mr. Clough. [^1] Then all waited tense and eager for the shout "water's in." Every ear had been tuned to catch this first sound, and every ditch was ready to carry the precious water to the town lots. Hoarded seeds of potatoes, onions, turnips and cane were ready, and into the ground they went as soon as the cry was sounded. With each seed planted went hope for a speedy germination and a prayer that the precious water would hasten its growth.

But the dry season faced them and before germination had reached a safe stage the people realized what hazards were wrapped up in that one word, "dry." Meager water supply dwindled and parched soil smothered life in many of the seeds. What few hopeful ones broke through the sandy soil had to face both the fierce heat of the sun and the searing blight of winds, the combined onslaught of which wilted tiny shoots. Derisive winds filled the furrows with sand, covered the tiny plants or snapped them off. Persistent colonists cleaned out the furrows, uncovered the plants and coaxed the water to stretch itself to each furrow's very end.

Late in the season the Clough shipment of trees arrived and the battle waged in favor of the seedlings was extended to include survival of the shipment of trees until late summer rains could relieve the water anxiety. When the irrigation stream proved inadequate water was carried from the river in buckets and in barrels. Even children were pressed into this service. To maintain interest in weary children parents painted glowing pictures of delicious fruits loading the trees, of luscious grapes hanging from the vines. They revived memories of bounteous fruit crops in former homes to give impetus to their own tired muscles. In one way and another they sought strength to battle unfavorable elements. Not until late summer rains came to end the drouth did they relax and take hope from the small harvest of corn and potatoes.

The first step in equitable water distribution was to measure the flow, then distribute it equally among all the lots by giving each a specified water turn. This distribution of water turns gave each lot four hours water usage every six or seven days. A watermaster both issued water tickets and kept an eagle eye on use as the turns were taken. Wise use and careful conservation made the difference between crop failure and one more or less successful, and a near realization of the hopes that had stirred hearts when the first cry of "water's in" had been heard.

Stimulated by this small water supply, the colonists instituted a beautification program that as years passed paid dividends and provided the picturesque setting for which the town became known. Rows of stately shade trees lining both sides of Main Street, with poplars standing like sentinels and keeping watch over the shorter walnut, locust, ash and elm, were soon the distinctive feature of the town. Trees dotted both back and front yards and lined the front walks. Homes took on a new beauty. Bermuda grass lawns took root in the sandy loam of many homes and with catalpa, Chinese umbrella, and weeping willow trees well placed around them, with the flower beds against the house, a simple but charming landscape pattern evolved.

Experts in flower raising such as Deseret and Mary B. Eyring, Hannah H. Croff, Leuna Wood, and Louisa Redd took the lead in home beautification. Each took stock of her own landscape problems and making them the basis of her planning covered unattractive spots with plants, flowers and climbing vines. Whether it was rock gardens, arbors or planned flower beds that solved her particular problem the result in each case was pleasing and satisfyingly different. The Eyrings specialized in arbors where climbing roses shared honors with wistaria, honey-suckle and trumpet creeper, letting them also run rampant over trellises, fences and rock walls. Tea roses, a Clough specialty, clumped pleasingly, bloomed fragrantly along paths and by porch posts. Mrs. Croff with her flower bordered lawn in the foreground, her terraced flower beds rising easterly from it, her mammoth pansies growing in plots supported by sawed off tree stumps, and her climbing vines and ornamental trees in the background, made a different picture which so highlighted her humble home against the eastern hill that visitors and neighbors often passed that way to be cheered by the view. Peter C. and Leuna Wood made their plain concrete home at the terminal of the east canal a picturesque spot by covering its walls with honeysuckle, building trellises for Dorothy Perkins and Baby Rambler roses. The homey restfulness of the Wood place invited young people to gather in its coolness on Sunday afternoons, and to regale themselves with its fragrance on moonlight nights.

Mrs. Redd brought her rock garden into bold relief by the surrounding arrangement of roses, bedding plants, and perennials and created a picture that expressed her love of the beautiful. Every plant in it, many of which had been transplanted from wild hillsides and canyon glens, so delighted the soul that the painful toil of carrying water in buckets from the ditch below or other hazards overcome in bringing about the riotous blooms never came to mind. Potted plants filled all the windows, a goodly array of blooms always greeting the passersby. Geraniums of all colors, grown from slips pinched from plants in a neighbor's window and set growing in crocks or discarded cans predominated although ivy, cleverly staked, smilax, verbena and coleous or sparkling Ice Plant often hung at the porch entryway or window tops.

No sprinkling system had periodically watered any of the gardens, nor even a garden hose. Nor had hand or power sprayer eradicated pests and disease. Neither had a hired gardener taken the brunt of the heavy work. Yet the lack of all these was not apparent in the final effect. Wise use of the periodic water turns, water carried from a barrel or the ditch, pests handpicked and drowned in kerosene emulsion was the magic. When men and boys lacked time to help, women weeded their own gardens even spading the ground themselves. And each woman received her reward in the final outcome, absorbing the beauty and counting no cost that yielded in the end the environment she had sought. Mexican officials and other visitors passing through the town and seeing beautification attempts ranging from the simplest to the most elaborate either never sensed water shortage problems or decided that unusual water concessions had been granted.

Waste water plus a small water right was utilized to convert the natural depression on the riverbank near the town's center into a park and recreational center. Small groves of cottonwood trees were planted to supplement the huge ones already there and were kept alive by seepage from the river, the little that got away from nearby irrigators, and the regular water turn. Picnickers reveled in the shade of the giant trees, merrymakers swung in strong swings, and old and young sought comfort there on any and every occasion that offered itself. As a place to hold patriotic celebrations the Park became traditional. Every parade began and ended at the Park and the program for the day was always held there. With a platform for the speeches, the band and others taking part on the program, it became an outdoor auditorium. Benches from the schoolhouse were sometimes hauled down and strategically placed for the benefit of the audience. In later years a colorful bandstand was built in front of this Park.

Not content to depend on this meager water supply for their homes, the colonists were counseled to dig wells. And had the campaign they so hopefully started succeeded there would have been a well on every lot. But an impenetrable hardpan close to the surface discouraged every attempt. Only in two places was water tapped—one of these was on Philip Cardon's lot in the upper end of town, and the other on William McKellar's place in the lower part. From these two wells fresh drinking water was carried to all homes in town. A supply of fresh water stored in burlap covered ollas and kept cool in a ventilated spot was ample reward for the work involved in carrying it from a well each evening. An olla suspended from the rafters of the porch, or resting in the crotch of a nearby tree with cup or gourd hanging conveniently near was a familiar sight and one that evoked almost as much sentiment as the old oaken bucket.

The nearest approach to water in the home was the institution of the "breakfast water hour" which gave free use of public water for a half hour each morning to fill tubs, barrels, vats or other water containers for the day's needs. Every morning at seven the bell in the schoolhouse tapped to notify all that the water had been released. It tapped again at 7:30 to shut it off. Water containers not filled at the expiration of the designated time made shift to wait until the water hour came again or were filled from the river. Unfair water users were subject to reprimand.

Every drop of water was utilized to its utmost capacity. Dish-water was fed to pigs, bathwater revived discouraged plants about the house. Washwater was poured down the ditch to supplement water turns on the trees. Irrigation turns were religiously watched to see that not a drop of water was wasted and that it was both taken and released on time. Wasting water, your own or your neighbor's, was a crime second to none and one the watermaster penalized at once. The entire family would assist in tending the water especially when turns came at night.

Irregularities did creep in, and misuse of water privileges or misinterpretations of the established rules and regulations did occur. Some failed to take or release the water on time resulting in loss of precious irrigation time to those following. Water shortage in dry seasons slowed up the time of water arrival even when turned on time and some deemed this ample reason for overtime use. And there were some natural "water hogs" who in their eagerness to get full share often overlooked or overrode the rights of others. Some there were who winked at leaky headgates and innocently benefited by seepage. These offenders created bickerings and altercations that, with the watermaster on the trail, ranged from minor disputes to formal filings of complaints and adjustments by the Board of Water Users or in extreme cases a special sitting of ecclesiastical heads. Peter C. Wood being situated on the end of the canal himself served effectively as watermaster.

When lots on the west side of the river were occupied, a system of canal building began that did not end until the east canal had been recharted, the west canal had been dug and widened, and a shorter canal had been dug by a group of private owners. The west canal, taking out from the river seven miles above town, was surveyed as soon as the east canal was finished. When the west canal was finished it furnished water for fields and orchards lying along the river above town as well as for the lots being rapidly taken up by incoming residents on the west side of the river. Cutting through rocky hillsides and fluming the Allred Wash was the supreme canal building test. To overcome all the difficulties besetting the work on this super-human task and speed the day of its completion, tactics used in building the east canal were again put into use. Sections were set to competing against section and shares in the Little Fields were offered as pay for time and labor expended. Much time was consumed in its building in spite of efforts to hasten its completion.

In the meantime owners of the improved sections of the Little Fields began a canal building project on their own, hoping to speed up irrigation facilities by making a shorter ditch. This took out from the river crossing one mile above town and was soon finished. Its course was surveyed by William C. McClellan in true pioneer style. Using a hollowed-out mescal stalk for a leveling device and sighting along its water-filled stalk he laid out a course which when tested later by accurate surveying instruments was found to be out but a scant inch in the mile and a half of canal. This ditch, discarded and used as a waste ditch when the west canal was finished was later known as Jackson's ditch, for it was Joseph Jackson who used it to carry water for power to run his furniture shop built on a high point overlooking the river. [^2]

Such extensive canal building plans and such wide use of water allotted to the people of Colonia Juarez in their legal water concessions excited discontent among the San Diego Mexicans who, feeling sure the colonists were either making illegitimate use of water allotted them or that special concession had been granted them, insisted on a readjustment. The demand was met generously by giving Colonia Juarez twelve hours daytime use of all the water in the river and by releasing it at night for the Mexicans below them. This arrangement besides appeasing the San Diego farmers and eliminating arduous night-time irrigation was turned to advantage in another way. Water pouring over the spillway provoked the idea of using it to generate electricity and brought visions of a lighted town. A dynamo was purchased by Guy A. Wilson in Ogden, Utah, shipped to Nuevo Casas Grandes, hauled by Alphonso Taylor to the proposed site and installed. Homes, offices and schools had been wired in anticipation of the installation of the motor. The flow of water, however, in their painfully dug canal proved too slight to turn the water wheel. With determination they widened and deepened the west canal, raising the height of its dam for greater water pressure. To do this meant virtually digging another canal which, when completed, tripled capacity and set the motor humming.

With homes lighted electrically, running water in them was the next ambition. The stream in the east canal was too small and too low to furnish force for water piped from its banks. Again there was nothing to do but chart a new canal bed, lengthen its course by taking it out of the river one mile farther up and let it skirt the hills fifteen feet higher in elevation than the original canal. When this was done a storage tank on the west canal opposite the head of the east canal not only did away with the need of a dam but united the two canals under one management. Soon cisterns dotted the banks of both canals from which water was piped into every home. [^3] Not only was the coal oil lamp relegated to the top pantry shelf to be used in emergencies only, and the washbench with its water bucket and cup banished forever, but the luxury of indoor plumbing became a possibility for all who could afford to buy the required fixtures.

The approximately thirty miles of canal with naught but the little Piedras Verdes stream as a feeder gouged and blasted from flinty hillsides had required experience, audacity, faith, and moral fortitude. The fact that the amount of water was more than doubled by the building of the canal system is an interesting by-product of the venture.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] HOUSES
[^2] FOOD
[^3] HOMES
