Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

VII

BE IT EVER SO HUMBLE

EXCEPT THAT THE TOWN was not built on a square plot and had no space for outlying farms on which to build barns and raise livestock the pattern for Colonia Juarez, like that of other Mormon villages, conformed to the original plot for the City of Zion in Kirtland, Ohio. The five-acre blocks were divided into four equal lots with a uniform location for the house specified and a place for outbuildings in the rear. This distinct Mormon pattern for laying out the town differed radically from the no-plan idea of pueblo-building in the nation. The simple gable-roofed houses were in sharp contrast to the flat-topped huts or jacales built by the natives while the speed with which the little rocky glen was changed into a thriving community stamped its founders as men and women of foresight, wisdom and thrift. The houses in Colonia Juarez were built of stone, concrete, adobe, log, lumber or brick according to the economic status of the builder and were on one or two levels according to the lay of the land. The entire town after five years of settlement, each house mirroring innate characteristics of the true pioneer, resembled a community of well-to-do inhabitants and was a credit to a people with no more resources than bare hands, a few tools, and invincible determination.

Simple and different as the houses were architecturally, in them was instituted a brand of home life that preserved family traditions. Meeting life on its own concrete terms these homes nourished culture, cemented home ties of love and understanding, and created memories that still remain. Most important to the colonists was the fact that the family life for which they had gone into voluntary exile was made possible. Children fathered by one man, but nurtured by two or more women in separate homes, usually, were kept in a family unit, the home of one always being the home of all, and children passing freely from one to another. The mothers in the respective homes working together like sisters endeared themselves to all the children no matter whether to them one was mother and the other "Auntie." Children were regarded as "an heritage of the Lord," and always a source of pride to the father who stood at the head of his large family in true patriarchal style. Respective homes of one family were usually within easy reach of each other, often on the same block and seldom farther away than across the street. Children working and playing together or gathering for special occasions often found every social need provided within the family group. When sisters of the same age sang together, created common "playhouses," studied in the same classes; when brothers took pride in escorting a sister to public functions, danced, sang, and worked with her, and "ran" in the same gang, it was not uncommon for "pairs" of children to become chums, for "twins" to find every need of a pal in a "half" brother or sister living across the street or on the same block and for ties to be formed that endured and carried over into later generations.

Smoke from chimney or stovepipe was the first indication that home life in a house had begun. The hour at which the first puffs were seen in the morning gave the family a definite rating in a community where all were early risers and there was a friendly competition for first place. With the first streaks of dawn smoke from chimneys in all parts of town appeared almost simultaneously, settling over the housetops in a soft blanket as proof of universal early rising habits and a definite indication of the hour at which the day's work began. Candlelight, firelight, or lamplight flickered from windows with the first sign of smoke, and met an answering gleam from neighbors comfortingly near. It soon shone on the faces of the family seated about the breakfast table. Sleep for all had ended with the early morning hours and chores preceding the breakfast were already done. The sun peeping over the hills shone on a community already started on work for the day.

Besides being an index to family habits and customs, smoke was also a weather forecast for those schooled to read its meaning. If it blew down the chimney to slink along the ground rain was to be expected. If it went up dry weather was promised. Work in the fields, on the freight road or about the home was regulated according to predictions of the smoke barometer. The density, color and smell of smoke pouring from the chimneys also told plainly whether oak, pine, or cedar had been hauled from the mountains, whether cottonwood, sycamore or black-willow had been cut from the river bottom or whether mesquite had been grubbed from the llanos.

The fireplace was the central heating agent of every home but because of the many activities set in motion around the fires kindled on its hearth, and the tender memories associated with the gatherings about its warmth, a fireplace meant far more than mere heat for the bodies of these pioneers. By its side the weekly ritual of Saturday night bathing took place. In a wooden or a No. 3 tin tub, filled with steaming suds, the family one by one were scrubbed to glowing cleanliness for the day of rest following it. Other nights the family sat beside it to carry forward tasks that found no place in the day's full program, or to while the evening hours away. Mothers knitted, mended, rocked the baby, even read aloud. Children sewed carpet rags, picked wool, kept the fire replenished and spun yarns among themselves. Father mended a bridle or dozed over a week-old newspaper. But one and all they discreetly withdrew should sister's gentleman friend call. The fireside was left free for the courting that often took place before its dying embers. There, as heat died young love warmed, and hearts and lips were drawn together and plans for a new generation were made.

A companion heating agent was the little four-holed cook-stove. It stood on stout legs in the kitchen with swinging doors on both sides of the oven and crackled its cheerful glow through the isinglass windows. Wood for the stove, cut and stacked near the fireplace chunks, was a gesture of foresight and thrift. The higher the pile the greater the rating as a provider was accorded the man of the house. The bother of perpetually carrying it in and the mess of daily carrying the ashes out was an unquestioned detail of the endless household duties. On this little Charter Oak stove was cooked the daily consumption of food until it was replaced by the Home Comfort range that squatted squarely on the floor, had a warming oven shelf above and an oven door that let down for bread and cakes to slide in and out on, and a hot water reservoir on the side.

Food in the early days of Colonia Juarez was meager in both variety and quantity. But in the hands of good cooks who had normal, healthy appetites to satisfy, even corn bread, molasses, and beans acquired a certain special savor. Nothing, they said, is quite so good as good corn bread, and nothing quite so bad as a poor imitation of it. Cornmeal was also used as hot mush for supper. From kettles bubbling on the back of the stove plates were filled for family members seating themselves about the supper table. Topped with molasses and dipped by spoonfuls into a cupful of meagerly rationed milk it broke the monotony of "Johnny cake" eaten three times a day. It was often a substitute for the "bread and milk" suppers long a favorite in pioneer homes.

Beans served with corn bread helped balance the diet. Monotonous as this might be, served day in and day out for weeks, it built strong bodies and was a far cry from starvation when supplemented with molasses honey-clear and fresh from McClellan's mill. The first hard year this diet was also supplemented with "pig-weed" greens. Boiled with a slice of bacon they rounded out the menu and furnished vitamins not even heard of in that day.

Gravy, a specialty with everyone, was homely or aristocratic according to the economic status of the family serving it. It ranged from a mere white sauce to a rich brown gravy made from drippings of a savory roast. Its usefulness extended from being the main article of diet when food was scarce to being a complement to an appetizing meal when times were lush. Its versatility is remembered tenderly by cooks during those first hard days because of the elegance it imparted to scarcity and the means it became of stretching humble fare into a satisfying meal. Made with water when milk supply dwindled and spread generously on potatoes boiled in their jackets or over crumbled bread, it both filled and satisfied hungry stomachs and was a change or addition to beans served so constantly.

It was a glad day when W. R. R. Stowell's "flouring" mill made white bread again available and white buttermilk biscuits pushed "Johnny cake" into second place. But until yeast was more available, "salt-rising" bread had to take its place. How odorous, and odious, was that batter of water and shorts as it fomented on the hearth. As it brewed and smelled to high heaven it offended delicate nostrils. But when baked into delectable loaves it was manna to the taste and until Fannie MacDonald's hop and potato yeast really made "light" bread a possibility it was eaten with gusto. "Going for yeast" became a ritual. A cup of flour could be exchanged for a cupful of the foamy, potent leavening agent and then good bread-makers assumed great importance. Housewives vied with each other to have the whitest, most uniform and even textured loaves. In the process salivary glands were excited, noses were tormented with the smell of rich brown loaves baking in the oven, or cooling under a cloth on the table. Only grim vigilance kept the upper crust intact and the heel of the loaf in place until it was time for them to be eaten.

It was not long until eating standards had risen—with vegetables from the garden, milk, cream and butter and cheese from cows gradually acquired, fresh meat from the butcher shop, sugar in hard cones from the Co-op store, eggs from hens scratching in the backyard, hams, bacon and sausage from porkers grunting in the pens. With these came experts to demonstrate rare skills in the arts of cookery. Tricks by which excellency was achieved, means of putting "that something" into a favorite dish were generously shared, for none of them used "receets" or read their directions from cookbooks. "If you have much, you use much," "throw in a little odds and ends of this and that," or "put in till it tastes good," were directions accurate enough for all to follow. And no mortal judgment could tell which one was best, for they all were good. To reduce directions for making a choice dish to terms of ounces or tablespoonfuls was to remove both discernment and judgment, the two elements that make a good cook.

Mally Skousen gained recognition for her flaky-white, crunchingly-crisp soda biscuits by a personalized stir which in her children's estimation made her pre-eminent in the biscuitmaking profession.

Elizabeth Walser delighted her family with Yorkshire pudding and popularized this supplement to roast beef by mixing milk and salted flour in equal proportions, leavening it with beaten eggs, and baking it quickly under a dripping roast. Cutting it in squares and serving it with the roast she achieved an "old-worldly" triumph that delighted her family, charmed her guests and recalled prosperous days in Old England.

Almeda McClellan glorified homely molasses by making it the sweetening agent for cake. Whipped into a batter, flavored with spices, baked and topped with crusty icing her cakes were a delicacy her grandchildren still remember. Hannah Taylor, besides specializing in salt-rising bread long after others had discontinued its use, made sweet soup and Danish pancakes for every woman who had a new baby. Sweetened rice boiled in milk, filled with raisins and prunes and seasoned with cinnamon made the soup, while a thin batter of milk, eggs and flour sprinkled with cinnamon and sugar made the pancakes. A dish of the soup and a rolled up half-dozen of the pancakes made a meal for every mother for one of the ten days she remained in bed. Fannie Harper made Farce meat balls by moistening grated bread crumbs with melted butter, seasoning it with sage and pepper, rolling it into balls and boiling it in chicken soup. Served to her hotel guests for Sunday dinner on special occasions it made an addict of everyone who tasted the dish. These and other specialties too numerous to mention went the rounds and were a potent means of tying cooks together as friends and neighbors and making a solid bond of the community.

Hospitality was a staple article. No one was ever too crowded to make an extra place at the table. No house was too small but that a corner for an extra person to sleep could be found. No menu but could be thinned, added to or stretched to meet hunger needs of extra persons coming in. And with immigrants making their way over the dugway in increasing numbers there were few homes which were not periodically called upon to play host for one or more days until guests could make ready a place of their own. "I see a wagonload of company has just driven into Sevey's yard," Mary Taylor was more than once heard to say. "Run over with this pot of soup. I imagine Martha Ann could use it." Should the guests overflow Bishop Sevey's home other homes would be open with a welcome.

Wise conservation of food, thrifty foresight in providing for the future reduced loss to a minimum and made maximum use of everything produced. Few families faced the winter without a supply of fundamentals such as salt or smoked pork, dried corn and apples, flour, cornmeal, etc., and from a meager to a full supply of canned fruits,—enough for themselves and some to spare in emergency needs.

Porkers, kept growing on foodscraps and dishwater and fattened in the fall from corn grown in the fields, were sources of hams, bacon and other by-products of the pig for winter use. Every part of the animal was used. Even the bladder, blown up, was a toy to amuse boys. Neighbors came in to help with the killing, scalding and scraping, often staying until the carcass was hung on a scaffold. After chilling it was cut up and hams and bacon were carved from its sides. These were rubbed with a mixture of salt, sugar and saltpeter and left to "cure" for a period of time. Further spoilage was discouraged by smoking the meat in a room built for the purpose, or in a barrel equipped with a pipe and a fire to keep the meat enveloped in a smoke screen. Wrapped in brown paper or otherwise protected against pests, it was supposed to keep indefinitely and was a firm gesture toward a meat supply for the winter. Trimmings from hams and shoulders were ground together for sausage. Seasoned generously with salt, pepper, and sage, rolled into patties and packed in jars, or covered with melted lard it became a keen supplement to the meat supply. Sometimes gut casings were cleaned and stuffed with sausage and hung in the smokehouse along with the hams. Fat from the ribs, belly and jowls was rendered and the grease stored away for lard. The residue, or "cracklings," was set aside for soapmaking days. Headcheese was made by chopping the pig's head, and cooking it till the meat fell from the bones, which were then carefully extracted. When the meat had simmered till thick enough to jell it was seasoned with salt, pepper and sage. Eaten on slices of bread, it was good. But thickened with corn meal, sliced, fried and served with molasses it became a mouth-watering delicacy.

Soapmaking was an ordeal of uncertainty, for so many elements entered into the process to keep it from "coming." To some the signs of the zodiac controlled the secret of success or failure, and almanacs were consulted to make sure the moon was in the right stage. To others it was a trial and error process with luck being the deciding factor. To still others it was reduced to a science with success more or less infallible. But to all soapmaking was an art without which no girl's housewifely training was complete until experience had taken her through the mysteries. No woman could claim laurels due a good housekeeper until a fair degree of skill as a soapmaker had been acquired. Into an iron kettle hung over a fire in the backyard, or placed on a tripod of rocks, the year's accumulation of grease was poured, along with the approved proportions of water and lye. The whole mixture was boiled and stirred until it strung from the paddle honey-like and "looked done." To make sure, a little was set aside in a saucer to cool. Sometimes it was grudgingly tasted to see if more lye or grease was needed. If it was pronounced "done" it was lifted from the fire to cool, then cut in usable pieces and hung in a cellar or woodshed to dry. Always it was examined for color and texture and neighbors came in to pass judgment on the soapmaker's skill. No homemaker but had a year's supply of soap hanging in a ventilated section, for the smell of that soap was both fearful and wonderful. Offenses against its rank odors were overcome by the agility with which it attacked dirt. It cleaned everything from faces to floors. Its foamy acrid suds battled royally with grime and grease. When circumstances sometimes permitted the use of clear grease for a batch of soap it was perfumed and sparingly used for "nice."

With the gradual improvement in milk-strain cattle a year-round supply of milk was possible. Then heavy blankets of cream skimmed from pans of milk stored in cool places and kept until it was "ripe," were churned into butter in a dasher churn which was either a stone crock or one of Pearson Ballinger's wooden casks bound by iron hoops. The labor involved in buttermaking was offset by the manifest pride the buttermaker showed in the fine quality of the butter and the satisfaction of serving butter every meal of every day. Clabber from which the cream was skimmed was made into cottage cheese, or eaten raw sprinkled with sugar and cinnamon.

A plentiful milk supply made cream cheese possible. In a new tin tub went the fresh milk, and on the kitchen stove it was heated with the approved amount of rennet in it to make it "set." Carefully it was cut and worked lest it "bleed," until the whey was gradually squeezed out. It was then salted, pressed into shape and set away to age. During the late summer months the year's supply of cheese was made by each household until Brig Stowell merged all effort into a common dairy out at his Tinaja Wash ranch and made cheese which found a ready market. His huge vat was a triumph, and James Mortensen's cream separator was a miracle, the first made dairying possible on a large scale, and the second turned buttermaking into an industry. Together they relieved the home of the drudgery of milk care.

Homes were lighted by tallow candles and kerosene lamps. With the Co-op store a steady source of supply few resorted to candlemaking, though many knew the process—melted grease into molds, wicking knotted at both ends to hold them in place, clipping of the knots and dipping in hot water to release them from the molds. Flickering candles set into candlesticks, or spermed into place in a saucer routed darkness and made the evenings comfortingly passable.

Some lacking candles resorted to a cruder means of making light, the "bitch." This was no more than a wick, fed by oil or melted fat and set burning in a dish. Sometimes just a piece of old underwear, cut and coiled up in the saucer with one end pointing up served as a wick. Later kerosene lamps were acquired and they improved the dismal lighting facilities. The hand lamp did valiant service and was moved from room to room or bracketed strategically on the wall until the Rochester lamp or those resembling it served more elegantly and decoratively for front room table use. A wary eye was always kept on them all for fear of explosion. They involved also a daily ritual of cleaning chimneys, trimming wicks and supplying with oil.

Volumes could be written on ways and means contrived in a pioneer home, located in a small community in a foreign land, to keep the house clean and the family clean and clothed when every article from skin out was made by the deft fingers of the housewife. But clothes were made, ranging in kind from simple panties, petticoats, "every day" and "Sunday" dresses for children; shirts, drawers and overalls for men and boys; chemise, underwaists and fancy dresses for women and girls. Stockings and socks were knitted for the entire family, seasonal need being met by using dyed carpet warp for summer wear and Germantown yarn for the wintry days. Even hats were braided in the early days. Making these articles and keeping them in repair often lengthened the day from early dawn until late evening hours.

Monday, following Saturday and the change of clothing from skin out was a logical wash day. Every available member of the family was put to work and preparations were begun with the first streaks of dawn. Men and boys filled the kettle and set the fire to burning under it out in the yard before breakfast. Smaller girls washed the dishes and tidied the house while mother and older girls began a scrubbing that did not cease until the last dud was flapping on the line or draped over the back fence. Smaller boys kept the fires replenished, the tubs full and helped in emptying them. Within the space of hours great mounds of soiled clothing were changed to a display of clean garments withstanding the scrutiny of neighbors and menfolks.

The ironing on Tuesday was done on folded sheets on the table until it was discovered that a padded board was better. Sad irons were heated on the stove or in an iron heater, rotated so that the place of the hottest one was always known. Mileage covered in trips from ironing board to stove and back to the tubful of clothes to be ironed before this weekly task was done was another accepted routine of the week's work.

On Saturday, another day of drain on physical reserve, the house was cleaned from "top to bottom." Rugs, removed for the "beating," were not returned until the broom had invaded every corner, the scrubbing brush had removed every grease spot from the pine board floor, and the dust cloth had left every surface smooth and shining. The day didn't end until the stove was polished, bedding was aired, Sunday cooking was stored for the morrow and Saturday night bathing had been done. All were ready for a day of rest.

Intervening weekdays were used for sewing, mending and myriad incidentals and daily routine tasks. No housewife but had a score of tricks by which grime and filth could be kept out of the house and children and clothing kept clean. Mats before every entrance cleaned shoes of barnyard trackings,—washable ones covering kitchen doorsteps and colorful hooked, braided or clipped rugs protecting the front entrance. Aprons, a house-wifely part of every costume, kept dresses free of spots and preserved maternal dignity. A bib apron for week day wear kept kitchen dresses clean for the week and a white one trimmed with deep crocheted lace protected the delaine or serge dress worn on Sunday and special occasions. Pinafores served the same purpose for children. A wash bench with water bucket, soap, and towel stood near the kitchen door for men and boys to clean themselves before meals.

Many activities of the home involved neighbors and friends to complete them. These were rag bees, sewing bees, quilting bees, etc., when neighbors in exchange for a hot meal and a full day spent visiting gathered to help a neighbor. At such times old clothes torn into strips, sewed together and bound into balls made ready an accumulation of rags for a carpet for the front room. They were then taken to "Grandma" Hardy to be woven into carpet strips on her loom. Sewing gone into arrears because of illnesses in the family, unexpected delays or any one of many emergencies interrupting the family schedule, was soon put up to date by a force of willing workers who counted the social aspect of the gathering as ample pay for time spent in helping a neighbor over a crisis.

Bedsteads, sturdy though plain, were equipped with wooden slats or criss-crossed thongs or plain coil springs on which cornhusk or straw mattress rested. When feather ticks, a Co-op specialty, covered the cornhusk or straw mattresses and smothered its crunchy protests, an air of elegance was achieved. The master bed in the front room fluffed up and covered with a colorful pieced-quilt counterpane, was the joy and pride of the housewife, who couldn't abide so much as a finger dent to mar its tempting smoothness. Trundle beds still further saved space and stretched bedroom capacities as they were hidden beneath the bed in the daytime, rolled out for nighttime use, thus reducing the number of beds to be made down at night and folded up by day. Corner cupboards stood in the kitchen with eating utensils behind screen or glass doors at the top, and cooking utensils behind a curtain or wooden doors at the bottom.

Decorations for the front room consisted of framed samplers worked into mottoes hanging on the whitewashed walls along with simple punch-worked pictures on velvet. Crocheted tidies to cover the back of rockers or adorn the mantel piece or the center table were favorites. "Home Sweet Home," "What is Home Without a Mother," "Love at Home," or other sentiments dear to the heart of the home owner, made up the samplers, while an antlered deer, a long-tailed bird, or a bouquet of flowers were favorite subjects for the "tidies." These or other favorite motifs were repeated in the pillow shams on the master bed and made elegantly convincing its untouchableness.

The family privy hid itself among outbuildings in the rear, the pigpen, the barn or clumps of trees being most often used to conceal its whereabouts. But wherever it was a beaten path led straight to its door. Women and girls sought its seclusion when men and boys were off the lot or otherwise engaged. Or, when gathering an apronful of chips from the woodpile on the way made one trip serve two purposes. Essential but never beautiful it was equipped with a can of ashes to kill odors and newspapers which became the family's most popular literature. Every word was read and re-read. Even advertisements were given a lingering study as legitimate time was consumed in answering nature's call. It also was a seasonable hide-out for finishing the last chapters of an absorbing story and was a convenient place for exchanges of secrets and "cross-your-heart-and-hope-to-die pledges."

The many ways in which fun and good times were had notwithstanding restricted living conditions indicate the people believed that "all work and no play makes Jack a dull boy" long before child labor had become an issue and organized play had been recognized as a preventative of delinquency. The element of play introduced into husking bees, sewing bees, etc., was never considered a substitute for unhampered frolic. Girls played jacks, hopscotch, rolled hoops, jumped the rope,—anything that released tension and provided an outlet for exuberant spirits. In jumping rope they "hopped on one foot," or "hopped on two," and told fortunes. In marble games three-hole perg was a favorite, played sometimes with boys but more often by themselves. Some became experts and could "kill" an opponent as soon as "lagging" for first shot was over. Or they could mercilessly let her shoot her way down and up and down again and ready for safety before putting her out of the game.

In running-games with boys, girls were only semi-occasionally admitted. Though they sometimes offered keen competition they rarely became a part of these boyish sports. Swimming also for girls was taboo and permission for boys only on rare occasions. "Stay away from water until you learn how to swim" was admonition enough to keep ninety per cent of the girls from learning to swim. The venturesome few who waded and splashed in shallow pools wore mother hubbards or calico wrappers for swim suits that when wet mercilessly revealed curves and bulges, induced cover of water to conceal and intense splashing to forget. Ventures in the water or even near its brink were always when boys were absent from swimming haunts lest they be scandalized by the naked truth of boys swimming free and unhampered by swimming suits.

House parties came in for their share of importance, birthday surprises being always a favorite. They were held in the "front room" vacated for the occasion, in the yard, or in the street, with starlight or a full moon for lighting. Springboard for the evening's merriment could be any game, "Button, button, who's got the button?" and "Pussy wants a corner" being most often used. In the mad scramble to keep Pussy from getting his corner as they stealthily outwitted him or openly tantalized him, the tempo for the evening was set. Then "Truth upon Honor" where the victim must answer truthfully a gunfire of questions under penalty of condemnation, or "Poor Pussy" which required each one to stroke the head of a yowling young man and repeat three times in succession "Poor Pussy" without so much as a smile, or "Cross Questions and Crooked Answers" could be played with equal fun. Always popular were games requiring forfeits the redemption of which often furnished an evening's entertainment. "Old Woman" was the game which usually collected the most forfeits and was most often played. The "Old Woman" was the comedian of the group and could be either boy or girl. Grotesquely personating an eccentric old crone leaning on her staff she would go the rounds chanting to each one in turn. "Here comes an old woman with a stick and a staff and you must neither smile nor laugh but say right down 'I will.'" Tappings with her broomstick punctuated her chant and comical forecasts of pledges about to be extracted made faces suddenly serious. Waiting until she heard a straightforward "I will" to her question, then "You will?" she would shrill banefully. "What will you do? Will you kiss me?" And then laugh gleefully at his involuntary dodge of her puckered lips. The room exploding into laughter usually exploded the victim too and a forfeit was collected. The "Old Woman" varied her attacks but never ceased until the solemn exterior of everyone had been cracked,—a task that grew increasingly easy as she proceeded and each victim became her ally and an enemy of the serious. Forfeits of value to the owner were extracted from all.

The remainder of the evening's merriment lay in the hands of the judge whose versatility in imposing sentences and whose keen wit in executing them provided fun enough for two evenings. Seating himself conspicuously and with the forfeiteer behind him, he judiciously estimated the tempo of the victims and mentally prepared a suitable sentence for each one. "Heavy, heavy hangs over your poor head," and in the return question "Fine or superfine?" The sex of the owner was asked and given "What shall the owner do to redeem it?"—a sentence was imposed without mercy. Redemptions were taken from a large supply of stock performances, most of which involved kissing, the only time such amorous exhibitions were permissible. Kissing was no casual act and was a practice in which only the boldest dared indulge. "Kneel to the prettiest, bow to the wittiest, and kiss the one you love the best," set a bashful young man to stammering, while "Paint the plow with so-and-so" was as embarrassing to a blushing young lady as it was painful to the gangly youth who furnished a knee on which to seat her while kissing one or both cheeks according to her sentence.

"Walk the cedar swamps" and "Go to the post office" both gave license to smack a secretly favored miss—while "From a Dutch wedding," resorted to only rarely, resolved the party into a wholesale kissing feat. By the time the kiss solemnizing the vow of each new couple was relayed down the line every kisser was tired and amorous tendencies quite definitely satiated. Provocative games like Charades were equally interesting, and many an evening was spent acting out words, syllable by syllable, for the opposing side to identify.

Nowhere is the moon so full, the stars so close, and the night so enchanting as in Mexico. And no place in Mexico is more peaceful than Colonia Juarez nestled between its hills. No place so resplendently comes to life as when the moon sparkles on the silver ribbon of water in the river, filters through the trees and casts shadows or glows on the housetops and shimmers through the balmy air. No people responded more to its enchantment or reveled more in its beauty than the people of this town. To the strollers it provided leafy quiet, to the slow stepping lovers it promoted romance, to the crowd it provoked hayrack rides, to the venturesome it called for a boat ride on Scott's pond. But to the teenager it signaled group games in the street.

The first shout when chores were done was answered by runners coming from all directions. Congregated, any number of games were played, the wild abandon of youth putting mind, heart and muscle into them until the reminding call of a parent dispersed them. "Pom, Pom, Pull Away," "Steal Sticks" and other contest games were played, but "Stink Base," more elegantly called "Prisoner's Base," held interest most consistently. Players divided themselves into equal sides, using the sidewalks from ditch to fence on both sides of the street as safety zones, the whole street as the sallying ground and lines at each end of the rectangle for home zones. Each side guarded a spot designated as "Stink," the point of the game being to fill it with prisoners from the opposing side. A dare from the most agile and venturesome, a quick dart from the other side to tag him before he could reach the safety of his own zone, and the first prisoner was "on stink." There he must remain until some teammate could outdodge the enemy and before he himself was tagged touch off the prisoner. Speed, alertness, clever decoys, expert dodging were the requisites for eluding or capturing. Back and forth they ran, tagging their victims, touching off those unfortunately tagged, or in turn being tagged until all on one side or the other were on "Stink," in the enemy's zone. Shouting goodnight, they dispersed and were soon dreaming of other nights and other games in the moonlight.

"Run, Sheep, Run" ran its cycle on starlit summer nights. Poor are the children who never played this splendid and exciting game. No rumpus room with its expensive equipment, no basket hoop set on a private pole, or any of the many places for play supplied by community centers of today could take the place of this twilight-to-starlight game of "Run, Sheep, Run."

Gathering under leafy branches of shade trees, the players chose captains for each side, then each waited apprehensively to be chosen on one of the teams. It was a tribute to one's popularity or skill to have his name called quickly. The choosing over, sides drew lots to determine which side was sheep and which was wolves. While the wolves remained in the goal, the sheep huddled secretly to decide on signals with which to elude the wolves soon to be turned loose—a signal for "Lie low," another for "Danger," and still another for "They're passing, get ready to run!" With signals in mind, the sheep scattered, searching frantically for a hiding place—one which spies, informers, or raiding parties could not find. Sometimes the barn way down in the lot would do, sometimes the haystack, tall and shadowy, and sometimes the trees in the river bed were best. Even a close-in place, snug under the latticed porch furnished a daring spot to hide, and sometimes hiding places took the sheep far afield. But from wherever, the sheep listened for the wolves scenting on their trail, and for the voice of their own leader who was running with the pack and periodically calling out signals, intelligible to the sheep only. Safely hidden, they did not dare to cough, to move or to draw a deep breath. If the wolf pack passed by their hiding place, the smart thing to do was to move, to dodge, to creep from place to place hunching over and melting into the shadows, but trying always to creep closer to the goal. After what seemed an eternity of peril, the shrill call of "Run, Sheep, Run!" sent them all racing for the goal. How the heart pounded, how the legs stretched and how the delicious danger in the air lent strength to streak it to the goal before the wolves could reach it.

One must have leisure for "Run, Sheep, Run,"—leisure and long and lazy starlight nights. Life must not be hurried as it is today. There must be time for gathering of the clans, time to go home shouting through the dim light when the call "Time for bed" is sounded.

Afternoons were for Ante-I-Over. How is it played today when there are no barns, sheds or even houses with plenty of space around them for the desperate challenge that followed the throwing of the ball? Perhaps another wonderful childhood game is lost. A ball of any sort would do. Sides were chosen, and each took his place on opposite sides of the barn, shed or house. At a signal the side holding the ball threw it over, always shouting "Ante-I-Over" as it left the hand. Then how the throwing side scattered to avoid being caught and tagged before reaching the other side! When all on one side were caught they chose up again and changed sides. Over and back went the ball, round and round went the sides, tagging or being tagged, boys and girls playing together, and cheers and shouts rending the afternoon air as long as leisure from chores permitted.

Sides were chosen in a variety of ways. Hand over hand on a baseball bat, with leaders alternately placing hands, and with the last hand gaining first choice, was a favorite way of choosing sides for "liners" or other ball games. To count out, the following chant was used:

"Onery, oery, ickory ann,

Fillasy, fallasy, Nicolas John,

Queever, quaver, English naver,

Strinklam, stranklam, you be bucran,

And out goes you!"

This decided the innings. Or:

"Eeny, meeny, miney, moe,

Catch a nigger by the toe,

If he hollers, let him go,

Eeny, meeny, miny, moe!"

gave the designated side "in."

Ball games played in the street and on the school grounds were Liners, One-O-Cat, and Base Rounders. For a ball they wound yarn around a walnut, covered it with twine stitches or with buckskin. For a bat they hewed a pine knot, scraped and smoothed for better gripping.

Moonlight nights in autumn and molasses candy pulls were synonymous. Ripened cane in piles on the molasses millsite demanded a candy pull.

Dave McClellan, anticipating the gathering, made ready for them for the weekend when the moon was in the full. Making a place by raking coals to the front of his furnace and filling a pot with an extra bit of molasses, he set it to boiling as soon as the first shout told him his load of fun lovers had arrived. While they spilled themselves all over the river lot, raked succulent stalks to chew from the piles ready for grinding, scuffing through the pungent pumice, sniffing the aroma of escaped juices on their way from rollers to boiling vats, he'd give a watchful eye both to his boiling and to them. Stirring his night batch of juice, keeping an eye on the candy boiling on the coals, he could still enjoy the games which immediately started,—"Touch you last" usually starting them off.

The whole lot was legitimate domain for the rollickers except the pit where skimmings were dumped. Woe to the hapless youth who stumbled or fell into it. If he ever cleaned himself of the smelly, viscous mass, he never entirely saved his face nor outlived the ignominy of rising slime-bedecked and dripping fermented juices from the place where he fell.

"London Bridge," "Hide and Seek," "Drop the Handkerchief," "Contrary" and other kindred games were played until "Candy's done!" was shouted and a mad scamper to get full share ended the games.

Then amid squeals and shrieks, punctuated by frantic blowing on burned fingers, a race to see who could first change the hot, dusky mass into brittle candy sticks, crisp and yellowish, began. In the comparisons of progress made, agile methods of keeping fingers from blistering, scuffles, runs and shouts as they playfully snatched and retrieved lay the fun of the evening, the actual eating of the candy when it was finally pulled and chopped into edible pieces being but incidental.

The more sedate or those beyond the running and courting periods of life turned to study groups or less formal gatherings for recreation, to learn better ways of living, and for gaining new outlooks on life.

Guy C. Wilson, through informal chats with teen-agers, made mothers conscious of the awakening interest in psychology, particularly as it applied to child development and promoted a general interest in child behavior.

Gladys Bentley, gifted musician and writer, organized the first Literary Society and a Mother's Club, thus making her love of music and literature and the gems of thought she gleaned through extensive study, a stimulus to all.

Maggie I. Bentley answered artistic longings by passing on tricks of her millinery trade, by teaching classes in painting, by giving music lessons along with Annie Williams, Mary Turley, and others. She often composed and taught the class song to academy seniors.

Home and community life in Colonia Juarez was full and varied and, for such an isolated spot, comparatively good.
