Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

VIII

CULTURAL ACTIVITIES—HOMEMADE

ENTERTAINMENT IN COLONIA JUAREZ during the early years was of necessity homemade, but conditions in the community were such as to bring close and spirited cooperation among those who directed, those who performed, and those who listened. No one would doubt, however, that the degree of excellence attained was due to well trained leadership in music and the other arts. The experienced leaders knew what they wanted and the eager young performers were willing to give the time and effort to attain the goals sought.

"Let the Mountains Shout for Joy," sang the ward choir in full unison. "Let the valleys sing,—the hills rejoice," with all parts swelling to full harmony. "Let them all break forth into song, and be glad before the Lord," and the audience joined in spirit, catching the tempo from song and singers. "For the wilderness has blossomed,—like a rose, and the barren desert is a fruitful field," sung by a trio was like a fulfillment of prophecy. In the rapturous climax with the theme impressively repeated, the audience was lifted, the singers were glorified, and the conductor exalted.

That anthem and its companions "Song of the Redeemed," and "In Our Redeemer's Name," have been sung and still are sung by choirs in all parts of the land, never more perfectly or with better trained voices more expertly directed than when John J. Walser and his choir sang them in the late '90's in Colonia Juarez with the old Estey organ giving support, and the entranced and proud audience pushing them on to excellence. It was an unforgettable performance. Nathan Clayson's was the full throated bass, supported by young John Walser's clear, dulcet tenor and rounded out by Mary Turley's rich contralto. The blended harmony of Sarah Clayson's lilting soprano was the finishing touch. The walls of the old meetinghouse were pushed back and heaven seemed near. The rousing finale with the whole chorus joining in and carrying the anthem to a triumphant end left nothing to be desired except to hear that song again.

Only conductor and choir members knew the grueling hours spent in rehearsals. Also only they realized to the full the thrill of achievement. Appreciation of the cultural value of such performances opened the eyes of all to the worth of John J. Walser in a young and struggling community.

Born in Switzerland of a music loving family, he early gained a thorough training in music fundamentals in Germany. These he had already turned to public advantage for the ward choir in Payson, Utah, and the Silver Band there.

In January 1890 he became a member of the Juarez ward, and leadership of the ward choir which Peter N. Skousen had organized in Old Town, was his first assignment. There were no books, no organ and few good singers. To offset this lack he had his own ability and ambition and a group of young men and women who loved to sing. With these and the full support of a community which traditionally knew the power of music to lift the spirit and who believed that the "song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and will be answered with blessings on your head" he began the climb to excellence.

Rehearsals were held punctiliously every Saturday night. He copied his own music, and with it prepared a concert that netted enough money to buy eight copies of The American Tune Book. These he placed in the hands of his best singers who in turn taught the parts, by rote, to singers near them many of whom could not read notes. Detecting discord, correcting and improving faulty tone quality, the hour and a half each week was used to best advantage. Soon songs were mastered with speed and ease, and more difficult numbers were learned. It was not long until concerts of high quality were presented to a grateful and appreciative public. Proceeds from these bought more music and the Estey organ and whetted appetites for greater excellence. The choir was the highlight at quarterly conferences and merited praise and commendations by visitors from stake and general Church authorities.

To church performances he added cantata and operatic productions, and through them spotlighted his best talent. In "Captain of the Pinafore" he himself played the title role and ran his ship's crew as efficiently as he did his choir. He was just himself on parade. A glamorous pair, Esther Coombs as Josephine and Frank Stowell her aspiring lover, won the hearts of the audience. Sarah Clayson in a tripping portrayal of Miss Buttercup was a breath from another world. Charles McClellan, as Dick Deadeye, croaking his warnings to all, brought sea casualties shiveringly close and cowered the audience.

In "Queen Esther" it was Esther Coombs in the title role, Ed McClellan in a pompous rendition of King Ahaseurus, the wife of Haman gorgeously and artistically interpreted by Mary Turley, and Adelbert Taylor plaintively but richly singing the part of Mordecai, the Jew. The Bible story was lifted from its pages and all hearts set to thumping first in misery then in triumph.

Recollections of these stars, along with the supporting casts that made them stand out, over the years has brought chills and thrills and laughs.

Excellence of his choir brought demands for Walser to begin band work and give young men and boys training with wind instruments. Elder Teasdale, ever forwarding cultural activities, offered to advance money to buy the instruments, and Walser, visioning at once the possibility of repeating Payson experience and duplicating some of his Silver Band triumphs, accepted this added responsibility. To his own E flat clarinet brought from Payson as a nucleus, he added three more clarinets, three cornets, a tuba and both snare and bass drums. In the hands of willing young men these instruments were soon doing phenomenal work.

He capitalized on every opportunity to present the band but insisted on a course of training that assured preparation. No occasion was so important but the band added prestige. No appearance too simple to warrant coming unprepared. The overall result was that patriotic celebrations were never complete without a sunrise serenade by the band and a parade with the band in lead. No special occasions with governors or important officials in attendance went over without the band to militarize the occasion and popularize the national anthem. Regular and special band concerts, periodically presented with the choir, were especially popular.

On one occasion when five zealous young missionaries left for distant fields at the same time, the band accompanied them to the train at Nuevo Casas Grandes and as the young men boarded the train, broke into strains of "Home, Sweet Home," continuing to play until the train, with the starry-eyed missionaries, waving goodbye, had disappeared around the bend. On the return trip to Colonia Juarez the band stopped by request and gave a concert in Old Casas Grandes.

With the band appearing on so many occasions, need arose for appropriate transportation—a band wagon. The end result was a wagon with an especially built rack to accommodate the players, a team of four well-matched, glamorous, white horses driven expertly by Dave Spilsbury. No one could resist taking time out to look admiringly at the colorful band wagon as it passed by with streaming pennants and prancing white steeds and players in smart uniforms.

All this time and effort freely expended on music for the community had its reward for the leader. On his fiftieth birthday he was surprised at home, taken by loving choir and band members to the schoolhouse where the townspeople had assembled to do him honor. Among the fine tributes paid him before the evening gaieties began was an envelope containing a small collection of cash.

Later when an accident at the Hurst sawmill on top of the mountain cost the life of his son Henry, it was his choir and band members who relayed the word to him, and provided transportation for him and Henry's wife to the scene of the accident. Finding that Henry was still alive in spite of his chest and leg lacerations, members of these same organizations acted as stretcher bearers to carry him to a conveyance at the foot of the mountain, six hours with a change of bearers every twenty minutes. A band member brought the doctor from Corralitos 25 miles away to amputate Henry's leg, and when he died, the band and choir raised money to pay doctor and burial expenses.

To accommodate the band and add prestige to its open air concerts the colorful bandstand which for years fronted the Park and faced Main Street and the Public Square was erected. Octangular in shape, conspicuously painted in red, white and green and with seats for the band flanking its banisters, it was a useful addition to the town's cultural facilities and did honor to the band.

Standards set by J. J. Walser are still the ideal in Colonia Juarez, and musical performances there today are considered above the average. When John J. Walser was released, after twelve years, band and choir work were merged with that of the Academy and Arthur J. Done was appointed leader.

"'The play's the thing,'" quoted Miles P. Romney as he pounded the last nail into the top floor of the new T-addition to the schoolhouse and sat back to share with his sons and other helpers the vision of play-production on it. "There's our stage, and right here on this little stage we can bring the whole world to us and feed a play-hungry people. What scenery we need can be made in the piece of a minute. With this overhead framework wings can easily be fitted for entrances and exits. Cover them with manta, paint an exterior on one side and an interior on the other, hang ruffled strips of blue silesia for a ceiling, make a couple of backdrops to fit in with either inside or outside scenes, and presto! we have stage properties lending themselves to quick changes that will not call for a great stretch of the imagination."

As he talked he was seeing again the packed houses in St. George that had gathered to see the plays he directed. He was feeling the thrills of interpreting title roles that had gained him public acclaim there. He was hearing again the applause of appreciative fans. He felt the urge to repeat on this stage. Already he was choosing his cast for "Black-eyed Susan" and predicting success.

The curtain soon to rise would project an eager audience into scenes which would delight, thrill or distress. The hall was packed to capacity by those who had looked forward to this presentation and carefully hoarded dimes and nickles to pay for admission. Adults were on the front seats and children on the elevated back ones all eager for the kerosene lamps to be extinguished.

As Romney led them through the heavy plot, they suffered with the heroine, chilled with the threats of the villain, and gloried in the achievements of the hero, as the story slowly evolved from the maze of conflicts and problems. When the curtain finally fell and suspense had changed to relief, when the heroine had collapsed in the safe embrace of the lover and all were sure "they would live happy ever after," the sigh of satisfaction was more eloquent than applause. The reluctant return to reality was proof that Romney's first triumph was sure. The grueling training inflicted on the cast had paid off with a successful drama. In the process rough mannerisms had been polished off, poise and dignity had been acquired and promising talent had been uncovered.

Following "Black-eyed Susan" came "Still Waters Run Deep," "Charcoal Burner," "East Lynn" and others. With every play rigidly censored to make sure its theme squared with his moral and ethical teachings, that its characters were true to life and reacted rationally to situations presented, and with questionable scenes featuring debauchery and immorality carefully cut, or those which might give false impressions to children, banned, he set high standards. Young people working with him impressed by his habits of excellence, strove to acquire his love of good literature, and became as diligent as he in promoting his ideals. Furthermore, they acquired much of his skill.

The climax of years of star productions was "Othello." Interpreting the swarthy Moor, he eclipsed all his previous character portrayals. Then recognizing the trend in histrionics away from his old theatrical school he bowed away from the glamor of footlights and fancies and left the field to the younger talent. His art suffered no decline in the acting of Charles E. McClellan. Younger and more adaptable to the new trends he presented plays through the years that were impressive. He too left his stamp on the recreational life of Colonia Juarez.

Miles P. Romney's love of the dramatic was proverbial and and displayed in other fields than before the footlights. He was ever the actor. As he lead the parade that marked every celebration, with plumes waving and sword flashing, it was hard to say whether his dramatic gestures set the tone of the occasion, or the occasion was created to give fitting opportunity for his part. His eloquence in a Sabbath meeting, his patriotic oratory on national holidays took full advantage of every opportunity to sway his audience by voice modulations and gestures. Reading or reciting to his family he implanted his love of the classics, and instilled reverence for the spoken word. His reward is a posterity of public speakers, dramatic coaches, speech directors, play readers ranging in abilities from fair to professional. Hardly a descendant but shows by his fluency, his oratorical trends and love for pure undefiled speech this family trait which enhanced dramatic art in the early days of Colonia Juarez. [^1]

It was Friday night, the regular dance night. Both hall and the stage had been swept and dusted, and the long benches pushed tight against the wall or shoved into the side rooms. Floors had been candled, the whittler spreading the shavings evenly over the pine boards and carefully tamping each big piece down for a sleek finish. Lamps trimmed with tin reflectors sat on the high wall brackets and swung from the ceiling on strong wires; and light gleaming from them chased shadows from the far corners of both rooms.

Dancers arrived in groups, those "going steady" lingering longest at the doors before separating to join the men and boys along the south wall or the women and girls seated on the north side. In exchange for fifty cents each gentleman was given a number. Lacking the centavos one could settle with the ticket collector by an exchange of commodities, a post dropped at his place during the day, an hour or so of help with extra work or even a promise to help out in a pinch always being acceptable and the equivalent in price to an evening of fun. Wives and girls settled down with neighbors sitting alongside of them to enjoy themselves, the mothers looking forward as eagerly to watch from the sidelines as the girls to the dances in store for them. For both ages it was the social event of the week, and they gave themselves to the mood of enjoyment.

Musicians took their places on the stand, P. N. Skousen uncasing his violin and strumming it lightly as it nuzzled under his chin and P. C. Wood trying out his flute, its dulcet tones tootling out as his lips caressed its mouthpiece.

"Please give us your attention," rapped "Uncle Erney" the dance manager stepping to the middle of the floor, "and Brother Haws will offer the opening prayer." "Amen" was the signal for the evening's fun to begin.

Gentlemen holding numbers from one to twenty-four took partners for a quadrille, four sets in the hall and two more sets on the stage.

The caller took his place strategically in the center and his voice carried to the remotest parts of the hall. With it he controlled the spontaneity of group fun and set the tempo for the decorum of the dance.

"Balance all," as the music strummed out he called. "Bow to your partners," "Allemande left," "Sashay out and swing on the corner," and "promenade all," each change following consecutively in split second timing. Then back and forth with "Ladies change," "Right and left four," "do-ce-do," "ballonet," or "grand cutta shaw," round and round in "circle all," "Grand right and left," and the promenade. They fell as easily into one pattern as that of another, whether it be "Promenade a star," "First couple round the outside," or "Swing those ladies to the center of the set while the gents run round." Not a moment's hesitation to break the rhythm, never a miscue between caller and musician to get them off balance, no mixing of the pattern of one call with that of another, nothing to break the harmony of eight sets dancing like one. Skirts swished out as twinkling feet carried ladies over and across or round and round. Faces steamed as gentlemen swung them about, patting out the rhythm with their feet and pivoting sedately as they swung. The throb of the organ, giving body to the tremulous flute and the singing violin, the thud of dancing feet accenting every beat, the clarion voice of the caller blended with gay laughter and shy glances as, conversation ruled out, the dance continued till "Promenade all and you know where" ended the set and ladies, flushed and radiant, were whisked to seats. Again the floor filled with the gentlemen holding the remaining numbers and their partners. Thus the dance continued until midnight when a closing prayer was offered and the dancers dispersed, perspiring but exhilarated, to await the return of "dance night" again.

Such were the dances held in Colonia Juarez during the gay nineties. The dances were gay and everyone participated, whole-heartedly supporting them as a favorite means of social expression and relief from discouraging predicaments. The same place was used for dancing as for worshiping. The same was true of dances held on the dirt floor of the stockade house in Old Town with a scant dozen couples participating, the same carefree jubilant spirit as that enjoyed later on good pine board floors and in a better building, and with half a hundred couples taking part. If there was distinction it lay in the fact that from 1887 to 1917 no form of dance other than square was permitted. For thirty years the Juarez ward and stake excluded the waltz and other round dancing and religiously kept to the square dance. [^2]

To build favorable reaction to the public dance, every possibility of the quadrille was developed. Callers were challenged to learn and teach new changes from call books provided, and dancers were stimulated to learn and take pride in the execution of them. The more devious and intricate the changes, the greater the challenge to master them. Scotch reels, Virginia reels, French Four and Cotillions were introduced for variety and Schottisches and Polkas were generously allowed. It was soon a matter of pride not only to be able to coordinate calls with swift execution but to anticipate the pattern of the set as soon as the first call had been made. It was a matter of embarrassment not to understand a call or be awkward and clumsy in carrying it out. Grace of action and lightness of foot were striven for. The lady who could take the promenade with the smoothest glide and the "gent" who could sustain the most graceful pivot as he swung the ladies round were the admiration of all. The effect of perfect coordination between dancers and caller and of every set moving in accord with every other set was gratifying to the dancers, fascinating to the onlookers, and a spectacle that won loud acclaim from distinguished visitors and presiding authorities.

Every one attended the dances from the age of fourteen up, presiding authorities, bishopric, and auxiliary leaders often being among the first to arrive. From the head of the hall they were an interested audience for the dancers, gave prestige to the occasion, acted as a check on undue hilarity or rowdyism, and often took part in the dance. Constituting the couples in the "head set," or leading the Grand March they set examples of dignity and grace.

Parents, those who danced and those who didn't, sat on the sidelines, often taking the baby and younger children so that none need stay at home, visited with friends, speculated on trends noted among the young folks, vicariously enjoyed the dancing, and got in on the short impromptu programs that often were given. These welcome intermissions gave local talent a chance to provide other forms of entertainment and the dancers a chance to cool off and relax. The program consisted of songs, clever readings, and stump speeches featuring "Uncle Erney" Taylor with "My Nose Stuck Out a Feet," "Aunt" Hannah Croff with her Scotch and English ballads, one of the Romney boys or the new school teacher from the "North" as stump speaker or "elocutionary" artist. Later Frank Stowell was often pushed in to sing one of the latest songs. "On the Banks of the Wabash," "In the Shadow of the Pines," "The Baggage Coach Ahead," becoming popular as soon as his rich tenor voice had interpreted them. In the farewell dance previous to Frank's leaving for a mission to Ireland, the audience unexpectedly called for a song from him, and he sang "I Am a Mormon Boy" with intense feeling. After returning his lovely Irish songs were a never ending delight. With "I'll Take You Home Again, Kathleen," "Three Leaves of Shamrock," and "Kathleen Mavourneen" he stimulated an interest in Irish folklore and culture.

Order in the dance hinged on the close cooperation of musicians, caller, and dance manager. Musicians, knowing the fine distinction between animated dignity and reckless abandon, played tunes that put "ginger in the heels" but still kept the merriment within the bounds of propriety. The caller with voice vibrant and penetrating, yet pleasingly modulated, kept interest centered in dance procedures, gave careful attention to the sequence of his variety of calls, and by both his personality and voice kept disturbance under control and the combined sets performing in unison. Dance calling was recognized as a talent. Disorders were handled by the dance manager. He kept order between sets, regulated behavior outside the building, and kept an eagle eye on the dancers in the set. Dancing out of turn, undue stamping, excessive swinging, whistling, or anything bordering on rowdyism was discouraged. While the smell of liquor or a whiff of tobacco smoke was profanation and sent the manager in quick search of its source. Eligibility of dancers was closely censored, ward infractions being punished by suspension of dance privileges. No person, having for any reason lost his standing in the ward, need apply for admission into the dance. Anyone admitted to dance privileges was a well recommended ward member. "Outsiders" were admitted only by invitation and after being well recommended.

E. L. Taylor, "Uncle Erney" to all, held the position of dance manager through the years, inducing a wholesome respect for rules and regulations he set up as peace officer in the town. No rowdy ever got far with either impulsive or premeditated disturbances before Uncle Erney was on his trail. No one having been in his custody but remembered it keenly. Anyone so bold as to "ring on," or dance out of turn rarely repeated it. If a tap on the shoulder, or his very special wink failed to induce obedience, a determined beckon from Uncle Erney's crooked arm summoned the offender off the floor, where he stayed until proper amends were made. This police aspect of dance management robbed the job of much of its pleasure, both for Uncle Erney and his successors. Had this not been offset by the gratifying aspect that public approval sustained him in his efforts to keep order, supported him in outlining the upright course, and stood by him by frowning down on what "just wasn't done," it would have been intolerable. As it was, the dance became a strong factor in social control. The small minority who resented restrictions, who persisted in private parties, who sought to gain recognition by independent reactions to regulations, or who used unfavorable methods of retaliation for real or fancied wrongs, found themselves at once outside the pale of public approval. The most formidable opponent was the majority who stood foursquare against nonconformity, interpreting it as an attack on standards they had set for themselves, and resenting it as a tendency to tear down the select society they were attempting to build. This united front, coupled with vigilance of dance management, was a power which few could withstand. Many unwritten rules grew out of this desire to conform.

Pranksters and practical jokers popped up regardless of how well regulated the society happened to be. One Christmas Eve a group of good Sunday School boys, frustrated in their insistence for a dance or something special for the festive occasion, gathered to have some fun on their own, to do something startling for a change. The fun started innocently. But by the time Stevens' and MacDonald's cows had exchanged corrals, the spirit of mischief was awake, and entering Ed Eyring's yard, they pounced on his new wagon and quickly dismembered it, strewing box and parts of running gear into unlikely places on the lot. That done, the sight of Peterson's woodpile out in the street prompted the next move. "It's already frightened too many horses," they rationalized, as they carried it piece by piece and built it into a worm fence completely blocking main street. Next they attacked a nearby pile of lumber and built every stick of it into a three-cornered pen in the middle of the street. "No use building a corral though," they decided before it was knee high, "unless there's something in it." So they stealthily removed E. L. Taylor's Percheron stallion from his stable, jumped him into the pen, and continued their work until the walls were too high for the horse to see over. From there they moved off up the street, committing minor depredations as they went until put to flight by Ben L. Croff and a menacing gun. Pledging themselves to secrecy they then separated and went home and to bed.

On Christmas morning the bishopric was outraged that any one should dare to so desecrate the day. Miles P. Romney at once suspected the usual town hoodlums and promised punishment. With no evidence of their guilt he had them arrested and hauled off to the basement of the schoolhouse and there demanded a confession. When it didn't come promptly, he settled down to an all day grueling task of forcing it from them. The more persistent the questioning, the more defiant became the boys, and louder their protests. Romney was determined that their defiant exterior should be punctured and they be chastened. Midafternoon found him still bombarding the boys without success.

It was Dennison E. Harris, school principal much concerned with the out-of-school conduct of his boys, who with casual tact and understanding got one of the guilty boys to confess and induce all the others to do likewise. Midafternoon the whole group, headed by Harris, walked into the basement of the schoolhouse, where the perspiring but still determined bishopric were belaboring the wrong boys in a vain attempt to get a confession.

What a change the few quiet words of the school principal made in the room. The bishopric subsided in disbelief, the suspects brightened with relief, and in a twinkling they were trooping from the room whooping hilariously, caring for nothing but release from suspicion. Romney exploded as he watched the noisy exit with indignation, not only because he had been on the wrong track all day, but that the group of good boys should be guilty of such a misdemeanor. He was determined to punish them but Harris intervened with determination. In the end the boys volunteered to replace everything and make apology to those unjustly accused, and with that the case would be considered closed. With this agreed to Harris walked out with his students.

Footnotes

As a lover he was irresistible. He could woo with his voice, his posture, his gestures, and his facial expression. When his vibrant voice lent passion to his eloquent appeal, no heroine could resist him. The more cruelly she was involved by the villain the more firmly conflicting circumstances held her, the more deeply and ardently he pressed his suit. When he had manfully overcome all obstacles and the heroine collapsed in his arms, the audience collapsed too. They became so much a part of the action, that it seemed a personal achievement.

Miles played lover parts when he was a young man, and continued to interpret those roles when he was older. As late as the 1920's and '30's, when he was a grandfather, he could still flutter the hearts of the young and amorous. Again as in the days of his father, trends in play production were leading from deep tragedy and soul stirring situations to heart warming comedy. To Miles this was retrogression, a distinctly downward trend.

But he loved to play so well, and his ability was in such demand in the rehabilitation days of Colonia Juarez, that he was persuaded to accept parts in comedy, in which he did surprisingly well. No actor could have been accorded more hearty applause than his delightful interpretations of humorous situations brought, and in spite of his advancing years he played the leading role again and again, and relived a popularity he thought was past.

But he was dissatisfied. He felt he was being untrue to real art, that to please a fickle audience he was forsaking himself. He decided to "let the rising generation present the trash they call plays nowadays." Nothing could persuade him to change his mind, although he was urged time and again to assist in ward dramatics. Finally he consented if the play could be the Charcoal Burner. He wanted to act once more in a real play to show the young people of Colonia Juarez the real thing. This would be his last gesture into dramatics.

"Charcoal Burner?" His young solicitors had never heard of Charcoal Burner. But they'd try to find it. At last it was found and immediately cast and rehearsals began. Miles awoke with the power of a sleeping lion rested and recuperated. Marshaling all his father's rehearsal tactics he attempted to impress the cast with the profundity and grandeur of the play. He put all of his father's stirring interpretations and deep intonations into his part and worked himself up to great emotional intensity. He waited for an echo of his great emotions in the rest of the cast. But all they did was ask, "Why all the dramatics?"

He hoped the real performance might do what rehearsals had failed to do. When it was finally presented, the audience, whetted and eager, sat quietly through the first short scenes, listening patiently as the long speeches outlined the situation. There was only mild interest in the awful Charcoal Burner who had mur-r-der-red the hero's father. All his imprecations, all the malediction he called down upon the villain's head, which of old would have provoked gasps and scalp-prickling forebodings, created only faint smiles. The sideshows, introduced for no other purpose than to break the monotony of the long villain-hunt, exploded the audience with laughter. This, to say the least, was disconcerting to Miles. To see silly buffoonery steal the show was all but a mortal wound. Still he pressed dramatically on, sure that a soulful rendition of his part would wake a responsive chord somewhere in the audience, or that something would transpire to prove that the love of real art was not dead.

When the curtain rose on the scene of scenes and the heavy villain was for the first time disclosed, busy and absorbed in his burning task, in the heart of the forest, mild interest quickened to curiosity. The unsuspecting man was such an easy prey to the avenger who could steal upon him unawares and in a surprise attack carry out the threats with which previous scenes had been filled. When the bushes parted in the rear, and Miles crept in and stood gloating with pistol in hand, waiting only for the precise time to shoot and as he muttered that at la-a-st he'd be a-veng-ed, a-hal he was rewarded by symptoms of the correct response. Playing on this he took plenty of time to cock the pistol, knowing that when the bullet exploded and the Charcoal Burner, with upflung arms, fell dead at his feet the audience would be with him. He put all he had into the pulling of that trigger. It clicked—but that was all. No discharge rang out, no victim fell with upflung arms, and Miles stood somewhat shaken while the audience tittered. But, as an old hand at the game, he disdained the disheartening response, and making the accident appear to be but an unexpected turn of events, he swung the pistol and took a second deliberate aim. Again it failed to explode. Then he really was shaken and the audience was mercilessly chuckling. With a burning glance he started to aim a third time, and then as if he had intended to do so from the first, he dramatically seized the gun by the barrel and crouched for a blow that would bash in the villain's head.

Meanwhile the poor Charcoal Burner, waiting for the cue to fall, didn't know what to do. He couldn't die until he was killed, nor could he go on raking coal indefinitely and spoil the climax of the play. Finally in desperation he decided he'd better fall, pretending that the click of the gun carried a soundless bullet that got him anyway. So with outflung arms he crumpled but a second ahead of the blow that was to have felled him.

Standing there with upraised hand and nothing to strike, and the audience in gales of laughter, Miles resolved to do the only thing left to do, walk majestically off the stage.

But the waltz was a favorite dance and when it was mentioned as the evil from which they were to be safeguarded, surprise spoke from their eyes and they stiffened in resistance. This he had expected and was prepared daringly to overcome it. Calling a gangly young man to the front he asked them to watch while he demonstrated. A few awkward whirls with the young man clasped tightly in his arms, a few waddles and twists as he pumphandled and shoved him about seemed to induce the favorable reaction he sought. In a swift flank attack he launched into praises of the square dance, so devoid of bodily contact, so free from passion-stirring movements, so capable of providing the same exhilaration. The square dance satisfied the same love of rhythmic motion and furnished the same opportunity for bodily grace. With a dance program built around it, they could be distinct and could raise ballroom dancing to such a high level that the eyes of the Church would be drawn to them. Wouldn't they like to try?

Some of them would, some of them wouldn't, but all wondered why exclude the waltz. For all objections he had answers. For every sign of resistance he had a weapon, and with every favorable response he took fresh courage. As resistance lowered and objections were gradually beaten down, he artfully built up his case until the scales finally tipped definitely in his favor. When one young man volunteered to support a program that excluded the waltz IF it would guarantee the setting of higher standards, the battle was won. Others followed the lead, and when the final vote was taken there were but two dissenting votes.

The rest of the campaign was comparatively easy. When the young ladies were informed of the action of the young men they also voted favorably. A persuasive voice raised first in Relief Society and later in priesthood meeting gained an easy victory over the parents, and left him only the combined consent of both parents and young people in a public meeting. For this meeting he also made careful preparations.

He was at the meeting place early and took careful count of the congregation as they filed. When the house was full, his spirits rose, for under the power of his voice and subject to his art in persuasion, he knew they were like strings to a violin, and needed but to be played upon.

When explanations had been made, he judiciously encouraged objections or comments that careful second thoughts might have induced. He waited patiently as one by one they responded, timidly at first but more boldly as one after another urged caution in abolishing a form of recreation so universally loved. Were they ready to assume such a responsibility? To Romney the only possible answer was yes. He assured them they would live to see the day when their children would thank them. Matching puritanic ideals against objections, one by one he beat them down. Little by little he swung the sentiment in his favor. When the last resistance had subsided, his voice rang out, "Are you ready for the vote?" When tense silence answered him, his big voice boomed, "All in favor of abolishing the waltz from our social functions make it manifest by the sign of the uplifted hand." Every arm was raised to the square, with eyes looking from resolute faces. Victory was complete and sure. With a final injunction to hold fast to the pact and stand as one in its enforcement, the meeting adjourned.

Thus the graceful swinging waltz was lost to Colonia Juarez, and for it were instituted the balance, the promenade and the circle of the quadrille. Thus the just-we-two intimacy of the round dance was supplanted by the family circle of the quadrille.

For forty years the pact held. Not one of those who voted for the change, nor any who followed after, but stood squarely for its enforcement. Dance managers, recreational directors, auxiliary heads, priesthood authorities and parents permitted no deviation, regardless of where their sympathies lay. From 1887 to 1917 the nearest thing to round dancing permitted were the Berlin Polka, the Varsouvienne, the Schottische, the Manitoe, the Wentworth, and the two-step and they were all safely danced with clasped hands discretely free from bodily contact. The unconverted minority who held private parties and indulged in illicit waltzing were reprimanded, and punished by exclusion from public dances.

---
Notas:
[^1] INDIAN JITTERS Lupa, great-granddaughter of Geronimo, still lives in Punto Pinal, a little valley between Garcia and Hop Valley.
[^2] THE THOMPSON TRAGEDY If only women were with Indian Juan when he was killed, and only women were found and killed in the camp when it was surrounded and wiped out by the Harris cowboys, he must have been the only brave in the Indian band.
