Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

IX

O STOP AND TELL ME, RED MAN

WHEN A. F. MACDONALD made his initial contact with Dr. Samaniego in San Jose for the purpose of gaining legal advice about colonization, he became aware of a dominant fear of Indians that gripped the Mexicans. Samaniego warned Mac-Donald at once that the Apache, wily, elusive, and cruel would prove a dangerous deterrent to the settlement of a defenseless people. He knew, for he himself had suffered at the hand of the Apaches. They had murdered his father, had robbed and killed his cousin in Sonora, and had killed both his mother and grandmother in New Mexico. But MacDonald recalled that settlement in the West had gone on regardless of the menace of Indian hostilities. Added to the spirit of adventure that opening up new lands presented was the mission of peace indoctrinated into Latter-day Saints and the feed-rather-than-fight policy Brigham Young had advocated. MacDonald explained this policy to Doctor Samaniego telling at the same time of the Book of Mormon and the missionary service of the Church. With moist eyes Samaniego confessed that deep in his heart was a kindly interest in the welfare of the Indians and a genuine desire on his part to help them. His most trusted servant was an Indian girl he had bought from a rancher. To her he had entrusted the keys of his house, and she was faithfully serving him. "Who knows," he continued feelingly, "but that I alone of my family was spared by a wise providence to help establish a strong colony of your people to tame this wild people, help them, and teach them of the forefathers your Book of Mormon tells about?" As a result the Indian topic that threatened to be a hindrance to peaceable settlement assumed real missionary potentialities, and a chance acquaintance was cemented into a lasting friendship.

But as MacDonald proceeded on his land-purchasing mission, he found the fears the doctor had mentioned were well-founded. Everywhere the mere mention of Indians was enough to spread panic. Twice Mexican scouts piloting him through mountain country to favorable land prospects deserted, refusing to go where Indians might be found.

Later, when camps were established along the river, it was still easy for reports of Indian depredations to become exaggerated. Many a night strict watch was kept to guard against surprises and protect animals. Rumors trickling in constantly kept the Indian danger a live issue. But for the policy by Church leaders and their hope to assist in spreading peace and helpfulness, they might have turned back.

As years passed with no serious trouble, fears subsided. Geronimo had been arrested and deported, and his lawless band imprisoned or scattered, and the terror he had injected into Arizona and New Mexico settlements in the early '80's became a thing of the past. Indians and Indian scares dropped into the background. A subconscious dread, however, showed the ease with which Indians could be saddled with the reason for every danger that threatened. Two incidents are typical:

In the spring of '85 seventeen year-old Ed McClellan, waiting in Pleasanton, New Mexico, for a chance to join his father in La Ascension, pooled his horse with that of Jacob Hamblin and rigged up an outfit to carry them both there. Indian scares were rampant in their neighborhood, but the cautions and predictions hurled at him as they left fell on deaf ears, for armored by the company of the famous Indian mediator, Ed felt safe to go anywhere among the Indians. Following Geronimo's trail which then extended from Arizona into Mexico, even viewing signs of his latest depredations and listening to tales of his cruelty and cunningness gave no concern, for Uncle Jacob was with him, and that was protection enough.

They made their way unmolested through Silver City and Deming until they reached the Spear. While waiting there for guards to escort them to La Ascension, they turned their horses to graze and prepared to eat their own lunch.

Ed sat on the spring seat of the wagon and Hamblin rested in the bottom of the bed. All at once Ed saw a string of horsemen, twenty or thirty strong, filing straight toward them. "Indians!" he thought right off, for who else would travel single file and ride Indian ponies?

They all sat hunched on their horses with blankets wrapped about them for protection from the cold wind. And as they came closer he recognized Indian blankets.

"Uncle Jacob," he called. "These men look like Indians to me," and getting no response he called again. "They are Indians, Uncle. What are we going to do?"

"Nothing," replied Hamblin going on with his lunch.

"But what will you do when they get here?" Ed asked.

"O, give them something to eat," he answered continuing to munch.

But Ed slipped from the spring seat and keeping the wagon between him and the approaching horsemen, inched his way to the river bank. There behind clumps of grass on its steep sides he prepared to defend himself. The wind blew the blanket from his target—the leader, and he recognized the uniforms of the Mexican guards they were waiting for.

Ed's hasty face-saving pretense that he was just rabbit hunting didn't save him from one of the few hearty laughs ever heard from Jacob Hamblin.

On another occasion in Old Town women at mealtime from their new stockades saw a file of Apaches round the point of Black Hill, and they knew for a moment how it feels to face immediate massacre. While some flashed signals to the men working in the fields, and others sought hideouts, Aunt Martha Ann Sevey serenely ate a plate of hot beans. "If I'm going to be killed," she said between bites, "I may as well die happy." Even so, she hurried through with the last bites and hid with the rest. They all decided to live happily when the invading Apaches proved to be soldiers from Casas Grandes giving a friendly call as they passed through.

In the fall of 1892 real fears were again aroused. The Apache Kid had turned renegade in Arizona, had resisted arrest, killed pursuing officers, and had spread terror both among the Indians and the whites as he made his escape and took refuge in the mountains of Chihuahua. Here he was joined by Geronimo remnants.

Confirmation of rumors that he was operating in the Colonia Juarez vicinity was certain: Indians were seen in the hills to the east, horses were stolen, ranches raided, and general panic among the natives all proved the proximity of Indians. But no one suspected just how close they were, not even Hans A. Thompson, who had leased the Pratt's Ranch and moved his family there. It was a picturesque location, and an ideal place to dairy and farm, not far from headquarters of the Cave Valley branch. The land, already broken and fenced by Helaman Pratt, had yielded fine crops the first year and from herds of range stock Thompson filled his shanty shelves with mellow cheese. He decided it was a good place to make a good living for his family which then consisted of his wife, a six-year-old granddaughter, Annie, and two sons, fourteen-year-old Elmer and seventeen-year-old Hyrum.

Sunday, September 28, was spent in the usual manner and in the evening Mr. Thompson drove to Pacheco to work the following day, leaving the mother and three children to carry on. Monday morning Elmer and Hyrum left for the field, taking along in a bucket, feed for the pig. Annie went along to bring the bucket back. Indians, entering the valley from the north, were upon them before their presence was suspected. Annie seeing them first screamed. This alarmed the Indians and they opened fire. At the first volley both boys fell.

Hyrum gasped as he writhed in the weeds, "Our pistol is in the saddle pocket hanging in the stable." But as Hyrum moved to get it, the Indians shot him dead. Elmer inched slowly into the chicken coop from where he watched the rest of the gruesome tragedy. He saw Annie run into the house, evidently to tell her grandmother, and he saw an Indian shoot his mother as she and Annie came out together. He saw her fall grabbing little Annie as she did so to shield her from the attackers. And as she lay there in the yard, he saw an Indian crush her head with a rock. Annie fought the Indian who tried to take her, flailing him with her sunbonnet. Since he preferred loot her feeble blows drove him off and he entered the house behind his companions. Elmer attracted Annie's attention and called her to him. No sooner was she safely in his arms than the Indians came out again with their arms full of cheese. Not finding the little girl, they looked for the boys where they had fallen in the weeds. Seeing only one victim, they fled, five bucks, one squaw and a papoose.

A grandmother lying in her blood in the yard, one uncle dead in the weeds, and the other bleeding dangerously from a gaping chest wound, was a pitiful plight for a six-year-old child. But young and frightened as she was, she still sensed that they must get away and notify the other ranchers. The Indians might return, "And, oh, we must tell grandpa," she sobbed.

"Yes," moaned Elmer, "help me to my feet. Maybe we can make it to Williams Ranch."

Half crawling, half walking, and using the little girl as support, Elmer dragged himself along the trail leading to the neighboring ranch. It was but a mile and a half distant, but weak from loss of blood, his eyes swam, his head whirled, and again and again he had to stop and rest.

"You'll have to leave me here," he finally panted, "I'll be all right. Take the dog with you, and hurry on. And tell them—to hurry," he gasped as he crawled off the path to a tree.

Elmer's tenseness relaxed as he heard the sound of horses' feet, and saw Sully Richardson from Thatcher's Ranch ride up, stop, listen to Annie's story, and whirl and ride away as fast as his horse would carry him. Everything then went dark.

Annie stumbled after the racing horseman till she came to the ranch and met John Williams coming to meet her. He encouraged her to hurry to the protection of his mother's care while he hastened on to give first aid to Elmer. When Annie reached the ranch she sobbed out the whole pitiful story.

Runners had already gone to notify Brother Heaton, presiding elder at Cave Valley branch, and a light wagon was hitched ready to leave for the scene of the tragedy. By the time the wagon found Elmer, John had revived him with water carried in his hat from the spring and he was conscious enough to tell them where to look for the bodies. They left him there and drove on. John staunched the bleeding and waited until late afternoon for the wagon to return.

This tragedy scared the ranchers in Strawberry, Hop Valley, and along the Piedras Verde River into moving their families to town until winter was over and they were sure the perpetrators of the crime had definitely left. But as spring approached and no tidings of the renegades reached them, fear passed, and they were soon going to and from settlements and ranches freely as before.

The Apache Kid, who became the most dreaded of Indian renegades, was not always an outlaw. Christened Shi-Be-Nan-Ted, shortened to "Kid" by Americans for whom he worked, he spent a normal boyhood on the reservation near Globe, Arizona. From his home wickiup he took work of one form and another on American cattle ranches nearby, and there learned American ways. He was apt, ambitious, agreeable, and courteous. He went to school a little on the reservation and learned to speak English. When he was old enough, still in his teens, he was chosen by Chief Government Scout, Al Sieber, to be a member of his company. Proving his worthiness he worked up until he became top sergeant in the agency of Scouts. He was with Sieber during many of his famous encounters even going into Mexico after Geronimo and other Apaches.

In a drunken brawl at an Indian dance one night on the reservation his father was killed by an Indian called "Old Rip." According to Apache code it was the duty of Kid, the oldest son, to avenge his death. Sieber warned the Kid not to take the law into his own hands but when Sieber was absent on business at the San Carlos reservation and the Kid was in charge he took five men, went to Rip's camp and shot him. He then took refuge in his own camp and remained until Sieber sent for him. Answering the summons, the Kid and the five other bucks allowed themselves to be disarmed. But before they could be jailed they incited resistance, seizing guns from the guards as they did so. In the interchange of gunfire one Indian was killed, Sieber was wounded, and the Kid got away. He was now on the warpath and before government troops could arrest him again he had committed other murders. When he was finally run down and stood trial, the crimes of mutiny, desertion, and murder were all lumped against him and drew a long term prison sentence in a federal penitentiary. But after serving only a few months he and his fellow renegades were pardoned by President Cleveland.

Sieber, who had suffered most at his hands, was not satisfied. He feared the Kid and insisted he be tried in a civil court. The result was a sentence for life in the federal penitentiary at Yuma. Enroute, the Kid and other Apache prisoners assaulted the guards, wrested their guns from them, killed Sheriff Reynolds and his deputy Holmes, and the driver, mounted the stage horses and escaped into Mexico. Here he was joined by other Indian outlaws, and for five years defied arrest while the greatest manhunt in the history of the West took place. A $5000 reward for his capture was posted, and U.S. cavalry, posses, and Apache scouts were put on his trail. Though they trailed him close, engaged in some first hand encounters and many running fights, they never captured him. He seemed to bear a charmed life and continued to kill, raid reservations, steal horses and squaws, ambush and kill scouts, cowmen and cowboys, and shoot ranchers always making his getaway with uncanny timing.

Eight years passed, and the tragedy at Pratt's Ranch was almost forgotten. Mountain settlements were established and farms and orchards were flourishing. People traveled back and forth without fear. Cattlemen ran their herds through the hills and cowboys tended them without any thought of danger. Only occasional irregularities caused concern as a camp was robbed, a horse stolen, a beef killed, or a corn or potato patch raided by thieves who disappeared mysteriously. Then stories by prospectors, who came out of the mountains minus camp equipment and supplies trickled in and some reports also of prospectors who went into the mountains alone never to return. While one who did reach Chuichupa in an exhausted state told excitedly of an attack by Indians who killed his partner and all but got him. But it was impossible to determine whether or not the perpetrators were Indians or other outlaws.

In 1900 Martin Harris and Thomas Allen who had rented the Williams Ranch, moved their families there and raised good crops. At the end of the season the corn was shocked, and some of the potatoes were dug and piled in the field. On Sunday, November 11, when the two families returned from attending church services in Pacheco, they found their ranch had been robbed. Corn from twelve shocks had been husked, most of the piled potatoes had been taken, and clothes and a blanket from the line had been stolen. Tracks showed the thieves had entered their fields from the west, where they had cut the wires, loaded their plunder onto horses, and disappeared in the same direction.

Supposing the culprits to be Mexicans from the Dos Cabezas Mines they decided to follow and overtake the thieves if possible. Arming themselves with a shotgun and rifle they left early the next morning and followed-the trail for several miles. The trail turned north and dropped into a deep canyon. Instead of following it up a steep ridge on the other side to the top of a high mountain peak, they kept to the creek, following it to a side canyon. From this they climbed to the top of the peak from the opposite side. As they rounded the peak from the east they suddenly came in plain sight of an Indian camp. But since the Indians were fearing pursuit from the other direction their attention was centered on the trail behind them and this allowed the two men to scuttle to cover behind two large rocks from where they watched the Indians as they prepared to break camp. The white men didn't know what to do. They couldn't ascertain the correct number of Indians in the party. They weren't prepared to engage in a fight with them, nor did they want one. Neither could move without attracting attention. Had they known the thieves were Indians they never would have followed them. Their only hope of avoiding a conflict was that the Indians in their departure would take the westerly trail and by so doing by-pass them. They kept hidden determined to defend themselves as best they could if necessary.

The Indians loaded their guns on their saddles, mounted and headed straight toward Harris and Allen. With guns cocked and leveled, the men waited their approach. First to come in sight was a woman, but immediately behind her was a man, followed by two men riding one horse. The woman saw Harris and Allen and spoke to the Indian behind her who at once reached for his gun. But before he could draw it from the scabbard, both white men fired. Without a tremor or change of countenance the big buck looked them squarely in the face, continuing to work on his gun which had caught, until life went out and he pitched forward onto the ground. The woman, shouting alarm, dashed back over the brow of the hill, followed by the two men on one horse. As she did so, another Indian came in sight. Both men fired; then backing off to the north they clambered back to the Williams Ranch to report without stopping to examine the dead.

When they reached Pacheco they found President A. W. Ivins, Apostle A. O. Woodruff, and Helaman Pratt there ready to hold a meeting. These brethren returned with them to the scene of the killing. The bodies of two Indians were lying on the ground just as they had fallen. Between them was a bow of elegant workmanship and a quiver of about forty arrows. Both Indians were dressed in tanned buckskin, and one was a woman. Her moccasin-leggings extended to her hips. The man wore a buckskin skull cap tied on with a chin strap and tufts of eagle feathers attached to each side. Under his tight fitting shirt was strapped a pair of French field glasses. Belt, knife case, pouches, and moccasins and other accoutrements were Indian made and of excellent workmanship.

As they buried the bodies, speculation was rife as to whether or not this was the Apache Kid, and if this was the party that had killed the Thompson family eight years before. President Ivins, and others did identify him as the Apache Kid. The Cluff brothers in Garcia, claimed to have known the Kid when he was in school on the Gila reservation and remembered an identifying birthmark. All obtainable evidence indicated that they were burying the famous outlaw. President Ivins was so sure of it that he applied for the reward offered by the U.S. government for his capture but because so much time had elapsed since the offer he failed to collect.

The Temoche War, a pretentious name for a mere brush with Temoche Indians passing through the country, was an interlude with a wide range of interpretations. To some it involved danger of a raid on the store and other business houses and a possible massacre of innocent people, requiring martial law and guns in the hands of all valiant defenders. To the more realistic it was but a cautious though desperate action of some two dozen fugitives in need of political and moral encouragement, a chance to supply medicines and provisions to wandering home seekers, an opportunity to show mercy to a group who considered themselves victims of priestcraft. Sticks would be good enough with which to meet the emergency. Reason for extreme range of interpretation stemmed from rumors of a warlike and renegade town in Guerrero in rebellion against the government and defeating government troops repeatedly who were sent out to subdue them. Prodigious stories of their bravery, of their uncanny skill in picking off officers, and of their ingenuity in choosing strategic points to meet the enemy reached the colonists. These stories told and believed by the natives had magnified the menace of the Temoches until they were believed to be cruel and invincible. In reality the Temoches were religious crusaders. They had taken a stand against the system of extortion the priests carried on under the cloak of religion.

Temoche, a little town in the hills of Chihuahua near Guerrero, was in 1892 a hamlet of thirty-five or forty families of Mexicans and Indians. Their presidente, Cruz Chavez, on a visit to Cabora in northeastern Sinaloa, became converted to Santa Teresa, a young divine who claimed to have received heavenly visitations. Mysterious personages, she claimed, instructed her to inform the people that the Catholic priests were not living in conformity with teachings of the Master, and were using their authority in unrighteous extortion. They were selling the sacraments of the Church for money, were forgiving transgressors of their sins for money, and were keeping the people in ignorance of these evil practices. Her teachings were supplemented by miraculous healings and she cured many illnesses. She soon gained a large following, none of whom was more sincere or devout than Cruz Chavez. Passing her teachings on to his fellow town members he converted them all to her doctrine of reform. Together they resolved to take a united stand against the abuses of the priests. Chavez built an altar in his own home and invited his people to come worship free of charge and encouraged them to refuse to pay for services of the priest. This of course outraged the priest when riding his circuit he next came to visit them. In his wrath he tore down the altar and destroyed the images. The Temoches retaliated by seizing the priest and bodily ejecting him from the town. This sacrilege provoked a series of punitive expeditions against them, each one stronger than the last, until in the end the town was destroyed, its inhabitants scattered and hunted by officers of the law.

The first to come against them were twenty armed men sent by the jefe politico of Guerrero, brother of the priest, and commissioned to bring Cruz and followers dead or alive to Guerrero. Chavez warned them to keep their distance but the officers opened fire and after a fierce ten minute battle fifteen soldiers lay dead without a casualty for Chavez. The jefe politico headed the next force of seventy-five men but suffered a similar defeat. Chavez stationed his men strategically, met their charge with surprise and routed them, allowing only ten men to escape to report another defeat. Three hundred and fifty federal troops were next sent but with like disaster. Cruz met their divided forces, scattered them, and took their arms, ammunition, and provisions which they left as they fled. Federal forces were increased to seven hundred fifty and finally to twelve hundred. In the final battle forces of four hundred men were detailed to attack from three directions at once. The cavalry division arrived ahead of the others, was surprised and captured by the townspeople, and confined in the Catholic church. The tardy infantry, arriving for the attack saw the last of the prisoners enter the church and supposing them to be Temoches barricading themselves for their last stand shot torches onto the dry roof and set the building afire. Four hundred cavalrymen were cremated. Under cover of the excitement Cruz Chavez and his people made their escape, taking horses, guns, and ammunition from the captured cavalry into the mountains.

But they were now homeless and fugitives as a result. Mexico afforded them no place of refuge, so secreting their families among friends in retired localities twenty-eight men crossed the border into the United States. They remained there a year but finding no place to settle and longing for home and loved ones they returned. No doubt feeling the hands of all against them and particularly the government, they supplied themselves with money and ten horses from the customs house in Palomas which they looted as they passed. They helped themselves to four horses in W. D. Johnson's pasture in Colonia Diaz, and appropriated a wagon load of provisions at Ramos as well as the four mules hitched to it, and started in the direction of Colonia Juarez. The approach of this company of twenty-eight men spread panic in Colonia Juarez and precipitated an excitement far out of proportion to its cause. The brush with these maligned warriors was afterwards known as the Temoche War.

Colonia Juarez at this time boasted of a military organization. It had been instituted by Miles P. Romney, major in command, as soon as the settlement was made. To squadrons of young men and boys he taught military tactics with great formality. They marched, maneuvered, shot targets and even skirmished with the dignity of real army trainees. And only the interference of Casas Grandes officials who watched suspiciously these military drills and immediately questioned the peaceable intentions of the colonists had stopped this army training. It was revived when runners brought word that the Temoches had passed Ramos with Colonia Juarez as their probable destination. Romney went into action at once marshaling and organizing his forces with all the energy of a general preparing for a major battle.

He detailed one runner to notify officials in Casas Grandes of their impending peril, others to circulate through the town and gather all the guns and ammunitions stored in homes. Others assembled the guards which he armed and stationed as pickets for the town. Still others quickly warned the people of impending danger and gave detailed safety instructions to follow. All were to listen for special taps of the schoolhouse bell as a signal of imminent danger in which case all, and especially the isolated west-siders, were to hasten to the schoolhouse for mutual protection. They were to carry with them food and bedding to last out the siege. Others were detailed to slip out of town, reconnoiter, and intercept the enemy's entrance into town if possible, and bring intelligence at whatever cost.

Orson P. Brown, arch enemy of bandits and thieves, was the scout detailed for this important mission and was sent at once to watch maneuvers from the Tinaja Wash region. He and his deputy Amos Cox left at once, shouting for Romney to send other men to follow as he rode off. No sooner had they left with all the flourish of Teddy Roosevelt roughriders, and before guards had been stationed, than three strange men rode into town trailed at a distance by Carl Nielson. They stopped their horses in front of the Co-op store but before they could dismount or state their purposes, their identity had been disclosed by Nielson and armed men appeared as if by magic from all directions. Before the three could stammer a request they were surrounded. Taking alarm they wheeled their horses and fled, climbing the hill to the east with Nielson in full pursuit.

Meanwhile Brown in his cautious trailing along the ridge overlooking the Tinaja Wash was suddenly challenged by three resolute fellows who rose from behind boulders with leveled guns. "Surrender," they shouted as one. But when Brown and Cox with serious precision quickly leveled their guns and shouted the same order, two of them dropped their guns. The third, still aiming, said to his companions, "Are we going to surrender and be killed like dogs? Send the other man to camp to summon them to our help."

"You are thieves and bandits," shouted Brown as he heard this order.

"No, we are not," answered one man with surprising quietness. "We have another mission. We want to find our wives and children and settle again in our homes in Temoche."

"That's but a ruse to gain the upper hand," said Brown quietly to Cox. Aloud he said, "You are thieves and bandits, I say. You have stolen four horses from Colonia Diaz. Return those horses to this camp or we will follow you to the sea to get them!"

"We will leave the horses," they continued still with surprising docility. "And we have no wish to harm you—unless you wish to harm us."

"Halt," shouted Brown, as he saw the man move to carry out the leader's instructions. "I am in command here. If you take one more step toward your camp, I will put a bullet through you." The man stopped and in the parley that followed they learned that three men had gone into town for medicine and provisions and the Temoches recommended with threats that nothing happen to them. Just then they saw Nielson riding back and forth before three men who had halted and challenged him to come closer. Further down the slope the seven men sent by Romney could be seen approaching. From another quarter twenty-five more were coming. All in all it seemed a fitting time to continue the parley, especially as the leader of the approaching squad signified his desire to get in on it. Brown and the leader walked to within fifty yards of each other. "Could we pass through your town on our way to the south?" Temoche leaders wanted to know at once. "We have money to pay for the supplies we need." But Brown answered with quick denial. "No, that will not be permitted. You must pass round the colony."

"Very well," replied the leader evenly, "we have asked permission and been denied. What if we should go anyway?"

"Then you go at your peril." Brown answered with bravado. "There are enough armed men in Colonia Juarez to wipe you out. Take my word for it, and follow the course I mark out for you."

With the leader listening quietly, he tersely marked their route—across the river, above the fields, into the western mountains and south through the valleys. The leader then retired to confer with his men, and Brown returned to his men to await the Temoche's decision. But he shouted as he turned, "We have one hundred men armed for our defense." And to impress the enemy with this exaggerated estimate, he marched his ten men over and round a small point, following each other in such rapid succession that they appeared as one long train of armed recruits. This ruse seemed to work and soon the Temoches moved off in the direction pointed out. Brown followed long enough to make sure they were on the marked trail, and close enough to ascertain their intentions and their camping place for the night. He and his men then returned to town to report.

They found that sixty men from Casas Grandes had arrived—twenty-five soldiers, twenty-five citizens, and ten gendarmes—and had taken shelter in a partly finished house. They reported they had come to capture the Temoches dead or alive. Brown confidently told them in a few words how under cover of darkness they could surround and surprise the bandits without the loss of a life or even the firing of a shot. "It is never good to attack in the night," said the captain solemnly. "It is better for you to go in the morning, find which way they are going, return and tell us. We will immediately come and destroy them all." That night the town was heavily guarded. At daylight next morning Brown with E. L. Taylor, Jerome Judd, Peter C. Wood, Carl Nielson, Amos Cox, and Brigham Stowell left to follow the trail of the bandits. They found the camping place at the head of MacDonald Creek by the springs. Embers of their campfire were still burning. Their trail led to the south, and they followed it until it crossed the canyon leading to the "Stairs." Then instead of following through to the other side, they continued along the canyon bed and ran into the Temoche outposts. Taylor, knowing the trail, led them as they put spurs to their horses and raced past the guards and in full view of the main body on the rim to a point of safety in a low pass behind some large rocks. From there they returned the fire of the guards who had shot at them as they ran. Brown ordered Nielson to ride to Juarez as fast as his horse could take him and tell the soldiers to come—that "we have the Temoches for them."

As Nielson sped off to carry out this order, he was exposed again to the enemy gunfire and a few shots were fired in his direction and when his horse slipped and fell down the rocky hillside the others feared he had been hit. But horse and rider righted themselves and with redoubled speed went on.

For the three and a half hours required for Nielson to reach Juarez and return with the gendarmes the two factions stood at bay. Neither wished to be the first to open dangerous fire again nor did either one care to be the first to move off and signify defeat. When the gendarmes arrived they were satisfied to keep the Temoches at their already safe distance. "No," said the captain, "let them go. We are not enough to fight them. One Temoche is worth one hundred soldiers." Brown then did what he had wanted to do ever since the firing had ceased. Sensing the uselessness of hoping for protection from the frightened gendarmes, he shouted, "Go home, all of you. Go home to your wives and children. Make peace with your government, and the Lord will bless you as he has blessed and protected the Mormons today." As if they had been waiting for just such an injunction, they hastily made ready to move off. Standing from a safe distance the Mormon recruits and the gendarmes silently watched the solemn retreat of the Temoches, feeling sure they had seen the last of any threat or danger from that quarter. Subsequent relations with the Temoches were friendly. The Sosas, who later made their home in Colonia Juarez, were Temoches. Juan Sosa applied for work from Orson Brown and was recognized as the resolute Temoche who refused to lower his gun that day on the Tinaja. Juan reported after he was established in remunerative work that the Temoches had taken Brown's advice given at Temoche Pass, had found their homes and families, were seeking amnesty from the government and if the Mormon people would send a petition to add to their plea he was sure they would all be pardoned. A petition was formulated and signed by all eligible colonists, the ban against the Temoches was broken and they became respectable citizens once more.

Sixteen years later when the Madero Revolution broke out, Temoches took part in the overthrow of the Diaz government. And when issues involving church and state arose, their old fight against the clergy and their oppression came into prominence again. They never ceased their opposition to the hold of priestcraft in Mexico. Abram Gonzalez, murdered governor of Chihuahua under the Madero regime was a Temoche as were also Pascual Orozco and his father. Love of freedom seemed to be a basic principle for which the Temoches would give their lives if necessary.

In the wild jagged country about fifty miles wide along the border between Sonora and Chihuahua are high rugged mountains divided by deep, narrow canyons. Here trout fill the streams while deer, bear, mountain lion, wolves, and turkey range the hills. The climate is mild, and palm trees grow in the lower valleys. There are no weather hazards. Here with food, water, and fuel in abundance, and caves in which to seek shelter, outlaw Indians from the United States and remnants of the Apache Kid band were as inaccessible as natural barriers could make them. Occasional trappers and prospectors unwittingly furnished guns, ammunition, saddles and tools, and ranchers living in the Arres and Bonita tributaries made good picking when cattle, corn or potatoes were needed. Even the Mormon colonies in the mountains had lost cattle, horses and mules to them.

Leading this group of Apache remnants in the '20's, was Indian Juan. His atrocities paralleled those of former desperado Indians and he spread terror in a similar fashion. He struck unexpectedly and slaughtered viciously, killing often when loot and plunder were all he coveted. He waylaid and slaughtered a family from Alta Mirana, Chihuahua, and a woman school-teacher who were on their way to a weekend visit in Casas Grandes. He stripped their bodies, looted their wagon, and made off with their mules, leaving the dead to be buried by friends when they found them. He ambushed and killed a Mexican man in the same vicinity and kidnaped the boy who was with him. The boy made his escape when sent to round up horses and in a few days returned.

Juan's raids on Mexican ranches often resulted in killings. His very approach sent whole families scurrying to hideouts. Capitalizing on this fear he often called out as he rode up in the night, "Soy Indio Juan," knowing his victims would flee or lock themselves in and leave him free to make off with whatever he pleased. Many ranchers had seen him, knew him by sight, and many more had suffered at his hands. But the pueblitos (little towns) in eastern Sonora suffered most, Nacori being most consistently stripped. Its inhabitants were poor, few in number, with small patches of corn and wheat, few cattle and fewer peach trees. Yet in one night thirty head of stock and the major portion of their winter's supply of corn were stolen. Juan Garabos, Pedro Fimbres, and Abram Valencio went in search of the thieves. On top of a high peak they found a recent campsite and with the aid of field glasses they located a camp on a nearby peak and identified their missing cattle near. The Indians were preparing to break camp, and the Mexicans made haste to intercept them. To do so they had to slide their way to the bottom of a deep arroyo and climb out again up the steep sides of the high mountain peak. In the bottom, they divided, Valencio climbing the north side, Fimbres the south, and Garabos the east. High cliffs on the west side made ascent or descent impossible from that quarter. Closing in they made the ascent without being suspected. Valencio reached the rim first and spied a young Indian riding a mule and guarding cattle near the bluffs. This Indian shouted an alarm that scattered the Indians into the brush like quail surprised by hounds. But the young Indian stayed with the cattle. First he tried pushing them off the bluffs and when they refused he rushed them to the southern end, Valencio firing wild shots at him as he ran in pursuit. Garabos and Fimbres, hearing the shots, hurried to join in the chase, Fimbres met the fleeing Indian face-to-face as he topped the rim on the south. The Indian slipped off the mule backward and bounded over the southern cliffs like a frightened animal. All three Mexicans followed in close pursuit, shooting at the fleeing Indian each time he came in sight. He climbed down a cliff, leaped off a precipice, and darted into a cave, where he was crouching in fear and fatigue when they caught up with him. They beckoned for him to come out, threatening to shoot him if he didn't, but the Indian only hissed and growled back. Finally Garabos laid down his gun, went in, and much to the surprise of himself and others, led the captive out by the hand. They were further surprised to find the captive to be, not a man, but a young girl about thirteen years of age. She was dressed in expertly tanned buckskin and calf hide. Her moccasins reached to her knees, were stitched and artistically trimmed with beads. Short calfskin pants, tanned with the hair left on, were covered by a short buckskin skirt. A soft, smoked buckskin jacket, fringed at the bottom and latched at the throat completed her costume. High cheekbones and a round plump face indicated her true Apache descent. Once the girl had surrendered she stopped fighting and calmly allowed herself to be led off. They returned to the Indian camp and gathered up everything the Indians had left—which was everything, including the girl. Allowing her to choose her own mount they all started for Nacori. Her choice was a sorrel burro which she rode without saddle or bridle. She showed no emotion, never once looked back, nor made any attempt to leave trace or sign by which they might follow her. After an hour or so she began cutting capers on the burro. She rode standing first on one foot then the other and then on both. She rode backwards, then squat on the donkey's haunches. She slipped off his back, trotted along by his side, then vaulted to her place again like a trained acrobat, never seeming to tire. When they camped at night she helped unpack, unsaddle, and tether the animals, then wolfed her tortillas and gulped her coffee. Refusing the blanket they offered she curled up on a piece of rawhide on the ground near the fire and slept like a tired kitten.

When they arrived at Nacori and had distributed the stolen articles to rightful owners, the question of who should have the girl was decided by drawing lots. She fell to Valencio, though she favored Fimbres and spent much of her time with his wife and two children. They took her to Church where she took vows and became a Catholic. They christened her "Lupa." She quietly adapted herself to Mexican life, learned to speak the language, busied herself grinding corn on flat rock metates, washing clothes on a rock at the creek, sweeping with a broom made of tall grasses tied with a string, and weaving hats with leaves from the palms. She was tall, straight, and agile as a cat. Her strength was prodigious and she feared no one. She was artistic in her tastes and her beautiful work showed plainly her descent from a highly talented and civilized race of people. She could carve one's likeness from a piece of bark, touching up personal features till it was at once identifiable. When one day a cowboy jokingly asked her to "take his picture," she in a few minutes handed him back the piece of bark. The hat brim had the same droop, the jacket the correct number of buttons, the chaps the same trimmings, his mouth the same curve, finished with the bowlegs of a cowboy. She was friendly and agreeable but refused absolutely to talk of her past tribal life. After about three months she was given permission to return to her people if she desired. She took a few tortillas, some ground corn and set out a-foot, refusing the horse and saddle they offered. After three days she returned tired and footsore saying she couldn't find them. Three months later she was again given the privilege. This time she returned after a week's absence saying she didn't want to find her people now, finding her so Mexicanized, they would surely kill her. After that she seemed content although she often took long walks alone. [^1]

In the summer of 1927 Pedro Fimbres with his wife and two children, a boy of ten and a girl of five, set out for Bavispe in Sonora. It was a long, hard journey. Some places were so steep they had to travel on foot, trailing or leading their horses up and down the tortuous mountain trails. As they made their way down one steep descent, Senora Fimbres took the lead with the little boy riding behind. Senor Fimbres followed on foot with the little girl in his arms, letting his horse pick its way down unhampered by a load. When the little girl asked for a drink Pedro left the trail for a spring of water near by. As he returned minutes later he heard his wife scream loud and agonizing. Running toward her he saw Indian Juan jerk her from her horse, throw her onto the ground and begin pelting her with huge stones. Shouldering the little girl he ran back to where some cowboys were rounding up cattle and gasped out his story. They returned but when they arrived at the spot of the ambush she was not there. At the top of a high ledge on the rim of the round valley they found the crumpled and mangled body of the woman. The boy was gone. As Pedro made his way down to her through his crazed brain rushed recollection of all the losses he had suffered at the hands of Indian Juan—horses stolen, food caches looted, cattle driven off again and again and now the brutal murder of his wife and his son carried away to be tortured or raised as an Indian.

Pedro could endure no more. Indian Juan must be made to pay. Kneeling by the side of his murdered wife, he solemnly vowed "Come what will, I will never rest till you are avenged." He would follow Indian Juan to the remotest fastness; he would never stop till he had rescued his son and exacted full payment for his wife's death. By the time he had taken her body to Nacori, his desire for vengeance was a consuming passion. Enlisting friends to help, and being legally deputized to hunt and kill Indians, he left to carry out his vow. For three years he followed the wily savage, his thirst for revenge driving him into places where white man had never before set foot. He combed mountain retreats in search of Indian hideouts following every clue or rumor no matter how wild or seemingly impossible. When friends tired and left him he went on alone. He even crossed the border into the United States, told his story, and solicited help from the government there. Failing to get it he returned to continue his search on his own. Nothing could dissuade him. No one could discourage him. No warning checked him. Even Lupa's entreaty that he give up the search lest he lose his life went unheeded.

One day his brother Calletano, heading his small party, climbed slowly to the top of a high, bald peak. Weary and worn they sought water from the never failing Indian Spring. There they would give the country one last over-look, refresh their weary horses, and eat their own meager lunch. But as they neared the spring they unexpectedly saw Indians approaching it from the other side. In a split second they realized that their long-sought enemies were near and that chance for vengeance had come. Secreting themselves they waited.

First to appear was a squaw riding a burro. They shot her as she was frenziedly trying to extract a gun from the side of her saddle. A second Indian woman, following close behind darted into oak shrubbery for protection but quick shots from the Mexicans wounded her in the arm. Screaming she continued to run, her dangling arm impeding her as she scrambled over rocks and bushes. The Mexicans in hot pursuit continued shooting until a fatal shot dropped her in the canyon bed. Calletano fortunately had not joined in the chase but had remained on the spot where the shooting began. Almost at once an Indian buck came in sight evidently in search of the reason for the shooting. His eye took in the fleeing girl with Mexicans in close pursuit and cocking his gun he slipped along their trail stalking the pursuers under cover of rocks and brush, waiting a favorable time to shoot. He had not seen Calletano and not until a bullet spattered the rock near him did he realize his own danger. He darted to cover behind a large tree. Then began a shooting contest between the Indian behind the tree and Calletano concealed behind boulders. Each was hidden from the other, except as one or the other darted a quick look to shoot. Calletano could change his position but the Indian could only confuse by darting his head first from one side of the tree then the other. Getting the exact level on which these quick peeks were made Calletano sighted his gun and in one deadly shot got his Indian. Pedro returning with the others found Calletano bending over his fallen victim and recognized his archenemy Indian Juan. The long search was over. Indian Juan was dead—not by Pedro's hand, but dead. But where was his boy? Not finding him Pedro's brain reeled again and blind with rage and disappointment, he ordered the bodies placed in a pile. He fiercely scalped them and left them to be buried by Cerilo Perez, a rancher they passed on their way home.

Pedro made a report of the killing to government officials and then prepared to continue the search for his son. But the search ended before it was begun. Perez when he went to bury the Indians found that an attempt had already been made to bury them. In a carefully laid up stone enclosure, covered by a beautiful Indian blanket, lay the three scalped bodies and on a pile of rocks by their side lay the scalped and mutilated body of Fimbres' son!

Who had killed the boy? Certainly not Indian Juan who lay dead beside him. Then who but the savage followers still at large in the hills. And against them continued warfare must be waged if property and lives in and around the mountains were to be made safe. Open season on Indians was therefore declared. Capture or kill was the order. Every rider through the mountains and every guard in the valley carried arms with which to fight this menace to the finish.

It was the vaqueros from Rancho Harris on the western slope of the Blues who finally located an Indian camp in a secluded valley of the Sonora mountains. With the aid of field glasses they studied the setup and made plans to take the camp by surprise making sure that none should escape. No one but squaws could be seen, however, and the cowboys had scruples against killing women. Only the urgent need of wiping out the menace made them decide to go on with their plans. They closed in, shouting and shooting as they rode, killing every squaw in camp as they scattered terrified and screaming, except one woman and girl. By the trail of blood left as the woman ran they knew she could not go far before dying.

The girl was found two weeks later by Bill Byes near Alta Mirana as she roamed the hills in search of food. Byes's hounds treed her, the strangest cat they ever had treed, though one that could fight and scratch as fiercely as any feline. She was induced to come down after the hounds had been called off, though she continued to fight and scratch at the least provocation. Byes took her to Casas Grandes where she was confined in the juzgado comun (jail). There she sat for days, glaring defiance at the crowds who clustered round her bars all hours of the day, contemptuously refusing food shoved in for her until her body collapsed and her proud spirit took flight—another wild heart broken by capture and confinement.

With her death the last Apache Indian in the Sierra Madre wilds was accounted for. Her burial in the Casas Grandes cemetery rang the curtain down on the Apache menace to peace and safety which had persisted since Geronimo went on the rampage in 1880. [^2]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Porfirio Diaz did not visit Salt Lake City but some plausible excuse seemed to Captain Diaz to be necessary.
[^2] THE THOMPSON TRAGEDY If only women were with Indian Juan when he was killed, and only women were found and killed in the camp when it was surrounded and wiped out by the Harris cowboys, he must have been the only brave in the Indian band.
