Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

X

O, COME TO THE FAIR

IN THE SPRING OF 1896 an invitation came to Colonia Juarez to participate in a national fair to be held in Coyoacan, Mexico, D.F., in May. It was addressed to A. F. MacDonald in care of the Board of Trade and, as such, included more than the one community in its invitation. For the Board of Trade, in operation since August, 1893, was organized for the purpose of opening up markets and of getting better prices for colony products, and was composed of representatives from all the wards in the stake. Joseph C. Bentley was business manager and, in the absence of A. F. MacDonald, was authorized to accept the invitation and take charge of the exhibit.

This invitation was a challenge. Leaders of the nation, it said, had been generous in colonization permits, had encouraged foreigners to help develop resources of the country, but thus far no successful colonizing had resulted. Could the Mormon colonies with exhibits in the fair help remove this stigma? If they could send exhibits, shipping charges would be paid by the government and a prominent place reserved for a display. The importance of accepting this invitation was seen at once. Not only would a creditable exhibition justify President Diaz in his generous permits but it would furnish a most favorable means of making contacts with key men of the nation and serve as excellent means of broadening the usefulness of the Board of Trade. The time of year was not propitious for a display of farm, orchard, or garden produce, but there were choice specimens of both preserved and dehydrated fruits in the cannery, flour and grains stored in the mill and private granaries, cheese and leather goods in dairies and shops, and needlework, quilts and rugs in the homes. Working through the Board of Trade to gain ward cooperation, a carload of choice specimens typical of ingenuity and thrift and indicative of the annual output was on the rails in time to overcome delays and be on the grounds and arranged in attractive booths before the fair opened.

A prominent location had been reserved for colony exhibits and with the help of Hyrum S. Harris and wife, temporary residents in Mexico City, a most attractive display was made. Sacks of white flour stacked on decorative counters, mounds of cheese, corn on the cob tacked on the wall in geometric designs, hides of animals tanned in colony vats, sides of leather made into harnesses, saddles, collars, traces and breechings, as well as a stack of brooms from the Colonia Diaz factory, covered the side of a long room and was Exhibit No. I. Pyramids of canned fruits attractively labeled and setting off a display of needlework consisting of quilts, rugs, gloves, samples of sewing etc., completely filled the other sides and was Exhibit No. II. Pictures of the best businesses, mills, and factories, of schools and public buildings, of blooded animals, of orchards, fields and homes, arranged in attractive groups along the end of the building made up Exhibit No. III. A small but attractive exhibit of fresh fruits, taken from caches in the home, and in a fine state of preservation, strategically displayed in the center of the room made up Exhibit No. IV. Around and among all the exhibits were potted plants lending color and distinction, while setting it all off were streamers of national colors, bows and bunting and a Mexican flag proclaiming loyalty to an adopted country.

It was an exhibit that invited not only a first inspection but repeated visits. It was a high point of interest throughout the fair. Attendants on duty found their time filled answering questions, explaining workmanship of various articles and demonstrating the steps in many of the processes. Intricacies of displayed needlework were explained again and again to crowds growing in number as interest in the exhibit increased. The braided and hooked rugs and the colorfully pieced quilts attracted major interest.

Photographs on the end wall elicited much controversy. It seemed incredible that they could be photographs of homes, schools, and factories built in Mexico in the short time the Mormons had been in the country. An ambassador was therefore dispatched to the colonies to verify the authenticity of the pictures.

The crowning feature of the exhibit, however, was the personal interest taken by President Diaz, and the means he used of limelighting both his interest and his pleasure. Shortly preceding the close of the fair he sent Bentley word that he and his cabinet would personally inspect the exhibit the following Sunday. He also informed them that he proposed to use colony products for the banquet immediately following inspection. The obvious gratification of President Diaz, when the visit took place, made the sight of blue ribbons streaming from the majority of products seem almost like a personal achievement. At the banquet each minister was given a sample of colony produce which served doubly by making a profitable disposal of what was left an easy matter after the fair closed.

Bentley returned with a box full of medals, several hundred pesos in his pocket, with the pleasure of a warm personal friendship with President Diaz and his ministers, and a wide market opened for colony products.

In September of the same year a regional fair was held in Colonia Diaz, sponsored by the Agricultural and Manufacturing Co., of the town with Bishop W. Derby Johnson as president. The summer yield had been bounteous and—added to the manufactured products of thriving industries and the output of homes, which were factories in miniature for the making of candy, soap, handmade articles, cookery and cheese—made altogether a creditable display. Cattle and stock breeding had also developed to the pureblood stage and choice specimens were available for the exposition. Of importance again was the interest shown by government officials in the higher ranks. President Diaz' regrets at inability to attend, expressed sincerely and publicly, made good publicity and induced Chihuahua's governor, Miguel Ahumada, to consent gladly to take his place. He arrived at La Ascension with a party of ten the day before the fair opened and sent word to Colonia Diaz officials he was ready to be escorted to the fair grounds.

W. Derby Johnson made the opening speech and introduced the governor who responded. "I am very much pleased to pay you a visit as the governor of Chihuahua, and as the honored representative of President Diaz. I have come for the purpose of seeing you in your homes, of witnessing the results of your labors, and the progress you have made in developing the resources of the country. In fact, to become acquainted with you as a people and to open formally your exposition. I shall give an account to President Diaz of what I see and hear that he also may form more extended ideas of your conditions and prospects. I congratulate you on the results of your labors and the progress you have made since you have been here. The sight before me of so many bright and healthy children, born on the soil of Mexico is a very pleasing and interesting one. The annual fair for 1896 of the Agricultural and Manufacturing Association is now open." After a close inspection of fruits, grains, dairy products, manufactured articles, livestock and home products, and a hearty participation in a banquet prepared in his honor, the governor said he would be pleased to shake the hands of everyone present, especially the children, and that he would be glad to attend other fairs. The governor's party, on invitation, visited President A. W. Ivins in Colonia Juarez where ovations in his honor further strengthened good relations.

The next fair was in 1909. Invitation was sent to President Junius Romney to participate in a regional fair to be held in El Paso, Texas, and opening November first. Here was an opportunity to take products of the colonies into the United States for exhibition. The state of Chihuahua seconded the invitation and urged the colonists to respond with the best and largest specimens possible. The colonists eagerly complied.

While preparations for this exposition were under way, an event transpired that temporarily pushed aside interest in the El Paso fair. This was the meeting of Presidents William Howard Taft of the United States and Porfirio Diaz of Mexico on the international bridge October 16. People in the cities through which President Diaz passed on his way from Mexico City turned out to do honor to a president who would soon run for his seventh term of office. Chihuahua City, eager to detain the President over night, to make a favorable impression for the granting of favors needed, decided in favor of a fair such as was being prepared in El Paso except that Chihuahua products only would be exhibited. Who better than the Mormons could be found to make it a success? They always had something to show, knew how to do it, and were always willing to cooperate.

This idea was presented to Junius Romney by Governor Enrique C. Creel. Romney, though deeply involved in preparations for the El Paso fair, consented in the name of the people to participate. This entailed loading a car with freshly harvested fruits, grains and vegetables, adding a few manufactured articles, speeding it on its way to Chihuahua and seeing that it was properly exhibited. With foresight he also had prepared two portfolios each containing thirty-six views of representative businesses, industries, and achievements of the various colonies, had them autographed and made ready to present to both the president of the republic and the governor of the state. This courtesy brought an invitation to President Romney and his party for an interview with President Diaz. When the special train arrived with the president and his party the exhibit was ready for inspection. VIVA MEXICO written with red apples, and green ones used for a background appeared prominently. Behind it and on both sides were the farm machinery, samples of grain, alfalfa, oats, cane, wheat, and barley both in seeds and on the stalk. At the appointed time, 4 p.m., they were ushered into the presence of the president each one eagerly looking forward to the privilege of seeing for themselves the "grand old man of Mexico," of expressing to him the sentiments of appreciation of their people and the renewal of friendships formed with him by the early settlers. The governor informed them as they entered that due to a limit on the president's time a greeting only would be possible. They were introduced as a group from the colonies of Galeana. The president made no sign of recognition but merely asked "What Galeana?" He was told it was the district of Galeana. "But the Mormons? What has become of them?"

"We are representatives of the Mormon colonies," quickly put in President Romney.

"You? You are the Mormons?"

"Si, Senor."

"Well, I'm glad to shake your hand," he exclaimed as he clasped theirs in a warm handshake. "Those Mormons are my friends. They are an industrious people. And industrious people are what make a nation."

"We have over 1700 loyal young people in our schools," said President Romney, "They send their love and best wishes to you."

"I should like to grasp the hand of each one of them," said the president with feeling, "for they belong to the country. They were born here. While I live, you will always have a friend in Mexico. All the reports I have received of you are good."

He then enquired concerning some of the older colonists, A. W. Ivins, A. F. MacDonald, Henry Eyring, Helaman Pratt and others he had known in days past. His eyes were shining as he recalled something distinctive about each one. President Romney then presented the portfolio.

As the president turned the pages and as he looked at the Academy, the Dublan canal, improved mountain roads, Juarez wagon bridge, Union Mercantile, and several of the nicer homes, he was obviously moved. "What a pretty idea. What could I wish more than the products of their labors as a token of their esteem." And when with it he was also presented a box of choice apples and an attractive cheese he seemed overcome with sincere appreciation.

As the interview lengthened the governor had grown restive and suggested tactfully that others were waiting, that the time limit was far past. He finally stated bluntly that the president's time was all taken up. But the president paid him no heed and Captain Diaz, the son who stood by his father's side through it all, made excuses to those waiting by explaining that his father had been a special friend of the Mormons ever since he had visited Salt Lake City in company with Brigham Young, Jr., and had seen their temple. [^1] And that now his father was eager to make the acquaintance of the next generation.

It was dark before the president finally found time to visit the exhibit. No provision had been made for lighting the building. With an attendant to flash a lantern carefully over every exhibit, the president went the rounds giving each colony display careful inspection. He passed down one side and up the other and out of the building without going further on his tour. But the colony display made up fully three-fourths of the exhibit. Without it the exposition would have failed.

This recognition by the president and his party gained prestige and official recognition from many quarters. Not only new friends were made, but old friends of the early settlers renewed their interest. Chief among these was Gomez del Campo who had sold the land on which three colonies had been established and Gandara the young lawyer who had been instrumental in revoking the order for expulsion by his brilliant plea for colonization permits.

When the El Paso fair opened the same committee that had been in charge of the Chihuahua exhibits was responsible and returned with nineteen first prizes, including those given on their blooded stallions, ten second prizes in horticultural and agricultural fields. With the eleven pieces exhibited in the textile display they won seven first prizes and two seconds. In addition they were awarded a diploma for the best exhibit of fresh fruits.

In 1928 Ralph B. Keeler, president of the stake, called the first fair to be held in Colonia Juarez. The country and the people had begun to overcome the poverty that constant strippings by the revolution had induced and were on a definite upward climb from the pit of depression. The purpose of the fair was to gain cooperation of Mexican officials and businessmen and to stimulate industrial and commercial production, both of which were necessary for rehabilitation. Choicest specimens from farms, orchards, industries and manufacturing plants, were solicited and with pens of blooded stock, pigs, and poultry, a most surprisingly good exhibit resulted. The relative prosperity in evidence was most surprising. From the fair came a determination to make more intelligent use of resources to produce more and better wheat, corn, fruits, poultry, hogs, and steers and to overcome handicaps that had throttled and discouraged. With renewed enterprise a rise to prosperity again would be possible.

In November of 1932, Colonia Juarez exhibited choice varieties of fruit in the Agricultural Fair held at Jacinto, Mexico, D. F. Foremost in promoting national recognition of the apples raised in Colonia Juarez was Ernest I. Hatch, who with his son Seville, personally arranged and supervised the exhibit. Superiority of the Delicious apple and other varieties easily gained recognition, and a silver trophy. The outcome was immediate enlargement of fruit raising tracts and an increased determination to raise fruit growing standards. Never once during the ensuing several years while participation continued did they fail in prizes for outstanding exhibits—and once they earned the sweepstakes prize for the largest and best exhibit on the grounds.

Through the years stimulation to higher endeavor was promoted through fairs and through them the colonies became known in the early stages of settlement, made a distinct impression on the industrial life of the nation, and gained a rating far out of proportion to the economic status of the people living in the colonies.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Account adapted from official minutes of the meeting.
