Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

XI

AND OFFER UP THINE OBLATIONS

"SIX DAYS SHALT THOU LABOR AND DO ALL THY WORK" was accepted at face value in Colonia Juarez. Accepted with this ancient commandment was the modern injunction "Go to the house of the Lord on this my Holy day and offer up thine oblations unto the Most High." In preparation for this the house of worship was made ready. The deacons, the boys from ages twelve to fourteen, swept the floors, dusted the benches, made ready the table on which oblations were to be offered—in short, put everything in readiness for the Sacrament meeting that convened every Sunday afternoon.

This was the most important gathering of the week for the people; the one to which general attendance was expected; the one for which the choir had prepared songs to promote the spirit of worship, and the one from which the spiritual build-up was gained to sustain through the week and at which teachings were given as guide for everyday living. It was the meeting in which was realized the promise that "where few meet together in my name, there will I be also." Located in a barren spot, struggling to build a self-supporting community, a task far too great to be accomplished by themselves alone, they gained the spiritual strength in this meeting to carry on. To miss it was to break a vital link. The opening prayer voiced a petition that solutions to problems be given them, and the closing prayer gave thanks for the measure of inspiration and guidance that had come. Partaking of the Sacrament renewed covenants. The bread and water solemnly passed to each was a symbol of the body and blood of the crucified Redeemer and in partaking they were moved to remember the sufferings He endured for the salvation of all. Partaking of it worthily was a promise to remember His sacrifice for them, to take upon them His name, to always remember Him and keep His commandments, and in reward they should always have His spirit to be with them. Full realization of the significance of this ordinance and the blessing it held for them was a moving force in their lives to remain worthy, to promote love and unity among themselves, eradicating ill will, hard feelings and backbiting among them, and a ritual so important that none willingly missed it. Believing that blessings could be expected only through obedience, that keeping their covenants was the only way to be sure of the reward, this ordinance was solemnly prepared for and was often carried to those who were ill or detained at home. This ritual alone became a compelling reason for attendance at the meeting which bore the name of the ritual—Sacrament meeting.

The social satisfaction of attendance and the means it furnished of keeping in touch with community progress were also important. At Sacrament meeting friend met friend in a way that the press of weekday duties made impossible. Familiar faces nodded and smiled as each rejoiced in the strength and encouragement coming from contacts with friends and neighbors. Although few remained away by choice, unexcused absences were checked and followed, for attendance at Sacrament meeting was a criteria of good standing in ward membership and a jealous eye was kept on the hundred per cent rating. Groups lingering about the doors after meeting continued the warmth and cheer often for another hour or two.

In a country where Sunday meant carousing, or sports, or celebrations, or business and political meetings, or work—anything but worship, strict observance of the Sabbath was not only a contrast but seemingly a greater satisfaction because of the contrast.

Some announcements were of necessity made in every meeting as town leadership kept contact and maintained communication with membership. Policies previously worked out in priesthood meeting were presented to the public for acceptance. Changes or additions in officers were announced, committees to head important projects were named, their plans, progress and final achievement reported. Special business was presented, special needs solicited, important happenings related, lost and found articles advertised, and names of new members were presented for acceptance.

Important as the town meeting function of the services was, it was the preaching that provided the spiritual build-up. Able speakers explained points of doctrine, clarified Scriptures, gave counsel and advice for individual and group conduct and stimulated a strict conformity to regulations by which they were governed. The need of the hour prompted the topic to be chosen, and whether the word of encouragement, enlightenment, commendation or reprimand came from one of the presiding authorities, a member of the Bishopric, a visitor or an able lay member, it was the voice of authority to the congregation and was accepted by them as the word of the Lord. "Teach ye one another, according to the office to which ye are appointed" (Doc. & Cov. 38:20) was the scripture that moved every "Elder in Israel" to be ready always to preach, expound and teach. The speaker who moved a congregation one Sunday by the power and flow of his words was in turn himself moved the following Sunday by the force and explicitness of another. The voice of authority was considered as vested in the speaker of the day in fulfillment of biblical reference: "It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh through you." (Matt. 10:20)

Special features were the reports of missionaries returning from Denmark, Germany, Switzerland, Norway, and Great Britain in Europe, and from all parts of the United States and Mexico, who brought firsthand information to enlighten the people of Colonia Juarez and permitted all to enjoy vicariously the joys, tribulations, and triumphs of world travelers.

Success of the Sacrament meeting was the responsibility of the ward bishopric. In a formal organization in June, 1887, George W. Sevey with Miles P. Romney and Ernest L. Taylor were given that responsibility under direction of Apostle George Teasdale and other presiding authorities. Bishop Sevey, unlearned but kind and peace loving, was mindful of the poor, tireless in promoting harmony and good will in his flock, longsuffering with the erring but forgiving with the repentant. The people followed him with confidence. Miles P. Romney, capable and well-informed, was the medium through which doctrine, aims and ambitions of the Bishopric, and specific instruction were passed to members. A frequent speaker, his eloquence charmed and edified as he expounded principles of the Gospel and urged the clean life. The fervor of his sermons, the contagion of his fiery defense of truth and right moved old and young to seek knowledge and to be pure in word and thought and deed, while E. L. Taylor with his financial ability and his respect for the law in the community rounded out the competent trio of men who provided leadership and inspiration. They were devout and sincere and their lives squared with their teachings. Their voices raised in support of ideals, in correction of trends or pointing the way toward more righteous living found an echo in the hearts, minds, and lives of those who listened.

When in April 1894 Fast Day was changed from Thursday to the first Sunday of each month, three special ordinances were reserved for the meeting on this day. Babies were blessed, children were confirmed, and oil was consecrated. In the arms of the father, and before the congregation a baby was given a name and a father's blessing. Children eight years of age, considered the age of accountability, were confirmed members of the Church. "Parents having children in Zion . . . that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the son of the living God, and baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents." (Doc. & Cov. 68:25) Likewise consecration of oil was also an injunction in the Scriptures. "Is any sick among you? Let him call for the elders in the Church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick." (James 5:14-15) A dearth of medical help made reliance on this aid in sickness a universal practice, and never a Fast Day meeting passed without the consecration of oil, as many as a score of bottles of oil being brought in for consecration at one time.

Following the performance of ordinances the presiding officer kindled the fire of testimony bearing and turned the services over to the congregation. Speakers then arose from their seats as moved by the spirit. Voices were heard in this meeting that rarely, if ever, spoke from the stand. Experiences were related, remarkable conversions and manifestations were repeated, striking personalities were revealed, interesting backgrounds brought to light which but for this meeting would never have reached the public. The standard pattern was to begin with an expression of gratitude for blessings the Gospel had brought, praise and thanksgiving for the richness it had given, and a prayer for fortitude to remain faithful and steadfast to its teachings. Valid reasons for accepting the Gospel in its entirety, vivid experiences exemplifying its worth when put into practice and "faith promoting" accounts encouraged the spirit of testimony bearing. Speaker followed speaker in rapid succession, the timid as well as the bold rising to join in the spiritual feast. Some sang their praises, others gave special prayers, some confessed, but all revealed individual personality traits ranging from the prosaic to the picturesque.

One Fast Day a sixteen year old native convert was confirmed a member of the Church. No sooner had hands, laid on his head for the gift of the Holy Ghost, been removed than J. R. Holt, venerable patriarch, arose to bear his testimony. At the first word the congregation was electrified,—he was speaking in tongues! A manifestation read of, but never experienced, was taking place before their eyes! A language never heard was being spoken in their presence! In silence they listened, speculating on the import of the message and bursting with impatience to have it translated. Interpretation came clear and simple but the wonderful manifestation was the subject of conversation for days afterwards. "But what surprised me," said the young convert, Manrique Gonzales, "was that an interpretation was necessary for I understood every word he said." [^1]

"I like to bear my testimony, my brothers and sister," said Alma Platte Spilsbury on one occasion. "I feel moved to tell you of the blessings of the Lord to me. I was born in August on the hot Nebraska plains as the wagon jolted along toward Zion. Eight days later Bishop Hunter, in whose wagon company we were traveling, pulled me from the Platte river where I was accidently thrown with my mother when the oxen drawn wagon tipped in the stream. 'It beats the devil, it beats the devil' said Bishop Hunter holding me by the heels for water to run out of my mouth. 'I thought it was a girl. I thought it was a girl.' I like to think I was saved to build roads in this country where the prophet Alma lived, the prophet for whom I was named when Bishop Hunter saw there was life still in me. And I'm glad to be away from the river Platte which gave me my second name. I was born on wheels, and have been on wheels most of my life. I thank the Lord for a strong body, and pray for wisdom to take good care of it, to give it the rest it needs, not to over-feed it, so it will serve me for many years to come. I love to work, to be out in front, to pioneer the way for others to follow, and leave a good road for others to travel on, smoother, freer of rocks, and a little straighter after I have passed over it. (He was for years roadmaster of Colonia Juarez.) To me a road is like life, to do the most good to the most people, it must go straight. That's why I take time as I travel to throw out the loose rocks, to dig down a bank, or fill up the chucks, and in my weak way to smooth the road for those who come after me. If the Lord will continue to bless me, I'd like to die in the harness, to be active and busy to the very last. May the Lord bless us all." [^2]

"I am a plain-spoken man, and have a blunt way of speaking," began William C. McClellan when tempted to add his testimony to that of others. "I hope none will take exceptions to what I say. But under what conditions may we expect to receive the blessings of the Lord except by keeping his commandments? That means to keep infidelity out of our midst, to obey the Word of Wisdom [^3] among other things. Young men addicted to the use of strong drinks should leave it off. People have more respect for those who do not have the habit.

"I am thankful that during my march with the Mormon Battalion circumstances prevented our taking any active offensive against this nation, that we were spared any part of the hostilities against the country that welcomed us when we were exiles. I am also thankful I was able to give service to the United States even though it failed to befriend us. The travels of the Mormon Battalion are matters of history and need not be repeated here. My part only I shall tell briefly. I was given the choice, when U. S. officers came into camp at Winter Quarters asking for five hundred men, of joining the recruits or staying to care for four families whose husbands all had gone. I was but eighteen years of age, and of course I chose to go. I marched with them to Leavenworth where we were outfitted, and from there to Santa Fe where two detachments were ordered to carry to Pueblo invalids and laundresses unable to continue the march. I left with the second. It was winter, heavy snows lay on the ground, and before we reached our destination four men had died, and we all suffered untold hardships as we wallowed through the snow half-clad and half-fed. We reached Pueblo Christmas Eve 1846 and stayed there until May. It was a good game country, and supplies were easily gained from Brent's Fort so we fared well during those months.

"When we left, we traveled north until we struck the old trail at Laramie Fort, then followed it along the north bank of the Platte River until we reached Salt Lake City on July 27. Three days after Brigham Young and the first train of emigrants had arrived.

"From then until the present I have been on the frontier, have helped in a weak way to build Payson in Utah, Sunset in Arizona, and Pleasanton in New Mexico before adding my bit to the settlement of Colonia Juarez. I helped in the establishment of the United Order [^4] in Sunset, and though as a family we came out the little end of the horn, speaking financially, I still regard the United Order as the only method of life that can and will save us. It is an Order revealed to us by Joseph Smith and calls for the best in us to be uppermost in order to live it. Nothing but selfishness and dishonesty keeps the Order from being practiced.

"If I were to fashion my opinion of the worth of a man, I'd take it from the words of the poet who said,

"'A wit's a feather,

A chief's a rod;

But an honest man is the noblest work of God.'

"If I could be worthy that appellation I should ask no better guide for my posterity.—Amen." [^5]

"I rejoice, my brothers and sisters," from Alexander F. MacDonald, "in the Gospel and its blessings to me. I will never cease to defend its principles of truth and righteousness, nor be unmindful of what it has done for me. I have never found need to defend it with my fists though I was tempted once to do so. You may be interested in hearing about it if you will be lenient in my telling of it.

"I was born in the highlands of Scotland and grew up rugged and strong by grappling with the rigors of my childhood surroundings. And to hold my own with Lowlanders, and gain respect from those who considered themselves above me, my father taught me the manly art of self defense,—tussled and sparred with me in the backyard by the hour, to give me agility and punch and to perfect me in the art of fisticuffs. He pommeled and mauled me until I equaled him in size and all but matched him in strength.

"Then one day I heard two missionaries tell the story of a young man in America who had talked with God, had translated some gold plates, and had organized a church, the principles of which they explained in a simple yet fetching manner. Every word they said had a ring of truth to it and found an echo in my heart. I knew they were servants of God. But when I told father of them, he shouted in anger, 'Those are Mormon elders, come to destroy the souls they lead away. Have nothing to do with them. Do you hear? I forbid it!' But hunger for what the young men had to say was stronger than fear of my father's anger, and I sought them again. I became so convinced of the truth of their teachings that I applied for baptism then and there. But the elders restrained me insisting that I first get my father's consent, if possible. But knowing I could not, I persuaded them at a following meeting to wait no longer. 'What will this mean to your relations with your father?' the elder wanted to know as I rose from the waters of baptism. 'Oh, a little manhandling, I guess,' I answered. 'But don't let that bother you. For I'm as strong as he is now, and can hold my own with him.' 'But Alec, don't strike your father. Don't lay a hand on him no matter what he does to you. Will you promise that?' And feeling the importance and gravity of the request, I promised, and walked into the presence of my father with my clothes dripping wet.

"'What is the meaning of this?' he wanted to know as he looked me over. 'It means,' I answered, looking him squarely in the eye, 'that I am now a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.' 'It does, eh?' he sneered. 'Well, come with me into the back yard.' Knowing better than to disobey, I followed.

"'Put up your hands,' he ordered as he faced me, 'and prepare to defend yourself.'

"But I just stood with my hands by my side. He struck me. And he struck again and again, each blow coming with a staggering impact, but leaving me still unwilling to offer a slug in return.

"After he'd worn himself out on me and his puzzled look had changed to one of wonder, he said, 'Well, have you had enough?'

"'Yes, I've had enough,' I answered evenly, 'And that's the last. Do you hear me? That's the last.' He nodded his head still wondering.

"With a few belongings stowed in a bag I stole from the house that night.

"I found work on a shipping vessel as a sailor's helper, and on board that ship I sailed the high seas for three years, touching most of the important ports of the shipping world in my travels. Everywhere I went my ears were opened for mention of the name 'Mormon,' and my eyes read every word about them that came my way. At the end of the three years, when I was twenty-one years of age, and by Scotland's decree a man capable of making his own decisions, I landed once more on Scotland's shore. I was thoroughly convinced that Mormonism was true and that the step taken three years before was the first one toward my final salvation. Finding my father had died, I made immediate preparations to migrate to America and gather with the Saints in the Rocky Mountains. Ever since, I've been fighting for the principles of truth and righteousness. May I be counted among the valiant ones on Judgment Day. Amen." [^6]

"I'm thankful for the peace and protection of the hills of Colonia Juarez," timidly ventured Thomas I. Hawkins on a rare occasion. "My object is to do the best I can to support my family, and I'm thankful for the chance to work at my trade again. (He was a tinsmith.)

"In my home in Salt Lake City, I suffered many trials and tribulations. I worked at well-digging, ditching, fencing and many other kinds of work as my object was to do the best I could to support my family.

"I remember the day when the power of evil was exercised against me, and gave me so much trouble that I could not eat or sleep. My mind being so troubled, and to give me an appetite and sleep, I foolishly took to drinking liquor. This I did thinking of doing myself good. But in course of time I saw it was not doing me good. It was doing me harm, although I felt better for a time and could eat and sleep better. I never felt wicked in all my troubles, my desires was always good. I was prayerful and humble before the Lord. Although I fretted and grieved very much day and night, still the Lord was with me. His holy spirit came in answer to my secret prayers. 'And 'ad not the Lord 'ave blessed me by pouring out his spirit upon me and giving me comfort and strength, I truly could not 'ave lived under such tryin' circumstances. Truly I realized the promise of the Lord that 'as thy day so shall thy strength be.' For I 'ave lived through it and 'ave retained my standing in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Lord 'as brought me safely through. Here I am rejoicing in the gospel of the Son of God. So I say, Seek the Lord at all times as his course is best. I recommend you all to do this and you will come out all right and I know it. Amen." [^7]

"A miracle converted me," confessed Bishop Sevey on one of his rare sermon ventures. "But it has not taken a miracle to keep me converted. The testimony it left with me is my choicest possession and burns ever brighter as the days pass.

"I left my home and widowed mother in New York to take part in the gold rush to California in '49. Had my job as teamster for a party of goldseekers held out, I would probably be there today among the discouraged and abandoned miners that fill the state. But the Lord intervened in a way that was hard to take, at the time. I fell so very sick that I could not continue with my party, nor could they wait for me to get well. They left me at a wayside camp, pushed on without me, and I probably would have died had a following party not picked me up and carried me with them to Utah.

"Before reaching Salt Lake City, I had heard much of Mormons but nothing favorable, naturally I was determined not to tarry among them. But being left stranded in Salt Lake City by the second deserting party, I had no choice except to reject the friendliness that was extended to me. Nothing but actual want induced me to accept work from one good Mormon brother who needed some teams taken to Palmyra where a group of Saints were struggling to begin a new community. While waiting for a chance to return, I took board and lodgings with a good sister who taught me the gospel by the way she lived it. Under her influence my steeled heart softened, and favorable impressions of the Mormons and their teachings crept in in spite of my resolves, though I took good care to let no one know of it.

"One night I went with them to a cottage meeting, more to please the good lady than because I was interested, and feeling sure my prejudice against their beliefs would never let them 'get me' I listened to the talks indifferently, passive and undisturbed, until one brother arose, took my attention, just as Patriarch Holt took it and yours a few Sundays ago by speaking in tongues, a strange language. The peculiar thing about it was that I understood him, I knew from the very start that he was speaking to me and telling me in a language that no one else seemed to understand, that I must not deny the voice trying to speak to me, nor be deaf to what it was trying to say. The plan of salvation was being shown me, he said, a way was being opened for me to accept this plan, and that if I did, I would be the means of taking the gospel to my widowed mother and be a savior to her. The idea shook me, left me so disturbed I was not aware of his closing. Not until the hush and quiet that followed could no longer be ignored. Then I came to with a start. The brother was asking who in the room knew the interpretations to the sermon in tongues I had listened to. I was amazed that no one answered. I was sure they must know what I knew, that they were keeping still to see what I'd do. When he pointedly asked me if I didn't have the interpretation, I kept still too, shaking my head vigorously as much to convince myself that I had not understood as to deny that I had. When the meeting broke up without any interpretation being given, I left the meeting feeling that every eye was boring me in the back, and that all were wondering why I had denied something I knew to be true. The uncomfortable remembrance of it kept me awake that night, tossed me about in my bed as I tried to make up my mind what to do. And not until I'd acknowledged the testimony and firm conviction that had come to me did I find rest. Then I went to sleep so soundly that I did not wake until the noise of the family assembling for breakfast awoke me.

"I then satisfied my conscience by making the confession I had formulated in the night, and my heart rejoiced with the spirit of peace that entered my soul, and for the conviction that my search was over, that the thing for which I had left my home had been found, and that it was something far more precious than the gold I had started for.

"I fulfilled the promise made to me and became my mother's savior. She followed me to Utah, Lem Redd's wagon hauled her from the Mississippi River to my home in Panguitch, and she was living with me when she died a firm believer in the principles of the gospel I had explained to her. She was a happy recipient of the ordinances that insured her salvation in the worlds to come. Amen." [^8]

"When ye are brought before rulers and judges, take no thought as to what ye shall say, for it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall speak," quoted W. R. R. Stowell as a spring board to a testimony that brought all to rapt attention, and gave an unsuspected background view of this venerable and energetic tradesman that, up to then, few suspected.

"I was a prisoner of Johnston's army," he continued. "Major Taylor and myself, an adjutant. We fell into the hands of his soldier outposts while doing scout duty in Ham's Fork near Fort Bridger in October 1857.

"I had in my possession a little black book containing orders from General Wells, some of his well-thought-out plans, as well as writings from my own diary. I knew it wouldn't be good for me if that book fell into enemy hands, and I did some quick thinking about how to dispose of it before we were searched. So as I marched along with soldier guards in front and behind me, I dropped a piece of paper to see if they'd notice it. They pounced onto it almost before it had reached the ground and examined it carefully before throwing it away so I knew I didn't dare try that with my book and in the daylight, but must wait for cover of darkness to drop it.

"When darkness fell, and the time was right, I drew the book from my shirt bosom. But before I could get it off my person, a quiet, distinct voice said, 'Keep it. It will do you more good than harm.' The voice was so close that I looked quickly to see who had spoken to me. And when I saw no one, I wondered if I were imagining things, for no living person would be foolish enough to make such a request. But it surprised me into complying though I was still determined that doing away with it was the only sane thing to do. When the chance came, I was restrained again by that quiet voice that spoke with more force and told again not to destroy that book as it would do me more good than harm. Though I desisted I still was convinced that the paper folded in that little book would be disasterous to me if it fell into officer's hands. After debating the question in my mind for some time, I determined to drop them no matter what the voice said. Reason dictated that they were a dangerous piece of property to have in my possession. Voice or no voice they must be destroyed. Whipping them out I determined to drop them quickly before the voice could stop me. But quick as I was the voice was quicker, and fairly shouted to me this time, saying, 'Keep them, they'll do you more good than harm.'

"This finally convinced me, and I replaced them in my bosom, but I was still apprehensive.

"At Camp Headquarters Major Taylor and I were separated, put under strict guard, and both very closely questioned, before a search was made. Why were we in the mountains, they wanted to know first of all, and under arms? How many Mormons were under arms, where were they stationed, and what was the number of their forces? To all these questions I answered quickly and without taking much thought, blurting out that we were part of a large army that had come out to repel a mob, that we'd been driven from Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois and forced to leave our property in the hands of mobbers, but that we didn't intend to walk off this time and leave everything we had to a vile mob, that we were ready to fight and that they'd find it out if ever they got close enough to be shown.

"All this had come pouring out before I realized how angry my questioner, Colonel Alexander, had become. But once I'd started I couldn't hold back all that was in my mind. And his continued questions made it easy to let it come. I told them the mountains were full of Mormons, that Echo Canyon was so well fortified that they'd never get through, that I myself had helped make the fortifications, and that we had stacks of big rock piled in strategic places ready to roll off onto them and smash them to pieces. And in anger, surprise and consternation the Colonel ordered me out and sent me back to my tent to be searched.

"When Sergeant Newman in his thorough search ran onto the little book, I controlled my anxiety, forced myself to seem casual and indifferent about it, and said calmly, 'It's only a little book in which I keep my diary, nothing important to you. And will you please let me have it again?' But instead he hurried with it to headquarters, leaving me most desolate and full of worry as to what I should say when they sent for me, as I knew they would,—and soon.

"And the words I just quoted, and ones the Savior gave to his Apostles, came to me as I walked from my tent to the Colonel's, and brought me the first calmness and peace of mind I had experienced since being taken prisoner. I entered his tent confident that no matter what I was called upon to say, that the right word would be put into my mouth.

"'Are you going to carry out General Well's instructions?' he wanted to know the first thing. 'If so, then you'd better get started to killing.' To which I answered that if they'd go back home and mind their own business, no one would interfere with them. And under his direct question I repeated much of what I'd said before, but clinched it all by saying, 'You have the Major and myself in your power. You can kill us if you are so disposed. But we are only two, and there are plenty left.'

"This closed the interview, and I was marched back to the guardhouse. I thought as they shoved me in that certainly I'd said things I had not intended to say when I left, and I wondered mightily if it was wise to talk as I had.

"But there was a change at once in their plans. Where they had been stationed ready to march into the valley and quell the insurrection beginning there, they now began to waver. Some argued they should still push on and show the Mormons how useless resistance was, but others more cautious overcame their impetuousness, and the result was that they moved into winter quarters to await the arrival of General Johnston himself. And before he got to them, winter had set in, and heavy snows impeded every step of their progress. Heavy wagon trains carrying their scanty supplies were strung out over a distance of six miles, the horse and mules drawing them became exhausted and fell off in flesh; and the heavy guards wallowing through deep snows, suffering from cold and discomfort, were afflicted with frostbitten hands and feet and ears. Cattle and mules died by the score. It was estimated that five hundred animals perished on the night of November 6. In fact, Black Fort where they were snowed in for a while was named 'Camp of Death.' Moving from there to Camp Scott, where they spent the winter, they were able to make but fifteen miles a day, and when they reached it, they, their animals, and their wagons were in too poor a condition to go farther. Even if they had been in better shape, they probably would have hesitated before pushing on for Major Taylor's and my report had disturbed their complacency about an easy victory.

"During the hardships of that long and severe winter, they had plenty of time to see that an inexcusable blunder had been made, and they were ready to accept any alternative that would correct it. Even the executives in the White House felt that an inordinate move had been made, and were ready to accept Colonel Kane's offer to be a mediator between the Mormons and their government.

"Colonel Kane was an old time friend of the Mormons, had had close association with them both in Missouri and Nauvoo, and knew the sincerity of their purposes, and being chosen as the instrument to effect a peaceable settlement was a fortunate choice for them. No abler statesman could have been found to plead their cause and convince Executive officials that the Mormons, if handled right or subjected to a sane approach, would prove to be a decidedly tractable people and the best prospective citizens in the nation. His trip to Utah, by way of Isthmus of Panama, to bring about a better understanding between belligerent parties, his unprejudiced view of both sides of the question, and his interview with Brigham Young proved that his estimate of the Mormon people was right. For Brigham Young voluntarily promised to do anything within reason to ease the strained relations, even to resigning his position as Governor of the Territory of Utah in favor of the appointed Governor Cummings to hasten the acquisition of peace. Only on the matter of allowing Johnston's army to enter Salt Lake City was he adamant. They could enter the valley, he told them, and pass through Salt Lake City, but they could not remain in it. And if in passing through they so much as lifted a hand against the Mormons or anything they possessed, the whole city with kindling and tinder ready, would go up in flames. And if they took possession of the City, they'd find it just as the Saints had found it ten years before—a barren desert. And to this provise Colonel Kane readily agreed, adding that their wishes to the last detail would be respected.

"He sent for Governor Cummings, who had been waiting all winter to assume territorial control, and waiting only until a satisfactory interview had taken place between Cummings and Young, and until the army had passed quietly through and established itself at Camp Floyd, he returned to make his report to the President of the United States that the Utah war was over.

"It was through Governor Cummings that I not only gained my release from custody of the U. S. army officers, but also received the first word from my home and family during my six months of captivity. My wife, Cynthia, gained courage to ask him to deliver a letter to me. Which he most graciously did, and which I most gratefully received. After reading it, I at once requested permission to greet the Governor face to face and thank him with my own lips. Standing in his presence, with my guard by request being absent, and feeling for the first time in six months that I was being treated as an individual, I could not say a word. I was too moved to voice my thanks when the chance to do so was given me. The governor was moved too, was unable to say a word until he had retired to gain control of himself. I could tell by the shocked look on his face that he hadn't expected to find a prisoner in chains nor one so emaciated as I then was, and when he returned from an inner room, he was wiping his eyes.

"He then told me to go ahead and say anything I wanted to. And after a half hour conversation with him, I knew more of conditions prevailing in Salt Lake City, and he knew more about the Mormons and the task ahead of him to be their governor than I had thought possible to learn in so short a time. And when I asked him at the close of the interview if I could have my trial soon, he answered readily, 'You shall have a fair, impartial trial. And the jury will not be picked from this camp.'

"On the first day of June I was released. I was made to swear my allegiance to the United States Government and was then taken to a blacksmith shop to have my irons removed. The blacksmith found a crack in the irons that I or any one else could have broken at any time. He was surprised that I had not discovered it, but was more surprised when I told him I had known it all the time. That had I been seeking the means of release from the custody of the U. S. army that I could have made my getaway any time during that long and painful winter.

"And so brothers and sisters," he concluded as they sighed at the close of his lengthy recital, "the Lord has proved that he keeps his word and is as mindful of us as of the sparrow whose fall he noteth. I thank him every day that I was a feeble instrument in his hand in staying the bloodshed and loss of life Johnston and his army would have caused had they made their entrance into Utah as they planned to. May we keep our part in our contract of partnership with Him, and ever remain trustworthy and true—Amen." [^9]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Account adapted from official minutes of the meeting.
[^2] Account quoted from the Spilsbury family history in manuscript.
[^3] The Word of Wisdom refers to Mormon teachings respecting personal habits, particularly the use of tobacco, tea, coffee, and alcoholic beverages.
[^4] A communal system of property dedication attempted at various times and places by some of the Mormons.
[^5] Adapted from official minutes of the meeting.
[^6] Taken from the MacDonald family accounts.
[^7] Quoted from the Thomas Hawkins autobiography.
[^8] 8. Taken from the Sevey family accounts.
[^9] 9. From the autobiography of W. R. R. Stowell. Stowell was perhaps the only man in the community who had had a personal acquaintance with Joseph Smith. He was a special missionary, along with members of the quorum of the twelve apostles, chosen to campaign the eastern states when Joseph Smith had offered himself as a candidate for president of the United States. He carried a copy of his platform with him, and had had several privileges of presenting it to interested audiences, when the martyrdom of the prophet called them all home to Nauvoo. He attended his funeral and was present at the meeting in the grove when the prophet's "mantle fell on Brigham Young," and Sidney Rigdon and his claims for leadership were discredited. To the end of his life he was a self-constituted witness of the divinity of the mission of Joseph Smith and never missed an opportunity to testify of it.
