Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

XII

VIVA MEXICO

THE COLONISTS, from the day of their movement into Mexico, observed with great zest the country's Fourth of July—Diez y seis de septiembre (16th of September) commemorating Miguel Hidalgo and the Grito de Dolores of 1810. On this national holiday the whole town would come alive at daybreak with the first simulated boom of cannon.

The 16th of September of 1896 celebration climaxed the first decade of settlement. Every detail of the memorable day was anticipated and provided for by committees. Cannonading at daybreak, serenading by the band and hoisting of the Mexican flag at sunrise were the martial preliminaries that set the tone of the day, but the colorful parade preceding the program was the event on which major preparations were expended. Floats representative of every industry fostered by the town and dramatizing the development and growth made by each in the ten years since settlement were entered. It was as gratifying to glory in seemingly impossible achievements and to demonstrate what faith, stamina, and determination could accomplish in a barren valley as to honor a day they had grown to revere. Patriotic fervor spoke from the red, white and green decorations on all the floats, in the costumes of the young ladies gracing them, from the flags bobbing on the bridles and breechings of the horses, floating from the standard bearer leading the procession, and from the hats of natives who joined the procession in prideful appreciation.

Promptly at 10:00 a.m. the parade left Cardon's corner in the upper part of town. Miles P. Romney, marshal of the day, seated straight-backed and majestic on a gaily bedecked charger, the plumes in his hat waving and the buttons on his coat gleaming, with booming voice and flashing sword gave the signal to start. Stretched from end to end of Main Street the parade made a spectacle that to be appreciated had to be seen. The band wagon followed the marshal and his aid Peter C. Wood, and in turn was followed by the Colonial Brigade, a cavalcade of seventy men and boys gloriously filing out on their own with a flag bobbing gaily from every horse. Then came carriages carrying Henry Eyring and Bishop Sevey, orator and chaplain of the day, floats, on which sat the Goddess of Liberty, Esther Coombs, and her attendants, and Miss Chihuahua with her accompanying twenty-six states of the Republic. All were costumed in national colors or decked with flags and bunting, and stirring dust as they marched.

Community floats made up the rest of the parade, each industry or activity typically presenting itself in some ingenious way. Humphrey and Wood had stalks of sugar cane, piles of corn, squash, turnips, and clusters of fruits displayed in tempting profusion to show the output from gardens and lots. Relief Society women carded wool, spun it into yarn and sewed on stacks of new and used clothing in characteristic resourcefulness. Ben L. Croff and James Mortensen as helper clanged anvils and plied bellows as they shaped rods of iron into horseshoes or reset wagon tires. John C. Harper wielded cleaver, knife and meat saw on the hindquarters of a beef as his wife, with baby sitting near, weighed out typical cuts of meat. Walser and sons, Clayson and sons, and J. C. Peterson combined leather tanning with leather products and proudly displayed sides of leather along with harnesses, boots and shoes. The cannery was represented by pyramids of canned fruits, some labeled and some not, piled beside Thomas Hawkins' glittering array of tinware from his tinshop. Roy Cluff plied his mason and stonecutting trade as he fitted both into a wall behind which he was all but hidden. Brigham Stowell with his stacks of yellow cheese by the side of a dasher churn in operation eloquently proclaimed the capacity to which his dairy had grown. The Cooperative Mercantile Institution with its bolts of cloth and the big variety of staple articles advertised merchandise kept in stock. Carpenters working with hammer and plane in a sea of shavings proudly displayed doors, window sash, and articles of furniture as a sample of their output. Sandwiched in between the more pretentious floats were neat loads of wood and hay, advertising not so much professions as utilities necessary to the life of the community. Bringing up the rear and climaxing the parade came a procession of forty-two wagons of individual citizens which all but exhausted the possibility of there being any spectators. These had joined in for the pure love of being a part of the celebration.

Grandly the marshal led them down Main Street, circled them about the lower blocks and onto Main Street again past the public square. Still keeping in formation they proceeded up Main Street beyond L. H. Redd's home, in the upper end of town, and came to a stop in the fields. Here the riding groups, the floats, and the wagons drew into a compact mass about the marshal who at once signaled the band to burst into a stirring strain of the "Himno Nacional." Then "Viva," shouted the orator of the day catching the spirit. And "Viva" answered the crowd. At once they all were shouting "Viva! Viva la independencia! Viva Mexico," "Three cheers for the brass band!" and "viva!" rang out again and again. Still cheering they turned, and following the bobbing plume and flashing sword of the marshal they made their way back through town to the Park where they adjourned to reassemble at two o'clock in the afternoon. Promptly on the stroke of the hour they seated themselves around an improvised platform in the Park. There, roofed over by leafy cottonwoods and cheered by the coolness of the breeze, they vibrated with stirring music from the band and spirited singing from the choir. They exulted in stories of heroism and tributes paid patriots by the orator of the day, and were moved to shout, "Viva la independencia!" and "Viva la Republica!" everytime Hidalgo, Morelos, Juarez, and other patriots were eulogized. They shivered with the round of shots the cheering provoked and stuffed fingers in their ears when the cannonading outroared the applause at the close of every part. They stood with bared heads while ten sweet-voiced singers each sang a stanza of "El Himno Nacional" and joined lustily in the chorus, fairly bursting their lungs as "Mexicanos, al grito de guerra" was executed "con espiritu." They laughed at the antics of the town comedian in a stump speech characterization, then bowed their heads in reverence as the benediction was pronounced by the chaplain.

Games and races in the street followed the program. A dance in the evening climaxed the day's festivities. Two hundred dancers, dressed in their best, happy and well-behaved, made the house a scene of elegance and chivalry and ended a celebration that would have done credit to a community larger in numbers and longer in settlement.

Another national holiday, the Cinco de mayo, commemorating a victory over the French at Puebla at the time of the Maximilian invasion called for cannonading, hoisting of flag at sunrise, and serenade by the band. But after these its martial elements subsided into a real welcome to spring and the climax of the occasion was crowning the Queen of May, setting her on her flower-bedecked throne and becoming her willing subjects for the remainder of the day. The queen was seated among her attendants on the platform in the Park with a profusion of greenery under the arching branches of the giant cottonwoods where her attendants braided the Maypole.

The queen continued to preside with gentle dignity throughout the day. Hampers were unloaded onto tablecloths spread over canvas on the ground and the whole congregation partook of a bounteous feast. Later there were sack races, potato peeling races, old ladies' races, children's races matched according to their ages with wheelbarrow races thrown in to give old and young a chance to participate and compete for a prize. Gathering into a circle, making themselves into a compact human wall, they turned a greased pig loose in the circle and set boys to catch, a sport reserved for the climax. And the boy winner in the slippery ordeal considered the straw hat held up for a prize a fair exchange for the fun he provoked in his mad scramble to finally pin the squealing porker down. Winners of other major contests had pennants pinned on them by the queen, peanuts, candy, or other knickknacks awarded to children winners of the races, but the prize of the day was reserved for the successful contestant of the tilting contest, a sport where expert horsemen, at a fast gallop, picked rings from a rod with long pikes. The queen was sweet awarder of all prizes.

Conspicuously on the sidelines was the refreshment stand with Sister Helstrum ladling out lemonade at five cents a pint, and handing out popcorn balls and bags of peanuts for the same price. Nickels hoarded in anticipation of this occasion were soon exchanged for a treat that was too often exhausted long before the demand was supplied. Home-grown popcorn made into crunchy balls, roasted peanuts with an exact number placed in each bag and the lemonade made by melting hard sugar in clear fresh water and flavoring it with lemon extract and tartaric acid were a part of every celebration and an attractive feature of every dance for as long as the thrifty widow lived.

Between the Cinco de mayo and the Diez y seis de septiembre came the celebration of the 24th of July with quiet centralization on a theme that in song, speech and drama paid tribute to pioneers of both Utah and Mexico. It was celebrated sincerely by recalling deeds of heroism and achievement and a heritage of hardy faith. Jollity and merriment were not excluded.

The celebration on July 24th, 1900 was a typical combination of humor and pathos which dramatized in a parade two blocks long pioneering as they knew it. Fifteen years of labor and sacrifice had paid off in improved living conditions, but was not so far removed that its hardships were forgotten. Early beginnings were safely down memory's lane and could be viewed passively, could even be cartooned in a parade that merged the ridiculous with the sublime. Leading the procession was Bishop Sevey in slouch hat and bushy whiskers. By his side sat his wife Martha Ann, in a billowing wrapper and clutching frantically but patriotically a huge red, white, and green flag. Drawing his wagon and giving it special recognition was old Darky, the faithful and still active mare who with her mate carried the Sevey family from Panguitch in 1885. In the wagon sat straw-hatted and tattered childen peering from the folds of a patched and torn wagon cover. Other dilapidated wagons followed with old covers stretched over bows of all kinds and sizes, drawn by burros and worn-out horses. Harnesses had tugs ingeniously mended with baling wire, with burlap padding under the collars, and with no breeching. Women in slat bonnets, torn and patched wrappers, knitted as they sat perched in all positions in and on the wagons.

For at least one woman, a pioneer in Utah, Arizona and Mexico, the caricature was objectionable as she observed "That is not the way we looked. We were clean, our wagons were in repair, and our neat patches were respectable looking and not just any color dabbed on." But the parade brought the laughs it was intended to provoke.

Following this procession of wagons marched a representation of the Mormon Battalion in full regalia, on foot and in perfect formation. William C. McClellan, a veteran of that historic group, led, his epaulettes sitting proudly on his shoulders, his own sword dangling at his side, and a banner in his hands. Buttons gleamed on all their uniforms, guns rested on all their shoulders, and dust was stirred by the tramp of all their feet, and in all their eyes shone pride as they honored the heroism of that famous band. When the caravan halted on the vacant lot (now the Academy grounds), McClellan conducted a spirited drill.

After the slow trek up and down the streets and across the river, neck yokes were dropped to let horses feed on hay brought along for the purpose, and all persons filed into the schoolhouse for a program of songs, recitations, speeches of eulogy, and recital of pioneer experiences, along with soulful singing of "Come, Come Ye Saints." After a dinner either at home or as a town affair the afternoon was devoted to frolic and the evening to gaiety.

These people were never happier than when commemorating important events or making merry together with any occasion as an excuse.

When Old Folks Day became a festive occasion in Colonia Juarez it was through the efforts of Alma P. Spilsbury who, while visiting his home town in Arizona and participating in an Old Folks Day celebration, became impressed by the need. Returning, he sold his idea to community leaders in Colonia Juarez who immediately set a day for its celebration.

To make the first gathering memorable Spilsbury carefully located every person, both Mexican and colonist who had passed the sixty-year mark, and on the morning appointed dispatched vehicles to carry them all to the place of meeting. There he greeted each one, escorted him to a place of honor in descending order of age. Badges were pinned on each one, a white one being reserved for those ninety years old and above. Red, green and blue badges were pinned on the 80's, the 70's and the 60's respectively. The program centered around the honored guests. Spilsbury himself had prepared a song for the occasion. Standing among them and with his heart in his voice he sang to the tune of "Hard Times":

"Let us cheer the hearts of the Old Folks.

Grandpa, Grandma, your sorrows we deplore;

We will make your burden lighter by kindness while we may,

O Father, bless them evermore."

Again and again it was sung until all joined with him. Every eye brightened and every face was wreathed in smiles. No merited praise was left unsung, stories were told and recognition given to everyone present. The same solicitous interest was evident at the dinner which followed. Waitresses filled every plate, supplied every want, and hovered near. When the party was over, each person was conveyed again to his own fireside to relive the happy day and anticipate others to come.

Later Spilsbury introduced a song "When You are Old and Only in the Way," and by singing it on other occasions besides Old Folks Day created a public sentiment that spread through the stake and resulted in the appointment of a committee to institute an annual Old Folks Day. Spilsbury was made chairman of the committee with Miles A. Romney and Daniel Skousen assistants. After Spilsbury's death in 1920 his efforts to promote cheer for the old folks were recognized by celebrating Old Folks Day on his birthday anniversary, August 5th. The occasion became so popular that it was changed to a Married Folks Day. But as such it lost its identity with the purpose for which it was instituted. It was later discontinued. Attractions of the day while it lasted consisted of barbecued beef, furnished and cooked by Lem Spilsbury, and special parts on the program by the older folks: a sentimental poem by Fannie C. Harper, a "tall" story by Miles A. Romney, and a stepdance from "Aunt" Clara Turley. As the latter tripped about in the center of the floor, holding her skirt slightly up with one hand so that her shuffles, her intricate cuttings with heel and toe action could be better seen, the observers forgot that she was an "old folks" and that her nimble feet had danced her through more than seventy years.

"Juarez is dead," decided Ernest Hatch as he listened to the program for Cinco de mayo read in choir practice the night before it was to take place. "Dead from the neck up," he continued as he thought of the day with no May Queen, no parade, no sports—nothing but a program in the morning and a dance at night! "All the town lacks is a burial." The thought fathered the idea of a unique celebration and he hurried to get help to carry out the idea. On the telephone Rita Bentley told him she agreed that all Juarez lacked was a swift and decent burial and suggested they get together to work out the gruesome details. Aunt Maggie Bentley was detailed to get the corpse ready for burial, Manrique Gonzalez was to make the coffin. Jesse Williams headed a group that dug the grave in the Park near the river and Ernest prepared the hearse and took charge of the funeral procession.

Timing his entrance into the program the next day just as the last number was finished, Ernest made his way to the front of the hall. There he very solemnly announced that a most unusual interruption to the day's festivities had occurred. That instead of the usual sports and contests of the afternoon there would be a funeral and a burial. The procession to the grave of the departed loved one would begin as soon as the benediction was pronounced and from the very door of this building. All were invited to join in. With bowed head and hands clasped he then walked slowly to the door. The audience in wonder rose and followed. Outside in an open coffin, one end of which was poked under the seat of a small buckboard, and the other projecting airily into space, lay a dough-faced dummy swathed in burial clothes and wrapped in a shroud. On one side of the coffin was inscribed in blood red letters the one word, "Juarez," and on the other side, "Rest in Peace." It was a tense moment, then someone giggled and the contagion spread. The crowd that had filed out to mourn now burst into cheers louder and louder as the buckboard moved off with the corpse. Whooping, all joined in the procession, following the one-horse hearse down the street to the Park, where they turned toward the river and joined in the circle that formed about the newly dug grave, gaping deep and ominous.

Thomas Romney delivered the graveside sermon pathetically touching off flights of oratory he little dreamed he possessed. He dwelt harrowingly on the tragedy that faced them with the passing of this grand soul and the suffering she probably endured in her final struggles for life. At a crucial moment he displayed to view the staring eyes, the painted and drawn features of this emaciated corpse, pointing out dramatically that every feature bore mute testimony to the agony endured when this grand personage faced death, and of the struggle put forth to stay in the land of the living. "But she is gone," he finished dolefully. "She is no more. Weep for that which has passed." Amid the semi-silence the stricken group had managed to assume, the dirt began pouring over the lid of the lowered casket.

"But halt!" a voice from the rear suddenly shouted. And bursting in among them came E. K. Fillerup, bishop's counselor and co-sponsor of public entertainments. "Just a word before you go forward with the burial of this departed personage who to all intents and purposes is indeed dead. We believe in a resurrection, do we not? that new life comes with and after death? Who will join with me to dig up this corpse and bring it back to life?" The hearty response to this request left no doubt that there was indeed much life remaining in the town of Colonia Juarez.
