Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

XIII

NOT WITHOUT HONOR

COLONIA JUAREZ along with the other Mormon colonies in Mexico was settled under the supervision of President John Taylor. He detailed six of the apostles at various times to assist, keeping them in the country for long or short periods and using them where their particular talents were most needed. With the exception of Francis M. Lyman all lived in Colonia Juarez, bought property there and left their mark on the early colonization. They are therefore included in this story.

John W. Taylor and Brigham Young, Jr., with the help of Moses Thatcher were instrumental in getting the order for expulsion revoked. In trip after trip to Mexico City they removed barriers incident to settlement. Francis M. Lyman headed an expedition into the mountains when land-purchase problems were most acute to give the Corrales basin official inspection and to authorize purchase should it prove satisfactory. Moses Thatcher was the authorized land purchasing agent for the Church. As appointed leader of the settlers, shoulder to shoulder with A. F. MacDonald, he piloted the way past difficulty after difficulty, thus carrying out a mission assigned him when he was made an apostle in 1879. He had organized the Mexican mission in Mexico City and had put great energy and imagination into the missionary work there. His contacts with key men in Mexico and his acquaintance with Mexico and her people especially prepared him to settle crucial problems as they appeared, to revive flagging spirits and to keep before the others the magnitude of their mission and of colonization possibilities. He had explored northern Chihuahua with Erastus Snow as soon as the Edmunds-Tucker bill had been passed. When Erastus Snow was released his mantle had fallen on the shoulders of Moses Thatcher. Together they went to Mexico City to adjust titles of land purchases already made and to purchase other lands: the Corrales basin, Strawberry and Hop Valley and 75,000 acres of timber land surrounding them. He was there when the new townsite of Colonia Juarez was dedicated, and gave the dedicatory prayer. He ever remained near the people of Colonia Juarez in spirit and came back again and again to visit them although property he had acquired there he had already disposed of—for colony benefit.

Erastus Snow had headed the Mexican mission in 1886, and for a brief period had cast his lot with the people of Colonia Juarez. With full intention of taking residence with them he chose a lot when they were apportioned out and was among the first to begin building. The rectangular two-story adobe house under the shelter of the eastern hill and facing the public square and later owned by Brigham Stowell still stands, a silent reminder that only his unexpected death in 1888 kept him from returning to occupy it. Brief as his sojourn was it exposed early settlers to his colonizing traits and left with them his faith and endurance.

George Teasdale, taking the place of Erastus Snow, moved into the Snow home and became the ecclesiastical head of the mission until it was made a stake. Earlier he had affiliated himself with Camp Diaz where he arrived April 1, 1885, and from where he was called to succeed Daniel H. Wells as president of the British mission, early in 1887. During his stay in Colonia Diaz he was advisor on camp problems, ecclesiastical director of meetings and conferences held, and helped officially in settling the expulsion order. He made the trip from Camp Diaz to Camp Turley on horseback, and by slow team travel from there to the railroad station at San Jose. He was chaplain in the exploration party headed by Francis M. Lyman, and approved purchase of the Corrales basin, the site for Colonia Juarez on the Piedras Verde river and Camp Diaz on the Casas Grandes river. He was preparing to move his family to Colonia Juarez when he was called to the European mission. Released in September 1890, he went to Colonia Juarez once more with full powers to direct Mexican mission affairs. He made regular visits to Colonia Diaz, Colonia Pacheco and Colonia Dublan. In 1894 he organized Colonia Oaxaca, the first colony to be established in the state of Sonora.

He instituted quarterly conference and rotated meeting places among Colonia Diaz, Colonia Pacheco and Colonia Juarez to equalize privileges. George Teasdale was at home when presiding over a conference, teaching doctrine, disseminating hope, dispelling discouragement, or when lifting his voice in praise. He encouraged good singing and named the first choir members in Old Town and instituted the choir in the new townsite.

Children were his delight. No effort should be spared in their training and no privations should retard cultural growth. Children's dances were to him a medium for teaching politeness. He demonstrated proper dance floor procedures and taught courtesy by example. Many a grandparent of today gives credit to George Teasdale for the first insight into social graces remembering what he did as much as what he said. As long as he remained in charge of the mission, children's dances were an important feature of every celebration. He lent dignity to the occasion by being present, led in the Grand March, taught changes in the quadrille and set a pattern of grace and gentility.

He encouraged children to sing and he sang with them, feeling when their voices rang out that he was in the presence of angels. "In Our Lovely Deseret," was a favorite song with its admonition to "always be polite, drink no liquor," and "eat but a very little meat." "They must not forget to pray night and morning every day" was the most important line of all.

Everywhere he went he wore a linen duster to keep his clothes free from dust or travel stains. The duster was so much a part of him that without it he seemed only partly dressed. He even wore it to church, never removing it until he stood beside his chair where it was neatly folded over the back. His steel gray hair, cut in a page boy bob and falling to his shoulders made a fitting outline for his classic face. He had lively brown eyes. His voice, pleasing and melodious, was heard at every religious gathering and gave force to his teachings.

His five years in Mexico entailed great personal sacrifice. Less than two years after moving his families into the country, the wife living in Colonia Diaz suddenly died. Her children were cared for by Mary Loretta in Colonia Juarez. Two days after the conference of December 8, 1895 at which he was released Mary Loretta also passed away. He returned to his home in Utah taking with him two sets of motherless children whose mothers were buried in Mexico. He had seen the mission grow from a few scattered camps on the Casas Grandes river to a stake comprised of six wards in two states. He had seen Colonia Juarez grow from a struggling dozen or so families to a thriving village of 616 souls. His work could speak for itself. He died in 1907 in Salt Lake City, Utah.

ANTHONY W. IVINS

Anthony W. Ivins was made president of the Juarez stake on December 8, 1895. At that time he was serving as first counselor to Daniel D. McArthur of the St. George stake and was affiliated with many growing enterprises. Leaving all was obviously a great sacrifice. This was his fourth mission to Mexico. The first three were of short duration and taken when he was younger, less encumbered with family, civic and church duties and in company with other missionaries who were sent into Mexico to search for colonizing lands as well as to spread the gospel. From one such trip in 1875-76 he had returned by way of the Casas Grandes valley, giving him an acquaintance with the region in which he would later live. His understanding of the Mexican people, his ability to speak their language and his acquaintance with the geographical location qualified him better than any one else in the Church to take charge and direct affairs in Mexico. In spite of sacrifices, therefore, he made preparations for an immediate move.

His call came in late August of 1895, and by November 30 he was in Colonia Juarez to be set apart by Apostle Francis M. Lyman. Henry Eyring and Helaman Pratt were his counselors. A High Council was named, heads of auxiliaries sustained, and all functions of the first stake in Mexico set in working order. He bought the home against the eastern hills his father-in-law, Erastus Snow, had built and in which Apostle Teasdale had lived, enlarged it to accommodate his wife and seven children and returned to Utah to complete business transactions and move his family. After attending the April conference in Salt Lake City he returned to Mexico and visited by team over rough mountain roads all the colonies of his newly acquired stake, securing land titles and attending to other business incident to settlement.

Again he returned to Utah to attend his mother's funeral. While there he rounded up and disposed of his cattle, relinquished management of the Mojave Land and Cattle Company, sold his home and tracts of land on the Santa Clara, resigned from ecclesiastical, civic, and social positions and said goodbye to friends and relatives among whom he had lived for thirty-six years. This year of preparation for his move set a pattern for the life he would live in his new work and to which his family must adjust. But the genuine welcome accorded him by the struggling people in the colonies eased and speeded the adjustment. What George A. Smith was to Iron County, Erastus Snow to St. George, Charles C. Rich to Bear Lake and Orson Hyde to San Pete a generation earlier, Anthony W. Ivins was to Colonia Juarez and the colonies in Mexico. Ex officio he became head of the Mexican Colonization and Agricultural Company. He was accepted as the final authority in ecclesiastical and civic affairs. On him rested the responsibility of settling questions, outlining methods of procedure, of setting standards.

Colonia Juarez because of his residence there profited most from the intimate exposition of his high standards and his stimulus to strive for a higher plane of living. He refused to let isolation and remote residence from civilization centers reduce him to primitive living conditions, and began immediate preparations to improve his environment. He bought a block on the west side of the river, and on it built a home, which in comparison to those surrounding it was a mansion. He fronted it with a dahlia-bordered, heart-shaped lawn, imported roses and shrubs to plant round it, and filled the lot with choice fruit trees, berries, and grapes. He built an attractive and spacious barn and outbuildings and filled them with imported purebred horses and cows including Plowboy, an imported stallion. His blooded dogs and registered chickens were in line. From a cement-covered cistern on the west canal he piped water to his home, making inside plumbing possible for the first time in the history of the town.

To end the periodic separation of the town in flood time and to make team travel safe at all seasons of the year he encouraged the construction of a stable wagon bridge across the river. After fifty years of use this bridge is a credit to its builders and has always given a certain prestige to the town. [^1] The only help ever received from the Mexican government by the colonists for public improvements was the thousand dollars paid by the governor Miguel Ahumada and two hundred fifty dollars donated by Luis Terrazas.

President Ivins donated a lot for the Academy and to hasten its erection turned to Ed McClellan the young bridge architect to get it built, a chance which was the turning point in Ed's contracting and building career. "Without the confidence and encouragement of President Ivins," he confessed, "I could never have tackled a job so out of proportion to my ability and experience." Before accepting Ed wrote to a well-known architect mentioned in his correspondence course and asked for help. The reply was a bid by the architect to do the work himself, promising to make the blueprint and specify graphically every detail of the building for a fee of four hundred dollars. President Ivins, however, declined and urged Ed to go ahead with the specifications outlined and see what he could do.

For most of a night Ed sat pouring over a pencil sketch of the finished structure as it slowly came to life in his mind, drawing out in detail the picture of both floors. When this sketch was presented for President Ivins' approval with location and size of rooms, stairways, halls, exits and entrances all carefully specified, it was accepted without reservations. Later he prepared a blueprint for the board of education. The board recommended that work begin at once. President Ivins took the lead.

He encouraged enlargement of the west canal which made running water possible in the homes and the installation of kitchen sinks and inside plumbing, the third step in modernizing the homes.

He was a keen huntsman, a clever angler, and an ardent lover of nature. Choosing to spend his few leisure hours in nature's solitudes, and giving apt illustrations of sportsmanship as he hunted and fished, he soon changed attitudes toward wild life abounding in the forest and streams, and created a wholesome respect for conservation. When his deer was killed and his quota of fish hooked, he put away his gun and reeled in his line. To him killing for the sake of killing was unsporting. He gave great care to the horse he rode, the gun he used, and the dog that helped him. This attitude he passed on to his sons and others who were privileged to be associated with him.

He founded a summer camp in North Valley near Chuichupa and took his family to it each summer. Here his gaming instincts found an outlet. Here his sons could ride and fish with him, and his daughters could cook the mountain trout, deer, and turkey the boys brought in. Here they all could learn the lessons of life he drew from nature. To him its secrets were an open book and his recital of drama taking place under his eyes, his reproduction of picturesque spots and his keen analysis of natural forces about him fascinated all who heard him. No one listening to his realistic description of the mocking bird who made its nest in the juniper tree near his camp in North Valley, and his dramatic portrayal of the maternal instinct that prompted the mother bird to let the hailstones batter the life from her frail body rather than forsake her helpless brood and seek her own safety, could ever again be unmindful of the tragedies and terrors besetting the life of the wild, or forget that kindred instincts urged all to fight for self-preservation.

Business trips he made to Chihuahua and Mexico City and Ciudad Juarez made many firm friends among leading officials of the state and nation. Among these were President Porfirio Diaz, then the sixth term president of Mexico; Fernando Leal, minister of colonization; Miguel Ahumada, governor of Chihuahua; Luis Terrazas, ex-governor and land king of Chihuahua; Governor Ortiz of Sonora and Colonel Kosterlisky, the fabulous soldier of fortune who commanded the mounted police force, the Rurales. His fair dealings with them were reciprocated and made lasting friendships.

As official host to visiting brethren from Utah he rarely let them return without a visit to some historic spot, or an opportunity to see nature through his understanding eyes.

Anthony W. Ivins was cut out for bigger things. While attending the semi-annual conference in Salt Lake City in October 1907 he heard his own name read with that of the quorum of twelve apostles. For the second time he was called to fill a position made vacant by George Teasdale.

His release as president of the Juarez stake removed from Colonia Juarez a great leader but it gave prestige to the colonies and put into the ruling quorum of the Church a man that never lost interest in their forward movement nor his love for the people there. He took advantage of his new position to make his services to them even greater than when he lived among them. Through the tragic happenings of later years he was ever their friend. He stood steadfast for policies that after the Exodus redeveloped the colonies.

Although his formal release, March 8, 1908, removed him from Colonia Juarez his influence there remains to this day. On the day President Ivins was released Junius Romney was sustained as president of the Juarez stake. He was but thirty years of age. It was a tender age to assume all responsibilities incident to the position but by natural endowments and training he was both capable and prepared. Junius Romney and Joseph C. Bentley served Colonia Juarez during its most crucial and turbulent times. President Romney's four years' incumbency was harassed by the 1910 revolutionary uprising, with incident political disturbances that ended in a complete break up of the Mormon colonies in Mexico and scattered their inhabitants to all parts of the United States. President Bentley's term of office involved resettlement problems and was concerned with preserving life, property, and ideals while political instability, persecutions from banditry and lawlessness hampered every effort. Only the loyalty of the comparatively few who shared his faith in a final restoration and rehabilitation to uphold and sustain made success possible.

The story of their struggles against great odds is reserved for later telling, but both earned a place among the leaders of the town.

Footnotes

To build a structure invulnerable to seasonal onslaught of floods, first consideration was given the supporting stone pillars. While stones already cut and sized were being hauled from the natural terrace or ledge in the foothills near the Taylor and Brown ranch, Ed and his crew of men set to work to dig to the stratum of hardpan they were sure was near the surface and would provide the necessary solid footing the structure required. Difficulties beset them. The hardpan was deeper than anticipated and the excavation filled with water. Before any depth had been attained, water poured in in such quantities that a pump had to be improvised to enable them to keep on with the excavation. But even with the horsepower Chinese pump that drew water out in barrelfuls, they still could not keep ahead of the flow. The crew, sensing the folly of pitting human strength against the force of a subterranean current, quit. In desperation Ed turned to his correspondence course for probable instruction and found that lumber platforms had been successfully used as foundations for stone masonry. Nothing was said, however, about water and Ed hesitated to use the suggestion. Then he remembered that the imbedded planks in the wooden turbine he had recently dug up at the Power House were in perfect state of preservation after years of lying in the damp soil of the river bed. He determined to follow instructions and give the idea a chance to solve his problem. He built a heavy plank platform to fit the water-filled hole, and with the help of his re-marshalled crew, laid it on the water. On this he placed the first layer of his stone foundation. As the weighted platform sank, he added a second layer and continued to build on it till it settled squarely and firmly into the hole. On this foundation he then raised the pillar to the desired height. Three pillars were thus built. During fifty years of constant use these pillars have withstood tons of flood waters hurled against them in periodic rushes and still stand firm and strong paying mute tribute to the builders.

---
Notas:
[^1] The words and spirit of the following song so well described the love of learning which characterized the men and women who settled Colonia Juarez that it was adopted as an unofficial school song and sung in school assemblies, teachers' conventions, alumni gatherings, and other educational functions.
