Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

XIV

THE LIGHT OF LEARNING

A SPIRIT OF LEARNING actuated the early leaders of the colony and from the leaders passed on to every townsmember. [^1] To them learning was light. Love of education was embedded in the very foundation of their colonization. Being ambitious to have the best for their children, schools became their first concern. Immediate provision was made for holding school; and in the short period of ten years, ten hard years, progress was made from a one-room ungraded school in a crude building in Old Town to the establishment of an accredited high school in the new settlement.

A rapid influx of settlers and constant expansion made possible the rapid growth of an educational system, and a forward looking board of trustees who carefully chose the teachers was responsible for the phenomenal advancement.

With men like Apostle George Teasdale to preside over an energetic and alert bishopric—George W. Sevey, Miles P. Romney, and Ernest L. Taylor—, and to be wholeheartedly supported by Henry Eyring, Helaman Pratt, A. F. MacDonald and others, it was inevitable that provisions for learning be made accessible to their children before steps were taken to provide shelters for themselves. All were veterans in the promotion of schools and learning. Some had served on school boards in other localities and were acquainted with problems besetting pioneer settlements and versed in ways of overcoming them. All had ideas on how previous operations could be repeated here in a foreign land. All accepted without reservations the doctrine that the "Glory of God is Intelligence"; that a man cannot be saved in ignorance, nor can be saved faster than he gains knowledge; and that whatever knowledge and intelligence we gain in this life will go with us to the next. Such beliefs were a moving power that took no stock of handicaps and allowed no barrier to shift their vision from the goal that "as man now is God once was, and as God is man may become."

Colonia Juarez was fortunate in that the majority of its men were determined not to allow primitive conditions to delay the beginning of a school system.

Annie W. Romney by unanimous choice was placed in charge of teaching. During the fifty-four days from the time of arrival to the completion of the stockade meetinghouse she took boys and girls into her dugout for a few hours of class work each day. January 30th, when the stockade building was completed, she moved into it, took her place behind the handmade table, seated her students on split log seats, and began a system of drill on the fundamentals of learning. She had no blackboard, no pen, ink, or paper, and nothing but laps to hold the slates some of the children were fortunate enough to possess. Only an odd assortment of textbooks carried into the country by herself and other parents constituted her teaching tools. But from her geography book with its maps, charts, and pictures, she widened the horizons and led her classes in fancy to all parts of the world to become acquainted with climates, children and living conditions of other lands and peoples. From her arithmetic book she taught basic rules for computation of figures, drilled on the multiplication table, and by repetition and use of rules made her students apt in the use of numbers. From her weekly spelling matches, preceded by oral drill on the words in her book, she produced accurate spellers. From her minimum of school readers she led her classes in concert oral reading, giving every pupil equal chance to enunciate and pronounce vocally every word in the lesson. Reading the whole lesson aloud made them all fluent readers. From the storehouse of her mind she dispensed vital information, from nature she taught the facts of life and the wonders of the world about her, and from the Bible, Church doctrine and by her own upright life she instilled moral and ethical teachings. Without a formal understanding of the laws of learning, without being versed in the principles of pedagogy and methodology, she set up a system of learning that completely mastered fundamentals. Her interest in the boys and girls opened their hearts to her, and the basic principles she drilled into them served as touchstones to desires to motivate proper use of knowledge and learning. One basic truth she put into simple terms by saying, "Be good, do good, and you will be happy."

Spring and fall terms of '86 and a spring term in '87 were held in the old stockade meetinghouse. By that time lots had been surveyed in the new townsite, families were preparing to take possession, and she moved her school with them.

While the provisional lumber building and the permanent adobe one were being built in the new townsite she held classes in her little lumber shack near the river.

January 1, 1889, a new 24 x 40 adobe room was ready for use. It seemed quite elegant with freshly painted school desks, a cupboard for books, a teacher's table, and a painted blackboard.

None but deemed the comfortable community house would be ample and roomy for years to come. But the constant arrival of new settlers, all with children of school age, soon crowded the seating capacity and made enlargement of the building necessary. Before the year was over a two-story concrete addition across the western end was begun. By the fall of '92 it was finished and the two large rooms more than trebled original quarters and made a formal school organization necessary with an enlarged faculty.

Dennison E. Harris was made principal and occupied the main hall. Annie Romney, directly supervising the intermediate grades, made use of the stage, while Sarah Clayson, teaching the smaller children, was comfortable in the rooms on the lower level.

The school at once attracted attention in educational circles in Utah, and Dr. Karl G. Maeser, general superintendent of the Church school system, was sent down to incorporate it into that system. He named a board of education with Elder Teasdale as president.

Dennison Harris had been a student of Dr. Maeser and had been induced by him to prepare to teach. He was an apt medium through which the virile teachings of Dr. Maeser continued to live in the minds and hearts of the young men and women in his department. Harris's lovable personality, his own high ideals, his genuine love for young people touched many lives, roused sleeping ambitions, built confidence, injected desires to reach higher goals, and set all minds toward finer and better manhood and womanhood. To many, contact with him was the turning point in their lives. To others he was the stepping-stone to work in higher educational realms. By all he was remembered as a friend, one they could go to when discouraged or when obstacles barred their way and get the particular help they needed.

In 1895, when Professor Harris had become involved in commercial pursuits that urged resignation from the school, other changes were begun in the school system. The establishment of colonies throughout Chihuahua and in Sonora made a stake organization desirable. This organization took place December 8, 1895; the Mexican mission became the Juarez stake and Anthony W. Ivins was made its president. Choosing Colonia Juarez as his home made this colony the headquarters of the stake. The changes for which he was responsible began in the Juarez ward.

At the first board of education meeting, of which he automatically became the head, he presented a plan: that education in the Juarez stake be centralized, making the school in Colonia Juarez into an academy, and the elementary schools in the various wards into seminaries as supporting units of the system; that the central school be strengthened until it could dispense academic training for young men and women who otherwise would have to go abroad for it; that a building be erected to house the Juarez Stake Academy, work on the building to begin immediately; and that a competent man to head the institution and educational system be secured.

Guy C. Wilson, a young law student at the Brigham Young Academy in Provo, was secured. Between the resignation of Dennison Harris and the arrival of Guy C. Wilson, Charles E. McClellan served as teacher. Professor Wilson arrived in Colonia Juarez September 11, 1897, and on September 20 he was formally installed as principal of the Juarez Stake Academy by Dr. Maeser, who came from Utah for that express purpose. He was also made inspector of all the schools in the stake. He took up the reins of school government as they had been laid down, instituting changes as his wisdom directed and taking steps to put the school on the same level as other schools in the Church. Adding one teacher to his faculty that first year, beginning with an enrollment of 176, he changed the "reader" system to grades, ended the year with an enrollment of 225, and graduated fifteen students from the eighth grade. These were to be his ninth grade or freshman class for the proposed high school.

During the winter he made a survey of school conditions in the stake. Noting the adverse conditions under which most of the schools were operating, the handicaps under which teachers were struggling, and the relatively poor results being attained, he recognized his primary step: If the Academy was to meet the needs of the stake, it must relieve teacher shortage and train teachers to do better work. In that thought a normal training department was conceived.

When school opened in the fall of '98, a teacher trainer was a member of the faculty. Miss Ella Larsen, a graduate of the Cook County Schools in Illinois, had been hired to supervise the work in the primary departments and to conduct normal training classes. Her work was supplemented by Professor Wilson's psychology and theory of teaching classes. Thus it was possible at the end of the year to send out some half dozen of the older pupils to take over the work in the seminaries equipped with the fundamentals of teaching and with the first semblance of good training.

This start was judiciously strengthened by further training as tenth and finally eleventh grade work were added, making more and advanced students available, which in turn brought stronger students from the seminaries. These, entering the central school, raised scholastic standards, on which the normal training course capitalized.

The normal training course continued to be the most important feature of the Academy, and stronger teachers were turned out year after year as Miss Larsen's successors carried on effectively. Ida Coombs, Maud R. Driggs, Lizzie Butler, Almeda Perry, Elizabeth Cannon, and others in turn left their stamp upon the teaching profession of the stake. The Academy continued to increase in usefulness by adding new departments, and expanding its course of instruction until it included four years of accredited high school work.

Normal training was further strengthened by summer school work, where in a two weeks session for both new and trained teachers pedagogical fundamentals were reviewed, new trends were scanned, and uniform standards set toward which to strive. Professors from Church schools in Utah were employed for these sessions to give short courses in teacher training work, to promote discussions, to introduce new theories, and to keep the Academy work on a par with that of other Church schools.

As the enrollment increased, new courses were added, more teachers were employed to teach them, and the commodious classrooms in the new building were all too soon filled to capacity. Too soon was heard again the cry that twice before had sounded. "Room!" shouted the students when seating capacity failed to accommodate them. "Room!" shouted the teachers when they were forced to commandeer borrowed buildings for new courses begun. And "Room!" shouted President Ivins, whose dream of a more expansive Juarez Stake Academy seemed ripe for fulfillment. The board of education went into session to find ways and means to provide that room.

Plans to erect a new academy building were the outcome, and a meeting for presenting them to patrons was called. If heads of families dreaded another building burden or questioned their ability to be taxed further, it was not apparent in the number who packed the house in answer to the summons. Every bench was filled with eager patrons, and desks were pushed in from the side rooms to accommodate the enthusiastic men, women, and children who flocked in to support the enterprise.

President Ivins, waiting only until preliminaries were over and the purpose of the meeting explained, set the tone for the spirit of giving by donating a five-acre lot for a building site. "It's the place for my dreams to materialize," he said, his voice a bit emotional, "and a chance to let you see the picture I've had in mind ever since my first visit to the town." And in a few terse words he pictured an Academy campus dotted with special purpose buildings and interspersed with playgrounds and trees, which would follow the erection of the building now under consideration. Over it all he spread a glow of possibilities, of a town growing to meet the cultural needs of its collegiate possibilities, and in every way matching its excellence.

This master stroke was greeted, not with profound silence, but with immediate bids for a chance to contribute—bids that came so fast and in such volume that Professor Wilson was forced to call a halt and, in a voice also touched with emotion, to beg them to take their turn and give the clerk a chance to make proper recordings.

When the meeting closed two hours later, not a person in the room but had pledged donation for cash or labor or both, every cent and hour of which came from willing hearts, hearts that counted personal sacrifice no sacrifice at all when educational advantages for their children were concerned. Whether $5.00 denoted the limit of one, or sums running into three figures from others, it represented their utmost. The grand total when the meeting was adjourned was $12,000, and with squared shoulders and shining eyes they walked out, happy for the tangible evidence that President Ivins' dream could now come true.

This initial sum, matched by an appropriation from both stake and general boards of education, and further swelled by contributions from other wards in the stake, made it possible to begin work immediately. Ground for the new building was broken December 29, 1903, the cornerstone was laid January 8, 1904, and work on it was vigorously pushed until it opened its doors for instruction in September of 1905. In fact, completion had been near enough in the spring to permit holding commencement exercises there. [^2]

With its completion education in the Juarez stake took another decided step forward. By 1908 diplomas of graduation were issued in four departments—normal and high school courses of four years each, and commercial and agricultural courses of three years each. In addition, certificates were awarded at the completion of a three-years' course in music and a two-years' course in domestic science, domestic art, and missionary training work. Also by that time the institution occupied four well equipped buildings, and had a staff of eighteen faculty members. The carpentry shop, the third building to be added, was supplied with both machinery and tools. The domestic art department with four new sewing machines, and the domestic science department with a stove and cooking utensils, each occupied rooms in the Ivins home. [^3]

The commercial department was equipped with six new typewriters, the library was well-stocked with good books, and the museum housed a small but choice collection of specimens. In addition the school sponsored an orchestra and a band. Members of both organizations were dressed in green uniforms trimmed with white—official colors of the school. The worth of the Academy to Colonia Juarez was obvious. To have such an institution maintained there made this colony prime beneficiary of the school's cultural offerings.

The Juarez elementary school served as the teacher-training clinic. It was manned by the best qualified teachers in the stake, and was under the direct supervision of the teacher-training specialist, who besides doing expert demonstration work in her own department, also by her efficient supervision kept learning at a high level in the other departments. The children although subject to the experimentation process were exposed to a brand of professional teaching that gave both distinction and prestige.

The high school provided benefits for Colonia Juarez young people in an even larger way. Without leaving home and at a nominal cost they had access to an academic training in a wide choice of vocational and professional subjects—could be taught by specialized teachers in the fields of education, agriculture, business, music, art, drama, domestic art and science, and carpentry. In addition courses in theology and missionary training were offered. Once enrolled their conduct was subject to closest inspection, both in school and out, and every device to stimulate them to higher endeavors and to more useful lives was employed. Teachers in both the elementary school and the Academy took residence in the town and by means of the homes they maintained and the service they rendered added distinction to the place. High-minded men and women, they gave freely of their time and talents to community activities.

The presence of the Academy was responsible for an almost immediate improvement in home and living conditions in the town. Obviously an influx of students for nine months required that most of the homes open their doors to them for board and room or housekeeping facilities. At first this was done with extreme inconvenience, for a spare room was furnished at the expense of overcrowding in other quarters, and the comfort of a guest was secured at the cost of family discomforts. But benefits usually outweighed inconveniences by enlarging the circle of friends and acquaintances as well as by providing a slight financial gain and there was a concerted move on the part of all homeowners to meet the need, either by remodeling, by a substantial addition, or a new house outright.

Proof of the appreciation of the residents of Colonia Juarez was given by the wholehearted support they gave the Academy program. Guy C. Wilson was acknowledged as the moving power behind the progressive educational system. Generously endowed with the qualities of leadership, he seemed to see the end from the beginning, and by canny placement of teachers and aids, bolstered weak spots, built up strong points, and dynamically incited all to better work. He influenced his school, his teachers, and his fellow townsmen through his philosophical talks in public meetings and lifted parents to new levels of thinking through his parents' class on Sundays. Through the high council and the board of education meetings he provoked betterment moves throughout the stake. His summers were spent at eastern universities and he returned primed with new ideas which he introduced at the first feasible opportunity. Nowhere was his influence stronger than in his classroom and among the students. As a psychologist he understood the workings of the human mind and possessed the ability to put the principles of the science to work in such practical terms that his students learned much by example. Many a young man owes his moral growth or release from the shackles of cigarette smoking, even success in life, to the help given by this stimulating teacher. Many a latent desire was awakened, many inhibited ambitions were released, and many a new start was made after contact with the warm personality of Guy C. Wilson. His sincere interest in the student's development and his unshakable confidence in the student's ability often resulted in a changed life. Bonds between him and students thus privileged were cemented never to be broken.

Except for one teacher each year imported from Utah the entire teaching force was recruited from local talent—outstanding members of the graduating classes and capable men and women in the community who showed special aptitude. Into them Professor Wilson built his ideals, to them he imparted his vision of the goal set for them, fired them with his ambition, and then left resourcefulness and native ability to do the rest. In few cases was he disappointed; more often he was surprised by the good results. Many of his students and teachers later pushed on to distinction. A philosophy of life had been formed which set their faces in the right direction and provided sure and safe guide posts. Among the many men and women who worked with Professor Wilson through the years was Charles E. McClellan who worked side by side with him from start to finish. An educational system resulted which was gratifying to the Church that sponsored it, a source of pride to the colonies and a vindication of the founders who envisioned it.

Footnotes

"Let there be light," the Master said,

The sun arose, the shadows fled.

So now the darkness takes its flight,

And learning holds aloft her light.

And 'neath its pure and steady ray

The nations take their upward way.

And with the power the light does give

They live to learn and learn to live.

—Anonymous.

---
Notas:
[^1] The words and spirit of the following song so well described the love of learning which characterized the men and women who settled Colonia Juarez that it was adopted as an unofficial school song and sung in school assemblies, teachers' conventions, alumni gatherings, and other educational functions.
[^2] The metal plaque over the entrance to the Academy reads: ACADEMIA JUAREZ, i.e., Juarez Academy. Even so the institution is referred to as the Juarez Stake Academy in line with traditional Church terminology and the fact that the school was designed to serve the entire stake—i.e., all of the colonies.
[^3] The Ivins home, the fourth building to be acquired, was purchased from President Ivins when he moved to Salt Lake City.
