Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

XV

WARS AND RUMORS

BY THE FALL OF 1910 Colonia Juarez was at a high level of prosperity. Joseph C. Bentley and counselors Thomas C. Romney and Archibald Clayson presided over a ward membership of seven hundred souls. Church organizations, fully officered, were functioning effectively in educational, cultural, and recreational fields. Local peace officers, Alonzo L. Taylor as presidente and Guy Taylor as policeman, kept delinquency at a minimum. The schools required a faculty of eighteen teachers and occupied four buildings. Scholastic standards were on a par with comparable schools in the United States.

Industries were flourishing. The Colonial Mercantile Company, then a branch of the Union Mercantile Company in Colonia Dublan, had a stock of merchandise valued at ten thousand dollars and was housed in a handsome, commodious building with a roomy warehouse behind. John W. Wilson, an experienced Kentucky merchant, was the competent manager and he was supported by a well-trained sales staff and assistants. Orders were accepted by telephone and deliveries made free of charge. Doyle Humphrey and his fast moving delivery wagon symbolized the progressive merchandising of the Colonial Mercantile. The store also housed a central telephone office which connected service to homes, schools and business concerns in the community. There was also long distance connection with the other colonies.

The shoe and harness shop and tannery, merged into one business called the Juarez Tanning and Manufacturing Company, was operated by the Taylor brothers, Alonzo and Adelbert. The old Co-op served for shoe shop and sales and a new brick building to the east served for manufacture of saddles and harness and for tanning. Hides bought in the surrounding country, tanned in their own vats, finished at rubbing tables and made into a fine grade of leather, were manufactured into products that, besides supplying all local needs, found a ready market in all parts of the republic.

The old W. R. R. Stowell gristmill, by now owned and operated by Daniel Skousen, was grinding night and day, supplying a good grade of flour to all the nearby towns and carload lots to all parts of the state.

Homes were well stocked with provisions. Pantries were filled with preserved fruits and vegetables, and cellars contained barreled pork, beans, flour, corn meal and shorts, besides apples, rooted vegetables and squash.

The Pearson Lumber Company was but ten miles to the south. With two band sawmills, planing mills, operating and drying sheds, burners and other buildings necessary to handle the huge output of lumber, it was rated as the largest lumber company of the West at the time, and was fast developing into a lumber center around which a flourishing American city was being built. From the myriads of projects set in motion, men, boys and even women of Colonia Juarez found gainful employment, some taking temporary residence, others riding back and forth to earn their share of the many dollars put into circulation.

Daily trains connected the border city of Ciudad Juarez (El Paso) and Pearson. The service equalled or surpassed any to be found in the republic.

There were no saloons, pool halls or drunkenness. Smoking was rare and the drinking of tea and coffee was discouraged. Church leaders visiting the colony were quick to note that the brand of culture achieved there was in the front rank of excellence.

Rumbles of a revolutionary storm had been heard but had given little concern. Minor outbreaks had been so quickly quelled by the iron hand of the Diaz regime, fiery advocates of equality and justice for the masses had been so effectively quieted that any upheaval seemed remote and improbable. But the unrest of the masses and the smugness of politicians in control had been noted by wise colonists and concern had increased with the passing of time. Porfirio Diaz, Mexico's first president to bring a semblance of peace to the nation, had overstayed his term of office. Power-lusting politicians with whom he had filled his cabinet had usurped power his advancing years were unable to hold. Invited foreign capital had developed resources in the country, the proceeds of which should have helped the poor of the nation instead of being used to enrich the few. The gap between the rich and the poor was too great, the difference between those who had all and those who had none was too apparent. Everywhere the small number of patrones oppressed the large number of peones who were dependent on them for every centavo that passed through their brown hands. Everywhere the lordly patrones owned lands by the hundreds of hectares, pastured their thousands of cattle, rode horses bridled with silver and carriages cushioned with elegance, and everywhere the poor peon walked, or rode a burro, and if he was lucky pastured a few scraggly goats. Everywhere the opulent patrones in fine clothing looked down upon the poor peon in his cotton manta trousers, his straw sombrero, his tegua guaraches and his one-roomed huts where cooking was done over open fires.

A firsthand example of these conditions could be seen on the San Diego ranch only six miles below Colonia Juarez. The San Diego hacienda was one of the divisional headquarters for the vast estate of Luis Terrazas. In an elegant central home (Casa Grande) lived Don Jacobo Anchondo, the mayordomo, and his family. Around it squatted the long adobe buildings, each room of which housed a family of one of the vaqueros who rode the range and cared for the thousands of cattle pasturing on the surrounding llanos or field hands who tilled the soil.

For long hours of service in the saddle or in the fields these workmen were paid thirty pesos (dollars) per month, every centavo of which must be spent in la Tienda de Raya (company store) on the ranch, where long before the peon had paid for the beans, chile, sugar, coffee, tobacco and manta his family consumed, all of his money was gone and a deficit was left that must be subtracted from the next month's earnings. Each month of each year saw him deeper and deeper in debt, more firmly shackled to Don Jacobo's vassalage, and less able to leave for more lucrative work elsewhere. The laborers were in reality slaves. Minor attempts to relieve the plight of the few had been made by some sympathetic colonists who purchased peons from Don Jacobo by assuming their indebtedness. These were given a substantial wage, and provided with a higher scale of living.

The colonists were grateful for privilege extended to them, for colonization privileges granted them in the beginning, and maintained a general feeling that Porfirio Diaz was a friend in need, yet they were not blinded to the plight of the poor peon, or unaware that sooner or later some overt act would precipitate a crisis. Not many but could predict that a leader to bell-wether a movement toward restoration of expropriated rights would at once claim the support of the downtrodden masses.

Francisco I. Madero proved to be that leader. Both his political intentions and background gave prestige. He was from a wealthy family in Coahuila, had early in life been fired with the injustices suffered by the continued re-election of Porfirio Diaz and his cabinet.

His political views were published and given wide circulation, causing an awakened public to organize and promote new political parties. The Anti-Re-electionist party nominated him for president to compete against Diaz in the October, 1910 elections. The campaign he began was a danger signal to Diaz supporters, and Madero was arrested and thrown into prison. With all opposition removed, on October 4, 1910, the Chamber of Deputies announced that Porfirio Diaz had been elected for his seventh term of office.

Madero retaliated at once. From San Antonio, Texas, where he had fled after his escape from prison, he denounced the re-election, declared himself the provisional president of Mexico, and called on the nation to support him in his claims. Assuming leadership of armed revolutionary forces of Mexico, he set November 20, 1910 as the official date for uprisings to begin. This declaration, called the "Plan of San Luis Potosi," also demanded that confiscated, despoiled and expropriated lands be returned to rightful owners and that proper indemnity be paid for damages suffered by the despoiled.

While this declaration made little impression on the campaign victors sitting smugly in long-held positions, blandly ignoring danger signals because of the supposed strength of their strongholds, it was the crisis which colonists had foreseen with apprehension. It was recognized by them as the tinder necessary to set off smoldering resentments.

Chihuahua, with Casas Grandes in the lead, was the first state to revolt. Pascual Orozco, Abraham Gonzalez, and Francisco Villa took the initiative and declared allegiance to Madero. By May 9, 1911 the revolutionists had recruited an army of insurgents strong enough to storm and take Ciudad Juarez, the port of entry on the north. Prestige, recruits and money gained there made possible the concerted move toward the national capital for an attack on the political stronghold of Porfirio Diaz.

There is space here only for a glimpse at the revolution in order to show that Colonia Juarez was suddenly faced with changed life which changed political conditions induced. First there was restlessness among the natives which found vent in a sudden disrespect for law. This attitude was at first felt rather than seen. Submission to law enforcement became tinged with resentment against those who enforced it, a challenge of authority. This grew into overt acts of insolence, open derision and finally into petty thievery. Bands of revolutionists coming into town to request help from businesses able to supply revolutionary needs increased this tendency to licensed robbery. Polite requests for horses, saddles, etc., from the Tanning and Manufacturing Co., sacks of flour and grain from Skousen's mill, and merchandise from the Colonial Mercantile, turned into firm demands. Owners of these properties were forced to comply and to accept in payment only promises or written agreements that both parties knew could not or would not be kept.

Added to their losses was the feeling of insecurity manifest by government officials at Casas Grandes. All had been "standpatters" for the Diaz regime, all had been overlong in their offices, and until the sudden capitulation of Diaz and his cabinet in Mexico, D.F., had regarded their terms of office as indefinite if not permanent.

Concern for the colonies under the unsettled conditions was shared by Mormon Church leaders in Salt Lake City. A. W. Ivins was sent down to confer with them, to study trends, to advise and suggest ways of preparing for unforeseen or unpredictable happenings. "Remain perfectly neutral," he admonished. "Take no part with either side. Solicit judiciously the protection of whatever faction is in power. Explain carefully your position, and strive always to be at peace with them. Accede to their demands in reason, and give or deny with all the wisdom in your possession. Be humble, seek diligently the help and protection of God. Do this, and though you may lose your property and animals, I promise you you will not lose your lives." There was no one in whom the colonists had greater confidence than A. W. Ivins; he understood their drastic situation and the hazards confronting them. His advice was the word of authority to them. After his departure they turned confidently to stake and ward leaders for directions when crises or dilemmas presented themselves. Junius Romney was a member of the Juarez ward but president of the Juarez stake, and as such the official representative to stand between them and revolutionary forces when they came in conflict. Following instruction of A. W. Ivins, President Romney made contacts with General Inez Salazar when he became leader of the rebel faction with headquarters at Casas Grandes seeking to gain promises for special consideration and leniency. When these promises were overridden or ignored, President Romney got them repledged, and did all in his power to save the people from being despoiled. No personal violence or property extortion was suffered without President Romney's being notified, no redress was claimed without petitioning his aid to effect it. When Mr. Black, the watermaster in Guadalupe, and later Elizabeth Mortensen were killed, when A. D. Harvey and later William Adams were shot and killed in Colonia Diaz by officers of the law who invented charges to justify, President Romney sought redress, importuning those in power for justice and calling on Salazar again for the protection needed. Though obtaining justice was an illusive hope and often time seemed wasted in making the attempt, he continued to work for peace. These tragedies all referred to occurred outside the confines of Colonia Juarez but were an influence in spreading the spirit of lawlessness. One agitator, malcontent, Toribio Lara, brazenly and belligerently goaded peace officers and openly invited a following. He was twice arrested and twice freed by native policemen who justified themselves by saying there were no jails in which to confine him. Under his growing leadership petty stealing blossomed into open burglary, Toribio always taking the initiative. He entered a widow's home, and after taking what he could find daringly demanded one hundred dollars from her, arrest for which again earned him an easy release.

As civil control became disorganized, thievery, robbery, and burglarism flared into open contempt of law or of those attempting to enforce it. Granaries were looted, clothes were stolen from the line, and even pantries were invaded. There seemed to be a concerted attempt to provoke an issue that would license violence. Only a certain respect which colony peace officers had earned from delinquents in the past, and the influence of strong personalities in handling flagrant violations curbed complete lawlessness, avoided an open break and kept a semblance of peace.

With the abdication of local Diaz officers and no Maderistas installed in their place, the Ponce brothers from Galeana licentiously took over.

Then raids on businesses in Colonia Juarez became serious. Soldiers galloping into town to do the bidding of both Demetrio and Lino Ponce were told by local informants where to go to get munitions and other things they wanted. Whether it was saddles, bridles, chaps or shoes, corn, flour or bran they went unerringly to them, loaded them into wagons brought along for the purpose, left worthless receipts and rode away. It made little difference if officers heading the foraging parties had attended colony schools or had done satisfactory business with the colonists, so strong was the impulse to take that no special consideration was given. They needed what the Mormons had and took what they wanted.

In the midst of this a simple act of thievery all but threw the town into the throes of civil war.
