Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

XVI

TINDERBOX

SOMEONE was persistently milking John Hatch's cow without permission, depriving the family of milk and causing considerable anxiety. John was working at Pearson, but on a weekend home he determined to discover the culprit. Accordingly he concealed himself in the barn at night with a salt-loaded pistol in hand. About four o'clock in the morning his long vigil was rewarded. He saw the dark shadow of a man creep into the corral and seat himself at the cow's side. "Alto!" shouted John as the first stream of milk hit the bucket. But the fellow instead of surrendering bolted. John fired at his rear end as it wormed under the fence and again as he fled across the street.

At daybreak John and his brother Ernest followed the thief's tracks straight to the house of Toribio a block away. Inasmuch as the family was seemingly still asleep, the Hatches went at once to Alonzo Taylor, the presidente (sheriff) to enter a complaint. Alonzo was away on business so they turned to ecclesiastical authority only to find that President Romney and Bishop Bentley were both marooned in El Paso by disrupted railroad service.

The situation presented complications. Serving a warrant in the absence of both ecclesiastical and civic heads was a grave matter. Charles E. McClellan, councilor to President Romney and Thomas C. Romney, councilor to the Bishop, and Guy Taylor taking the place of the presidente, called in other leading men to consider the problem. After careful deliberation they finally decided to arrest and prosecute in spite of their annulled authority, otherwise such incidents would increase. Accordingly, Amos Cox, who held a written commission from the former jefe, headed an arresting squad with Guy Taylor and Ed Eyring as aids. With them went S. E. McClellan and Guy C. Wilson.

Toribio was absent when they called, had been gone for some time, they were told. However, they served their warrant and gained permission to search the house. To their surprise they found a room full of loot. Flour, bacon, bottled fruit, quilts, clothing, tools, etc., a veritable cache of stolen articles, many of which were at once recognized. All goods were repossessed and four men in the house were arrested.

Meting out justice was the next and most precarious step. Lest the situation resolve itself into a racial issue they called in twelve Mexicans to deliberate with them. When all facts in the case were carefully studied, a unanimous decision was reached that, for want of a jail, the four men should be confined in the tithing office, and that in the absence of Alonzo Taylor someone must be appointed to assume control. This "someone" must have the confidence and respect of the Mexican people and be favorably inclined toward the colonists. Some discussion took place before such a man was found.

Senor Jesus Jose Rodriguez, a man of commanding appearance, and a former judge from Chihuahua City now in the employ of the Taylor Tanning and Manufacturing Company was suggested. As soon as his name was mentioned, he became at once the unanimous choice of both colonists and Mexicans. Monday morning, April 10, therefore, he assumed control and with extreme precision called a court session in the tithing office to decide on a just sentence for the offenders. No sooner had the session begun, however, than Juan Sosa, a local Mexican, interrupted the hearing. He showed great anger over the arrest of the four prisoners being tried. Belligerently he lurched into the room, hurling abusive language at Senor Rodriguez and at the colonists. Ignoring Senor Rodriguez's courteous and dignified order for silence, he advanced, shaking his fist and making threats. When strong hands expelled him from the room, he shouted, "I will kill every Mormon here and Senor Rodriguez along with them."

This violent exhibition of vindictive hatred presented a new aspect in the case—if Juan's hostility expressed the feeling of the lower element of natives, of which he was the recognized leader, might he not stir up more trouble than they could cope with? Furthermore, Toribio had returned and the two of them might menace both peace and lives before morning. Senor Rodriguez sensing the danger and to establish his authority, acted at once by ordering Juan's arrest. Guy Taylor, with seven deputized men to assist him, was detailed to do the arresting. He chose John Telford, Jesse M. Taylor, Leslie Coombs, Ed Taylor, Charlie Conover, Frank Lewis, and Ernest Hatch. With Guy on horseback, the others on foot, and all armed with loaded rifles, they left to carry out their order.

They found Juan irrigating his corn in Duthie's lower lot. He watched their approach from behind his lowered hat brim, his very posture expressing belligerence and hostility. To their casual greetings he eyed them tensely but answered nothing. To their inquiry as to the whereabouts of Toribio he replied gruffly that he wasn't Toribio's keeper. When informed that they had come to arrest him he flew into a rage. He defied Rodriguez. He defied anyone who attempted to use assumed authority and dared them to come through the fence to get him. Thus challenged, the deputized officers felt they had no choice. "Go take him," ordered Guy, and Frank Lewis stepped forward, the others falling in behind. But as Frank stooped to pass through the wire fence, Juan struck with his shovel, laying Frank's skull open with the first blow. Before Frank's body had reached the ground Juan's shovel had struck him again. It was raised to strike the third blow when a volley of shots from the deputies rang out and Juan fell dead.

Pandemonium followed. Juan's wife, his sister, his friends all came running and screaming. His neighbors joined in the hue and cry and immediately the lot was filled with friends, neighbors, and relatives, all screaming, cursing and swearing vengeance, gesticulating and shaking fists. The only reason the arresting officers were not attacked was that they carried guns. The killing was interpreted as outright murder, not as arrest resisted.

Realization of this interpretation sent Guy speeding to Rodriguez to acquaint him with the alarming turn the attempted arrest had taken. Ed, Jesse, and Charlie helped the half-conscious Frank to his feet, steered him to a waiting buckboard, and rushed him to medical help, leaving Leslie, John, and Ernest to guard the dead man until officers could assume control, an assignment that only their guns made possible.

Senor Rodriguez, returning with Guy, took over with calmness and dignity. He dispersed the crowd with firmness, allowing only immediate relatives of the slain man to remain with the body. Then, either to mollify the frenzied family members or to show disapproval of the drastic measures the arrestors had resorted to, he placed the deputized officers under arrest. He answered their surprised looks as he disarmed them by explaining that it was customary to hold all until an investigation had disclosed all facts in the case, when they probably would be released—a supposition which they questioned as they were led back up the street as prisoners and placed in confinement in the tithing office along with the four prisoners already there.

Next day the presidente called another preliminary hearing, but again their court session suffered interruption. This time it was Lino Ponce, the brother of Demetrio Ponce, the self-constituted presiding officer in Casas Grandes, with three other armed men who walked in as the court convened. They announced they had been authorized by Demetrio to investigate the killing of the day before, and since the court was in session for that very reason they would listen to the presentation of facts. Taking their seats they listened quietly as the grim details were rehearsed. They shook their heads dolefully over some parts of the recital, but in the end they commended Senor Rodriguez for the capable manner in which he had handled the unfortunate affair, particularly in his arrest of the Mormons. Lino insisted that Guy Taylor, Leslie Coombs, John Telford and Jesse Taylor remain as prisoners under heavy guard. They were to be confined with the four prisoners arrested Sunday with a guard for each man. Four Mormons and four Mexican guards were to do duty with Mormons guarding Mexican prisoners, and Mexicans guarding Mormon prisoners. Adding insult to injury, the Mormon prisoners were to allow their Mexican guards to use the guns with which they had attempted the arrest. Only the fact that feeling was at a high pitch and a riot imminent made them submit to this indignity. The Casas Grandes officials had already taken the wrong impression of the affair and for sake of peace suffering this wrong seemed better than precipitating further conflict.

While Rodriguez prepared documentary evidence to be perused by the Ponces at their leisure, these officials repaired with great dignity to the Harper Hotel and to the special meal served them there, after which they graciously accepted the loan of Brig Stowell's buggy and fine team of horses to take them to Casas Grandes again, by way of San Diego. They rode off without having read the paper prepared by Rodriguez. They did talk secretly with the guards and the Sosa family and promised them that a court would be sent up next morning. All of which was anything but reassuring to the colonists and held little promise of a just judgment.

In their dilemma now they turned to Captain Creighton, an adventurer in charge of the revolutionary forces in Pearson, as the only one likely to be of help. Guy C. Wilson, Thomas C. Romney, Miles A. Romney and E. L. Taylor were appointed to make the approach. Creighton greeted them cordially, listened gravely as they presented their case, and then assured them that Senor Rodriguez's action would be sustained. He wrote a statement to that effect, adding as he signed his name that he was surprised at the action of the Ponce brothers. Later in his conversation he denounced them strongly. "Don't worry any more," he said at parting. "In spite of prevailing revolutionary conditions, I'm sure we can handle the Ponces."

In his bravado and highsounding promises they could take little comfort, for they read his own insecurity in his voluble assurances. They went home and placed the town under heavy guard, especially about the tithing office and the road leading to Casas Grandes to prevent surprises from that direction.

To their relief all was quiet that night.

The quiet, however, was but a lull in the storm. For by daylight the tithing office street was filled with angry natives led by Toribio. He had been to see the Ponces in Casas Grandes, and had actively inflamed revolutionary leaders against the Mormons by presenting his version of the killing. His actions now, inciting disregard for the law and contempt for Rodriguez, was rapidly gaining support from followers. Rodriguez sensed the trouble as tension increased and a riot seemed imminent. Finally in sheer desperation, and as much to bolster his waning prestige as to ease the tense situation, he determined to arrest Toribio knowing that as a supplement to his puny authority he had only his compelling personality and the wisdom to choose a psychological time to act. The time occurred shortly after noon when Toribio was temporarily separated from his followers. Deputizing Amos Cox to make the arrest, and giving him a mixed group of Mexicans and Mormons as aids, Rodriguez dispatched them on this precarious errand.

The deputies found Toribio near his home where he warily watched their approach. When they were close enough to serve their warrant, he defiantly pinned on his shirt the rebel colors and dared them to take him. Cox, fearing to risk another shooting, withdrew and reported his failure to Rodriguez.

"Take him!" shouted that enraged official. "Here, I will write my order by authority of General Madero." And suiting the action to the word, he handed Cox a written order that Toribio with all his braggadocio dared not ignore. He surrendered and returned in custody. This had a quieting effect on the mob still milling in the street, though his insolent swagger implied he was still their leader. Rodriguez met Toribio's contempt with calm dignity and blazing eyes which bored into those of Toribio, mastered his bluster and forced his own to lower in token of submission. Rodriguez impressed his authority still further by handing him a flag and requiring him to wave it above his head and shout, Viva Madero. When Toribio had complied, he ordered, "Say it again." When it had been shouted satisfactorily, he continued, "Now say Muera Diaz! and say it distinctly."

This masterful subjugation of a belligerent personality not only impressed those who witnessed it from inside, but it also quieted the mob outside which began to disperse.

No sooner had the door locked behind Toribio than excited horsemen galloped through the mob and asked to see the prisoners. They were Ed Payne and his brother from Dublan who brought information that a party of sixty men had mobilized in Casas Grandes with the intention of raiding Juarez that night, releasing the prisoners and killing the Mormons. "We told them they'd better not," they said, "as we delivered hay to them, for the Mormons up here were muy valiente, and there'd be some that wouldn't get back. We played you up as straight shooters who wouldn't be taken without resistance. Don't know if they believed us or not, but we thought you'd better know. That's why we're here. Sabe?" And waiting for little more they rode off as quickly as they had come. "Forewarning is forearming," said the guards as the men rode off, and they all set to work to forestall a surprise attack.

Guard duty around the town was doubled, ten men were placed in Edmund Richardson's home, ten in Ed Eyring's home across the street, ten in the shoe shop, and ten more in the Harper Hotel across the street from it. Ten more were stationed on the dugway leading to Casas Grandes; these had horses and were detailed to watch until the approaching force was heard, to wait until their route of entrance into town was determined, then gallop in and give the alarm. If the invading forces approached the tithing office from the south, the guards at Richardson's and Eyring's were to catch them in a crossfire volley of shots, while if they left the road before entering town and approached from the north, those stationed at the shoe shop and hotel were to treat them in a similar manner. With guards all set for vigilance, Charles E. McClellan watched his chance to explain the plan to the Mormon guards and prisoners in the tithing office. "Be ready," he said guardedly, "to make your escape if shooting starts, and be sure to get your own gun. Remember, no matter what it costs, get your own gun." Guards, prisoners and informed officers tensely settled down for a night of watchful waiting, a vigil that found eyes staring from haggard faces as daylight dawned and the fight they had nerved themselves for did not materialize. Truly this was a "Noche Triste" in Colonia Juarez.

In desperation E. L. Taylor left early the next day for Pearson to interview Creighton again. Even though his promises might be unconstitutional, they indicated a favorable attitude and might be helpful. At noon he brought the word, backed by Creighton's authority, that the Mormon prisoners were to be released, their arms restored, and the Mexican prisoners taken to Nuevo Casas Grandes the next morning.

That seemed too good to be true. But how would they explain to the Mexicans who were still at white heat and spoiling for the riot which this news might provoke. And why take the prisoners to Casas Grandes out of control? Then Taylor, with a characteristic wink, explained that General Francisco I. Madero on his way to attack Ciudad Juarez with one thousand troops would be in Nuevo Casas Grandes that day and replace Demetrio Ponce's authority. This would provide the opportunity to explain the situation to the general before a distorted version could be presented to him. Accordingly delegations were quickly formed, one, headed by Sr. Rodriguez and including Guy C. Wilson, Hyrum Harris and Thomas C. Romney was to leave by most direct route and seek an early interview with General Madero, and the other taking the prisoners was to go by way of Pearson.

Fearing that the release of the Mormon prisoners might stir up a riot it was decided they should not be released until they got to Pearson. Rodriguez commissioned Charles E. McClellan as acting presidente in his absence and gave him definite instructions. "Guard and double guard the town," he said, "using academy students if necessary. Take no chances and prevent surprise attacks at all hazards." And to E. L. Taylor and the others he continued, "Report to Mr. Creighton that the Mormon prisoners are being delivered to him for release, and leave town simultaneously with the team carrying the native prisoners. By the time you arrive in Nuevo Casas Grandes we will have delivered our prisoners, interviewed President Madero, and be waiting with instructions from him."

On the way to Pearson, near San Diego, they received orders to take the Mormon prisoners on to Nuevo Casas Grandes. Wondering what the order boded, they changed their destination and jolted on the roundabout journey. Upon arrival they found Nuevo Casas Grandes teeming with throngs of excited soldiers and civilians—waiting recruits, arriving recruits, and excited spectators all mixed in one jam of people that all but blocked their entrance. It was a scene of military turmoil in its first throes of travail, and appeared decidedly ominous. Their progress was halted before they had gone a block. What were they to do? They could not go back, neither could they go forward—nor could they see anything of those who were to have met them with instructions. They could only wait, feeling momentarily safe as they discovered they were ignored by the milling mass eager to get into the train before it was overloaded. Suddenly a familiar face appeared in the moving mass—a face which under normal circumstances would have been friendly but was now filled with hate. "There they are, the men who killed Juan Sosa. They killed a man because he shouted Viva Madero!" The prisoners were jerked from their seats into the midst of violence and hostility where fists were shaken in their faces, guns were jabbed in their sides, and threats were hissed in their ears. Anything could happen. Then from a distance they saw Hyrum Harris approaching on a horse. But even before he reached them a sudden change in the mob spirit was sensed. The manhandling ceased, the tension eased, and attention was focused in another direction. Coming straight toward them two men elbowed and jostled their way through the throng so resolutely that a path was opened. These men ordered the throng back to make room for the outfit to pass. The prisoners were ordered to get away pronto as the mob could be restrained no longer.

No urging was necessary. They clambered into the wagon and lashed their horses through the lane made by the mob, first grudgingly, but with more agility as they came in danger of being trampled down by the surprised and frightened horses. Nor did they stop to inquire to whom they were indebted for their miraculous deliverance.

Once out of the mob they headed for Dave Spilsbury's home, only around the block, risking this delay to find out if possible what had become of the Madero delegation and whether they were to hide out for a while or go straight home to Colonia Juarez. Guy C. Wilson was there sleeping off the exhaustion caused by his night long wait for them to arrive. He told them that Madero had heard their story, approved of their action, relieved them of their Mexican prisoners, and had told them to go home and all would be well. They also learned that the two men who had so recently come to their rescue in split second timing were no less than Raul Madero, brother of the General, and Pascual Orozco. With unspeakable relief they turned their teams homeward silently hoping a speedy victory for Madero both in Ciudad Juarez and Mexico, D.F.

Exoneration by President Madero in person should have cleared the case. Tragically it did not. Demetrio Ponce, waiting only for the departure of Maderista soldiers, slipped once again into his seat of command, and signifying his intention to resume prosecutions he stealthily sent a small squad of soldiers to Juarez to rearrest the colonists at night, hoping to take them by surprise. But being warned by watchful friends, the suspects made their escape. Other attempts followed. Soldiers slipping in at unexpected and unpredicted times, prisoners scrambling madly to a hideout, soon made it a grim game of hide-and-seek.

The resumption of train service permitted the return of President Romney, and on him then rested the responsibility of restoring these forced fugitives to security and to get the case out of the hands of revolutionists. He sought the counsel of Edmund Richardson, their legal advisor and practicing lawyer. Richardson advised putting the matter in court, and letting Leslie Coombs stand trial, because there was proof that his gun had never been fired. Richardson was sure that with this alibi he had a clear case. Unfortunately he was not given opportunity to present the case as he prepared it. For as soon as Leslie appeared in court, he was seized and thrown into jail and all explanations and pleas for justice were ignored. He was shoved into the jail, the door locked behind him in spite of protests, and left to the companionship of criminals and lawbreakers of every nature. His weakened physical condition and danger of acute illness, as Dr. Gay, a trusted physician pointed out, succeeded in getting him removed to an outer office where he was more comfortable. There he remained while the lawyer worked in vain for his release.

A change in the political situation, however, accomplished what his legal advisor could not. As soon as Madero moved the theater of revolution to the southern part of the Republic Pascual Orozco left behind to hold what he had gained, traitorously planned a counter revolution. Orozco's first gesture of defiance when his troops entered Casas Grandes and formally took possession was to release all prisoners from the jails. Leslie although suspecting a ruse to shoot him as he fled took his freedom and returned to his family in Colonia Juarez with all speed possible.

During the press of events following the Orozco rebellion, the case was pushed into the background.
