Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

XVII

RED FLAGGER TACTICS

PASCUAL OROZCO used Casas Grandes as the seat of his rebellion plans, placed himself at the head of a party christened the Liberales, chose a red flag as his emblem, and smarting from real or fancied neglect, started a campaign that plunged the nation into a rash of contraband warfare that was to last for years.

This drastic turn of events was felt in Colonia Juarez immediately and sounded the death knell to hopes entertained for an early peace. Instead of the hoped for release from persecutions following the Juan Sosa tragedy, it was an opening for malcontents to vindictively intensify persecutions. Instead of the hoped for end of hostilities the election of Madero promised, it was the beginning of other and fiercer rebellions. Instead of looking forward to the security of a restored and stable government, the colonists faced a withdrawal of any protection whatsoever. Bishops and high councilors went into special session with the stake presidency at the December 1911 quarterly conference in Colonia Dublan to consider possible action. With no general authorities in attendance, action had to be taken on their own responsibility with sanctions and approval gained later. The most urgent need was for some kind of protection. The purchase of long range Mauser rifles to meet this need in case of a possible siege was discussed. Their critical need resulted in a vote that a most careful attempt be made to bring in from the United States guns—guns which they promised themselves would be used only for protection of the group and never for private use. With encouragement from Church leaders Orson P. Brown was detailed to do the business. He succeeded in purchasing thirty long range guns and 25,000 rounds of assorted ammunition. Although secrecy was important because of neutrality regulations an account of his first attempt to ship the arms into Mexico got into the newspapers. The shipment instead of being delivered into the hands of trusted men on good horses stationed at strategic points on the road from Columbus to Dublan was seized and confiscated by secret service men. The custodian would have been arrested also had he not eluded the U.S. officers. With the critical need of guns and protection still felt, a second and more successful attempt was made and guns were finally delivered into the hands of President Junius Romney who in turn apportioned and delivered them to the Bishops of the various wards.

The Juarez ward allotment was delivered to Bishop Joseph C. Bentley one night at 10:00 p.m., with instructions that his ten rifles and several thousand rounds of ammunition be guarded and kept from persons unauthorized to use them, but in a place of easy access in case of need. He accepted the charge most reluctantly. To him a gun was a dangerous instrument for use only by men of evil intent and certainly not a respectable skeleton for a bishop's closet. To have to be a party to concealment of weapons he had taken no part in procuring was highly distasteful and irritating. The whole procedure was at variance with his idea of keeping the peace. He, therefore, took them in the dark of the night, shoved them between rafters under the loose floor boarding of a little used closet, and prayed for a better means of settling difficulties than by the use of firearms.

As the need for guns by the revolutionists grew more and more acute, polite requests by the Liberales, or Red Flaggers for guns and ammunition fast changed into firm demands, and finally into a demand for a count and report of the guns in the colonists' possession. President Romney, hoping for intervention of federal troops before complying with this demand, stalled for time and Bishop Bentley worried for fear the revolutionists knew about the hidden guns. An embarrassing defeat and a humiliating retreat by the Orozco forces at Chihuahua City sent them back in Colonia Juarez territory, without the funds the capture of the state capital would have provided. The realization of the predicament turned to abject fear when Orozco learned that federals, under General Blanco, were moving from Sonora through the pulpit Pass to join Federals in Chihuahua. Without horses, guns, war supplies how could he hope to keep out of a pincers movement of the Federal army under Generals Blanco and Sangines or to contest Federal plans to march through Pulpit Pass and Las Varas country and make an attack on Casas Grandes? The United States, in an endeavor to discourage further uprisings, had refused to allow arms and ammunitions to pass to rebel leaders from the United States and was keeping a close vigil on the border.

The most ready source of both funds and equipment was the Mormons whose thrift and industry had accumulated stores of both. Orozco left the extortion in the hands of Salazar and Portillo both of whom had been raised in Casas Grandes and knew the Mormon people, their teachings, and their policies. Raids on the town were made to secure arms, ammunition and horses, and cattle were killed for beef. President Romney sought an audience with Inez Salazar and made a persuasive plea for protection or for leniency in demands. He outlined the helpless and unprotected condition of the colonies and justified exemption from furnishing war munitions in a conflict in which they were no way involved, and one which they had no responsibility in starting. Salazar, seemingly convinced of the justice of the plea, promised all the protection his power could provide. Either through duplicity or inability to keep the promise, raidings continued. Detached bands continued to enter town to demand and carry away. Other interviews were secured by President Romney to report raids, to remind of promises and ask again for leniency and protection. Suavely Salazar renewed his promise, though his shrugs indicated that war conditions made the keeping of promises difficult. Continued infractions and indignities, continued breaking of promises, persistent appeals for redress, pried President Romney and the doughty Salazar more and more apart. Loss of confidence increased and signs of real animosity developed. A tense situation, taut and unpredictable, resulted.

On the 24th of July, 1912, Salazar sent word to Henry E. Bowman that all former promises of protection to foreigners in Mexico were withdrawn. The revolutionists needed the guns, the ammunition, and the war supplies the Mormons had, and he proposed to get them at whatever cost. President Romney quickly called a council. A review of Salazar's demands, each one increasingly firm, indicated a determination to force a crisis they feared to face and one they earnestly hoped to avoid. Could they mitigate this decree by seeking another interview? Would not another flimsy promise be better than open hostility and a final forced surrender? Could they stall for time in hopes of intervention from some source hitherto undiscovered? In the end the unanimous decision was that one more attempt be made to pacify Salazar and soften the decree.

Accordingly, President Romney, Hyrum S. Harris, Guy C. Wilson, and Henry Bowman called at Salazar's office in Casas Grandes the morning of July 25. Salazar in an ugly mood admitted only Romney and Bowman, and to them in terse, belligerent tones he repeated his ultimatum. He had just returned from an interview with General Orozco in Ciudad Juarez, where the situation was critical, mostly due to American injury to their cause. They must have all the guns and war supplies the Mormons possessed, and Romney must issue the order that would get them.

This order, intended to intimidate Romney, stiffened his resistance, and he refused to make any such demand. He insisted that guns were personal property, that he not only had no right to make such a demand of his people, but that he would not if he had the right. This attitude resulted in an ugly ultimatum from Salazar. "Then, you are my prisoner until you comply," he said as he moved between them and the door. "You'll have to keep me a long time," replied Romney resolutely, "and you'd just as well start shooting now, for I'll never give the order. Constitutional laws of this country guarantee the right of having arms and no one has a right to take them." As angry eyes glared, as determined faces darkened, and a dangerous situation evolved, Demetrio Ponce insinuated a diplomacy that somewhat calmed the enraged general and slightly softened Romney's obstinate resistance. In a less brusque manner he repeated Salazar's demand, reasoning that they must have the Mormons' guns. He assured Romney he need not fear for the safety of his people after arms were surrendered, that they would be given protection. He urged a recommendation to the colonists that they help the rebels in their desperate need by surrendering their arms. But Romney still withheld a conciliating response and Salazar called Lino Ponce and ordered him to take fifty men with him to Colonia Dublan, forcibly search every house, and seize every gun and cartridge found.

This ultimatum forced a compromise. Romney tempered his refusal by promising to go with Ponce and his men, and rather than subject the people of Colonia Dublan to the indignity of a forced search, he promised to arrange for a central place to which the guns might be brought and surrendered. He stipulated that in return for his order for guns to be delivered Salazar should issue a permit for women and children to entrain at once for El Paso since it would be unsafe for them to remain. To which Salazar replied that he would give the permit, although it was not dangerous for them to remain with him as protector.

At Colonia Dublan they found a dangerous situation. The rebels had unloaded six cannons from boxcars at the cattle yards and had them trained on the town ready to force compliance in case of resistance. To calm the fears of excited town members, and at the same time issue an order that would deprive them of their one means of defense was an ordeal. Taking the responsibility of evacuating women and children as an alternative was an additional strain. Yet President Romney faced the task resolutely and unflinchingly carried out his part of the agreement.

Runners were dispatched to all parts of town with notice that immediate surrender of guns to the home of Bishop A. D. Thurber was obligatory. Others were sent to prepare railroad transportation for women and children and their reception in Ciudad Juarez. H. E. Bowman was detailed to precede the migration and inform President Ivins who was at the border to help in anticipation of a crisis. Excitement was so high that several families left the same night from Dublan for the protection of the United States.
