Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

XVIII

EXODUS—WOMEN AND CHILDREN

NEWS OF WHAT was taking place in Colonia Dublan reached Bishop Bentley at Colonia Juarez by telephone late in the afternoon. From Hyrum Harris he received details as well as the added information that President Romney was on his way to Colonia Juarez to repeat the Dublan action. He sent his counselors to notify all priesthood members to assemble immediately. Family heads must be informed of the drastic turn of events and combined wisdom must be assembled to discuss possible action. In the meantime he discussed the probability of evacuation with his family and others within reach. Armed with the conviction that there could be found a way to prevent leaving he met with a full representation of the priesthood members at eight o'clock that evening determined that all the power he possessed would be exerted to prevent it.

"We don't know what pressure was brought to bear on the people of Dublan to force this ultimatum," he told those assembled, "but I still feel the Lord can protect us here as well as anywhere. Though through it all, we will be subject to President Romney and the instructions he will give us when he gets here." Others felt the same and expressed themselves quite unanimously in favor of remaining with their homes, unless counseled otherwise by President Romney. President Romney arrived and gave a dramatic recital of the train of events which forced compliance at Dublan, and his surrender of guns to the rebels. With no visible means of protection he felt that his wife and children were no longer safe in the country, and that if his family was not safe none were. The sentiment at once changed. Bishop Bentley, regardless of personal convictions, took the initiative in promising that "If our Stake President's advice is to move women and children to a place of safety, mine will go right along with the others and I'll instruct my ward members to do the same. No matter what private opinions I may maintain, I know that safety lies in obeying the priesthood and I am as always subject to its direction."

There were no dissenting votes when the final count was taken and the men dispersed to notify their families to make ready for a move the next day. First, however, guns were to be delivered to the band stand by noon the next day where Lino Ponce and other rebel officials would receive them. This order did not include the new guns still in the possession of the bishop.

Sunday morning, July 26, 1912, preparations for evacuation were begun. Special trains ordered by H. E. Bowman would arrive on Monday, but many preferred to take the regular train which left Pearson at noon Sunday. And before the day was far advanced the road from Colonia Juarez to Pearson was lined with a stream of wagons piled with bedding, trunks, boxes, and topped with excited women and children who rode where they could. Once the spirit of move had taken hold there was no delay in getting to Pearson. Only the knowledge that the regular train held accommodations for a limited number kept them from making this the day for complete exodus. All rode off leaving their homes just as they lived in them from day to day; all were sure that an immediate return would be possible. As a result none took along more of necessities than could be placed in one trunk or a bed roll, and few realized that they were looking on their homes for the last time. Rather, this was an adventure altogether pleasant except for the sadness of leaving husbands, sons, and fathers. Even the war seemed remote and unterrifying until an incident occurred to the foremost wagon, driven by Walter Haws and carrying the wife, children and grandfather of Ernest Hatch. This was stopped by a drunken bandit, who, with gun leveled, demanded money. Grandfather McClellan, an aged Mormon Battalion soldier and a veteran of the Utah Indian wars, answered from the spring seat, that he had none. He was ordered to step down which he did with as much dignity as proddings from the horseman permitted. Directed a few steps from the road he was ordered with pointed gun to give up his money or be shot. Standing erect, sun shining on gray locks, McClellan looked the crazed man in the face, and without changing the expression on his own replied "Well, then shoot." The drunken bandit wavered and without explanation whirled his horse and rode off in the direction of another approaching wagon, that of Bishop Bentley, driven by his son Richard. Again he was unsuccessful and he raced for the next wagon to demand money from each in turn. From Byron MacDonald he got $25.00, from George Redd $20.00, and from Edmund Richardson a gold watch. He then entered town and robbed the aged Mary B. Eyring of $40.00 and Alma Walser of $5.00. He later stole a hat from Juan Treviso, the local policeman, an act that ended in his arrest. All this took place while public attention was centered on the gun delivery ceremony at the band stand. Lino Ponce, Melquiades Alvarez and twenty-five assistants had been occupied in the gun count and were unaware of the depredations of the red shirted bandit as he moved from one helpless victim to another. Disappointed in the collection of guns being handed in, they might have ignored the offense had the policeman not complained at the loss of his hat. This complaint, augmented by a report of Alma Walser's loss, brought the arrest and the robber was brought to the band stand where he was searched. Concealed on his body was found money, and in his sock was found the watch. This was the kind of treatment which Salazar had promised protection against and to correct the apparent injustice Lino Ponce immediately assured them that execution would take place as soon as Salazar was informed. Lieutenant Alvarez pointed out, however, that delay made possible the bandit's escape during the night and urged immediate execution. To this Ponce agreed and about sundown Juan Bautista and two other soldiers took the prisoner to the old graveyard on the eastern hills, stood him against a bank, and shot him. The body was partially covered by what loose dirt could be kicked over him and there he was left until Ernest Hatch, President Romney, and Eli A. Clayson went the next day and completed the burial.

After collecting and listing the guns Colonel Ponce and Lieutenant Alvarez returned to Casas Grandes leaving a Captain Miguel Castillo, stepson of an American in Galeana named Porter, to take charge of the town with orders to prevent looting and keep order.

By the next afternoon, July 27, when the last wagon had unloaded on the depot platform at Pearson there were about four hundred women, children, and old people, assisted by a few able-bodied men, ready to take the night train for El Paso. At Dublan their number was swelled to approximately one thousand persons. All were crowded into one train. When passenger cars were filled, boxcars and even a few cattle cars were attached to the passenger service. Some of the cars were so crowded that standing room was at a premium. Suffering was intense as the delayed train finally moved off in the stifling July summer heat. The proud of heart were thankful for the curtain of darkness which hid their plight, others fanned and panted for relief from suffocation; all were convinced that what might have seemed an adventure in the beginning would be stark tragedy in the end. Any doubt of this was removed when they arrived in El Paso the next day and saw the accommodations prepared for them—rude sheds in a lumberyard. As the refugee train was unloaded and each family took the place assigned it in the shed, they felt the shame of newspaper reporters and photographers recording graphic pictures of their pitiful dependence and despair settled heavily upon them. Any emotion of gratitude for food essentials and first-aid facilities for those suffering from emergency illnesses stirred but faintly. Writhing under the stigma of being public charges, suffering undue publicity, made it a struggle to keep appreciation uppermost. Sights of children deprived of a father's care, of sick women, pregnant women, of old women and men snatched from homes where relative comfort provided every need, recalling that in those comfortable homes so hurriedly left were commodities that made need of money negligible, and that here they were stripped and penniless and forced to accept public charity was anguish to their souls.

President Ivins in cooperation with Presiding Bishop O. P. Miller was instrumental in obtaining the loan of army tents from Ft. Bliss and in getting emergency plumbing installed. Gates to the yard were also guarded to give some privacy. The government appropriated $20,000 for their relief, and the city was cordial and sympathetic. In these quarters they made shift.
