Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

XIX

EXODUS—MEN

GRIM-FACED MEN in a sad, silent procession of thirty-seven wagons and other vehicles, which had carried women, children and the aged to the train at Pearson, returned in the evening to homes empty and desolate. Each one drove somberly into his own yard, cared for his team, and entered his home. But each one rather than endure the loneliness of empty homes soon sought the company of others in which to pass lonely hours until time to sleep. They congregated at Brig Whipple's confectionery store and there the idea of a special treat began to blossom. There were eggs, ice and freezers in the shop, there were cows that could be milked to furnish good jersey milk and cream and there were willing hands. Soon the ice cream was being ladled out to go with watermelons brought in by George Haws and Ernest Hatch. Gaiety and banter pushed the first night's anxiety into the background and eased the pangs of loneliness momentarily. Fresh courage to face the vigil of long or short duration was born.

Walking about the streets next day, peering into homes and strolling through stores and business houses whose outward appearance was unchanged, nostalgia came on again. Homes looked as if family members had but gone to the neighbors, stores as if clerks just had gone home to dinner, corrals and stockyards as if animals to fill them were in the pasture. Realizing that the inmates were far removed the men busied themselves taking care of loose articles, hiding movable stuff from rebels, who in detached bands passed in and out of town, and doing all possible to help Captain Castillo and his guard of ten in their valiant protective service. Much valuable property was saved and many homes were kept from being looted. At first even the store was kept from the looters and when Captain Castillo finally found himself outnumbered, he kept a semblance of control and avoided a riot by going behind the counters and personally handing over what greed demanded and with diplomacy ejected the intruders with minimum demands supplied. To rebels who came from Pearson with orders from their captain to take horses, saddles, and merchandise, he insisted that he had been authorized by General Salazar to keep order and that attempts to override him or his orders would end in more executions. This had its effect and for several days the town was quiet.

With nothing to do but to keep a vigilant eye for surprise stragglers, it was easy for the men of the town to gather at every opportunity and discuss again the threadbare problem of how long this state of affairs would last, how soon would it be safe to call women and children home again. With so little apparent danger many felt the time was already right for their immediate return. Before sentiment could crystallize, however, discouraging word came from Dublan. The guards there instead of giving protection were disposed to help the looters and were sharing in the loot. Homes of Alexander Jameson and Ammon Tenney had been forcibly entered and the men poked in the ribs or threatened with death for objecting. Farm animals were being driven off, stores being looted, and insolent treatment inflicted. The town leaders were on their way to confer with President Romney in Colonia Juarez, fully determined they could endure no more and rather than suffer longer at the hands of insolent rebels they would resist abuses by strength of arms. They awaited only the sanction of President Romney to do so. When they arrived, a meeting was held and it was decided that as long as life was not in certain danger abandonment of homes should not be considered. The men returned feeling better though Dublan conditions remained the same. Salazar was still in control at Casas Grandes; other rebels were in power at Pearson. The rebels held Americans responsible for defeat by the Federals. Resentment was expressed in contemptuous gestures which grew more menacing each day and gave the colonists less hope as time passed that peace could ever come. And the looting continued in Dublan.

But Colonia Juarez continued quiet and Bishop Bentley took advantage of the fact to get those hidden guns out of his jurisdiction and off his conscience. With permission from President Romney to dispose of them he enlisted the help of Edward C. Eyring, Miles A. Romney and Alonzo L. Taylor. On the first dark night Romney and Eyring took pack animals into the lot behind the tithing office, and while Taylor charmed the unsuspecting guards who occupied the building with stories of past Indian depredations, the Thompson tragedy in particular, Bentley quietly removed the guns and ammunition from their hiding place, and the two men loaded them onto the waiting animals, guided them through the T. and M. yards, down a back street to the river road, and cached them.

On August 1st, affairs took a decidedly serious turn in Colonia Juarez. Fifty men under command of Major Salcido and Captain Cavada rode into town in a threatening mood. Ignoring Captain Castillo they made camp at the E. L. Taylor place. When approached by Captain Castillo and asked to show an order for the intrusion, Major Salcido replied he had no written one, only a verbal order to make headquarters in Colonia Juarez, to watch the northern passes and guard against a surprise approach from Federal General Blanco whose proximity had stirred up apprehension among rebel forces concentrating at San Diego. This reply brought from Captain Castillo an aside to colony leaders that he was sure the newcomers were there for no good purpose. This fear was substantiated when Captain Cavada demanded of Captain Castillo, "You haven't executed any more of my men, have you?" Castillo replied that he had not executed anyone, that Ponce had ordered the execution. The only reply was that there had better not be another execution. He referred to the colonists as those Mormones cabrones, who with a mere complaint could have a man executed. He rode away with threats against Ponce.

This conversation relayed to President Romney in various versions gave cause for alarm. Romney in charge of the colonists had expressed no objection to the execution in question and accordingly feared he would be regarded as in favor of it, and would be the victim should Cavada seek vengeance. Hurriedly the men in town gathered to discuss legitimate and united protection. The resulting decision was to leave town for a while rather than resort to violence in which case Castillo and his small force would prove inadequate protection.

Ed Eyring and Miles A. Romney were dispatched to notify all men on the east and west sides of the river respectively. They decided between themselves to ask the east-siders to gather at Frances Romney's home, a mile above town, and the west-siders to meet at Ed Eyring's barn also above town. The east-siders were then to go in a body to the barn to join the west-siders. All should be done quietly to avoid suspicion of the watchful Cavada.

A complication arose right at the outset. Captain Castillo, approached Alonzo Taylor and requested help in getting in touch by telephone with Demetrio Ponce in Nuevo Casas Grandes so that Castillo could find out exactly what Salcido's occupancy meant. Alonzo complied, and they went to the central switchboard together. Repeated rings got no answer from Nuevo Casas Grandes office, but Colonel Alanis, listening in from the Farnsworth and Romney store in Dublan, replied. In answer to their question he assured them that Cavada's men were in Colonia Juarez under proper orders to watch the passes north of Juarez and prevent Blanco from surprising them at San Diego and effecting another defeat for the rebels. He also told Castillo to watch Cavada's men to prevent looting and permit nothing to be taken from the colonists other than good saddle horses and necessary provisions on penalty of being reported to him. This information was reassuring and Taylor hurried out to pass it on to President Romney thinking it not only would be cheering but that it would also materially alter their plans.

Romney was nowhere to be found, nor were any other of the men. In fact Alonzo walked through a deserted town in his search and finally turned toward his own home at the upper end of town. On the way he met Bishop Bentley, who revealed the gathering plan and was most elated to get the direct word concerning Salcido's orders. Both men were sure that President Romney would also be happy to get it and they went at once to the appointed meeting place above town to make the report.

By the time they reached the Frances Romney home, about forty men supplied with guns, ammunition and bedding had gathered there. Instead of going in a body to find President Romney, Miles Romney and Bishop Bentley, alone left on horseback at ten p.m. to ride through the flood waters at the crossing and carry the good message to their brethren waiting at the Eyring barn, feeling sure it would alter plans. They were surprised to find the Eyring place deserted. A search of the hills and washes nearby failed to discover anyone and surprised and disappointed they returned to their east-side camp shortly after midnight to report. A second unsuccessful attempt was made to find the west-siders.

It was now after three o'clock and of those at the Romney home several had grown tired and returned to town. With the report of a second failure the remainder decided to do the same—to cache their guns, return to their own beds and wait a more favorable time for delivering their important message.

They had no sooner reached Alonzo Taylor's home however, where all except a few men had decided to spend the remainder of the night, when one of the second search party arrived and reported that President Romney had been located at MacDonald Springs and had summoned all to meet him there. Couriers, he said, had already been sent to Colonia Dublan, Pacheco and Garcia with orders for all men in the stake to meet in a proposed camp at the "Stairs," a strategic hiding place in the mountains, and it was imperative that the east-siders join them at once. A thunderbolt from clear skies would not have dismayed them more. To a realization that they were too late with crucial information which might have changed the state of affairs, came knowledge that a momentous decision to which they must conform had been made without them. Furthermore, compliance with President Romney's order was hazardous. Men were now scattered as far as the Daniel Skousen mill and before they could be assembled it would be daylight and impossible for armed men to pass the rebel guards stationed on the hills. They therefore sent word to President Romney that they must wait for cover of the next night to join him. Next morning Bishop Bentley and Alonzo Taylor decided to interview Major Salcido and Captain Cavada and complete negotiations for the prevention of looting by uniting the forces of two sets of guards in the town. Having attained this cooperation, the colony men gathered at the home of George Romney to make careful arrangements for leaving town to join President Romney at the "Stairs" as soon as darkness had settled.

No sooner had they gathered than a third party of rebels galloped into town, shouting and shooting, and began to loot. The first home to be entered was that of John Hatch. Eli Clayson and John Wilson were immediately detailed to see the leaders of the new arrivals, Captain Manuel Gutierrez and Colonel Escobar. These they found in the tithing yard awaiting returns from their looting men scattered about town and incidentally appropriating all the horses the colonists had readied to carry them that night to the "Stairs." Gutierrez and Escobar had crowded themselves into Captain Castillo's quarters and were ignoring both him and his authority, but they were considerate of Clayson and Wilson. They were Liberals, they said, and had been sent by General Salazar to intercept any move on the part of the Americans in Colonia Juarez to leave and join General Blanco as the men in Colonia Dublan had done. "O yes," Captain Gutierrez explained answering the question in their eyes, "the men in Colonia Dublan rose up against us and left town to join you of Colonia Juarez and those from Colonia Pacheco in the mountains. You will all then join General Blanco our enemy. Salazar ordered us to stop the Dublan men but the best we could do was fire upon them as they fled. We killed several. They were well armed as we could see through our field glasses, so we let them go. But we're here to keep you from joining them. Our orders from General Salazar were that if the Mormons from Colonia Juarez had already gone we were to burn the town, leave it in ashes, follow the men into the mountains and leave not one of them alive. If they had not yet gone to take them all prisoners to prevent their escape. Owing to the excellent report given us by the guards here we do not feel like carrying out the order. But, you'd better not try to leave town." The Colonia Juarez men did not leave town that night.

They did meet, however, at Clayson's home, to discuss ways of eluding this new guard and making their way to President Romney. Not only was no immediate solution found but as the meeting broke up they encountered still other barriers to prevent an easy evacuation. Two of the group, Alonzo Taylor and Eli Abegg, leaving for home, were stopped by Colonel Escobar before reaching the corner and asked why the Mormons were holding a secret meeting and carrying dynamite to the meeting? Were they planning to destroy the rebels? He was angry and their quiet answers but infuriated him more. Other men gathered to add to the explanation that the meeting was a peaceable one to consider their welfare, and Abegg, untying the supposed package of dynamite, showed Escobar a shirt and other articles of clothing rolled in a neat bundle. "But," he continued angrily, "you have saddles," and turning to Alonzo Taylor and Frank Lewis, "unless two are delivered to me immediately, I will let my men search and loot your homes." He then ordered the arrest of Eli Clayson. "Keep him from leaving town tonight as was planned in the meeting just held." When Clayson insisted that the meeting was for a peaceable consideration of their own welfare with no plotting against the rebels and that among other things they were deciding where each should sleep that night, the Colonel observed, "You don't need to worry about that for you will all sleep in the schoolhouse with my soldiers." As soon, however, as Bishop Bentley reported the situation to Captain Castillo, he advised them to disregard Escobar and return to their own homes as they had intended. This they did. But looting began the next morning and was not stopped until Castillo took measures to stop it.

Definitely no one left town that night, nor the next day. But during the day a significant change took place. At noon a guard galloped into town from the north shouting that Blanco had been sighted heading straight for Colonia Juarez. In a matter of moments bravado turned to fear. The rebels gathered up the colony horses from every quarter—work horses, gentle colts, even "Distingue" the prize French Coach stallion was herded into the remuda and lashed out of town. Nothing that could be ridden was overlooked in the mad scramble.

Cavada was the last to leave town, and from him Alonzo Taylor and Bishop Bentley retrieved a few favorite work horses and colts by exchange or the paying of a few dollars. The fleeing Liberals sent back word that they would accept twelve good horses in exchange for "Distingue" the French Coach stallion. But since the colonists lacked the twelve horses the exchange was not made and this expensive investment in good horse-breeding made at great sacrifice, went the way of hundreds of horses to supply the needs of rabble insurrectionists who supported themselves by extortion from helpless owners.

By noon the town was quiet. The retreating rebels passed through the mountain colonies on their way to Sonora and left no trace of their passage except a few gutted homes. Bishop Bentley considered the change favorable which when reported to President Romney would move him to order a return of the men to their homes at once. So sure were all that this change would bring home those hiding in the hills that in the meeting, called again in the evening, they discussed only ways of getting the word to President Romney. They had not proceeded far with the discussion, however, before S. E. McClellan and Ernest Hatch brought in an urgent message from President Romney, who with the west-siders and the men from Dublan had congregated at the "Stairs," where they were waiting for the few remaining men of Colonia Juarez to join them. This message definitely expressed impatience at the seeming disregard of a previous message and implied that if instructions were not immediately followed the men at the "Stairs," present seat of colony authority, would move in a body to the United States without them.

This message, based on misunderstanding, left the gathering almost dumbfounded. It demonstrated the extremes to which two factions could diverge in a short time. Only four days had elapsed since Cavada and his men had entered town and President Romney had decided to move out. During that time the east-siders had judged the west-siders as failing to keep their part of the agreement by gathering at MacDonald's Springs instead of at Ed Eyring's barn as agreed. In addition they had departed from the regular practice of group decision and had arbitrarily and independently decided to congregate at the "Stairs." And finally they had decided to move in a body to the United States without considering developments since the separation. This letter requesting immediate action and implying disobedience brought them to the first realization that they were being considered irregular and nonconforming. To Bishop Bentley, a life-long stickler for obedience to authority, the implication was painful and one from which he was most anxious to be exonerated. He was confident that once they were together an understanding could be reached. Observing that the rebels had gone and there was now no apparent reason for fleeing but that the word of President Romney was the voice of authority to him, he was leaving as soon as possible. He counseled all others to do the same. The meeting broke up about 10:30 p.m. with definite decision made to abandon homes. All were sure that an immediate return would be the certain ultimate decision.

To trustworthy and surprised natives they gave over care of the town, explaining that repeated abuses of the Liberals and the improbability of protection from Federal troops had prompted them to go for a few days into the mountains. To Felipe Chavez was given direct charge of the town, with others assigned to help him in various capacities. Incarnacion Martinez was placed by John Wilson in charge of the store, other reliable Mexicans were put in charge of the shoe and saddle shop. Still others were to care for public buildings, while individuals chose neighbors and friends to have special watch over their homes. All were assured that the colonists would be back in a matter of days.

Chavez was given two letters, one to General Blanco, in the event that he should occupy the town, and the other to any unknown rebel leader in case one faction followed another. To both possible invading parties Bishop Bentley issued a cordial invitation to make whatever use of the tithing office and yard might be required. Pen, ink, and paper were in his desk in one room inside and a good iron cot for his use in another. In return he requested that each oblige by caring for the town, recognizing the rights of those left in charge, permitting no wholesale looting, and taking no more than was absolutely necessary for the needs of men and horses.

With these preparations the party filed out of town at three o'clock in the morning: Joseph C. Bentley, Alonzo L. Taylor, Eli A. Clayson, John Wilson, Edward C. Eyring, John Hatch, Ernest Hatch, Ed Black, Fred Humphrey, Doyle Humphrey, Edward F. Turley, Eugene Romney, John Allen, Frank Lewis, Robert L. Scott, Daniel Skousen, William Walser, Ed Clayson and Samuel McClellan. Alma P. Spilsbury and Byron MacDonald, thinking they could do more good by remaining, did not leave.

That Sunday morning at nine they reached the "Stairs," prepared to make explanation and attempt reconciliation. Learning that messages to gather had already been sent to men in all the colonies, that the men from Dublan had already arrived, and that the others were expected momentarily, they concluded not to press the idea of immediate repossession of their homes as contrary to the desires of the majority. Therefore they merely joined the general organization of the entire group. The stake presidency, having general supervision, formed six companies of home guards, nine companies of scouts, made A. D. Thurber commander of the expedition, gave Anson B. Call charge of the home guards and Miles A. Romney charge of the scouts, assigned Gaskel Romney the job of quartermaster with Ed McClellan as assistant. To George S. Romney was given the responsibility of camp discipline and moral conduct.

Captains of the home guards were assigned as follows:

Company 1 Alonzo L. Taylor

Company 2 Edward C. Eyring

Company 3 Martin L. Harris

Company 4 William Jones, Jr.

Company 5 John Bingham

Company 6 F. M. Stocks In charge of the scout units were:

Unit 1 Nephi W. Thayne, Captain

Unit 2 Loren Taylor, Captain

Unit 3 N. C. Tenney, Captain

Unit 4 Sam Hawkins, Captain

Unit 5 Ira Pratt, Captain

Unit 6 Edgerton Lunt, Captain

Unit 7 Omni Porter, Captain

Unit 8 John Beecroft, Captain

Unit 9 John A. Whetten, Captain

At 4:00 p.m. a council meeting of the stake presidency, bishoprics and high councilors and all general officers was held where it was unanimously decided to remain together as a company until after the arrival of the Pacheco, Garcia, and Chuichupa men, when a concerted policy would be adopted as to whether to return to their homes or join their families in the United States. After the arrival of the Pacheco men that evening, and no others having arrived by noon the next day, they moved to the Park in the left-hand fork of the canyon. In another council meeting held that night, with the brethren making themselves comfortable on the side of the hill, and with a huge campfire lighting up the faces of the stake presidency who stood above them, they unanimously decided to move in a body to the United States and join their families unless a radical immediate change in conditions made a peaceable repossession of their homes possible. The increasing restlessness among the men had crystallized a rapidly growing sentiment that camping about in the hills with no assurance of conditions making a favorable return possible was a poor exchange for reunion with their families, who probably needed them badly.

The men from Garcia arrived that night after dark explaining that men from Chuichupa were detained and that it was a remote possibility of their joining them for several days. The company therefore moved to the Tapiecita arroyo and there made camp again, about 9:00 p.m. The weather was hot, restlessness and worry had increased, and it reached a climax when John Allen suddenly became a victim of mental despondency, and special care for him was made necessary. While waiting for the Chuichupa men to arrive, several men and boys were dispatched to Juarez and Dublan to bring more provisions and to take a general look around. These returned during the next night bringing Jim Haws's six passenger mail coach filled with provisions and fruit. They reported all quiet in Juarez, but an unfriendly spirit among the local Mexicans at Dublan.

The same night John Allen slipped out of camp barefooted and without coat, hat, gun, or dog. Next morning, Thursday the 8th, a hundred men scoured the hills and brush without finding a trace of him. Volunteers to continue the search and overtake the company which would move steadily on were called for. Harvey and Adelbert Taylor, Jesse Smith, David Black and Dave Haws responded. Returning to Colonia Juarez they found Allen. He was being cared for by local Mexicans under the direction of Alma P. Spilsbury. Other than being footsore and weary from the twelve-mile jaunt he had suffered no harm.

As planned the main group had moved on and from 9:00 a.m., August 8th, to 9:00 a.m., August 13th, the men were en route to El Paso. They traveled in formation. The main column, led by wagons in which rode Robert L. Scott, Hillstrom Masters, David Stout, Ammon M. Tenney and others too old to travel on horseback, was escorted by four scouting parties followed by the ammunition packs and companies one to six. Loose horses and horse wranglers brought up the rear. The caravan extended for a mile and a half. The advance guard carried a white flag, to avoid being mistaken for rebels, and fired upon, by either rebels or federals and to indicate that the movement was a peaceful one. The passenger coach and one wagon drawn by four horses were loaded with provisions supplemented by pack animals. The men on horses, rode with or without saddles, but all had guns—221 rifles, 19 shotguns, 78 pistols and approximately 2600 rounds of ammunition. They were prepared to give a good account of themselves in case of an encounter with hostility. Salazar, who thought he had disarmed them all, might have been surprised by what he missed. The horses they rode and those driven numbered five hundred.

It was August, it was hot and it was dry. The dust stirred by the horses' feet was smothering and settled on their perspiration-stained clothes and faces changing the complexions of all and almost the identity of some.

At 6:30 p.m. on Friday the 9th, the company crossed the international boundary line into the United States three miles from Dog Springs. A company of twenty American soldiers, seeing the approach of a cavalcade carrying a white flag fortified themselves behind rocks for fear it was rebels trying a ruse. Finding their mistake they gave the company the very best of treatment.

The company moved on to Alamo Seco where the rain they had missed during the dry days hit them in great fury beginning before beds were made for the night or other preparations completed. It came first in torrents and then settled to a steady drizzle and gave them a soaking that had not dried out by the next night when another deluge struck them again. Those who were not fortunate in getting shelter in a little ranch house nearby, found themselves in a camp under four inches of water. With sodden bedding, soaked clothing and drenched outfits, they slogged through heavy mud for fifteen miles to Hachita.

From there, as soon as a place to keep their five hundred head of horses was found, and a yard in which to store their wagons and equipment was located, they took the night train for El Paso, arriving about nine a.m. on August 13th.

As they were reunited with their families they found themselves torn between the joy of reunion and the discouragement of the primitive accommodations in which they found their loved ones. With great anxiety they all awaited the outcome of the deliberations of stake officers and bishops who went into session at once to decide on the best policy for the future. As they looked off to the south they yearned for a speedy return to their homes.
