Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

XX

HOMING PIGEONS

WEARY WEEKS of hopeful waiting followed. The sheds were abandoned, families were more comfortably located in El Paso, but expectation of an early return to their homes made it difficult to obtain anything but menial or temporary employment. One by one family heads accepted offers of transportation to places with better opportunities for providing for their families. Hope and faith that political developments would permit a peaceful return and a determination to hold on to properties in Mexico induced some to remain.

Most persistently hopeful among this group was Joseph C. Bentley. He had participated in the priesthood sessions called by A. W. Ivins, and presided over by President Romney, where earnest attempts to decide on future policy were made. He had listened to discussions where the pros and cons of the evacuation and return had dragged on for days and weeks while women, children and lay members waited for decisions. He had heard some justify the Exodus, declaring positively that it was the only means to avoid the use of arms and the probable loss of life. He had heard others declare with equal conviction that had strict neutrality been observed, had wisdom and discretion been used, the departure need never have taken place. He had seen discussion wax warm as both alternatives were aired. He had taken sides with neither extreme. He neither condemned nor condoned,—never placed blame or criticized an act directed by the priesthood. But he did lift his voice to plead for a more patient appraisal, a better understanding of the Mexican people, as the only basis of peaceable resettlement. "They are a naturally good people," he claimed, "kindly at heart but caught in a frenzy of war. Acting in accordance with the rules of war they might have done much worse. Their needs were great, they had no government supplies. Raids on the Mormon people who to them appeared opulent were in keeping with the spirit of warfare no matter where it occurs and was their only visible means of getting war needs. I don't hold it against them or blame them for their apparent hostility to us. I think it is better to give with grace than withhold with force. This is no time to meet force with force. The adage 'A soft answer turneth away wrath' can be sometimes used effectively in wartime as well as in peacetime. It is a policy that must be adopted if peaceful living in Mexico is to be maintained." These pacific opinions he interjected at every favorable opportunity during the trying sessions. Finally in desperation a conclusion was reached that each individual must be guided by his own circumstances in a choice of the course to follow. This decision was consent enough for Bishop Bentley. He immediately made preparations to return. His decision, however, was confided to Elder Ivins, President Romney and other Church leaders lest his move be misunderstood, or be a dangerous precedent for others to follow. He made it clear that he moved on his own responsibility.

September 1st found Joseph C. Bentley with his family and about thirty-five other men, women and children again in Colonia Juarez. Some half a dozen families had preceded him all told enough, he hoped, to form a nucleus around which others would gather. Due to faithful care of those left in charge homes were still intact and there were few signs of destructive looting. All went to work picking up life as they had left it a month before. Politically they found themselves under Federal control. General Blanco, whose approach with General Sangines from Sonora had panicked rebel soldiers and precipitated the crucial demand for guns, was now established in a temporary garrison at Pearson. From there he sent daily scouting parties through and around Colonia Juarez in an attempt to impress the rebel force still holding Cases Grandes. It was feeble protection to the colonists but the friendliness extended with it was gratefully accepted.

The absence of former friends and associates was impressed upon them by many empty homes but conditions were made endurable by the hope of a speedy return by all. Also they were loaded with the responsibilities and labor that twenty times their number had carried on before. Orchards and lots were lush with fruit and garden products were ripe on the vines and teams were scarce. To do the work of the many in a way that satisfied thrifty souls was a gigantic task. Resolutely they did what they could. Enlisting the help of loyal native neighbors to whom re-employment was welcome, they devised ways of bringing canning supplies from Pearson, put men to work picking and hauling fruits and vegetables, women and girls to peeling and cooking and soon had the cannery running to capacity. Hay and grain were cut and put into barns. John Allen was restored to his job as custodian of the schoolhouse which helped him regain stability and health as he resumed the routine of keeping his loved building in order. There were discouragements, as they pitted their fewness against the great amount of work to be done, but they began to feel that a new start had been made and that complete restitution of the month's losses was possible.

Rebel factions, however, were aware of their return and within a few days Captain Enrique Portillo rode into town at the head of a contingent of soldiers. The purpose of his visit was obvious as he scanned corrals and stables. He wanted horses. No matter that he was a friend of long standing and a one time student in the Juarez Academy, he was ruthless in his demands. After helping himself to available horses he rode off with his men under control. One trailing straggler, however, entered the Romney home in the uppermost part of town and menaced the family there. Miles Romney was enraged when he returned home. He complained to Bishop Bentley, "Our women will never be safe in this country if such acts are tolerated." The Bishop repeated the complaint to Enrique. "You are right," the captain replied and ordered trial of the accused soldier. Execution [^1] of the guilty man brought Bishop Bentley to a realization that a serious incident might result from his bold action in returning when priesthood authorities had but recently ordered evacuation. It might be better to wait yet awhile on the border. The next train to leave Pearson carried the men and their families back to the United States for another period of waiting.

His disappointment over this first venture at resettlement was offset by a letter from President Joseph F. Smith re-appointing him to act as Bishop of the Juarez ward should he desire to return. This gave him the authority be had lacked. Feeling responsible for the safety of those who had remained he returned a second time to Colonia Juarez. In the absence of train service he and two or three other brethren made the trip by team via Hachita, passing through exciting revolutionary troubles in Colonia Diaz, and through Dublan where a few people were preparing to spend the winter.

At Colonia Juarez conditions were still quiet and peaceful and there was gainful employment at Pearson where sawmills were partially operating. He arranged for payment of taxes at Cases Grandes, gathered up tools, books and equipment at the Academy, encouraged all to continue their vigil until he could come to them soon, left the church office unlocked, reiterated instructions to natives in his home, and returned to El Paso to await a favorable time for a return with his family.

This favorable time did not occur until after the first of the year. Then, true to his word, Bishop Bentley organized the first real movement to resettle his beloved town. Leaving El Paso by train January 31, 1913 at seven a.m., the party arrived at Columbus, New Mexico by ten where teams to carry them overland were waiting. There were sixty-five persons in the company including, besides the Bentley family, John J. Walser, his wife and daughter Gertrude; John A. Hatch and family; Fanny MacDonald and daughters Lucy Bluth and Flora Taylor and children; Hannah Ellett and two sons, Fawn and Manly; Alonzo L. Taylor and family; Ernest Hatch and family; George E. Redd and family; James N. Skousen and family; Canute Breinholt and Alvin Coon. As the wagon train drew away from Palomas February 1st, headed toward the south and home, those who composed it were traveling no more elegantly than the early settlers of 1885, and they felt no less venturesome. They hoped for peaceful reoccupation of their homes, yet insecurity sat close and they were subject to rebel interference every step of the way. Still they proceeded with the same faith that had actuated the first settlers.

Camping the first night at Boca Grande, they were in Colonia Diaz next day at noon. It was Sunday and a day of rest, so they paused for the usual Church session. Carrying Charles Whiting's organ from his abandoned home to the shade of the cottonwoods in his yard they used it to accompany their singing and to promote the spirit of testimony bearing that followed. Here new courage for their venture was born, faith was kindled, and a reserve of strength built up from which they later continued to draw. Under the spell of this fervor they saw themselves as the vanguard of a new period in the history of Colonia Juarez. So exalted did they become that they could listen unafraid to the unholy use being made of the Church house, now occupied by a garrison, as ribald singing reached them. They could even explore the town that had so recently been filled with a happy, busy people. Bishop Bentley, tempted to save a few choice volumes from W. Derby Johnson's well stocked library desisted by saying, "If the native people can leave these homes unmolested, I'll not be the first to disturb them." When a few days later Antonio Rojas and wanton Red Flaggers set fire to every house in town and rode off leaving them a heap of smoldering embers, Bishop Bentley regretted his own restraint.

Tuesday the wagon train passed through Colonia Dublan where a few men, hoping to remain all winter were gathering crops, and arrived in Colonia Juarez Tuesday evening at nine. There the few families who had held on during the winter and the natives who had cared for homes in their absence lined up to greet them and give them a hearty welcome.

The journey, peaceable and leisurely, was accepted as a favorable omen, and fortified the feeling they already had acquired that "come what would" divine protection would temper events ahead of them and that their defenselessness would find a shield. This abiding faith continued to be their source of strength. The schoolhouse was cleaned from the effects of occupation as a barracks and ward organizations were set to functioning.

Then President Madero was assassinated, and Victoriano Huerta took his place. Political tremors shook the nation, and coupled with the rebellion already hatched in Casas Grandes, gave the revolution another vicious stir. Salazar and Orozco became rebels to another cause, joined Carranza who at once called for armed forces to follow him and avenge the death of Madero. Salazar was left in charge. His followers, suspicious, deserted him and took all the money in the treasury and all horses and guns. Shorn, he resorted to his old Red Flagger tactics of looting and robbing. Independent bands also sprang up, some led by vicious men and whether headquarters were in San Diego, Pearson, Casas Grandes or a camp in the hills, unprotected Juarez became a common ground for operations, and a source of supply none of the bands overlooked.

Bishop Bentley warned and fortified ward members. "Political conditions have taken an unhoped-for turn. Perilous times no doubt lie ahead. But let us not lose faith in the power of the Lord to protect us or ever cease striving to be worthy of that protection. Let us not be easily stirred to anger or let resentment for unjust treatment bring further tribulation upon us. Though they may despoil us, deprive us of our property and misuse us in many ways, let us not forget that the despoilers, though ignorant and depraved, are still God's children, and that our mission in this land is to be a link in the chain of their salvation. Who knows but that we may be hastening the day when they shall become a 'white and delightsome people?' Be humble, seek diligently the help and protection of God, and we have Elder Ivins' promise to us that we shall not lose our lives."

The first lawless band trooped in on May 24th and made a thorough search for guns, ammunition, horses or mules. Leaders concentrated on cash to be found in the store and the T & M shops, taking $150.00 from each. Where no guns were found, the word of the owner that he had none was accepted, unless suspicion prompted otherwise, then cruel tactics were used to force confession. John J. Walser was such a case. He was dragged from his home to the fields above town and stood before leveled guns. Given a few seconds to reconsider continued denials before the final order to shoot, he surprised his captors by, "Well, then shoot, if you dare." Frustrated, the men dropped their guns and when a friendly neighbor interceded and told them he spoke the truth they grudgingly released him. "The Lord has spared my life," solemnly acknowledged Walser.

This raid was typical of those that continued through seven long years. Bishop Bentley urged the people to continue unafraid, to withhold property if possible but to comply in the end with grace, to remain calm even when prodded and pushed about. As a result there were few acts of violences and no casualties. The colonists became inured to meeting unheralded approaches of large or small bands of insurgents, at any hour of the day or night, whether renegades doing a little foraging on their own, detached bands of Red Flaggers seeking munitions or organized troops. The raids, intense and frequent at first became milder and less frequent in the end, partly because the constant stripping gradually dwindled or wiped out supplies, and partly because the revolution was drawing to a close. But while the raids lasted, patience and long suffering were the ruling virtues, and intuitive understanding of bandit tactics the saving qualification. A ruse to intimidate was ever the bandit's first approach, beginning with a demand and following with a threat. If guns, horses, saddles or money were forthcoming at once the bandit rode off mollified—in some cases immediate acquiescence excited suspicion and demands were increased. But when the victim, lacking that which was demanded or being loath to part with it forced an issue, a leveled gun was often the alternative. Meeting it with courage was rewarded. In the face of a brave challenge never a bandit had the courage to fulfill his threat. Never a case when the goaded victim said, "Well, then shoot, if you must," but the bandit wavered, lowered his gun, and saved his face by a compromise. Meeting the bandit half way proved determination of the colonists to remain peaceful, mollified the extortioner, and was the means by which complete stripping of farm and riding animals, barns, stackyards and pantries, and money was avoided.

During all this trouble no victim felt the heavy hand of the extortioner, no hapless colonist faced extreme alternatives without having Bishop Bentley by his side. Many a serious situation was mitigated, many a cruel demand was modified by his persistent admonition to meet force with gentleness, to bend to the storm rather than be snapped off. He saved many a casualty and changed fate in many a critical situation. No belligerent but was calmed and no victim but was helped by his timely interference and was impressed by his peaceful tactics.

There were exceptions. Usually it was petty officers in one faction or other or in detached roving bands who inflicted the most insolent and ruthless treatment, who did the most consistent looting, caused the most worry and concern, and the ones by whom the greatest property losses were suffered. Benigno Turin and Antonio Rojas were examples. The first, a onetime employee of Bishop Bentley, was sneaking in his tactics, and least influenced by the Bentley way. Turin's band was the only one to threaten Bishop Bentley's life. Rojas dynamited Sarah Lunt's house in Corrales and drove off all the cattle found there. He also ruthlessly burned every home and business house in Colonia Diaz.

Higher ranking officers, those most conscious of their "cause" and most sincere in their efforts to help the revolution accorded more courteous treatment, though extortion was always a temptation. These officers in the main were most severe on their own race, often spreading terror among them by shooting and other forms of execution. Maximo Castillo and Pancho Villa exemplified this class. Castillo raided the company store in Pearson, and executed all captured officials. He will ever be remembered as the cause of the Cumbre Tunnel disaster, which killed by suffocation and burning fifty men, women and children trapped in it. [^2] Between such acts he visited Colonia Juarez where the students in the Academy entertained him with a program and the townspeople pacified him with a banquet. He was impressed and rode off promising to be their benefactor when he won the revolution. Pancho Villa raged in like a tornado to take vengeance on Red Flaggers. He stormed Cases Grandes, captured and executed those in office, left, but returned unexpectedly to catch those who had eluded him. Manuel Gutierrez then took his turn using E. L. Taylor as the butt of his depredations.

The spirit of revolution infected renegades and they took advantage of lawless conditions. Brigham Stowell was attacked in the night at his farm in Cases Grandes, shot in the face by a neighbor who resented gringos and felt safe in showing his resentment. P. H. Carlin was dragged from his home in San Jose in the night and stood up to be shot but turned the tables by shooting dead four members of the firing squad with a pistol concealed on his body. In this he was lauded by local peace officers trying to stop night robberies and murders. Attempt at interference in a robbery on the part of George Redd, however, in Colonia Juarez ended in his tragic death, though the shot that shattered his knee and caused death by shock and loss of blood was meant for the policeman. Another crisis arose when Guadalupe Treviso, a malicious agitator in town, forced a crisis by attacking John Hatch with intent to kill and was himself killed by Hatch in self-defense who struck first with a rock in his hand causing the man's death. Except for mediative tactics of Alonzo Taylor, Bishop Bentley and friendly Mexicans the town might have been plunged into a civil conflict by this incident.

Raids, visits, casualties, robberies and rough treatment were exciting while they lasted. And other incidents, such as the near drowning of fourteen-year-old Viv Bentley, added excitement. Two days before Christmas an unusual flood in the river rose to the level of the foot bridge suspended on a cable and tore it suddenly away with several of the Bentley boys who had gathered on the bridge to observe the rising waters. As the bridge was torn from its moorings on the east end and collapsed in the flood all the boys jumped to safety except Viv whose clothing caught in the bridge wreckage and pinned him there. A tragic drowning seemed inevitable as he sank and rose repeatedly with the dangling bridge. He finally got loose and drifted down stream where he was rescued by Eugene Taylor and Alma P. Spilsbury who rode their horses into the raging torrent and threw a rope to him.

But interims of peace gradually lengthened with the passage of time, plantings and reapings took place, school and ward activities functioned normally, and gaieties and merriments increased. Knit together by common tribulation the people shared joys and sorrows as one large family. They lost little time brooding over possible dangers. Again and again they saw their persecutors of one day become the persecuted the next. Repeatedly they were moved to admit that "Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, and I will repay." Always in a crisis the charitable attitude of Bishop Bentley instilled compassion rather than censure and thereby lightened the burden.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] When Portillo was convinced of the guilt of his man and determined upon execution as penalty he reportedly proffered the executioner's gun to Miles saying, "It is your privilege, Senor Romney, the offense was against your family." Romney declined and the culprit was shot by Portillo's own men.
[^2] The victims of this tragedy were not Mormon colonists but passengers on the Mexico-Northwestern Railroad travelling from Madera in the mountains to Pearson.
