Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

XXI

A FRIENDLY ENEMY

PANCHO VILLA, the revolutionary leader from whom most severe treatment could naturally have been expected, surprisingly was the one from whom most consideration came. Had tactics he used against other foreigners been pitted against the small number of Mormon colonists, they would have been wiped out. Instead, many times he used his influence to befriend them and even to punish those from whom mistreatment came. This can be explained only by drawing a picture of the man himself and understanding the power of the peaceful ways used against him by Joseph C. Bentley and other peaceably inclined colonists. These measures softened his rough exterior and sometimes induced him to make last minute moves in favor of the colonists in spite of avowed intentions to do otherwise.

His by-passing Colonia Juarez lying geographically in his path on his march to attack Columbus was an example. Instead of following the easy road of travel he led his men through the mountains. Yet the American ranchers Earl Wright and Frank Hayden and an American cowboy Arthur Kinney were executed in his march. Also, following the attack on Columbus when the American expeditionary forces engaged in hunting him down had been removed and only a remnant of colonists at Colonia Juarez remained, helplessly exposed, he made no use of opportunities to retaliate or punish even though Mormon scouts had been employed to help run him down. Only from detached bands claiming to be his men, and from outraged federal officers smarting at the indignity of occupation by a foreign army, was animosity vented. Even these were tempered by mild and pacific reactions of President Bentley and his associates who exemplified the same Christian attitude toward mistreatment that had sustained them before the Pershing expedition had intensified animosities.

AFTERMATH OF THE PANCHO VILLA MANHUNT

The day following the United States army evacuation the first test came to the colonists in meeting retaliation from the Mexicans both revolutionists and federal forces. From the north came word that rebels acting in Villa's name had ambushed and killed three American cowboys, ex-residents of Colonia Diaz, and had ridden off on the cowboys' horses, wearing their boots, chaps, and hats. This tragic news overtaking friends and acquaintances, blanched their faces and set wonder in their hearts. But mourning for the dead was short-lived. Before noon the commanding general of Carranzista forces from Pearson with an ominous following of men was in town. Sitting his horse pompously in an American saddle, he tried to assume the dignity of his office.

Rapping smartly on every gatepost and asking the same questions of everyone who answered his summons, he made his way through town, and knew by the time he had reached its extreme end how many men were in town, what homes were unprotected by their absence, and just where to strike. He had also found an avenue by which the most useful ones could be reached. It was a barnful of hay in Alonzo Taylor's lot, and which in the space of seconds he had set burning, knowing that a conflagration would gather spectators and that from among them he could seize a victim.

Hardly had the black billows of smoke burst from the roof before a couple of boys came running, Richard Bentley and Leland Martineau. But they stopped short when the general met them. "Who set that barn afire?" he demanded with sword raised for striking. And before they could stammer innocence, it whipped round them once—then twice. Summoning a henchman with a commanding jerk he ordered him to arrest the two boys. Without more reason than that hay his horses needed was burning, the bewildered boys were prodded into the street and told to "get going." Which they did and at a lively rate.

Bishop John J. Walser, who interposed, was roughly pushed aside, and his plea for mercy stopped in his throat as horses' hoofs all but ran him down. Other men who sought to befriend the boys with sanity and fairness were shouted down. Only at the river crossing, as the general left town, did he bare the reason for the arrest and then because enough representative men had gathered to make his ultimatum effective. "Unless money enough to pay for damages done by these boys is in my hands tonight, they die before my firing squad at sunrise." Which told them what they had suspected from the beginning—a revengeful desire to punish those who had basked under American protection, and to get his hands on some of the money they had earned.

By the time President Bentley had been located and a conveyance had taken him to the garrison quarters in Pearson, the ire of the general had cooled, and he was no longer so righteously indignant at either the boys or the people he had abused. He was willing, in fact, to waive all charges and be a good friend and protector of the Mormones if they would at once advance the money his benevolence would cost them. He was even affable and garrulous and willingly released the boys from custody and smilingly promised to be in town early the next morning to collect. He waved his fat hands in goodnatured disbelief that President Bentley hadn't worked for the American soldiers or had any commercial dealings with them. He would come and collect just the same.

Collect he did. Seated in a little buckboard he was in town early the next morning, and took President Bentley into custody as soon as he arrived. Not content he came again the next day for more. And he continued to come, leaving his own conveyance at the mill on the way up each day and commandeering the services of Dan Skousen and his automobile to carry him into town and to lead him to President Bentley and others who might have money he craved. The only day he remained discreetly within the confines of his own little garrison was when Silvestre Quevedo, now a Villa man, stopped with his men at President Bentley's yard to feed their horses as they passed through on their way south to join Villa now operating vigorously in the Namiquipa country. Silvestre also was friendly but rather uncommunicative about the vicinity from which he had come. Men of the town, however, who walked freely among the horses as they fed recognized the brand on three of the best and knew them to have belonged to Andy Peterson, Burton Jensen and Hugh Acord, the cowboys killed but three days before.

Ironically it was the one-man army of General Manuel Gutierrez, Trinidad Quesada, who rescued the people of Colonia Juarez from the clutches of the Carranzista general who came again as soon as Silvestre's men had passed over the hills to the south. Manuel's man slipped into town unexpectedly and chanced to see the general in Skousen's car with President Bentley. The chase that took place was hilarious to all but the general. Falling to the floor of the car, and with eyes popping he begged Dan to get him out of Trinidad's reach. "Andale, amigo Daniel, por favor," he pleaded, sitting flat on the floor and pointing the way to go and repeating Andale, Andale!

As the car raced up the street and turned to cross the wagon bridge Trini was close behind, his gunshots plopping the dust on both sides of the car. Then he whirled his horse and continued his plopping from the east side as the car raced down the west side. Fearful as Dan was that some of the wild shots might crash his engine or windows, he was amused at the frantic plight of the frightened general cowering on the floor of his car and his continued pleadings to hurry. "Por favor, Daniel. Por amor de Dios Daniel, andale, Daniel, mi amigo," he kept saying as he patted any part of Dan's anatomy within reach.

And Dan did hurry until the mill was in sight. Then Dan's car stopped—dead still—and refused to go another turn. The general begged and patted and bribed both Dan and the car, urging them to keep going until the safety of his garrison in Pearson was reached, but the engine just sputtered and died. Nor did it start until after the Carranzista general in his buckboard had lashed his horses out of sight.

PANCHO VILLA AND SALAZAR

When this interlude of molestation from both parties had subsided, and a peaceful respite once more had come to the little town, not a person but was still glad he had not joined the two mile long procession that left with General Pershing, or among the flood of refuges that fled to the United States. Five hundred wagons had trailed along for fear their association with the United States army would bring wrath of the Mexicans on their head. Faith and endurance were taxed two weeks later when another raid came. In the end it was not so formidable as they had feared. It was their last but one test.

February 17, 1917, Inez Salazar, now a staunch Villa man, headed a raid with Silvestre Quevedo second in command. Both had recently seen active duty with Villa in his hectic campaign in southern Chihuahua, and both were imbued with his bitter, fuming, vindictiveness against Americans. With Salazar in the lead they galloped into town from the north, stopping only long enough as they passed down each side of the river to order every male, Mormons and Mexicans alike, to report at once at the Skousen grist mill below town for a "junta" with Salazar. The orders were given with menacing threats and no one disobeyed.

President Bentley, in a buckboard with Lester Farnsworth, was the first to arrive, and while waiting for the angry general to address them, watched camp operations, soldiers working like ants, carrying flour from the mill and distributing it to the men. This operation suddenly stopped, however, when three Chinamen, in a wagon loaded with merchandise and drawn by a span of mules, drove up and were immediately made prisoners. The terrified Chinamen were jerked from the wagon. Gleefully the soldiers listened to the piteous pleas for mercy. Salazar even pocketed $300.00 U.S. currency they offered him to spare their lives. Then pitilessly he ordered "Take these perros (dogs) down by the river and shoot them." Amid shrieks of terror and wild pleadings from the Chinamen, the men climbed onto the wagon and practically tore it apart for lard, eggs, bacon and other staple articles. With these they hurried away, arms full, oblivious to the pleadings of the poor victims, or the staring of those petrified with horror.

"Don't shoot those men," Dan finally took the liberty to say, "they've done nothing worthy of death. That's merchandise they've purchased from the American army to set up a store in Colonia Juarez." Salazar gruffly explained, "We have to kill Chinamen. They refused to help Villa in Chihuahua when they had the money and he needed their help." And while the explanation was still being shrugged off all heard the shots that ended three lives.

In the stupefied silence another crisis was precipitated. Brigham Pierce, who had arrived late and unaware of the reason for the silence, walked straight to Salazar to complain that one of the soldiers on his way through town, had entered his house, frightened his wife, had robbed her of money, and had then threatened them both because there was no more. In addition he had taken a team of brood mares unfit for army use. Would the general please do something about it?

"Do you know the man?" demanded the general.

"Yes, he is sitting there by that nearest fire," replied Pierce.

"Well, we'll see," glowered Salazar as he summoned the man, put him through a barrage of questions, and finally had him searched. In spite of denials and explanations, the money and other articles taken were found and the team identified. With no more preliminaries than turning to Silvestre his next ranking officer, he barked, "Take this man out and shoot him."

Time stood still for a moment as everyone held his breath. Then, "Don't shoot the man, my goods are returned," pleaded Pierce. "He's one of my best soldiers," from Silvestre Quevedo, "If you kill him on my place, it will terrify my children, and other factions will hold me responsible," from Dan, and "That offense doesn't justify death," from President Bentley, all coming at once, and added to the mercy in the eyes of all the bystanders, seemed to add fuel to the flame of wrath smoldering in the general's heart. With each petition his face had grown darker and his eyes more cold. "Son asuntos mios" "This is my business." Whipping out his revolver and covering Silvestre in a menacing gesture, he hissed, "You'll kill that man, or I'll kill you." By the time Silvestre had moved his man the first step toward his execution, none but Mormon men were left to face the angry general. And whirling on these he roared, "Go home, every man of you, get your guns and prepare to fight on one side or the other." As the import of his words sank in, he added, "Or leave the country. Villa will no longer tolerate pacificos (neutrals)." Then sneeringly, "Go back to the United States where you belong. And where Grandma Wilson can take care of you." Mistaking stupefaction for subjection he added one last scathing anathema, "Mexico for Mexicans, and los Estados Unidos for gringos."

He got no farther. Suddenly his wrath was met by a quiet voice of fearlessness and understanding. Salazar wiped his mouth with his hand in sheer surprise at the challenge of spirit to force and as he listened the tension went out of his face. "No, we will not leave the country," said President Bentley looking up into the face towering above him. "Neither will we take up arms to fight you and your people. This is our country as well as yours. We've lived here many years; our sons and daughters have been born here and some of our wives and children have been buried here. This is our home and the country is dear to us. We did not come here to fight, but to live in peace, to make homes and build up the country."

"But," stammered the general, finally breaking in, "Villa's orders are—" but he got no farther again. For somehow antagonism had melted and he was shaking hands as if in agreement. A friendliness he could not understand had taken over. The quiet spokesman of the group had broken down his rough exterior and without full realization himself of the change, the general said, as he responded in spirit to the man shaking his hand, "Senor Bentley, you and your people may stay in this country as long as you wish. I will be your friend, but," he added anxiously, "I don't know what General Villa will do when he comes for he told me to raid your colony and force you out of a neutral position."

"That's easy," smiled President Bentley. "And we won't worry about that now. You're the man we're looking to for protection today, and we'll ask the same of Villa when he comes." Then bidding the general goodbye, he and the rest of the brethren except Dan Skousen returned to their homes.

"I don't understand Don Inez today," confided Silvestre to Skousen after they all had gone. "Yesterday he ordered us to be prepared to rush in, seize everyone and everything of importance, kill and burn the rest, and leave Colonia Juarez a clean place on the map. But today, just before we entered, he suddenly decided to have a junta first. He divided his forces and gave orders to take saddle horses only as we went to each home to notify all to assemble at the mill. And now this," indicating the unmolested Mormons and natives. "Instead of making soldiers of them all as he threatened he's taken but a half dozen poor scared natives and let the Mormons go—and with a promise to protect them. Que General!" (What a general!)

Salazar's wrath, for all the people at the mill knew, had sent three helpless Chinese to their doom. What astonishment when one of the Chinese vendors in the evening after Salazar and his soldiers had left stepped onto the Skousen porch and begged for water to wash himself. With two bullet holes in his face he had lain hours between two dead comrades, never so much as wriggling a muscle until he was sure Salazar had gone. Would Daniel please help him? And would he keep Salazar from getting him again? Mrs. Laura Mecham, the town nurse, dressed his wounds; Daniel provided a hide-out and when he was sufficiently recovered he was taken to friends and relatives in Casas Grandes.

Some months later Salazar and a few men returned to Colonia Juarez and made camp above town on the river. He was a changed man. He no longer wished the Mormons out of the country. He counted them his only friends and was glad so many had remained. So friendly and sociable was he that community activities were in no way curtailed because of his proximity. The girls of the M. I. A. one day, in an outing, stopped for their picnic lunch not far from his camp. A boy was sent to invite Salazar to join them in their lunch. When he eagerly accepted and joined them a few moments later, he had shaved, tidied his clothes, and appeared clean and shining and without gun or sword. As he ate bounteously of wholesome food, it was hard to tell which touched him more, the taste of good clean food or the kind invitation. Under the influence of both, he waxed affable and confidential, speaking most graciously to the young ladies and referring often to his widowed mother and sister.

A few days later Salazar left his camp telling some of the colonists as he passed through Colonia Juarez that he was on his way to the United States. He was disappointed and disgusted with the revolution, and the way it had gotten into the hands of Carranza and other ambitious politicians, all of whom he claimed were actuated by graft and desire for loot instead of patriotic fervor, and that he had lost hope in the cause for which it was instigated. No one, he predicted, had ability to establish a stable government now. Weeks later the details of the death of the man directly responsible for the Exodus drifted in: he had camped, his first night out, near the Nogales ranch, and sent a man to buy something to eat. When the man failed to return, Salazar followed him, and was ambushed and killed, reportedly by two cowboys who feared the general.

PANCHO VILLA AND MISSIONARIES

In March of 1919, President Bentley with the missionaries James E. (Bert) Whetten and Albert Teitjen prepared to visit the Namiquipa district and check on missionary work being done there. In a light wagon, well packed with food and bedding, they left, feeling secure that growing confidence in the strength of a central government had made the time right for missionary work. Disturbing reports at El Valle, however, that Villa was operating in the vicinity worried them and should have checked them. Instead they and the missionaries, Enos Wood, Joseph Williams and Isidro Bautista went to the commanding officer of the garrison to explain the peaceable nature of their travel and to obtain a salvo conducto permission to travel and guarantee of protection. With this they proceeded on their way.

Within but a few miles they ran into outposts of Villa's guard and were immediately arrested, and informed they must be held prisoners until someone could communicate with Villa. In vain Bert Whetten plead their cause, showing his passport and explaining the nature of their mission. Orders were that no one was to enter or leave territory under Villa's command. The brethren were reluctant to continue their journey now that troubled political conditions were encountered, and when the orderly returned in the evening with word to take the prisoners to Villa's camp, they could see that the captain was also worried. "Villa," he said, "is still revengeful and bitter toward Americans."

"Let us return to El Valle," prompted Whetten, noting his anxiety.

"No," replied the captain, "you are prisoners and can be released only by order of the general."

"Could you go to Villa without us?" Whetten earnestly urged. "Explain our mission to him and if he considers we are interfering with him, get him to allow us to return to our homes."

"Pues, si," shrugged the captain, "But what would Villa do to me for leaving prisoners to escape while I spent my time pleading their cause?"

"But if we give our word of honor to remain here in camp, make no attempt to escape, could you then do that for us?" argued Whetten. After more persuasion, the captain finally rode off, looking back doubtfully at the prisoners as they prepared for bed.

Beat of horses hoofs approaching from the south awoke them soon, and "Elberto! Elberto!" they heard the approaching rider shout. "I am Jenaro Lugo, remember me?" he said as he met the hastily awakened men. Get out of Villa's country as fast as you can. Take your mules and go with all speed for Villa will kill you if you don't. I saw Villa's fit of anger when the captain reported without you. It won't be well with you if he gets his hands on you, so get going pronto before it's too late."

"But we promised to stay in camp until the captain returns," explained Whetten, "and that is what we should surely do."

"Then it's too bad for you. I've made my escape and I'm getting out while the going's good. There may be some one following me now, so adios, and good luck."

Again they went to bed. But not to sleep, for soon the captain arrived. The tramp of many horses' feet told them he was not returning alone.

"General Villa has sent these men to bring you to him," announced the captain looking relieved to see them. "It's good for me that you still are here. It will be still better for me when he sees you."

The night was cold, and comfort for President Bentley was secured by making a bed in the bottom of the wagon, leaving Elder Whetten to invite the captain to ride in the seat beside him and Tietjen. Conversation became interesting even confidential as they rode. The dread of what awaited them gave way to a bond of friendship.

Villa had gone when they reached his camp, so their fate was prolonged. The men in camp, subsisting on parched corn, looked avidly at the wagon supplied with provisions, and but for the captain would soon have made away with every morsel in it.

The day and night spent in waiting were long indeed.

By morning orders came to move to Cruces, a town in Villa's hands whose inhabitants had fled. There the brethren were given into custody of strange guards who took them through a great saguan door, across the little vecinidad which in this case was used as a corral, and locked them in a room opening onto it. There, with no outside windows, only a tallow candle for a light, they were securely locked while strange guards watched their team and wagon in the enclosure in front. They were most uncomfortable and filled with apprehension. The town was deserted! The guards were unfriendly, their captain friend had been removed, and Villa seemed to be in no hurry to make an end of their uncertainty.

But friendliness was foremost in their nature and used on the guard soon secured for them the privilege of opening the door, and to talk with him at every favorable opportunity. But his remarks were so cautiously made, and his fear for their final outcome was so apparent that it afforded them little comfort.

After what seemed an eternity they were led through the corral again and out of the saguan door into the street and into Villa's presence. He was giving orders to his men, and instead of ordering the three prisoners to some place of execution as the crowd gathered round seemed to expect, he motioned them into the house he was occupying, and then gave them no more apparent heed.

Inside they were met by a small, slightly built gentleman with an intelligent face who in greeting them cordially found out they had not yet breakfasted and immediately provided breakfast for them. As they ate and he conversed in a friendly manner they learned they were temporary guests of the famed artillery strategist, Felipe Angeles. He had been with Villa until the Columbus raid and Villa's vow to remain a bandit had broken them up. But they were still friendly and bound together by old campaign ties and dedication to the same cause. Angeles was in civilian clothes, having been sent by friends in New York to urge Villa to accept the amnesty being offered by international leaders.

Villa was in no hurry to grant them audience, and being in the company of this illustrious and kindly disposed gentleman was a missionary opportunity too rare for President Bentley to ignore. In Angeles' opening question as to why they were risking hazards of unsettled political conditions to check on work being done by missionaries they found their opportunity. "Give him all the Gospel you can," urged President Bentley as he saw his interest. We'd rather talk to him than to Villa right now anyway. Perhaps our chance to talk to Villa and others will come later." Angeles nodded understandingly, smiled encouragingly, and gave courteous attention as they talked. Others gathered round to listen, and a conversation, punctuated by questions from Angeles, continued for more than an hour.

Bert Whetten explained the first principles of the Gospel. He told them of the Book of Mormon translated from gold plates found hidden in Hill Cumorah and containing a history of the people of this land, and he dwelt carefully on promises made of eventual enlightenment and redemption. From there it was easy to introduce the missionary system, of which they were a part, wherein men and women commissioned to go into all parts of the land carrying a message of hope for salvation, also taught the people to be clean, to be honest, how to be better farmers, raise better stock, grow more fruit, so they might build themselves better homes and more ably build up the country. The audience showed great interest.

Even General Villa, entering the room again and again, paused to listen. "Come hear some of this doctrine," Angeles said on one of his nervous entrances. "These men are trying to do with their Gospel what we are trying to do with our guns."

"Yes," answered Villa, for the first time addressing them directly, "I know all about the Mormon people. I've been in their colony. They are good and peaceful. But this is no time to be doing missionary work. They should be home. No one knows what might happen to them in times like these."

In the audience he finally granted them he reiterated his respect for the Mormon people. He had at one time lived with a Mormon family in Sonora, had learned their doctrines, and knew the way they lived. "Many times," he said, "I could have wiped you out and destroyed your colonies, but I've never desired to do you harm. I would like to help you now, and will if I can, but no one can guarantee safety in times like these. Go back to your homes, stay there until we get things settled. Then will be the time to do what you are trying to do now."

Both he and Angeles voiced their admiration for the American government, both were sure peace should be kept between the two nations, and though Villa felt the United States had legislated against him and been the cause of his final downfall, he still protested that should the United States ever need his assistance to fight a foreign foe he'd be on hand among the first.

With another salvo conducto they prepared to leave for home, as Villa had suggested. As they were leaving Angeles unexpectedly spoke to them in perfect English, smiling as he did so.

With passport, their team and wagon intact, they finally drove away.

At nearby Namiquipa they were stopped by a company of rurales. The town was deserted, and Elders Williams and Sloan had left. Fidel Herras, the leader, arrested them. The Villa passport made him immediately suspicious. "That's not Villa's way of doing things," he protested, "He kills Americans. It is impossible that you have passed through his hands and are still alive and in possession of your outfit. You must be spies." Mention of Felipe Angeles made him even more incredulous. "Felipe Angeles would never affiliate himself with a bandit like Villa. I think you are spies. You must report to the mayor."

But the mayor was in the hills where he and all citizens had fled to hide from Villa. When found he was most incredible of all. "You cannot go on. We are expecting strong reinforcements, including a regiment of Indians, and when they come, we will attack Villa. You can't go until the fight is over."

For nine days they were confined to the camp while waiting for the army that would surely come tomorrow. Since Namiquipans were virtually prisoners also, and with little to do, the zealous missionaries had a ready-made congregation and another excellent opportunity to explain themselves and their mission. By the end of their stay they had made many firm friends and some sincere investigators who were later baptized.

In spite of this rich field for missionary work they repeatedly importuned the mayor for permission to leave. But he still maintained that they were dangerous spies. To prove it, one Jose Antillon who had fought with the Rurales under Madero and knew Angeles, held a picture of him for Elder Whetten to identify, but covered with his thumb the name beneath. Whetten recognized him immediately. Other pictures were shown where he posed with a group, and Whetten picked him out again. But they were not released until Villa sent the Mexicans word they could return to their homes where he would molest them no more—proving it by marching his men through the town without harming anything in it. Then since the expected reinforcements had not yet arrived, they decided to end camp life and return to their homes. Permission for the brethren to leave was grudgingly given, the mayor stipulating it would take a passport from him added to that given by Villa to insure a safe passage through the country.

"A fine lot of men," commented President Bentley after they were on their way. "And a splendid lot of people." "Yes," answered Whetten, "to us. But I am wondering who will believe we actually have been Villa's prisoners for thirteen days, and come away not only with our lives, but with outfit all intact." "And," he continued, "who will believe that Villa let us keep an animal that had been in his possession and on which he had placed his brand? I can't believe it myself. But there you see him," pointing to the "off" member of the team, "and Villa saw him plain as day and could have claimed him any time he wanted to. So could Herras, because the mule fed right along with his horses all the time we were in camp in the hills. Yet, when one of his men rode it off one day and refused to return it until he had threatened him with a gun, he made the fellow unsaddle it and turn it back to us. It beats me, for either of them could have claimed it with as much right as we."

And further reminiscing on their unusual experiences, going over every detail again and again, they occupied the time during all the days it took to reach Colonia Juarez. Then as they topped the little dugway and looked on the "hills of home" and their loved ones living among them, their eager eyes lighted, for well they knew their arrival would end suspense from anxiety and worry, and quiet fears of families and friends.
