Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

XXII

AND THERE WAS LIGHT

WHEN AFTER A YEAR'S SUSPENSION of school activities, the Juarez Stake Academy opened its doors again in September 1913, instead of eighteen faculty members and an approximate enrollment of three hundred students, there were but three teachers for high school work and three for the elementary grades. Instead of the four buildings formerly occupied, both high school and elementary students were accommodated comfortably in the Academy. Ray Oberhansley, an agricultural teacher of pre-Exodus days was principal with Ernest Hatch and Nelle Spilsbury as aides. A relatively full course was possible for the elementary grades. Only minimum essentials could be included in the high school curriculum.

In spite of hectic revolutionary conditions and hard times that followed the school never once closed its doors but kept going, often when hostile bands of armed men were in town. Shining through the struggle was a reincarnation of the spirit of the early settlers and the same hope of providing learning for their children. To the principal they looked for the same broad leadership and the school continued as the cultural center of the town. Ray Oberhansley, I. Daniel Stewart, Farley G. Eskelson and Joseph S. Fish were the young men who with courage and persistence directed school affairs during ten years of revolution.

During the tenure of Ray Oberhansley Colonia Juarez passed through its most dangerous experiences, the first of which happened the first week of school when General Maximo Castillo paid a visit. The general and his staff were met in the entrance hall, and affably escorted up the stairs to seats on the rostrum where they enjoyed an impromptu program given by the students.

As Professor Oberhansley bowed the general and his retinue out, he made a bid for protection of the building as an educational shrine so that he could go forward in an educational program that included in its benefits Mexicans, Americans, and Japanese. With a bow Castillo responded, "As long as schools such as this can be maintained in spite of existing conditions, the destiny of Mexico is assured." Turning to his men, he instructed them that on this visit or any others that might follow this school building was to be protected, and the people operating it molested as little as possible. And so the building stood undisturbed throughout the hectic years of revolutionary warfare.

Experiences of a more violent nature were to follow. Oberhansley was arrested by Manuel Gutierrez and held until ransomed by his father-in-law, E. L. Taylor, who was the coveted victim. He was undertaker as well as mourner when George Redd, a brother-in-law, died from loss of blood and shock following a ruthless shooting by a renegade thief. He experienced dangers that threatened the town when John Hatch, in self-defense, caused the death of Guadalupe Treviso, and a maddened native populace sought to avenge an imaginary wrong. He suffered the same spasm of anguish that racked all when Castillo's orders resulted in the death by suffocation and burning of fifty-five helpless men, women and children, although not colonists, in the Cumbre Tunnel disaster. He was apprehensive when natives, who in pre-Exodus days had been friends and neighbors, such as Camilo Acosta and son Florencio, were arrested and executed and he contrived clever defenses against blame should enemies try to saddle responsibility onto the colonists. He was alarmed, then amused by the battle waged in and near town at daybreak when Carranzistas put to flight Manuel Gutierrez only to make of him a more wily nuisance.

While fitting into this exciting life outside school, he continued his daily round of school functions, promoting work in all departments as he taught those in his specialty and kept interest of both students and patrons centered in the school.

Near the end of the first year of school after the Exodus the crises at Tampico and Vera Cruz between United States marines and the Huerta government precipitated a second Exodus, but the people returned in time to open school on schedule in September, with an increase in students and with Richard T. Haag, an able music director, added to the faculty. Class programs, class dramas, class parties, and dances kept school spirit at a high level, and the first commencement program was planned with the enthusiasm and activities of more peaceful and affluent days—graduation exercises in the morning, alumni program in the afternoon, honor dance at night followed by a two-day stake conference. The presence of President Ivins to address the graduates, Lucian Mecham, Jr., John Wall and Bernice Spilsbury, and to be the principal speaker at the conference to follow was a fitting climax. The program was the climax to the life of Principal Oberhansley as well, for on Monday following this relative triumph he was drowned while relaxing with his family and friends on a picnic up the river at the "Hebe Davis Hole." President Ivins preached the funeral sermon, former students sang "The Teacher's Work is Done" and he was laid to rest with tender sadness.

Isaac Daniel Stewart followed as principal. His school year came to a successful close with a class of five graduates and he was followed by Farley G. Eskelson. At this time United States troops under General John J. Pershing were pursuing Villa. Their occupation of the colony area resulted in much new business activity and an increased enrollment at the Academy. When the troops were ordered to leave about half the enrollment of the school also left. Although offered free transportation to the United States and honorable release Professor Eskelson remained. His fearless stand, and that of his entire faculty, helped calm the panic and induced a normal resumption of work.

The next principal was Joseph S. Fish and following him Lucian M. Mecham, Jr., the first Academy alumus to become its principal. He was twenty-one years of age. After graduation in 1915 he had spent four years intensive work at the Utah Agricultural College. This and his own resourcefulness developed in frontier life in both Sonora and Chihuahua was his preparation. With it he set in motion a plan that made striking advancement during his eight years of incumbency. The first step was to unify the school system, putting all elementary schools in the stake under the same management as the Academy. Salaries and standards in general were raised. The second step was the resumption of a summer school for teachers and others who might care for the teacher-training work instituted. This plan again brought outside educators to Colonia Juarez, and exposed teachers and townspeople to trends in teaching methods. Among the men and women who willingly spent a part of their vacation time to help build up the school system were Amos N. Merrill, Thomas L. Martin, Lowry Nelson, Henry Oberhansley, Hermese Peterson, William H. Boyle, and Grant Ivins.

Lucian Mecham was a dynamic factor in overcoming the inertia and lethargic tendencies that were a natural aftermath of the revolution. Although he set a pace few could follow, he changed the indifference and hopelessness. His energy carried his small wiry frame from one task to another. His fertile mind no sooner devised a change necessary than his capable hands had accomplished it. The contagion of his speedy developments stimulated others to move in like directions. Slogans that had actuated his life on the frontier were passed on to his students and from them to parents until they became proverbial. "This day I will break my own record," "Hitch your wagon to a star and then get out and push," Don't be afraid to say 'I don't know' but don't say it too often," "Whatever is worth doing is worth doing well," "Get mad, but don't show it." On first appearance he seemed stern and austere until closer acquaintance discovered kindliness and love for the student. No student awed by a demand to make the best use of his time but was warmed by the understanding wink that followed. He was out of service and otherwise occupied during the years 1925-27, but resumed his school labors from 1927-29. During his second term the gymnasium was built.

Ralph B. Keeler served the Juarez Stake Academy during the depression years from 1925 to 1927 and from 1929 to 1938. The Academy enrollment of 150 students had long outgrown the capacity of the school building. There were no facilities for indoor ball games, no class rooms with laboratory equipment and, since the Ivins home had passed into private hands, no place for home economics classes. These basic needs were met by the completion of a modern two-storied brick structure 120x90 feet in size with accommodations for an amusement hall and gymnasium on the top floor, a home economics department and laboratories, rest rooms, showers, dressing rooms and heating plant on the ground floor. A large shipment of woodworking machinery from the Brigham Young College in Utah was moved to the Academy. Lockers were installed, the library was augmented by the addition of 1500 volumes, most of which came from the closed L.D.S. University. A decorative fence, cement walks and ornamental gateways were senior class projects.

By 1934 the gymnasium was finished, the fireproof machine shop completed, the old assembly hall in the main building had a modern stage, a sloping floor, and a name—Ivins Hall.

First grade pupils were taught Spanish along with their English; teachers were required to conduct part of their classes in Spanish, and students gave Spanish programs, told stories and sang songs in Spanish. Students left high school able to write, read, and speak Spanish fluently. Keeler raised teaching standards by increased salaries, teacher-training classes, sabbatical leaves, a supervisory system, and a night school to which parents were invited. He instituted a rent book system which made it possible for every child to have his own text and at a fraction of the cost of buying it. He instituted a stake field day held in Colonia Juarez where children from all the schools competed in speech, music, dramatic and creative art, as well as in athletics. Songs and speech numbers were conducted in Spanish. In 1936 he appointed a vice-principal and full-time secretary to the superintendent. For five years he was president of the stake and is the only man to have held at one time the two top positions. He traveled from one end of the stake to the other all seasons of the year, in all kinds of weather over rough roads.

He had wells drilled on the Academy grounds, and on the Juarez and Dublan elementary school grounds. This not only provided safe drinking water for school children but made possible a beautification program with buildings surrounded by lawns, shrubs and trees. He planned a sprinkling system and lighting as well as a telephone system to save the time and expense and trouble of traveling. He had hoped to make the Academy into a junior college. He also promoted a poultry project importing a specialist as supervisor.

Bryant R. Clark, first vice-principal, followed Ralph B. Keeler as principal and superintendent. His background of experience and schooling suited him for effective work in rural Colonia Juarez. Building on the foundation laid by all his predecessors and following sympathetically plans already made he saw the Academy and grounds develop into the show place of the community with fresh coat of paint, new slate roof, lowered ceilings, venetian blinds, new pews for old benches, pictures on walls, floors polished, carpeted aisles. The result is an attractive, restful, and highly artistic place for worship, for cultural programs, or for ordinary gatherings.

The elementary school building has also been remodeled providing smaller but more and better classrooms than before. A drinking fountain has been installed in the hall, and rest rooms provided for both boys and girls. An encouraging start toward beautification of the grounds has been made. This high, stony point has ever defied the softening effects of plant life and its barrenness over the years remained an eyesore in spite of repeated attempts to change it. Now the grounds have been terraced, walks and level play space provided and the lot enclosed by a neat, lime-pointed rock wall mounted with a neat iron railing. Shrubs and trees have been planted and their survival assured by the deep-water well on the grounds. It seems only a matter of time until lawns will dress up the grounds and together with shade trees change its present barrenness to one of beauty and comfort for children who spend their most impressionistic years in its environs. Dreams that possessed the early settlers when they picked the spot are at last being realized.

Libraries at both the elementary schools and the Academy have been modernized and augmented.

Among cultural activities of the town dramatic productions still loom large with opportunity to take parts provided everyone. Drama directors have ranged in ability and training but all have conformed to the fundamental ideals set up for this art at its very first inception in the town. Many of the directors have taken part in the plays, teaching as much by example as by precept. The list includes Nelle Spilsbury, Reed Gammell, Elizabeth Wilson, Barbara Green, Libbie Cook, Lucile Markham Thorne, Bryant R. Clark, Edna Romney Noel, Isabelle Romney Gledhill, Viola Leavitt, Blanche Lenore Taylor and Leland Robinson.

Debates, public speaking, and storytelling contests have also been included in the activities program. But the music department of the Academy has been the most constant source of public entertainment with band concerts, music festivals, solo work, school chorus exhibitions and operatic productions. A re-awakening of musical activity, after the Exodus, got under way effectively with the arrival of Reed Gammell and his wife Maggie in 1919. The Gammells were talented, well-trained, and full of youthful enthusiasm, an enthusiasm which soon infected the school and the town. They gave of their time and talents unstintingly and were soon showing results in both chorus and solo productions—the operetta "Pauline," then "La Boheme," and in time the sextette from Lucia di Lammermoor and the quartette from Rigoletto. Although all voices improved in performance, some individuals with unusual gifts were discovered including Evelyn Telford, Josephine Nielsen, Rolfe Pratt, Nathan Whetten, P. D. Spilsbury, Hannah Skousen, Henry Walser, Karl Guthrie.

Juarez again became a music center. Available instruments were few but they were made to serve many aspiring musicians. Practice time on the few pianos was budgeted to accommodate more students. The old Estey piano in the Academy was in use from early morning until late at night. Even the "pump" organs were pressed into use. Cash to pay for private lessons was scarce and the Gammells accepted food commodities and household help for professional services. Many a boy earned his lessons by hauling, chopping or stacking wood; many a girl did cleaning service on Saturday or after school to pay for her lessons, while others bought their training by supplying milk, butter, eggs, cheese, chickens or whatever the Gammells could use.

When the Gammells returned to their home in Utah, after four years of intensive work they left a music-conscious student body, a town of music lovers, and a greatly improved town morale. In grateful recognition of outstanding and unselfish work done in the J. S. A. they were awarded honorary membership in the alumni association and formally issued diplomas of graduation at the commencement exercises in 1923, incidentally raising the number of graduates that year to twenty-three. The Gammells as music mentors were followed by Frank Wanlass whose specialty was wind instruments. He it was who, overcoming all obstacles, revived the earlier interest in a band.

Gertrude O. Keeler, a Boston Conservatory trained pianist, injected her love of classical music into students, both piano and vocal, and through choral and band work kept a continuous round of musical productions under way. During the school year she treated townspeople to recitals, concerts, and operas, and developed music appreciation. Most important was her recognition and development of talent among the native Mexican students with whom she worked.

Viva Skousen Bluth, an Academy product of the new era, was responsible for all divisions of music for six years. When only a sophomore in high school she had distinguished herself at the piano. Four years of advanced study fitted her for the outstanding work she did as a music teacher and leader.

She was followed by John Bennion Taylor a young man with fine personal qualifications and a master's degree in formal training. When in 1939 he assumed direction of musical activities, he set definite goals: to be satisfied with nothing but high quality of work, to select standard numbers for chorus and band so that students could become familiar with good musical literature while learning to sing and to play, and to present groups in public as often as they could present programs with finish. As a result consistent growth and greater appreciation have been achieved and the patrons of the school have been favored with three to four concerts a year. Many of his perfected programs have rivaled collegiate productions in quality. To the band he gave new status by means of a regular class period for practice and the acquisition of school-owned instruments available to the students on a rental basis. His consistent policy of excellence has stimulated wholesome respect for the musical profession.

As stake director of music his usefulness has been extended. His choral groups at conference time have brought praise from visiting Church authorities who have observed that he would add distinction to more favored localities. Notwithstanding monetary inducements from elsewhere he continues to dispense service to the people of whom he is a part.

To the list of music directors should be added the names of Ethel Taylor Robinson, Ella Farnsworth Bentley, Floyd Walser, and Leland Robinson who each did service one year.

Six of the nine named are Academy graduates, received their initial training there and are the children and grandchildren of the founders of the institution.

At the Juarez Academy as at other schools throughout America it has been athletics that skyrocketed school spirit and loyalty to dizzy heights. It mattered not to the sport fans whether the basketball games were played on the dirt court in the early post-Exodus days or later were under the brilliant lights of the new school gymnasium. Cheering for the school team was as hearty when the team marched out in improvised suits shortened to knee length as when it dashed about in the latest style basketball trunks. Practice for competitive games went on just as strenuously through the years when a swim in the river was the only means of washing off grime collected from the dusty court as when showers both hot and cold freshened the body after a workout in the gymnasium.

Coaches through the years have been actuated by the same objectives—to produce hard fighting, clean playing sportsmen and to meet as many teams as possible thus gaining experience and a widened acquaintance. Post-Exodus coaches include: Reed Gammell, Velan Call, Ernest I. Hatch, Ivins Bentley, Toney Bentley, Viv Bentley, Ralph Keeler, Floyd Walser, and Leland Robinson. Academy basketball squads have played one or more times in Texas (El Paso, Austin, Bowie), Arizona (Gila College, Bisbee, Safford), New Mexico (Deming, Hachita, Virden, Cliff), and Chihuahua City and Nuevo Casas Grandes in their own country.

Through the years the Juarez Academy has fulfilled the dream of the farsighted pioneers who wanted better educational opportunities for their children. The best evidence of its success may be found in the lives of hundreds of its graduates, now distinguished citizens, who point to the J. S. A. as the initial point of their inspiration. Among these are highly successful businessmen, doctors, lawyers, editors, university teachers and presidents, missionaries, bishops, stake presidents and some general authorities of the Church. [^1]

During the dark days of the Revolution the Academy, the fact that it continued to function, repeatedly served to rally the spirits of the colonists and encouraged them to hold on when otherwise they would have given up and left the country.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] DECADENCE
