Nelle Hatch, Colonia Juarez: An Intimate Account of a Mormon Village ( 1954)

XXIII

BY THEIR FRUITS

THE INAUGURATION OF Alvaro Obregon as president of the Republic of Mexico December 1, 1920 made peaceful operation of businesses and industry once more possible. This long looked-for day should have marked the beginning of a normal resumption of peace time activities and given new life to every industry from which prosperity of the Colonia Juarez community had stemmed. The tragic fact was that none of the former enterprises had any life left in them. The Colonial Mercantile was a mere building with empty shelves and bins, empty warehouse, rifled safety vaults and vacant money tills. John W. Wilson, manager and part owner, after repeated robbings and manhandlings had moved his family to El Paso. President Bentley and boys after struggling against repeated robbings to keep flour and beans and a minimum of absolute essentials on hand were cautious to a point of defeatism.

The grist mill, an industry with which Daniel Skousen had become an independent and moderately successful miller, was now but a slim reminder of prosperous days. Persistent robbing of every sack of flour as fast as hoppers could fill them, of belts and movable parts stolen faster than he could replace them, with little grain to grind as his farm and others lay idle for want of teams to work them, with water rights questioned and continued litigation occupying too much of his time he had decided to cease operations, put his efforts into farm lands. The building that through the years had been a symbol of thrifty home industry, a monument to the dynamic energy and keen foresight of its builder, W. R. R. Stowell, stood unused and forlorn.

The Tanning and Manufacturing Company was all but wiped out. The old frame shoe and harness shop had burned. The brick tannery building at the rear had been so consistently robbed of every manufactured article, that its vats, its rubbing tables and its disabled machinery now stood idle or completely incapacitated, a prey to vandalism. The Taylor brothers, rightful owners, had left the country.

The Harper Hotel now made for Fannie C. Harper but a bare subsistence. Among the first to return, Fannie C. had with great difficulty regained possession of her property from rebel parties who utilized it as a barracks. Only her absolute fearlessness, her diplomacy and persistence had wrenched it from their control.

The herds of cattle that had once pastured on the Taylor and Brown ranch lands had long since fallen into hands of foraging revolutionists, cutting off revenue from the colony.

The Pearson lumber mills were at a standstill. Pearson was now but a station for the Mexico North Western railroad and a terminus for the mail. Trains limping around burned bridges on "shoo-flys" found it difficult to carry on. The huge planers, drying sheds and floating log service were idle. A million-dollar industry was deteriorating from disuse.

The cannery had completely disappeared, its equipment stolen piece by piece.

Local self-government had passed into the hands of native Mexican policemen and presidentes. Post office rights had been taken over by a native postmistress.

Telephones hung useless on the walls for want of wires and a central service to connect them. Wires had been torn down and poles had been used for firewood.

Fewer than half of the original occupants had returned to repossess their homes so that empty houses stood forlorn and desolate on every block. With native or transient occupancy or left vacant they had deteriorated from disuse or vandalism. Some had burned through the years and left blackened walls and sightless windows to add to the appearance of desolation. The foot and the wagon bridges were both out of repair. The western end of the swinging bridge torn from its moorings by the flood of 1914-15 had been replaced provisionally but flooring planks disappeared from both bridges as fast as they were tacked on. For want of bridge crossings the people resorted to old time fordings for teams and planks or logs precariously balanced on rocks for pedestrians. Cisterns with rusted and clogged pipes had fallen into disuse or were condemned for sanitary water storage. Drinking and culinary water was a serious problem.

Only the land was intact and it was in a poor state of cultivation for want of animals with which to work it. Much land had gone back to nature and only a few fences remained intact.

This sad state of affairs in contrast to opulent pre-Exodus days, was not the whole story. Low morale and apathetic acceptance of a bad situation completed the picture.

Through the patience, persistence, and courage of Joseph C. Bentley, supported by other tenacious colonists, abandonment of the town had been prevented. Bishop Bentley had been made president of the stake and John J. Walser followed him as bishop of Colonia Juarez. From April of 1916 to March of 1922, he struggled to encourage rebuilding and to bolster waning spirits. But with no assurance because of the revolution that a business could remain intact, even if by a miracle it could be started, and with the past experience that whatever accumulations accrued from any source would be taken away, ambitions narrowed to mere subsistence. As hope of progress died morale lowered. Morale bordered on defeatism. A precious heritage of the will to be master over environment was all but lost.

In March 1922 W. Ernest Young, an energetic and forward-looking teacher in the school, was appointed as bishop with S. E. McClellan and Lucian Mecham, Jr., as counselors. With them the battle for rehabilitation began. All three were teachers in the Academy and they assumed control of town activities with the same cooperation found effective at the school. The first constructive undertaking was the repair of both bridges. Steel beams, obtained by President Bentley from Pearson, were strung across the stone pillars of the wagon bridge. Concrete moorings were installed for the swinging bridge. Planks were clamped securely for flooring on both bridges. With the stigma of dilapidation removed a new found pride in upkeep of the town was awakened.

Finding that revival of the tanning and manufacturing company and the electric light plant was quite impossible even with pooled resources, they temporarily abandoned the idea. The electric light plant had been operated by R. E. Harris over a period of years on a limited scale.

In desperation they turned to the obvious. "At least we can plant trees," declared Bishop Young recalling the part the fruit industry had played in the early settlement of the colony. "Fruit raising was a basic and saving industry when the town began, and it can solve the problem of scant acreage again. These vacant lots, the 'two-and-a-half' acre sections above town and the land now supporting worn-out orchards are still productive. The fruit industry can furnish a major cash income for this colony now as it did earlier."

New plantings, once begun, awakened the desire to beautify as well a hitherto desolate spot, the cemetery, where vandalism had long outraged the sanctity of a sacred place. Around the graveyard a stone wall which took three long years to finish was built.

But even with a courageous bishopric in the lead it was not easy to remove the label of shiftlessness or to avoid criticism by temporary residents. "It is one thing to found a colony," reminded the bishop, "and quite another thing to save and hold it after years of revolution have destroyed so much. But let us not lose heart, we have in our veins the blood of the best pioneer stock in the Church. We are the offspring of men who established a mission in this land—a mission that many now predict will be abandoned, but which we, if faithful, will be the means of preserving. Remember always, we are no worse off than we think we are, and if we choose, that which we lack in material things will be made up to us in spiritual benefits." Heartened again by a resolute town leader they partook of his staunchness.

Apostle Melvin J. Ballard encouraged the people by promising that prosperity would reward their faithfulness. When abundant crop yields followed this promise the people were sure it was because he had blessed the land for their sakes, had rebuked the drouth, and commanded the elements to function for their benefits. Visiting them often he became the friend and advisor Anthony W. Ivins had formerly been, and on each visit he improved morale by naming the improvements made since his previous trip.

This new courage found expression in the organization of a local mission under the direction of the stake presidency. This was carried on until the Mexican mission, which had been disrupted by the revolution, was reorganized in the United States and absorbed the local effort. The new zeal and improved morale were soon evident. The people came out of their meetings encouraged and with a growing sureness that at last they would be justified for returning and holding on.

The young orchards planted about the time of the Exodus by Guy Taylor, Junius Romney, Edward C. Eyring, Alonzo Taylor, Daniel Skousen and others now began to bear. These young orchards, now mostly in the hands of other owners such as Brigham Pierce, Miles A. Romney, and Ernest Hatch, yielded crops in the early 20's—Delicious apples, King Davids, Jonathans, Mammoth Black Twigs, Stayman Winesaps, Winesaps, and Black Bens. Eager planting followed. Little orchards sprang up on field corners, vacant lots, and unused sections of field property, and a fruit packing industry of sorts was organized.

Fruit buyers from population centers in northern Chihuahua became interested and by 1923 select apples were being shipped to Chihuahua City and neighboring pueblos. By 1932 the market had outgrown local demands and carload shipments left the town billed for Mexico City. When Casa Mistretta, a major distributor, made a bid for handling the entire output, the fruit growers of Colonia Juarez saw possibilities of their town's becoming an important fruit center. The fine quality of pears and apples from Colonia Juarez was apparent as soon as they were placed on the market, excelling anything grown in the republic. The apples rivaled those shipped in at great expense from Washington and Oregon in the United States. Recognition of this fact by merchants and other businessmen resulted in the planting of extensive orchards throughout the northern part of the republic. After several hopeful years filled with optimistic advertising and propaganda aimed to discredit colony apples a startling fact was discovered. Apples from what had seemed to be choice fruit-growing sections failed to meet the guarantees made for them. They lacked color, size, and flavor. Placed on the market, they suffered a sacrifice in price value. The climate, the soil, or underlying earth stratum, or all combined, proved unfavorable to fruit production. Trees died, pests attacked, and weather hazards destroyed. The large investments netted such poor returns that investors were discouraged and competition died almost before it was born. Orchards planted with hopeful expectancy were uprooted in disgust. Even the trees planted by Agrarians on the once coveted acres of the Old Town refused to grow. A hardpan too near the surface discouraged deep rootage and the trees died before any returns were realized. March winds sweeping over the open spaces tore young fruit from the branches and frosts following the winds froze and blackened. An unusual combination of physical conditions at Colonia Juarez seemed to provide precisely what was needed for color, flavor and healthy growth of fruit—the low sheltering hills, the wind currents, loose soil and sufficient sunshine. The output increased as orchard acreage was extended and the fame of Colonia Juarez apples spread to every part of the republic unchallenged by competition, unhurt by influx of foreign fruit, favorites among discriminating customers and commanding top prices.

Notwithstanding the great promise in fruit raising, many hazards threatened—shortage of water was a constant handicap, killing frosts were always possible and ready capital was not to be had. All these challenged the resourcefulness of the colonists. Water was strictly budgeted and experiments in frost prevention took many forms: moldy straw mixed generously with cow chips and set fire to smolder when temperatures reached a danger point, pine knots piled in a series of stacks through orchards and clay pots filled with crude oil and set blazing. The straw burned too briefly, the pine knots burned too hot and damaged blossoms, the clay pots were impractical. Not until 1940 when an investment could be made in a large supply of tin buckets was the problem of frost hazard solved. Filling these with crude oil and lighting them resulted in a thick black smoke which settled among the branches as a warm blanket. Smudgers wading through the sooty curtain emerged exulting "She's come up ten degrees," showing thermometers to prove it. With the retreat of Jack Frost and the assurance that at last a weapon to battle him effectively had been found, what cared they that faces were streaked with smudge, that soot clung to their hair and their clothes, and that the fumes smarted and reddened their eyes? They had proved that unpredictable weather changes need no longer be a hazard, that a successful crop could be an annual assurance rather than a gamble. Now every orchard boasts of an oil tank, a house in which to store pots and an individual system of getting these into operation with the least loss of time.

The coddling moth, arch enemy number one, was next tackled. This insect had made its first appearance in 1912 when a shipment of boxes infested with larvae came through Ciudad Juarez from infected areas along the border. The revolutionary years were prolific years for this insiduous pest, and by the time fruit raising had prospects of becoming big business, he sat in full control of every orchard and defied eradication. Each feeble effort to combat the moth was futile and unimpressive. Some growers faced with the losing fight were in favor of complete replacements of every orchard and a thorough disinfection of the soil before replanting. Such a drastic move was not possible so they struggled on, spraying with arsenate of lead and destroying infected fruit. Rival producers in the south were moving for legislation against allowing infested apples in public markets. Propaganda circulated in all parts of the republic to have the apples of Colonia Juarez quarantined was spreading each year and merchants who favored colony apples when they could be obtained in a perfect condition were fearful of unfavorable reaction. Some even advanced money to buy enough arsenate of lead to de-moth every fruit tree.

Spraying was carried on under difficulties. Pumping the handle of a hand spray barrel for twelve hours a day with even strokes and forceful enough to sustain a steady flow of mist was exhausting but the price exacted of all determined to remain in the business. The purchase, therefore, of a community power sprayer was a real event. Orchardists patiently awaited their turn as the proud operator went the rounds until the last tree had been treated with the mist of poisonous discharge. But occasional breakdowns, impatience to get spraying done, and the acquisition of means with which to operate independently induced first one grower and then another to purchase a power sprayer for himself. In spite of this determined battle some larvae still hatched out in the spring and not until DDT was made available, did the coddling moth disappear. But as in many other places a new menace took its place. Mites swarmed in and settled on weeds and Johnson grass, fastened themselves to limbs thus shriveling the fruit and curling the leaves on the branches. San Jose scale spread itself on the bark of the tree and woolly aphis oozed from the joints. A New Mexico county agent flew in to diagnose the problem. "DDT has killed the enemy of the mites," he told them first off. "A contact spray that smothers, such as parathion, is needed." This proved to be true and with its application a trio of pests went down. By the continued use of a combination of parathion, oil, and arsenate of lead with an occasional dosage of DDT the pest problem is under control.

Marketing also passed through a cycle of growth as it expanded from a simple beginning to its present status of large size and effectiveness. In the early twenties, when crop yield was too great to be absorbed by the local market yet not great enough to attract buyers with transportation facilities, orchardists were forced to see a large percentage of fruit go to waste—which meant much needed income "down the drain."

An apple packing and grading machine was purchased in 1923 and set up, first under a shed in Miles Romney's backyard and later on the top floor of the old power house where accommodations for apples, both before and after they were packed, was to be had and where ample operating capacity was possible. With the boxing of apples in uniform containers accurately labeled for variety, number, and source the business took on a certain dignity, always lacking previously, no matter how excellent the fruit. With this styling feature and the zealous advertising and expert salesmanship of Enrique Alvelaes, Chihuahua merchant, the output of the Pierce, Romney and Hatch orchards became known throughout the state of Chihuahua and far into the interior. The zeal of Alvelaes in promoting the production of apples, and the handsome profits that rewarded his promotion of a growing enterprise opened the eyes of all to possibilities but partially dreamed of before. The market widened until other fruit merchants, with greater capital and facilities, were attracted and made bids against which Alvelaes soon was unable to compete. He was forced to withdraw in favor of C. M. Brees of Piedras Negras, Coahuila, who at that time operated one of the largest fresh fruit markets in the republic.

Brees purchased apples in bulk, shipped them to Piedras Negras for packing and grading, and then sold them as California apples. But the expense of shipping loose apples over a roundabout route to his out-of-the-way packing center soon induced him to permit the growers in Colonia Juarez to do their own packing and retain the identity of their products. He then sent his agent, Enrique Bruchardt, to superintend every phase of the apple packing industry, to exact a more carefully inspected apple, and induce a more specialized work in return for the higher prices he offered. For years the presence of Mr. Bruchardt, during the packing season, was a familiar sight as he worked first with the sorters then with the packers, and in turn supervised the unloading of the boxes at one end of the packer and the loading of the packed boxes from the other end into trucks preliminary to the ten-mile haul to the loading platform at Pearson. Not a phase of the industry was overlooked and after his year by year training which began with the picking of the fruit in the orchards and ended with the loading of the packed boxes into special cars the orchardists grew ambitious to operate on their own. With the accumulation of funds and self-assurance they decided in 1932, a prolific year, to eliminate the middleman and sell direct in the Mexico City market. To give publicity to their superior products they obtained permission to exhibit in the San Jacinto Agricultural Fair in Mexico City. Much care was taken to make the space allotted them attractive, to brief those entrusted with advertising, and to make the display an avenue through which to bid in the larger fruit markets.

Ernest Hatch and son Seville were in charge of the six carload shipment of apples. They not only kept a supply of boxed apples in a convenient stack in the rear of the attractive exhibits but they hovered near to watch the type of people attracted, and to engage in conversation key men of establishments who came to buy. They also watched with satisfaction the sale by the kilo of box after box of apples to customers who sampled, nodded approval, and returned to buy again. When the fair was over and every apple had passed over the counter, they not only had made a new friend with each apple sold but they had realized the most handsome profits of any year. They had gained what proved to be permanent patronage with Casa Mistretta, a key fruit merchandising house, thus reaching another phase of fruit distribution.

Seville Hatch remained in the employ of the Mistretta company to learn from beginning to end the business of handling fresh fruits. Nicolas Katsicas, the foreman, and his teacher proved to be friend as well.

After two years of service with Casa Mistretta Seville was encouraged by Mr. Katsicas to rent a bodega (warehouse) and undertake the handling of colony fruit himself. Katsicas even helped him find a suitable bodega and stood by with advice, encouragement and help when needed—as for instance when a delayed shipment of Bartlett pears arrived in an apparently unsalable condition. Under Katsicas' tutelage Seville developed a first-rate wholesale fruit business with orchards in Colonia Juarez as source of supply, his father as agent to solicit purchases and superintend packing, his brothers to load cars and make certain that all shipping specifications were complied with before the cars were sealed. On the receiving end Seville used methods all his own to get the fruit onto the market.

There were times when shipments were delayed by floods and arrived in an overripe condition, when overcrowding of cars hastened fruit spoilage, and occasional disappointment of customers by infected or inferior fruit. Losses ranged all the way from small to near disastrous. But the gains on the whole overbalanced the losses, and his prestige with veteran fruit houses continued to grow, and his credit with them became an asset of increasing worth. He returned to take residence in Colonia Juarez in 1937 but kept connections with Casa Mistretta and the Moranchel Company. Choicest shipments of fruits went to them.

Prices for fruit have increased with the rising cost of living. In spite of depreciation of the peso, total receipts from apple sales have steadily mounted. Yearly shipments from the little colony have passed the half hundred carload mark again and again. In 1950 enough cars to accommodate the apples picked and packed in the three graders in town could not be secured, and the most drastic losses in years resulted. Never since smudging was universally adopted has there been a total crop failure.

In 1948 problem number two, shortage of water supply, was relieved by sinking deep water wells. Mennell Taylor, on the old Brigham Pierce farm, pioneered in this endeavor and with his first attempt tapped such a rich flow of subterranean water that Ernest Hatch and sons and Irvin B. Romney, on the old Ivins' farm drove wells. These wells doubled the water supply and made more land available for the planting of more trees thus expanding further the fruit business.

A survey of the fruit industry in 1946 revealed that 400 acres are planted to orchards with an average of 60 trees to the acre. Two hundred fifty acres of these orchards are bearing while 150 acres are in young trees. Only a small acreage is devoted to the raising of other crops.

The increased water supply is making it possible to clear and plant many acres of land hitherto useless except for grazing. Promising young orchards are found on the Tinaja Wash, on the cemetery hill, and in many new places along the west canal bank, all the way from where it takes out at the dam above town to where it again flows into the river below.

Two wells are now operating on the property of Elizabeth Romney, the former Edward C. Eyring pasture. The first one, sunk by Gaskell Romney at the foot of "J" Mountain (MacDonald Springs area) in the wash, went down 800 feet and flows approximately 700 gallons per minute from a pump set at 250 feet. A tract of land supporting 1500 trees is being made ready with hopes pinned on this well. The second well sunk by Maxel Romney in the swamp area near the Bentley field below the west canal with an 8-inch pump throws approximately 2000 gallons per minute. By means of a centrifugal pump, water from this well is delivered to the flats above the canal level to water 2500 new trees.

Moroni L. Abegg, on the former Alonzo Taylor property in the "Two-and-a-half-acre" section, has supplemented the flow to his extensive orchards, and has made possible the planting of new fields by a prolific flow from a well found near the foot of the hill.

A second well has also been sunk by Mennell Taylor which when manned by a larger pump and more powerful engine will add additional water for ambitious orchardists.

Property owners on the Tinaja Wash have kept pace with fruit growers in the struggle to overcome water shortage hazards. Clarence Turley, having faith in promises made for these dry land farms, pioneered in well drilling by planting the first orchards. Other farmers watched speculatively and when the well finally tapped the coveted flow of water followed by drilling with immediate success. D. S. Brown also launched a well drilling project that materialized into a fruit farm of 2000 fruit trees. This young orchard, now the property of Ashton Longhurst, planted in the mid '40's is near the cement dam and storage reservoir in the upper region of the valley and has been a real incentive to other attempts. In cooperation with Irvin B. Romney, Ashton has sunk the second well and they now have water to support another tract planted to trees. In 1952 and '53, D. S. Brown, in company with Irvin B. Romney and George Turley sank a second well with surprising results. At the 360 foot level an underground river was tapped and water rising at once to the 160 foot level has proved inexhaustible. In fact indications are strong that with a battery of pumps installed the well would supply water for the entire valley. From this flow an orchard of 6000 trees covering a hundred acre tract of land has been planted.

Still on the Tinaja Clifford L. Whetten with two wells, one near the road in the bottom of the wash and the other on the old Stowell dairy, is making extensive preparations to utilize his vast acreage for fruit growing, while the flow of water secured by David and Leroy Johnson has opened up possibilities on the old D. E. Johnson property.

All of these wells reached water near the 700 foot level and have an output of from 500 gallons to 1500 gallons per minute. If all operate according to the pattern set by those first drilled, the new orchards yield proportionately to present acreage, the Tinaja Wash area will not only fulfill the promise made for it—that it would be the "bread basket" of Colonia Juarez—but it will do much to make Colonia Juarez the fruit basket of the nation.

Colonia Juarez could well be called Appleville, Delicious Town, or any appellation which would properly give credit to an industry that has justified Bishop Young when he made the injunction, "let us plant trees."

Town leadership was adapted to changing economic conditions. Anthony I. Bentley, appointed bishop in April 1933, took the initiative in combating deterioration. The schoolhouse-church with cracked walls and a belfry that swayed and creaked, stood in danger of crashing and therefore was a hazard to younger children should extreme weather conditions cause a collapse. Temporary safety measures were taken by bolstering the walls with steel bars, and encasing the bell on the top floor of the tower after the belfry above had been removed. Complete removal of shabbiest structures, repair of others, or building new ones was planned. The little lumber building on Main Street that had done duty through the years as a post office but now stood in extreme desolation was removed. The tithing office in disuse was converted into a Relief Society home. After four years and a setting laid for improvements Ernest I. Hatch became bishop. The schoolhouse was completely remodeled for school use. Church activities were shifted to the Academy for weekend use. Sunday, March 17, 1940, the last service was held in the old meetinghouse and the following Sunday, the first services in Ivins Hall at the Academy took place. Appropriately enough this was Easter Sunday.

The summer of 1940 was spent in remodeling the schoolhouse. The top story on the east and the north and south wings were removed. New partitions were set up in the enlarged hall and in the basement, and a porch was built on the south side. Rest rooms were built in at each end of the porch. By the time school opened in the fall a building completely changed in appearance was ready for the children. It contained six classrooms, a hall with drinking fountain, an office, and a stage for class programs. The whole was covered with a shingle roof, the outside walls were plastered with gray stucco, and the woodwork was gayly trimmed with white paint.

The remodeling of the schoolhouse started a fever of building and remodeling throughout the community. Bricks from burned buildings were reused and new Spanish styled homes became prominent. Little by little the shabbiness of the town disappeared.

During Bishop Hatch's tenure merchandising, which had been in the hands of native merchants for several years, once more reverted to the colonists. David S. ("DS") Brown took over the Wall store building at the west end of the wagon bridge. Soon native merchants were induced to sell. Brown's store fast outgrew the old Wall store building and was moved to the old Colonial Mercantile site where in a remodeled, modernized building it became an attractive business center. In it was found a place for the post office. Brown stocked merchandise ranging in variety from staple articles to farm machinery, from home equipment to gasoline and stock feed. Managers of the store in addition to "DS" have been his brothers Laurel J. and Murlyn. Laurel remodeled the home, which is part of the store building, and enclosed the yard with a decorative rock wall, the distinguishing feature of which is a flat cement coping on top broad enough to provide a runway on which children can play, but over which no intruder would attempt to vault. This wall was extended to enclose the Relief Society home. Centered in the block, it improves the appearance of that portion of Main Street.

During World War II Bishop Hatch, as Bishop Young before him, served as representative of the American Consul in Ciudad Juarez and kept accurate record of young men eligible for service in the armed forces of the United States. No young man in Colonia Juarez of draft age took advantage of residence in a foreign country to evade induction. From a membership of approximately three hundred persons thirty young men and women joined various divisions of the armed services. They saw service in all the theaters of war and achieved ranks up to that of major. When the war had ended the service flag in Ivins Hall showed thirty-one stars, two of which were in gold.

A budget plan for the town was adopted in 1940, and payment for and attendance at public functions was placed on a new basis. Public entertainment, school tax, road tax, in fact any public enterprise for which monetary support was necessary, were billed to town members in one sum. Annual payment of this account made attendance at public functions a cost-free affair.

Medical service in Colonia Juarez had been limited to that given by practical nurses and midwives (Polly Skousen Sloan and Laura Mecham), which meant relatively fair service in the treatment of minor illnesses. But for operations, emergencies, and accidents expensive trips to border cities was imperative. Invaluable nursing services of Laura Mecham, Polly Skousen Sloan, Jane R. Spilsbury, Belle Foutz and other capable women who answered calls day and night deserve mention. They gave to the women and children and babies expert care and were on hand always in case of epidemics of minor illnesses. It was Professor Keeler who devised a sort of cooperative medical system that appealed to the people. E. LeRoy Hatch, in 1938, enrolled in the school of medicine in Mexico City and in 1946 returned with a medical degree and a term of "socialization," to set up practice in Colonia Juarez. Each day except Sundays he included a six-hour office service in Nuevo Casas Grandes. The cooperative plan was considered impractical and was discarded. But the services of the young doctor were not. Beginning humbly and with but few patients, he soon demonstrated superior ability in diagnosis, aptness in giving emergency help, and skill in minor operations. Within a year's time his service was "round-the-clock" and included patients living anywhere within a radius of seventy-five miles. Occasional trips to the mountain colonies, the sawmill camps, or outlying ranches called for airplane, jeep, muleback or travel on foot. Conditions under which he practiced called for great resourcefulness. Approximately one hundred and seventy-five major operations were performed by Dr. Hatch and a companion doctor in homes on kitchen tables, with flashlights, or kerosene lamps for illumination and a pressure cooker for sterilization. Many homes of native patients had dirt floors with no screens or doors or windows and no facilities for even the slightest sanitary provisions. The absence of any cases of post-operative infection was almost miraculous.

In collaboration with two other physicians Dr. Hatch now maintains a small twelve-bed hospital equipped with X-ray and elementary laboratory service. In five years fifteen hundred patients have been operated on without a casualty or post-operative infection. The waiting room during his office hours in Nuevo Casas Grandes is always crowded and hopeful patients await his return for evening service in Colonia Juarez. He has encouraged more adequate health education, and an intense vaccination and inoculation campaign. To the townspeople he has given the relief and security of ready access to a doctor and to the town the prestige of having a resident physician.

Bishop Hatch during his seven years of thoughtful service as father of the ward was ably assisted by Velan D. Call and later by David S. Brown as first counselor and by Willard Shupe as second. He was released from active service in 1944 and remained a revered and respected member of the town.

When David Samuel Brown was sustained to succeed him in 1944, he was seasoned bishop material having served nineteen of his thirty-nine years in ward bishoprics—ward clerk at the age of 20, second counselor at twenty-four, first counselor at thirty-two, and bishop at thirty-nine. With the help of E. Seville Hatch, J. Bennion Taylor and later Irvin B. Romney he presided over the town through its most prosperous years. With a keen business sense and great energy he was in the lead of every enterprise and an active instrument in forwarding the prosperity the little town enjoys. As agent for the Juarez Mercantile Company he purchased and shipped carloads of apples each year. He was the first to impound the flood waters of the Tinaja Wash with a huge stone and cement dam. From the stored reservoir water he irrigates an orchard under its flow, and has sunk a well near it to add to a dwindling water supply when rains are inadequate. The tracts of land surrounding this water supply are stocked with white-faced cattle which, shipped to cattle markets in carload lots at periodic intervals, furnish a lucrative income further enhanced by fruits from his orchard. He takes satisfaction in seeing his neighbors and ward members also thriving as evidenced by late model cars, pickups, trucks, and jeeps for business purposes.

General ownership of cars made road improvement a necessity and Bishop Brown was instrumental in purchasing part ownership in a road grader which, maintained by poll tax income, has changed the primitive and rain washed roads to turnpiked highways and made travel to and from neighboring towns a comparative pleasure.

One of the first achievements of Bishop Brown's administration was the construction of a community swimming pool. With funds raised through a May Queen campaign in 1945-46, plus liberal donations from public spirited town members a cement pool of regulation size and graduated depths was possible. The pool is situated under the bank of the west canal, back of the Academy campus and has an adobe and cement wall around it. It is kept full of clean fresh water by the Academy water turns. It is equipped with springboard facilities which make diving from conservative heights possible. Close supervision with lifeguards on duty keeps the pool safe and it has become a favorite center for parties, day recreation for children and young people, and a rendezvous far superior to the old swimming holes in the river.

Bishop Brown purchased the electric light plant, and augmented its water turbine nighttime service by Diesel engine to generate power for daytime use. This made possible modern electric appliances in the homes and a broadcasting station for the town. Service is dispensed to patrons at cost.

In October 1944, prompted by the need for more industries in the community, Bishop Brown encouraged a poultry project which with Stanley Martineau responsible for instruction in latest methods in chicken care bids fair to outrank the fruit business in cash returns. A Poultry Cooperative with a board and managers was organized. Each member of the association was allowed to have his own flock. Money on which to operate was raised by members of the association, who in the beginning were those who had already met with some financial success. The fund subscribed was used entirely to purchase feed to be sold to producers at cost. Membership was extended to all regardless of race. Where necessary, help was extended in the form of credit, making it possible for many to join the association who otherwise would not have been able to build coops, buy chickens or feed them. Some individuals extended private financial aid to those in need. Chicken feed manufacturing, hauling, egg handling, and all similar services were contracted. Board members served without pay and individuals with experience and training gave freely of advice. The project became what it was intended to be, a nonprofit organization, where collective effort could be more effective than individual attempts. Every person so inclined could go into business for himself. The number taking advantage of the opportunity indicates how ripe was the time for such an organization. Within a year there were sixty-five thousand laying hens in flocks ranging in size from one hundred to one thousand. Possibilities had stirred interest of both natives and colonists and bids for entrance into the association came from all quarters. So many came in fact, that restrictions as to size of flocks had to be imposed in order to provide opportunity for all desiring to enter the cooperative. Although the venture is still young, with many unsolved problems, prospects for its future are bright. A ride through the town for an overview of the chicken industry with one and two-story coops filled with birds in the rear of most every home, and loaded trucks carrying feed in and egg crates out give one the assurance that Colonia Juarez, besides being a fruit center, is rapidly growing into a poultry center.

Another successful project which materialized during these prosperous years, was the getting of water onto Cemetery Hill. This was accomplished by siphoning water through the Quintana Wash at the end of the west canal. Irvin B. Romney, who had a tract of land adjoining the cemetery where he had planted a young orchard, was largely responsible. With water available a row of shade trees on three sides of the cemetery was possible and the beautification of a hitherto barren spot, foreseen by Bishop Young in the twenty's was realized.

January 31st, 1954 the Academy band was requested by Oscar Soto Maynez, Governor of the State of Chihuahua, to meet with road commissioners from the national capital at Flores Magnon (El Carmen), and present a program in honor of the inauguration of a main highway now under construction. The highway under construction when completed will connect Palomas—near Columbus, New Mexico—with Gallego on the Pan American Highway, and will pass through Colonia Dublan and Nuevo Casa Grandes.

The motive behind the Governor's request for the band was to pass on to the other officials the cultural influence of the Juarez Academy—that had charmed him on a recent visit—and to convince road commissioners that highway facilities to the school was justifiable. The gratifying result was a bona fide promise that when the modern Palomas-Gallego Highway is completed, it will include a fifteen mile lateral to Colonia Juarez, El Centro Escolar.

With the completion of this highway—promised for January 1955—overland travel will be reduced to a comfortable ride in a fraction of time now consumed; tourist trade will be materially facilitated and trucking should assume large proportions. Diesel trucks will be able to carry fruit from the town packers, and eggs from the central distributor to the markets in Mexico's capital with a minimum of time and expense and deliver them in prime condition. Already there is preparation to supply the many new demands expected of the new facilities. Indeed a Diesel truck was put into operation with success by E. Seville Hatch in 1953.

Though the town population is but half its pre-Exodus number, and blocks that then had a house on every lot now contain but one or two, the town in general has regained its former prosperous appearance. Homes are fashioned after present-day building trends, are furnished to suit modern decorators, and have conveniences equal to many city homes. With garden space where vegetables are grown both winter and summer, with barnyards where cows, chickens and pigs supply dairy products, eggs and meat, supplemented by fruits both fresh and conserved, every home is a storehouse. Poor indeed is the family in Colonia Juarez that does not have always a year's supply of foodstuffs on hand, including flour stored in the local mills. The people own their own homes. No property is mortgaged, and except for minor debts, being met in regular payments, there is no indebtedness.

Material success has not interfered with religious activities. Attendance at religious services in the Juarez ward under Bishop Brown's leadership but with no special campaign reached as high as seventy-five per cent of ward membership. Tithes and offerings have maintained high levels.

Colonia Juarez has kept a quota of missionaries in the field, many in the Mexican mission. This has qualified them to preach, teach, and conduct services in the Spanish language, and to continue missionary work among the natives in and near Colonia Juarez. This has resulted in the organization of a thriving Mexican branch as an integral part of the ward. The branch is presided over by a native convert, Arturo Raya, and is supervised by returned missionaries. Attendance at the meetings has been excellent. The Relief Society home (once the tithing office) serves as center for gatherings including entertainment.

Public relations with the natives among whom the colonists have lived for three quarters of a century have never been better. Work in the homes for native girls and on the farms and orchards, for young men, with good wages, has enabled the natives to gradually raise their living standards. Patterns of better living have been adopted by the natives. Relations with government officials, business firms, and others are friendly and cooperative. Fair dealing has brought confidence and respect. Membership in the Rotary Club in Nuevo Casas Grandes by business and professional leaders such as E. Seville Hatch and Dr. E. LeRoy Hatch, of Colonia Juarez, Claudius Bowman and Harvey Taylor of Colonia Dublan, is evidence of the esteem in which leading businessmen of the colonies are held.
