Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

PREFACE

THIS book is offered to the consideration of sane people,—people not willing to hold convictions the premises of which lie in other men's brains; especially when such convictions affect their attitude toward a considerable portion of their fellow-citizens. Needless to say, this is a new kind of "Mormonism Exposed,"—written from the point of view that Mormonism is good, and true, and beautiful; and that, consequently, its detractors should improve their judgment, or mend their manners.

Mormonism claims to be, not a sect, but a religion,—the religion of Jesus Christ. The distinction between a sect and a religion lies in the fact that the sect has no philosophy, no way of looking at the cosmos differently from that of the family of beliefs to which it belongs. Christians generally insist that Mormonism is not to be classed among the sects—or, to use the softer expression, the churches,—of Christianity. In this judgment Mormons willingly concur. Neither in the background of philosophy, nor in the foreground of its doctrine and ritual, does it more than distantly resemble modern Christian churches. But that it is therefore not the religion of Christ; that it is therefore not built upon the revelations of the Bible, as well as the teachings of modern science, Mormons by no means concede.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints may be studied from two aspects: from the external aspect, by which are meant its organization as a church and its rites, doctrines, ceremonies, and practices as a social body; or from the internal aspect, by which is meant its philosophy or fundamental principles,—the principles that must be, in order that its forms as a religion may exist.

To enter upon the first aspect would, in this day, be a thankless task. The age of religious polemics is gone. Time was when to prove a doctrine scriptural was to prove it true; now it is merely to prove it scriptural. People are weary of wrangles concerning interpretation. Suppose you show that the Bible is on your side. What then? You have merely shown that the Bible is on your side. The vital question is not, Does this doctrine square with Scripture? but, Does it square with life as interpreted in that newer revelation of God, the book of nature?

I shall therefore discuss the subject from its second or philosophic aspect, and attempt to show what answer Mormonism gives to the questions, "Whence came man?", "Why is he here?", "Whither does he tend?"; at the same time making comparisons step by step with what modern scientific thought teaches along the same lines.

N. L. N.

PROVO, UTAH,

May 2, 1904.

"THE time is wracked with birthpangs; every hour

Brings forth some gasping truth, and truth new-born

Looks a misshapen and untimely growth,

The terror of the household and its shame,

A monster coiling in its Nurse's lap,

That some would strangle, some would only starve;

But still it breathes, and passed from hand to hand,

And suckled at a hundred half-clad breasts,

Comes slowly to its stature and its form,

Calms the rough ridges of its dragon-scales,

Changes to shining locks its snaky hair,

And moves transfigured into angel-guise,

Welcomed by all that cursed its hour of birth,

And folded in the same encircling arms

That cast it like a serpent from their hold."

OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES—Truths.
