Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER I

THE OCCASION FOR WRITING THIS BOOK

"It [the Mormon Church] is not to be educated, not to be civilized, not to be reformed—it must be crushed. No other organization is so perfect as the Mormon Church, except the German army."—A prominent Christian clergyman before the general assembly of his church. [^1]

DURING the last three quarters of a century, remarks like the above quotation have formed the staple commentary on Mormonism; and the animus so expressed, bolstered, indeed, by whatever facts could be impressed into such service, has found its way into dictionary, cyclopedia, and general history. It need not be pointed out here that these harsh judgments have almost invariably originated with those guardians of our moral and spiritual civilization, the ministers of the Gospel; nor need it be wondered at therefore that the Mormons credit the unbalanced zeal of the preaching fraternity with being a prime cause of all the mobbings and drivings which have marked them out as the persecuted religion of the nineteenth century.

To the extent that we Mormons are Latter-day Saints, we smile at such ministerial zeal and forget; for our religion teaches us to "do good to them that hate and revile us, and to pray for them that despitefully use us, and speak all manner of evil against us."

But to the extent that we are merely Mormons, that is to say, human beings trammelled by church forms, we keep tab on such utterances—and the deeds which often follow them; whence it happens that by every human law of offense and reprisal, the sins of the clerical profession against the Mormons should have accumulated by now past all hope of their ever establishing among us those bonds of fraternal sympathy which are indispensable to proselyting work among any people.

As mere human beings, we cannot forget that it is their prejudiced views and mistaken zeal that have propagated the hundreds of lurid "Mormonisms Exposed," which have come to be as necessary as narcotics to many good people. Naturally enough, too, we resent the air of superior sanctity, with which these same men condemn our religion unheard. And if our confidence in them is shattered, by the way in which they misrepresent us,—from mere fragmentary and often misquoted passages; and if our respect follows our confidence, when we see the obvious connection between our periodical besmirchment by them, through the eastern press and pulpit, and their ardent need of funds for the "Mormon Crusade," is it not precisely what would happen with any other people under like provocation?

Now if this animus of meddling clergymen stopped with the godly men themselves, one might regard it as a necessary evil,—a sort of escape-valve for the lingering spirit of Adam in them; but it spreads,—much faster than righteousness could,—as any message winged by hate always will; so that more than once in the history of Mormonism a whole continent has been inflamed against an unoffending people behind the Rocky Mountains.

One can readily imagine the mental process by which the opinions of the pastor become the convictions of the congregation. Accustomed—not without good reasons—to consider his judgment as the standard of righteousness, the flock can only reason that what excites godly anger in the shepherd must be bad indeed; and on no other form of sin does the good man usually wax so righteously eloquent as on what he is pleased to call the delusions of Mormonism.

And yet, on the other hand, one cannot help wondering that, in an age of psychic analysis, several palpable phases of this wholesale denunciation are overlooked by the laity in coming to a conclusion. First, the spectacle of a reverend gentleman turning red in the face and breaking out into anathemas against other interpreters of the religion of Jesus Christ, ought in itself to excite a cautious wonder; secondly, the fact that hatred (of Mormons) can temporarily unite sects which love (of Christ) has never hitherto brought together, ought at least to raise a small doubt as to the real source of the inspiration; thirdly, the fact that Mormonism thrives in spite of this combined assault of the other religions, ought to suggest that righteousness may possibly form a considerable part in the system which this ministerial anger denounces; since, by the growing wisdom of the age, sin is coming to be regarded as weak, transitory, wholly incapable of cohesion,—righteousness alone being vigorous enough to form and perpetuate an organic system.

All this negative agitation by ministers of the Gospel could be overlooked, however, as what we ourselves might do under similar circumstances; but it will not down even with the best of us, the fact that in all the drivings, mobbings, and sanguinary tragedies, which have accompanied the ostracism of this people, the sanctified figure in black has invariably turned up as the immediate plotter and arch-villain.

If, on the whole, therefore, Mormons do not rush to fill the sectarian churches established in our midst; if the advances of sectarian ministers are received with an undercurrent of distrust and suspicion; if they fail to interest, let alone convert us,—the evident reason lies, in part at least, in their general attitude of contempt for us; and especially in the history of their dealings with us as a people.

But this, after all, is only the minor, the superficial reason for our mutual antagonism. For we are not morbidly sensitive, nor do we hold a grudge. Were we a secluded or insular people, sect-narrowness might perpetuate the memory of wrongs and stimulate the desire for revenge, as it no doubt did in the older days; but what with two thousand Elders constantly on missions, and returning every two or three years laden with ideas and observations from every quarter of the globe, we are fast becoming the most cosmopolitan people under the sun; and a cosmopolitan people are not likely to cherish sect-resentment.

Besides, we are too often buffeted and bruised to harbor our injuries long. Let any minister meet us fairly and squarely on the plane of equality, and there is no house of worship throughout Mormondom that would be closed against him, as many notable incidents of this kind already attest.

The real reason why the ministers and the Mormons are as oil and water, lies deeper. What the reverend gentleman says, contains a substantial truth. If being "educated, reformed, civilized," means being converted to his way of looking at things, then, indeed, the solution that he suggests is the only one that will be effective; and if it will ease the gentleman's conscience in advocating it, I may add, that Mormons would prefer it as decidedly the lesser of two evils.

The reverend preacher of Christian love and charity must not think, however, that his reasons for crushing us are either new or novel; for such a justification has invariably been the working basis of every religious crusade that has darkened the history of the world; save, perhaps, that where the bigots of former times proceeded in the name of God, this later Dominie invokes the name of civilization.

It is by no means impossible that we are on the eve of a new crusade; especially in view of the painful memories of Mormons still living. Do you think the thorns and thistles of the Middle Ages forgot to cast their seed? Neither did the Inquisitors and witch-burners. The present universal prate about liberty of conscience signifies nothing. No persecutors ever proceeded as conscious persecutors; nor did contemporary popular sentiment recognize them for what they were.

Religious bigotry is discernible, save by a few, only in perspective. It is ever a past, never a present vice of any people. Couched in the cant phrases of the prevailing popular movement, it seems the very incarnation of purity and progress. The one persistent element in it, if, indeed, we may not call it the motive power, is hate—an element which should make even enthusiasm pause; but then this very quality itself masquerades as the supreme religious virtue,—a righteous valor against iniquity.

Now as the crushing process has more than once been tried against the Latter-day Saints, why should it not be tried again? And as the "reform" demanded of us in the past, has merely meant "conform," and consequently has failed,—I am grateful for the opportunity of pointing out in this book why any new attempt to crush ought not to be made, and if made, why it ought to fail, as it surely will.

In other words, I am grateful for this opportunity of putting the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints into sharp contrast with the isms whose efforts thus far, instead of having added to the extremely small sum of Christian patience and long suffering in their promoters, have so far as I have been able to learn ended only in balked and vindictive rage. [^2]

Mr. Elbert Hubbard (Cosmopolitan, October, 1902), in reviewing with Philistine pen the factors that would make for the Millennium, places this condition first: "Men will decline to join any social club that calls itself a 'Church'."

I do not take it that Mr. Hubbard condemns churches in toto—only those which have degenerated into fashionable clubs, and so are hindering social progress. Let us, then, take this admirable criterion of the fitness of any Church to survive: viz., its social effectiveness or inherent power to help usher in the Millennium; not on some world-to-be, but here on the third planet of the solar system. And by the result of such a comparison, let it be judged whether Mormonism ought to be crushed or cultivated.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. The author has considered it desirable to avoid for the most part specific mention of living people.
[^2] 2. Let me disclaim any intention of arraigning ministers of the Gospel in general, save as they resemble those in Utah. These latter have declared war on us, and are therefore legitimate targets for counter attack. Unable to agree among themselves on tenet and doctrine, they have yet found, deep in their spiritual bosoms, a common bond of union—hatred of the Mormons.
