Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER II

MORMONISM A SCIENTIFIC RELIGION

SCIENCE and religion have so long been thought of in contrast, that is, as systems of thought more or less irreconcilable, that I shall perhaps provoke a smile from the critical reader when I unite the two concepts as I have done in the title of this introductory chapter. I shall even commit myself further, however, by taking the ground that a religion which is not scientific is scarcely worthy the credence of our enlightened age.

To demonstrate that Mormonism is such a religion is perhaps too large a task for the limit which I have allowed myself in this volume. The utmost I can hope to do, is to show that its basic data are not out of keeping with those general laws of nature on which all the conclusions of scientists rest.

To begin with, the fundamental conception of Reality is alike in science and Mormonism. Joseph Smith defined truth as an account of "things as they are, as they have been, and as they will be." In other words, truth is not a mystical something behind and below phenomena; truth is nothing else than the impression made on the mind of man by phenomena.

But phenomena are merely appearances, not realities. Theosophy and Christian Science—in fact all idealistic schools of philosophy—will demonstrate this fact, that phenomena are illusory—not things, but the shadow of things. Well, in spite of such demonstration, science proceeds to build up these illusions,—these shadows,—into a great many correlated classifications, known as astronomy, geology, biology, chemistry, and so on, through the long list of human investigations. All things seen, heard, smelled, tasted, and felt may, in fact, be illusions,—"wrought of such stuff as dreams are"; but while human nature is organized as it is, they are extremely satisfactory illusions, worthy of all study, and capable, when properly manipulated, of bringing out other and still more satisfactory illusions, which we sum up in the name of enlightened civilization.

Besides, if science were to give up dealing with phenomena, it would have to go out of business for want of raw material. These unrealities—if such they are—constitute the only reality in the universe that man, as man, is fitted to apprehend. Scientists might follow the example of Buddha, or Mary Baker Glover Eddy, and weave a marvellous system out of the entrails of that mystical thing called mind. But the product would not be science; it would be,—well, a web woven from the entrails of that mystical thing called mind. "Things as they are, as they have been, and as they will be"—let them be shadows, illusions, or what not—will therefore continue to be the warp and woof of science. It cannot afford to give up hungry facts for hectic fancies, no matter what dire predictions hinge on the consequences.

And no more can Mormonism. It finds mankind located in a most beautiful world, albeit a world of phenomena, or illusions,—if you will. It finds those phenomena wonderfully and progressively related. It finds, moreover, that they are always consistent with themselves, and may be absolutely relied upon. If they vary, it is only during vast cycles,—cycles quite beyond the range of any one generation; so that the farmer plants beans absolutely without any lurking fear that the crop may turn out squash.

It finds on the other hand that man is primarily and most emphatically fitted to apprehend these phenomena, and but dimly fitted—perhaps not at all—with powers for apprehending the occult; and to the extent that he forms harmonious correspondences with these same illusions, it finds that he grows in wisdom, power, and happiness. And so it reasons that the objects of sense proclaim their own mission—the development of man; and consequently that the experiences of this world constitute a fabric entirely worthy of religion,—especially as there is no other, save the gauze material of metaphysical dreams.

Thus it will be seen that science and Mormonism see things in this world primarily in the same way, and also reason as to the purpose of things in the same way; the one naming its product civilization, the other religion; both coinciding in the final generalization, viz: The uplifting of the human race.

But Mormonism does not forget that "things as they are, as they have been, and as they will be" result, when interpreted by man, only in relative truth—truth subject to constant modification. Absolute truth it defines to be "things as they are, as they have been, and as they will be," when interpreted by God. And right here rises the problem of religion—the only reason, in fact, for its existence. Can man come into possession of absolute truth? In other words, can he come to look at things from God's point of view? For, if he cannot, then science is the very best religion he can have.

Here the two systems of thought divide: Science is sceptical, Mormonism confident. Briefly generalized, the teachings of Mormonism on this point are: (1) that apprehension of truth is the means whereby man is perfected (is made like unto God); (2) that God makes use of relative as well as of absolute truth to this end; (3) that while God's point of view might guide men in all their investigations (should God so will), the unity of His purpose respecting the race would preclude such divine guidance, save only as man directs his attention to what God would have him learn next; (4) that relative truth, resulting from man's point of view, and absolute truth, resulting from God's point of view, are both concerned with the much contemned phenomena, or so-called illusions of our senses—such phenomena having in fact been created for no other purpose.

With this brief general statement by way of justifying the title for this book, I am ready to pass on to more specific matters in the domain alike of science and religion. While this single fundamental instance of agreement could not have convinced the reader respecting the thesis of this chapter, I hope it may have served to arouse interest in other notable instances which are to follow.
