Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER III

THE MORMON CONCEPTION OF GOD

Thou shalt have no other God before me.—Jehovah.

Let God be true, even though it make every man a liar.—Paul.

THE virility of religion, as an ethical modifier of the human family, lies, at the last analysis, in its conception of God. Faith dynamic enough to make for the betterment of the race, must be centred in a Being that can be both loved and feared. The first requisite, therefore, is that He be a Reality, not a metaphysical abstraction; and the second, that He be a sympathetic Reality. In the words of Paul, we must first believe that He is, and next that He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him.

In that word "rewarder" lie summed up the foremost qualities which a live faith requires in its Divine Source. There must be felt, first of all, a relationship equivalent to that of parent and child, with all the best qualities which our own lives have taught us to associate with father and mother; mercy, forgiveness, daily guidance, anxiety, protection, a haven of refuge on earth, and ultimately an eternal home. And we must, moreover, feel that we can safely multiply these parent-qualities as many times in effectiveness, as we conceive God to be greater than man.

On the other hand, as a salutary restrainer of evil tendencies, we must feel God to be the omnipotent creator and preserver of all things; whose omniscient eye beholds even our secret thoughts, and whose omnipresent power and spirit pervade to shape towards righteousness—or else to nullify—all the aspirations and deeds of men.

Along with this conception of God, the man whose faith is to help remove mountains (of sin) must have a conception of mankind equally definite and clear. He must feel himself categorically a child of God; differing, indeed, in degree but not in kind from his Father in heaven; potentially free, as a moral agent, and actually free, to the extent that he has emancipated himself from sin; capable of "becoming perfect as God is perfect" (Matthew v.: 48).

Such faith, and faith in such objects, is enjoined on almost every page of Holy Writ; and as long as mankind worshipped the God in whose image (physical as well as otherwise) man was created; who walked as a man walks, in the Garden of Eden; who conversed with Noah as one man converses with another; whose glorified person Moses beheld on Mt. Sinai; whose voice said in articulate words: "This is my beloved Son"; whom Stephen, the first martyr, looking into heaven, saw side by side with the risen Redeemer; whom John the Revelator saw, seated on a great white throne,—as long, I repeat, as mankind believed actively in the Christ-type of God, their faith was a living, virile force, which shaped their daily lives in directions known peculiarly to themselves and the eye of their Maker.

Then came the expansion of Man's idea of the physical universe, and with it the mistaken demands of reason for a conception of God commensurate with the new ideas of infinitude. Greek philosophy offered such a conception. St. John's remark, that "God is a spirit," [^1] was accordingly made the scriptural point of departure from the "God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob," to the God of Buddha.

Into Buddha's cold abstraction, theologians have since been trying to inject the warm qualities of Jehovah,—with what success, from an academic point of view, let the contradictions of metaphysics bear witness; with what failure in the ethical betterment of the race, let the apathy and artificiality of the so-called liberal or intellectualized churches of to-day declare!

These latter are, indeed, fine places to be "respectable" in; for which reason they are no longer social or racial workshops. It is not here that movements affecting the destiny of the race originate, but in clubs, guilds, unions, and other secular organizations. True, they still stand on the topmost branch of the social tree, by virtue of past growth; but the vitality of the roots is running into lower branches. [^2]

The trouble is, that philosophic theories have supplanted the living faith. That there is left any warmth or virility of faith whatever in such creeds, is evidently owing to the fact that the God of the Bible still lingers, though in a most contradictory fashion, in the person of Jesus the Redeemer. But how long—with the Buddhist conception for a Father—will it be before Christ, too, shall be spiritualized to an essence, boundless as the universe?

Looked at superficially, the question whether God is to be regarded as a boundless spiritualized essence, or as the personal Prototype of man, would seem to be immaterial. As a matter of fact, no question could be more vital to the unity of man's conceptions. It enters into and conditions for him the whole aspect of the universe, from large to small. Let us therefore examine the question more narrowly.

The only conception that any people can possibly have of Deity, is one which comes within their mental horizon—the horizon bounded by their experience. Into His personality they will think their highest and noblest ideals. What they love most, fear most, admire most, will somehow be found among his attributes. To the extent, and in the direction, that they are civilized and enlightened, to that extent and in that direction will He be idealized.

It was therefore a profound remark of our Saviour, that to know God is to have eternal life. No one can know Him save as he becomes like Him. To know Him absolutely, is therefore to be perfect as He is perfect, which of course could be nothing else than eternal life.

By the same reasoning, to know Him in part is to be like Him in part, and therefore to be saved in part; or, to generalize, we are saved (i. e., we have eternal life assured unto us) no faster than we learn to know God; in other words, no faster than we become like Him.

But becoming like Him implies a progressive means of getting ideas about Him. Let us take time to see how this thought works out in practice.

To know God is to have adequate notions of His personality in, say, five different aspects: physically, intellectually, socially, morally, and spiritually. Manifestly these notions can come to man only as God reveals them. The germ ideas respecting His personality are to be found in Scripture; but these are meaningless, save as man thinks into them the content of his experience. The real revelation of God to man is, therefore, to be found in that which gives man experience: in life—nature—law.

If a man would have the noblest ideal of God's physical personality let him master all that is known of physiology and hygiene—and conform his own life thereto; if he would realize His intellectual personality let him become familiar with the elements of intellect in man, then calculate what must be the Intellect that could create and control a solar system, with all the myriad forms of life and being therein manifested; if he would know God's social personality, let him study sociology, determine what qualities in man lead to love and harmony: in the home, in the state, in the nation, in the world,—and then consider that God has so mastered these laws that heaven (ideal social harmony) is His eternal habitat; and so of God's moral and spiritual personalities: to the extent that man discovers and lives moral and spiritual law,—to that extent he will know God.

It follows therefore from the very nature of things, that the honest man's conception of God is a progressively growing ideal. As, day by day, he discovers law (truth), and especially as he conforms his life to law (obeys truth), so must his ideal of the Ordainer of law change; and let no council of ecclesiastics presume to lay an embargo on his soul, by pronouncing once for all what God is or is not.

But this latter was precisely what St. Augustine and his brother monks tried to do for mankind. Consider for a moment with what possible hope of success. How much did these men know of that greater revelation of God, the book of nature, which flooded the last century with light? Interpreting Deity, as perforce they must, by the content of their experience, think what a narrow emanation of the life of the Dark Ages their conception had to be!

What of His physical personality, considered from the standpoint of ascetics,—men who despised the human body as something viler than the rags of a beggar?

What of His intellectual personality, interpreted by an age dogmatic and unscientific to the last degree?

What of His social and moral personality, mirrored in the imaginations of men, whose highest social ideal was to shirk all contact with, and responsibility for the world, by living in caves, convents, and monasteries?

What of His spiritual personality, judged of by beings who wore stones away with their knees, believing that mere adoration was pleasing to Him?

Is it any wonder, then, that when men began to study science; when they went direct to nature for their ideals; when they read God's purpose concerning man by studying man himself, especially in his relation to social evolution,—is it any wonder that they turned away from the artificial conception promulgated by theologians?

For was not this idea of God, after all, only an intensified conception of the mediaeval monarch; whose approbation was to be gained, and whose anger appeased, through the mediation of court favorites (saints, angels, the Virgin Mary, the Son of God), who might be bribed or cajoled into pleading the sinner's cause?

Such a conception could not co-exist with ideals attained through the larger generalizations of life. To find pleasure in the servile prostration of multitudes, is not now conceived a noble trait even in kings; less, therefore, in the King of kings.

To make life and death dependent on the mere caprice of human will, we have now come to believe unjust and dangerous, and accordingly have substituted the reign of human law; in the same way, eternal life has come to be conceived as dependent, not upon the favor or anger of Deity (in the mediaeval sense), but upon divine law (i. e., the laws of the universe).

But in this shifting of the ultimate Source of volition and responsibility, a great mistake was made. Instead of stripping from the Christ or Bible type of Deity all the vagaries and artificialities in which he had been clothed during the Dark Ages, and then reclothing Him according to the ideals of modern life, scientists overthrew the type itself; and after awhile theologians caught up by substituting a vague generalization,—first fathered by Buddha and afterwards developed by Plato,—under the mistaken notion that such a concession was necessary in order to patch up the breach between science and religion. I repeat that a great mistake was made; for, after all, what type of creative intelligence, other than the man-type, can the race possibly come in contact with? Why, then, throw away the teachings of experience, from some fancy that it may be inadequate, and build upon non-experience, which we know is inadequate?

The point of the foregoing discussion, so far as the present volume is concerned, is this: Mormonism, though starting as it did, in the blaze of a scientific age, yet took for its object of worship the Bible-type of God; but it did not load itself down with the incubus of mediaeval interpretation.

Like Christ, God is conceived as the perfected man; but as to the meaning of "perfected," no theologian of the past, however wise in the estimation of Christendom, can have a voice: each man knows God to the extent that he has grown like Him; and he has grown like Him to the extent that he has discovered and obeyed law.

Mormonism thus finds in life, not in metaphysical speculation, its commentary upon Scripture. Accordingly, let the reader come to this book, not with the pre-judgment that he is to witness the setting up again of a conception which has fallen a hundred times in previous polemical battles; but rather with the idea that Mormonism may have something new and entirely worthy of modern thought. For however true of the Augustinian conception, Carlyle's jibe of "an absentee God, sitting idle ever since the first Sabbath on the outside of His universe, and seeing it go"—has no meaning whatever in the conception believed in by Latter day Saints.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Let me ask the reader to realize as far as possible the thought involved in this paragraph, by re-reading it and testing each word by introspection; that is, by referring it to his own native intuitions, thereby forming some judgment of its truth.
[^2] Here is the conception set forth in the Athanasian creed, a conception followed, with modifications, by most sects of Christendom: "We worship one God in trinity, and trinity in unity; neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance. For there is one person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost. But the Godhead of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is all one; the glory equal, the majesty co-eternal. Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the Holy Ghost. The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate, and the Holy Ghost uncreate. The Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible, and the Holy Ghost incomprehensible."—To which we may fairly add: this definition is incomprehensible. For how can God be "formed" and "limited" (i. e., as three separate persons), and at the same time be "formless" and "limitless" (i. e., uncreate)? It is stultification of this kind that has brought religion into contempt with thinking minds.
