Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER IV

THE QUESTION OF GOD'S PERSONALITY ARGUED

IN the preceding chapter I have assumed, partly on the authority of Scripture, partly from the necessity involved in a living, virile faith, that the personal or Christ-type of God is true, and the Buddhistic or universal-spirit type is false.

The proposition is, however, of such vital importance—reaching as it does into every thought and act of our lives—that it should not rest upon these good foundations, if better can be established. Accordingly, I shall, in the two chapters which follow, attempt a series of parallels between the two conceptions in their relation to life itself.

One preliminary, however, needs to be taken into account on the start. Science insists that truth can be known to man only by experience; and that, consequently, the basis for the credibility of any reasoning, speculative or otherwise, must be that its premises are realities. In this discussion I shall insist strongly upon the law of experience being kept in view. A little reflection must show how valueless is any system, however logical, that is not formed on this law.

Buddha, for instance, retires into the darkness of a cave to escape the "tyranny of his senses"; in other words, to escape the truths of experience. There, untrammelled by the necessity of conforming to objective law, his mind weaves a beautiful and most perfect system of soul-evolution; which, because of its unexampled logical unity, he soon comes to believe is real, and in due time, that it is the only reality.

All this is marvellous enough; but what shall we say to the greater marvel of millions of people, in every age since then, disavowing all experience as mere shadows and accepting this dream as the criterion of life! Suppose the first timepiece had been evolved in the same way; should we have apotheosized the watchmaker, and thereafter treated the movements of sun, moon, and stars as base illusions!

To make a beginning then, at the beginning,—let us contemplate the largest truth of which the human mind is capable; a truth, moreover, concerning which all minds must agree, viz., the formlessness, the reality, the unity, the homogeneity, the integrity, the harmony, the infinitude both in time and space, and, withal, the mystery,—of the uncreated universe. We need not reason, indeed we cannot reason, to these aspects of the All-in-All. We have only to open our souls and they pour in to the extent of our capacity. Nor can we reason these intuitions out of ourselves: insanity might temporarily obscure them, but soul-atrophy alone could deprive us of them. [^1]

Other aspects, though dependent upon perception and inference, are almost as self-evident. One of these is the fact that the universe is not empty, but full. Full of what? Ah, there we come face to face with the Mystery. We call it ether—quite as if that signified something. Let us rather say, full of power, static, quiescent,—a dark, silent ocean of energy out of which forces rise, and into which they sink, after they have played their transitory parts before the mimic stage of our senses; say rather that the universe is full of the mother-essence of creation, out of which Invention has formed worlds without number, and the resources of which Invention shall never exhaust.

It is precisely at this point—the point at which the uncreated becomes the created—that the problem of religion begins. How and by what agency the "formed" and "limited" comes out of the womb of the "formless" and "limitless"—this is a question that immediately begins to divide mankind. And to this question, therefore, let us first address our attention.

In Salt Lake City is a beautiful temple of gray granite, and in one of the canyons to the east is the quarry whence its massive walls were drawn. Consider then, these two objects: the gray granite mountain in the clouds, the gray granite temple in the valley. What is the relationship between them? Did the mountain brood and bring into being the temple? If not, was there an "All-soul" deep in the bosom of the ancient Wasatch range that conceived this magnificent piece of architecture, then shaped the rugged cliffs into geometrical blocks, and laid them one upon another? Or, if not the soul of the mountain or the soul of the range, perhaps it was the soul of the earth; or of the solar system; or did the universe itself bring about this substantial piece of creation?

If these questions seem palpably absurd, the reader is kindly requested to exercise patience till the analogy is completed.

Science practically agrees with Scripture that there was a time when the space now occupied by the solar system—a very lonely part of the universe, so astronomers tell us—was "without form and void"; that is to say, it exhibited all the formlessness, quiescence, and homogeneity of the rest of the uncreated universe.

Why did it not continue so forever? Who or what caused the change? What is the relationship between that first state and the present? Did the "All-soul" residing within this sphere of pregnant space,—the sphere bounded by Neptune—conceive the sun and his satellites, then bring them blazing forth in the dark abyss? Or was the moving cause of this transcendent marvel the "All-soul" of the million-fold greater sphere, whose radius sweeps the nearest fixed star? Or did the creative act spring out of the universe itself?

The solar system could not have come about without a cause. To call that cause God, brings us not a single step nearer the solution of the problem; save perhaps that it narrows the question to, What is God?

Of all the conceptions that have at various ages held the attention of mankind, only two survive the enlightenment of the present century, the Buddhistic conception and the Biblical. According to the first, God, if not the universe, is at least co-extensive with the universe; an essence permeating every infinitesimal portion of boundless space; a spirit, dormant or quiescent in the uncreated universe, but active and dynamic—the animating principle—in the created universe; the noumenon, or only Reality; out of which phenomena—that is to say, illusions—arise, and back into which they must inevitably melt or sink; the boundless and eternal uncaused cause of all things.

In so far as a rational conception of God can be gathered from the very irrational definitions given in numerous confessions of faith, this is also practically the conception of modern Christianity; save that its advocates, while they derive all created things—phenomena—from the uncreated universe (or God), have nevertheless not the courage of the Buddhists to carry their premises to their inexorable conclusion, viz., that these phenomena, these semi-illusions exhibited to our senses by form and limitation, must inevitably go back,—melt, sink again,—into the uncreated universe; in other words, that creation must be followed by Nirvana.

Various and fantastic have been the attempts at conveying an idea of the modern Christian God. The Church of England is, perhaps, clearest in its announcement of the immateriality of Deity; declaring Him to be "without body, parts, or passions, and of infinite power and wisdom"; then, very illogically, announcing that in the "unity of this Godhead there be three persons!"—quite ignoring the distinction between the limited and the limitless. [^2]

From current religious discussions may be gathered the notion that He is a being whose circumference is everywhere and whose centre is nowhere; who sits on the top of a topless throne beyond the bounds of time and space. But as there is neither centre nor circumference to that which is boundless, nor top to that which is topless, and no beyond to time and space, such explanations are beneath the dignity of ministers of the Gospel.

Although this conception of God as an immaterial, omnipresent Spirit, is prevalent among modern Christian churches, it is by no means traceable to the teachings of Christ. On the contrary, it represents two distinct compromises of the religion of Christ with secular cosmogonies. The first was with the philosophy of Greece as represented by Athanasius and the school of Greek dialecticians who joined the church during the third and fourth centuries. By the Athanasian Creed (quoted in a footnote) God is called a person, which of course represents the Bible side of the controversy. But in the next breath He is pronounced uncreate, which makes Him without form; the definition thereby violating the second law of thought, viz., a thing cannot be, and not be at the same time. True, by the powerful writings of St. Augustine, the personal aspect was kept in the ascendency down until the eighteenth century. Unfortunately, Augustine associated with the Bible conception such human limitations of Deity,—including also the doctrine of the total depravity of man,—that his ideas became untenable before the onslaught of evolutionary philosophy; and when they fell the idea of a personal God fell with them.

The second compromise—which was all but a complete surrender—was to modern science; for to the extent that science is not agnostic,—that is to say, in so far as science applies the name God to any of its concepts,—it, too, accepts as most rational the Buddhistic idea, that of the immanent God, the indwelling Spirit of life. For does not this idea admirably explain the vivifying principle in nature,—the source and meaning—to borrow Spencer's phrase—of that "infinite and eternal energy whence all things proceed?" Does it not also explain the unity and harmony so manifest in the universe?

Another rapidly growing cult—which might be roughly classed as transcendental, keeping in mind both the good and bad sense of the word; a cult in whose front ranks stand such rational thinkers as Emerson and Carlyle, but whose wings and vanguards are marshalled into line by such dreamers as Madame Blavatsky and Mrs. Mary Baker Glover Eddy—also accept as the basis of their various philosophies this same background of things knowable, the Buddhistic conception of Deity. So that this doctrine of Pantheism—for such it is, more or less modified,—holds all but universal sway among civilized peoples at the present time.

In view of this fact it would seem to argue unusual temerity for a handful of people like the Mormons to hold up and proclaim the old-fashioned conception of God as a glorified, perfected, personal Being, the Father of the human race and its prototype in every sense; physically, intellectually, socially, morally, and spiritually. To be sure, such is the revelation of Him in the Bible. As before pointed out, from the first page in Genesis, where man is represented as being made in His image, to the last page of Revelations, where He is represented as seated on the great white throne,—in almost every chapter of holy writ we get the conception of a personal God.

Nor do Mormons alone get this idea from Scripture: all men do, who have no esoteric meanings to read into the sacred text. But not all men can withstand the bombardment of speculative philosophy. Let a college professor explain, with his fine air of superiority, that only in a crude age of the world's history did mankind hold so narrow and degraded a conception of Deity, and these honest but entirely exoteric readers of Scripture blush for their ignorance and straightway go over to the popular side.

Only the sturdy convictions of a Mormon can withstand the contempt hurled in the word "anthropomorphism" and similar philosophic brickbats. "Fancy God using His legs!" exclaimed an elegant preacher of righteousness. Well, my fine bird, fancy the Redeemer of mankind not doing so! And yet Jesus is pronounced by Paul to be the "brightness of his Father's glory, the express image of His person." It is not least of the evils of this Buddhistic philosophy that the mental palate becomes so finical as to reject merely natural phenomena as coarse and contemptible.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "The explanation of how God can hear prayers from millions of worshippers," writes a friend to whom the MS. of this work was submitted for criticism, "has often come to my mind, but I have not dared to put it forth so boldly. I have explained that He has means whereby He can hear us, and read our inmost thoughts; but that those means are in the nature of angels appointed to deal with the prayers or petitions of men, I have not felt at liberty to express. That this is so, is probable; but will it be wise to make the assertion as strong as you have made it? May it not seem a shock to many good people's faith in prayer?"—To which I can only say, that the explanation is put forth, not dogmatically, but only as a suggestion. It is a thought that has helped to make my own prayers more real and vital, and therefore it is hoped that it may also help other doubting Thomases.
[^2] Here is the conception set forth in the Athanasian creed, a conception followed, with modifications, by most sects of Christendom: "We worship one God in trinity, and trinity in unity; neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance. For there is one person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost. But the Godhead of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is all one; the glory equal, the majesty co-eternal. Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the Holy Ghost. The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate, and the Holy Ghost uncreate. The Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible, and the Holy Ghost incomprehensible."—To which we may fairly add: this definition is incomprehensible. For how can God be "formed" and "limited" (i. e., as three separate persons), and at the same time be "formless" and "limitless" (i. e., uncreate)? It is stultification of this kind that has brought religion into contempt with thinking minds.
