Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER V

ARGUMENT FOR THE PERSONALITY OF GOD—(Continued)

It is not my purpose to contend that the Mormon conception of God is that of the revelations of Scripture. This will probably be conceded. The vital question here is, How does this conception work out in the revelations of nature?

In passing, I may merely mention the old philosophic difficulties connected with the non-Mormon or pantheistic conception, viz., that if God is immanent, that is to say, the animating principle in all things, He must be the author both of good and evil; conversely, if man has no psychic existence separate from God, he is not free, and, therefore, not responsible,—either of which destroys a vital principle in the religion of Jesus Christ. These difficulties have never been squared, and it is safe to say never will be, with Christianity's present notion of Deity.

But it would, perhaps, be unprofitable to pursue this dilemma; let us rather take the two conceptions and set before each the problem of creation; and in order to simplify matters, let the problem involve only a single series, such as the creation of our own cosmos, the sun and his retinue of worlds, down to the last ripple of created movement, say of the animalcule swimming, with ocean-like freedom, in a drop of water.

First, then, did the "All-soul," the reservoir of quiescent force, the spirit or essence filling the uncreated universe, brood and bring forth the solar system?

Such a thought is absolutely fantastical. Where in the experience of all mankind, did a block or cube of pure space ever do anything resembling the invention and execution involved in an act of creation? I challenge any philosopher to produce from experience,—and experience, remember, is the criterion of science,—even the remotest analogy for such a thing. It is the absurdity of the mountain creating the temple.

We might indeed imagine intelligent beings walking about this earth, but so hooded as to see results—cities springing up on the plain, locomotives dashing across the continent, steamers plowing the ocean—without perceiving the agents. These might be pardoned for theorizing that somehow an "All-soul" residing in the materials or forces making up a created thing, is the efficient cause of the creation; but how men observing daily the agency involved in ten thousand acts of creation, could come to so crass a conclusion, is explicable only by remembering Buddha and his dream.

Again, by this conception things created take form and outline by virtue of God's being the animating principle. He is conceived as the all-pervading spirit of nature—the noumenon behind all phenomena. The human soul is figured as a breath of Deity breathed into the clay of our mortal habitation, or as a spark struck from the soul of God himself.

Now, what purpose, what possible motive, could a spiritual essence co-extensive with the universe have in creating, say, our solar system or any other system for that matter? It could not have been for His better security, since, by our very conception, He is the All-in-All; and if not for His security, then I can see only two other motives—His improvement or His diversion. The first we may dismiss at once, for how can that which is infinitely perfect have need of improvement by finite entanglements?

There remains then the last consideration. We are to contemplate the probability that the "All-soul" of the universe has involved that infinitesimal portion of Himself which is bounded by the orbit of Neptune, into a blazing sun, a congeries of glowing, dead, and dying worlds, shooting stars and wandering comets, ice-capped poles and belching volcanoes, strutting bipeds and buzzing insects,—all for the purpose of relieving the ennui, the monotony, of eternal bliss!

Is it thinkable? I shall no doubt be charged with blasphemy for daring to ask the meaning of creation. "It is not for the finite to question the Infinite. We do not know—cannot know—what God's motives are." Which objection is precisely the conclusion I have aimed to reach, viz., creation, with the Buddhistic conception of God as Creator, is motiveless, purposeless, from man's point of view.

And if this be so, what assurance, from the standpoint of reason, has man that things formed and limited will endure, i. e., that there is eternal existence for worlds, eternal life for man?

Buddhism answers by flatly denying the possibility; asserting, moreover, that there is eternal life (and bliss) for man only in Nirvana, the uncreated, or, as applied from our present point of view, the decreated state; in other words, that state in which the God-essence forming man's soul is completely disentangled from matter and reabsorbed in God.

This is undoubtedly the legitimate and logical outcome of such a conception of Deity. And yet to the Christian, Nirvana, involving as it does the complete loss of self-consciousness or sense of individual identity, is the worst state imaginable: it is worse than the second death—it is annihilation.

Accordingly, he refuses to follow out the inexorable logic of his Oriental premises, but stops half-way to build him a heaven in which shall reside a risen Redeemer—limited, remember, as to form—with multitudes of other individualized beings, including himself; together with thrones, mansions, cities with pearly gates, and streets paved with gold,—for all which he claims eternal duration; whereby, though he has repudiated the only premises (i. e., the personal God of the Bible) which make possible either the organization or the eternal perpetuity of such a Heaven, he yet very illogically holds fast to the conclusion from the premises set aside.

His clinging to the scriptural Heaven makes him, in fact, twice illogical; first, in repudiating the conclusion of premises he accepts (i. e., Nirvana); and second, in accepting the conclusion of premises he repudiates (i. e., Heaven). But bless him for his inconsistency. It shows that the vagaries of philosophy affect only his head; his heart, which is the altar of the Holy Spirit, still beats loyal to the true God.

Need I point out that from the Mormon conception, creation becomes immediately intelligible? The solar system was constructed in obedience to a necessity similar to that which impels mortals to build colleges and universities; the changes going on in the cosmos, which scientists have collectively named evolution, take place from the necessity of adapting environment to the growing and varying intelligence of God's children; to the end that they may evolve in the direction which He has planned.

We Mormons trust the stability of creation, from the feeling that all this cosmical panorama is but the unfinished work of our Father's hands; for, knowing with what loving tenacity we earth-spirits hold to the working out of our feeble inventions and idealizations, we feel instinctively how dear to God must be the fruition of His perfect plans.

And as to the reality of Heaven, as localized in the revelations of Scripture, if it were not essential to the existence of God himself (as would certainly seem to be the case with the other conception of God), then we might, indeed, fear for its eternal perpetuity; but being in fact that state which is progressively the outcome of evolution, or, as Mormons put it, eternal progress; that state which is the sum-total at any moment of what God has achieved,—it is a necessary part of himself, the very quintessence of His work as Creator, and without which He himself, as well as we, would be homeless; and consequently it is easier to have faith that Heaven will endure than not to have such faith.

By way of bringing out another important relation between Creator and created, consider this illustration: John Jones has lost his way in a blizzard. Feeling a sense of drowsiness stealing over him, and realizing its terrible meaning, he kneels down and prays. Will his life, in consequence, be spared from the fury of the storm?

Before answering, take careful account of all the conditions. First, the storm is only doing the duty God appointed it to do; that is to say, it is the legitimate outcome of law. Law, on the other hand, provides that everything in the blizzard's path that is fitted to survive, shall survive—all the rest shall perish.

But John Jones asks in effect that these laws be set aside for his benefit, i. e., either that the storm be so mitigated that his natural strength may save him, or that he be miraculously raised into the rank of things fitted to survive. Suppose, in addition to praying for himself, he entreats mercy and protection for his horse, for the cattle he is seeking, for the buds in his orchard, will the indwelling soul of the universe stop to consider and act upon his petition?

The example fairly sets forth the inner meaning of prayer and also its conditions. If the Christianized god of Buddha can (and will) act the role of Providence, that is, intervene and set aside the operation of his own laws at the request of man, then it is logical to pray—otherwise not.

Is it rational to believe that an infinitely diffused spirit or essence could or would so intervene? Buddhism says emphatically, no. God never acts as Providence, but ever as karma, the establisher of law and dispenser of absolute justice in accordance therewith; and consistently with this view, theosophists, the modern disciples of Buddha, teach that prayer is enervating; that a man can have his way against the universe only to the extent that he himself can influence his environments; to which end let him pray to nothing external,—let him rather assume, not the supplicative, but the compelling mental attitude: so shall the incarnation of Deity within him,—the only God with whom his psychic life can come into contact,—perhaps secure for him his desire.

It is difficult, on a priori grounds, to come to any other conclusion. First, there is the bigness of God and the littleness of Jones. Compared with Infinitude the solar system itself is relatively smaller than the smallest microscopic speck discernible to mankind. Where then does the man Jones come in? Secondly, for purposes of answering prayer (as well for all purposes), this Infinitude must be considered Unity, not Plurality; since otherwise ten thousand antagonistic prayers might be granted at once, to the undoing of the cosmos.

But answering a petition involves hearing it, considering it, granting it, and setting in motion the forces necessary to give it effect—in other words, it involves time. Now, Jones' petition is urgent: five minutes' delay may mean death to him. Will the "All-soul" of the universe suspend attention from a million other petitions—to say nothing of temporarily dropping out of mind such trifles as a million solar systems just shaping out of chaos—to listen to a man whose cupidity, perhaps, made him tempt the blizzard?

But even though Infinitude could do such a thing, why should it do so? By the very conception of advanced Christianity, whatever of life is manifested in Jones, his horse, his cattle, and his orchard, is merely the fleeting incarnation of the indwelling Life of the universe. What bond of love or solicitude can be imagined between such a Creator and his creatures—merely limitations of himself—that He, the Infinite, should bend down and heed the selfish cry of the finite? Why should it seem better to Him for them to remain limited and finite than to be changed back to the unlimited and infinite?

But belief in an overruling Providence does not, as it may here be pointed out, result from a priori but from a posteriori reasoning—that is to say, from experience. "Ask and ye shall receive," said the Saviour, and made the promise seem reasonable by this appeal to common sense: "If ye, then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to them that ask ye, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask Him!"

And millions, testing the promise, have found it true. Here, then, we have again the blessed inconsistency of men holding to conclusions derived from premises repudiated and in spite of premises accepted. Another triumph for the human heart!

How much better it would be, however, if man's faith in Providence—that is to say, in the effectiveness of prayer,—were re-enforced by the head as well as by the heart. Observe that the God to whom the Saviour pointed in the words just quoted was no spiritual abstraction, but a Father whom he compares with our earthly parents.

But, it may be objected, while God's love, out of which grow acts of intervention in behalf of his children, is satisfactorily accounted for by conceiving Him as the personal Father of our spirits; while we may readily believe that the Being who created the solar system for man, would also, were it in accordance with His wisdom, modify or set aside the general application of His will in the interest of individual cases, how is such a thing possible? Millions of petitions go to the Father at the same time, each requiring more or less specific attention.

The objection would hold were God alone engaged in listening to prayer and devising special providences. Let us, however, take a commonsense view of the situation. The President of the United States, for instance, comes, either in person or by agent, into executive touch with every one of our eighty millions of people. Is it possible to conceive God as less resourceful?

I do not pretend to know how God answers all the prayers that should be answered; nor has Mormonism spoken definitely on this point. But the Mormonism spoken definitely on this point. But the following conclusion may safely be inferred from well-established premises in our religion: Ninety-nine per cent. of our prayers are probably passed upon by our guardian angels; the rest by councils of greater wisdom,—by Jesus Christ, or God himself, if need be. [^1]

Nor would providences thus secured be any other than God's providences; for whoever, under God's appointment, does any of the works of God, is to that extent acting by divine authority, which is the very essence of Deity and Godhood.

At any rate, with such a rational view of the modus operandi of Providence, one can draw near to God with full confidence that if his petition involves that which will be for his own eternal good, it will be granted. The thought, however, opens up a marvellous new world, a world of beings behind the veil, and their relationship to us, which will be discussed in a later chapter.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "The explanation of how God can hear prayers from millions of worshippers," writes a friend to whom the MS. of this work was submitted for criticism, "has often come to my mind, but I have not dared to put it forth so boldly. I have explained that He has means whereby He can hear us, and read our inmost thoughts; but that those means are in the nature of angels appointed to deal with the prayers or petitions of men, I have not felt at liberty to express. That this is so, is probable; but will it be wise to make the assertion as strong as you have made it? May it not seem a shock to many good people's faith in prayer?"—To which I can only say, that the explanation is put forth, not dogmatically, but only as a suggestion. It is a thought that has helped to make my own prayers more real and vital, and therefore it is hoped that it may also help other doubting Thomases.
