Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER VI

COMMON GROUND BETWEEN THE TWO CONCEPTIONS

It is time now to see what Mormon philosophy and modern Christian philosophy have in common, albeit under different names.

Perhaps Mr. Fiske, in his Idea of God, states most clearly a certain Christian hypothesis when he says:

The world of phenomena is intelligible only when regarded as the multiform manifestation of an Omnipresent Energy that is in some way—albeit in a way quite above our finite comprehension—anthropomorphic or quasi-personal. There is a true objective reasonableness in the universe; its events have an orderly progression, and so far as those events are brought sufficiently within our ken for us to generalize them exhaustively, their progression is toward a goal recognizable by human intelligence. . . . Such a theory of things is Theism. It recognizes an Omnipresent Energy, which is none other than the living God.

With all of which Mormonism is in perfect accord, save the last clause. Instead of being itself the living God, this omnipresent energy is regarded as merely a palpable evidence of the living God.

Suppose no mortal being had ever seen the sun, nor any other heavenly body to give him the suggestion of its existence,—yet its effects on the earth remained precisely as they are, excepting perhaps the phenomena of shadow. Under such circumstances, could the scientist be persuaded that the phenomena of light, heat, actinism, magnetism, and electricity were not immediate expressions of an omnipresent energy, but were in fact effects of a cause localized in space? If he could, it ought not to be difficult to conceive of God, not indeed as that omnipresent energy, nor as the creator of that energy, but as the efficient Cause of its differentiation into the forces known to man.

To quote Mr. Fiske again:

The fathomless abysses of space can no longer be talked of as empty; they are filled with a wonderful substance, unlike any of the forms of matter which we can weigh and measure. A cosmic jelly almost infinitely hard and elastic, it offers at the same time no appreciable resistance to the movements of the heavenly bodies. It is so sensitive that a shock in any part of it causes a tremor which is felt on the surface of countless worlds. Radiating in every direction, from millions of centric points, run shivers of undulation manifested in endless metamorphoses as heat, or light, or actinism, as magnetism or electricity. Crossing one another in every imaginable way, as if all space were crowded with a mesh-work of nerve threads, these motions go on forever in a harmony that nothing disturbs. . . .

It means that the universe as a whole is thrilling with Life—not, indeed, life in the usual restricted sense, but life in a general sense. The distinction, once deemed absolute, between the living and the not-living, is converted into a relative distinction; and Life as manifested in the organism is seen to be only a specialized form of the Universal Life.

All this Mormonism believes implicitly, and goes one better. As early as 1832, five years before Mohr announced the law of the conservation and correlation of energy, Joseph Smith identified all the cosmic forces with which man is familiar as differentiations of one Supreme Force; declaring, moreover,—and this is where Mormonism is still in advance of the age—that man's ability to perceive truth, the power variously known as inspiration, genius, intellectual penetration—is only a higher power of this same "infinite and eternal Energy"; that is to say, just as a certain rate of vibration of the eternal medium gives the sensation of heat, and another rate the sensation of light, so still other rates, progressively varied, account for all the psychic states which result from our perceptions, respectively, of the manyangled aspects of the one universal harmony of Truth.

But this power is not God: it is merely the medium through which He works, plus His will impressed upon the medium. Without the medium God would be helpless to execute, while still retaining all his power to invent. Without God, the medium would remain changeless, inert, throughout all eternity, having no power of initiation within itself.

This medium, which is co-extensive with the universe, would, if unimpressed by God, perhaps present no attrition (i. e., no phenomena) to the present state of our intelligence. The fact, therefore, that this medium does present varied forms of attrition to the human mind is evidence that God by virtue of His will is in all things, through all things, above all things, below all things—the animating principle of the created universe.

To put the distinction in scriptural terms, what Christians recognize as God the Father, Latter-day Saints perceive to be the Holy Ghost (i. e., the universal medium colored by the will of God). Christ himself draws this distinction. "Howbeit when he the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak." Showing that the power of initiation does not lie with the Holy Ghost, but with God.

The failure to keep this distinction in mind is explicable perhaps on the ground that only through this universal medium can God's will be made to bear upon man—just as it is only through the medium of the ether that the sun can influence the earth; nevertheless such failure to perceive the distinction between God and His medium, does not differ in kind from that which should fail to see the architect and builder behind the gray granite temple in Salt Lake City—or the sun itself as the source of sunlight. It is, in fact, a blindness of the same kind that would postulate an "All-soul" residing in the materials used, as the adequate cause of the phenomena presented by such materials.

And yet preposterous as seems this last supposition, let us see how nearly true it is, in fact. The gray granite quarry,—to use my former illustration,—exists only by virtue of the "infinite and eternal energy," which Christians identify with God, but which Latter-day Saints identify with the basic fact of the Holy Ghost; so do all other materials used, and so also do the architect and builders themselves; indeed, the very intelligence necessary to plan the temple, and all the mechanical powers used in its construction, are transmutations, more or less remote, of this same universal spirit.

What remains then for its finite creators? The initiative, and, in a relative sense, the mastery of the materials and forces involved in its construction.

Here we come face to face with the essential characteristic of God: the power of initiative and the mastery of materials and forces. Not, indeed, mastery and control in the clumsy, mechanical fashion in which man seeks to imitate creative intelligence; but in the absolute triumph of mind over not-mind. In these two facts, then, the capacity of mind to invent and the power of will to execute, lies the supremacy of God over the universe, even though He Himself be limited in form to the Christ-type of being.

In no other way are creation and control intelligible to man; for to place initiative and the mastery of materials and forces in the materials and forces themselves, is unthinkable. It is a postulate that never has appealed, and never can appeal, to the experience of man, and is therefore no more worthy of credence than are the vagaries of Buddha's dream; among which, indeed, it stands foremost.

For the present, this must end my discussion of God as the source of all light and life, and consequently the source of religion. I am fully aware that there are philosophic questions that I have not touched as yet. These I do not ignore; I only postpone them, while we consider the nature of religion itself as related to man's temporal and eternal welfare.
