Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER VII

THE PLACE OF RELIGION IN THE ECONOMY OF LIFE

"RELIGION," says a recent writer, "religion—the childish mistaking of pictures for facts,—the crass materialization of allegory,—the infinite talent of man for humbugging himself,—and underneath it all the shadowy outline of Truth."

It is something to be an iconoclast—there is work for him among the tottering, ivy-grown institutions that are outliving the ages when they really served mankind; it is more to be a builder. The philistine whom I have just quoted assumes to be the arbiter of religion, as well as the oracle of truth. Verily, we have progressed since Pilate's day. Here is a man who not only knows what Truth is, but is able to recognize her outline even when shadowy. Or is he, after all, only a phrasemaker?

It seems to me the utterest folly to attempt a generalization of religion in a single stroke. He who can do it knows too much for this world, and should promptly take his seat among the angels; or else he knows too little, and should have the fostering care of a mental hospital.

Nevertheless, some broad lines of differentiation need to be drawn in religion between what tends to serve and what tends to hinder the evolution of the human race. With this reservation, then, that our findings are to be regarded only as a groping after the truth, let us face the question: What should be the place of religion in the economy of life?

In a previous chapter I took the ground that a religion to be virile enough to make for the betterment of the race, must be founded on a living faith—faith in a Being who can be both loved and feared; also that the first requisite of such a faith is that the Object of it be a Reality, not a Metaphysical Abstraction, and the second requisite that He be a Sympathetic Reality.

But if religion is to be regarded as a gilded something superimposed upon life, a society for the culture, and especially for the display, of a religiously veneered estheticism, then there is little need of real faith—the less indeed the better. Its immaculate pastors can, with a long pair of scriptural tongs dip for themes into the turbid stream of life, and so escape soiling their white hands by contact with men and women still of the earth earthy.

Its votaries, placidly conscious that they are already saved, can sit back in cushioned pews, while sin is idealized, salvation dramatized, and a sense of their own righteousness is distilled upon them like dew.

The Church will thus remain eminently holy and respectable, and will draw to its fold all the I-am-holier-than-thou worshippers who can afford the luxury.

True, along with this heaven-tending selective culture, there are likely to grow a few incidental evils; such as artificial righteousness, spiritual snobbery, religious shams and make-believes, a snivelling, psalm-singing cant, and hypocrisy unadulterated; but then who expects in this vale of tears to find any garden of holiness without a few weeds here and there?

It is this conception of religion, so widely prevalent among Christian sects of to-day,—the fashionable church, retaining, to use the language of Scripture, "the form of Godliness, but lacking the power thereof"—that the school of iconoclasts are inveighing against. Lay on, ye philistines; a ranker sham, a more bedizened artificiality does not cumber the field of social progress to-day.

Religion may next be conceived as a divine something which is to be integrated or interwoven with life; a daily and hourly burnisher of the conscience; an unostentatious something that goes with a man to the field, the workshop, or the office, and guides through love or restrains through fear all the thoughts and acts, great and small, which make up the warp and woof of his complex life.

This conception involves on the one side a fervid, perhaps unreasoning, faith in the everpresent love of God, or at least of the Saviour; and on the other, the total depravity or essential vileness of human life, in and of itself.

Man is conceived as belonging to an order of being somewhat above the ants, and somewhat below the angels; with power to rise, through the medium of religion, into the heavenly spheres, but doomed without its power, to sink to the depths of hell.

This conception really represents a stage rather than a kind of religion. It represents the dogmatic, just as the first conception represents the philosophic, stage of almost every sect in Christendom. It is, however, distinctly a factor in the social betterment of the race; as witness the present efforts of the Salvation Army.

The difference between these two conceptions lies in the fact that the first is not only in itself a holy sham, but a breeder of correlative social shams—a religion which at best "but skims and films the ulcerous places" in society; while the second is an earnest, whole-souled effort to probe, cleanse, and fill with health the putrescent moral nature of man. The defect of both alike lies in the fact that they are mere specialized functions of life; seeking to do for the soul by spiritual unction, what the physician tries to do for the body with drop and pill.

There is still a third conception of the right place of religion; not as something superimposed upon life, nor as something integrated with life, but as life itself—life from God's point of view, which is the only real, true, eternal life.

This is the conception of Mormonism. God is conceived as the Father—in a very literal sense—of the spirits of all men. He must therefore be, like Christ, a glorified, perfected man. These spirits, again like Christ their elder brother, lived a spiritually organized premortal life, perhaps for thousands, perhaps for millions of years; and the ego, the I AM, or principle of self-consciousness, never had a beginning.

This earth, by the Mormon conception, is not a pestilent island in the ocean of eternity, where souls are quarantined for sin, as the dismalists among Christians would have us believe; on the contrary, it is a world prepared by our Father in heaven for the transplanting of His children; a glorious university—the only real university—for the development of His sons and daughters.

These sons and daughters do not belong to an order of beings lower than that of God Himself, and are therefore not "totally depraved"; their so-called deformities of sin are, for the most part, merely the deformities incident to growth and development; the deformities of the scaffolding as compared with the perfected house.

Sin itself as ordinarily understood is little else than relative righteousness; that is to say, what would be sin for a higher order of intelligence is often virtue for a lower. This is not denying, however, that there is real sin, recognizable alike in all grades of being; nor that there is a real Devil, capable of tempting men to evil.

From the conception that earth-life is a definitely-planned, and very necessary part in the eternal education of man, it follows that heaven is not some impossible region, remote in time and space, to which the soul flies at death; heaven is the HERE and Now, and a million years hence in the life of the soul, will still be the here and now.

That is to say, heaven is always a present, not a future, state of the soul; and if any being would know the extent,—the height, depth, and breadth,—of bliss which the universe has in store for him at any time, let him take stock of how much heavenly beauty he sees, and feels, and LIVES, in the creations immediately around him.

His future Here and Now will no doubt be ineffably enhanced in glory; but only on the condition that the beauties and glories between the present and the future state shall have been progressively seen, and felt, and lived; only on the condition that he progressively accumulate in himself, what Dr. Jordan calls the higher heredity.

Let him not foolishly imagine that he can fly from the one state into the other; for the farther he would go, either backward or forward from the here and now of any stage in his progress, the more deeply he would sink into hell. [^1]

For what is the essential fact of hell if not a state of discord with one's surroundings? Just as heaven represents the upward, forward, positive point of view—the life that seeks law to the end that it may come more and more into harmony with God, so hell is the negative, reactionary rebellious point of view—the life which, opposing itself to the harmony of the universe, is in process of being undone. It was with profound insight that Goethe made Mephistopheles declare: "I am the spirit that denies."

It follows from such a conception that there are as many varying degrees of hell as there are of heaven. Our present state, in fact, may be either heaven or hell according to the direction in which the soul's aspirations are pointed. He who says, "Father, thy will be done," is in heaven,—as exquisite a heaven as his soul is capable of,—with angels and all the positive forces of the universe surrounding him. He who has not yet learned to take this mental attitude, is groping in neutral shades; he who denies it, is in hell; for he opposes himself to law, and makes all things eternal his enemies. And as by obedience to law he built up all the power of his psychic life; so now his opposition to law, must result in stripping him of that power. This latter state is what is meant by being damned,—a state in which the soul has lost the power to repent and come into harmony with God. [^2]

The tortures of hell can only be approximately imagined from the relatively short psychic basis of our natural life. Nevertheless, to feel a growing sense of confusion and discord about one; to realize the insidious approach of impotence as revealed periodically in actions which more and more tend to terminate in empty, useless rage; to feel one's power slipping away, and realize that the time will inevitably come when coupled with an awareness that shall know all heights and depths, there will be an absolute helplessness to react upon the universe; in short, to become a keenly self-conscious piece of drift-wood on the waves of eternity—this it is which probably constitutes the supreme agony of the damned.

But in a relative sense, the pains of hell evidently result from being out of joint with one's environment. Such a state would, as before suggested, result from arbitrarily moving either forward or backward from any given point of soul-development. If, for instance, some devout Christian, with mechanical ideas of salvation, should have his prayer granted and suddenly be transported into the presence of God and angels,—supposing that his earthly dross could actually withstand a glory intenser than the atmosphere of the sun,—what would he find in this advanced psychic universe with which to form soul-correspondences? What should he find as food for interest, delight, or comprehension in an environment exquisitely poised to beings psychically millions of ages perhaps ahead of him. Practically he would be in hell—the hell of utter barrenness and monotony.

So, on the other hand, were he suddenly put back into environments whose elementary crudeness once formed delightful soul-attrition, but whose power to shape and modify, and therefore to interest him, he has long outgrown,—what would be the state of his feelings? Fancy a Mozart or Wagner condemned to linger in a plane where Yankee Doodle and the Arkansaw Traveller were among the highest types of musical concord! Again he would be in hell—this time in the hell of psychic nausea and boredom; than which let no man this side of the gulf of the damned fear a worse fate.

Mormonism, it will thus be seen, has nothing in it to encourage the delusion of those Christians who believe themselves already saved, and who, in consequence, dally with the present life in listless fashion while waiting for the advent of their paradise; Mormonism is pre-eminently the religion of present endeavor.

Trust no future, howe'er pleasant,

Let the dead past bury its dead;

Act—act in the living present,

Heart within and God o'erhead.

He obeys God best who learns most of the present world, but in such order and relation that the link between him and his Maker becomes daily brighter and stronger. He is in the highest heaven who sees most beauty, feels most harmony, in the creations immediately around him.

Compare, then, with a religion so outlined, a religion vitally interrelated with all real things; indeed, an interpreter of all things in their relation to the soul,—compare with this conception of religion the definition with which this chapter opened: "Religion—the childish mistaking of pictures for facts,—the crass materialization of allegory,—the infinite talent of man for humbugging himself,—and underneath it all, the shadowy outline of Truth."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] If, indeed, matter and spirit shall not turn out to be ultimately the same entity. Who shall tell?
[^2] On the face of things, this does not seem to say much; but as a matter of fact, it recognizes that there is a "could n't" even for Omnipotence: that things in themselves contradictory are not possible even to the Creator; e. g., the mediaeval notion, still held by some Christian sects, that God made the world out of nothing. It also hints that such a passage as that "God is able out of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham," is to be taken as an hyperbole; or if taken literally, that the miracle would imply the reducing of the stones to the atomic state, and then their incorporation first into the plant-world as food for man, and next into the living human tissue,—quite according to natural law. God can, indeed, do all things not contradictory in themselves; but he must do them in the way they can be done, and not in the way they can't.
