Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER VIII

MORMONISM A TRANSCENDENT SYSTEM OF EVOLUTION

IT must be this time have dawned upon the reader that Mormonism is a transcendent system of evolution—a system so vast and far-reaching, that by comparison the researches of Darwin and his collaborators, important though they have been, are but as links in an endless chain.

And yet evolution is hardly the word to express our idea of the unfolding of the cosmos. From its derivation (ex, out of, and volvere, to roll), the word gives no hint of final causes. Its chief aim is to trace modifications and record results; accordingly, as a term in science, evolution stands merely for an unrolling, a coming out, a developing from some centre, of the world and all its forms of life.

This non-committal attitude is certainly a becoming one to the cautious historian of nature; but the mind is hardly satisfied with an account of how things have unfolded: it instinctively seeks for a cause of the unfolding. As a consequence we have, more or less intermingled with the record of evolutionary science, an evolutionary philosophy, which proceeds by speculative theories.

Mormonism accepts all the facts of evolution, but has its own way of accounting for those facts. It cannot agree, for instance, that things happen fortuitously; nor are the present theories of evolution adequate, in its estimation, to account for the status and trend of the universe. Mormonism believes, not only that the cosmos was set going by God, through the agency of intelligent beings, but also that every modification traceable to it since, is likewise the result of intelligent supervision. If, therefore, to the idea of evolution there be added the idea of constant oversight,—that things happen not by drifting, but by direction,—then we have fairly the Mormon idea of evolution; which, however, we are accustomed to speak of under another name—eternal progress. This idea I shall now proceed briefly to outline.

The theme naturally divides itself into two aspects: the evolution of the world as a habitat for man, or as a new set of environments designed for his development; and the evolution of man himself in his relation to this habitat or new sphere of life.

Conceive, then, our Father in heaven, the perfected Man,—not, as Carlyle says, "an absentee God idle on the outside of the universe, seeing it go," but vitally related as Creator and Controller to all His creations: the very Source of all light and life; not isolated in His aspect of perfected Man, but surrounded by millions of just men made perfect,—supreme and alone only in the sense of Godhood, or the power that makes Him God: in the same sense that presidency makes the President of the United States supreme and alone. Conceive also as many million ages of progressive development between Him now and the state when, like Christ, He was man, as are necessary to account for His intelligence and omnipotence as God.

Next conceive as vacant the space now occupied by the solar system: a condition of things which might be represented by matter in its atomic state, or sleeping, as it were, in the bosom of spirit; [^1] both matter and spirit quiescent, inert, and literally "without form and void,"—that is to say, presenting no phenomena to beings organized as we are now: a state which science itself postulates previous to the creation of our immediate cosmos.

I choose this small fraction of the universe, not only because it presents a fair sample of creation, but also because it furnishes water deep enough for any sane mortal to swim his ideas in; to say nothing of the further supreme fact that it concerns me immediately, and the Pleiades do not. If I can connect myself and my habitat, the earth, with their adequate Cause, my philosophy is satisfied; I care not a rap how this Cause is in turn related to a remoter; I am content to rest in the conviction that the continued existence of our smaller cosmos, is evidence that its connection with the universe is real and vital.

Conceive next, as a motive for creation, millions upon millions of nascent intelligences, the spiritual offspring of perfected beings,—human souls, if you please, in their first or pre-existent estate; needing just such an environment as ours—"a second estate," in the language of Scripture—to further their development in the powers and attributes of Deity.

If this is not the explanation of psychic life, the adequate motive of the creation, will some one rise up and give us a more rational, a nobler, a more exalted conception?

To proceed then. What would be the first step in creation? Manifestly the setting into operation here of a law in force elsewhere in the universe—wherever, in fact, created forms of matter existed—the law of gravitation. For though Newton called this law universal, it is to be thought so only in the fact that it is a condition pre-requisite to the existence of any world; but as to whether the law shall operate within any given area (i. e., whether a system of worlds shall come into being), or cease to operate in any given area (i. e., whether a system of worlds shall pass out of being), depends upon the will of God.

Science has traced better than theology can, the history of creation since the beginning of the operation of this law; and with the facts of science Mormonism has no controversy. Ask me how God created the world, and I shall answer: In the way it could be created and not in the way it couldn't. [^2] Ask me how long it took Him, and I shall say: As long as it needed to take. That is the only commentary of Mormonism on the first chapter of Genesis.

We have still thousands among us who cling to the seven-days' notion; thousands of others who are willing to make a day with the Lord a thousand years (which latter concession seems, to the more intelligent among us, as if after discovering that you cannot dam the Mississippi with a spoon, you conclude to use a shovel); but these narrow notions represent, not the ideals of Mormonism, but the remnants of the mechanical theology of sectarianism still clinging to its converts.

Latter-day Saints recognize a great symbolic truth in the Biblical story of creation, but are not dogmatic either as to the way in which God worked or as to the time consumed. Moreover, to the extent that science has read, or shall read, definite concepts into this wonderful chapter, it may rely upon the reverent, grateful attention of Mormonism.

So also of other controverted teachings respecting the order and time of creation. For instance, thousands of books have been written by Christians combatting the notion that species are derived from one another by a process of gradual adaptation. But why should this idea be so strenuously opposed? Because it involves a few million years, instead of seven days, could not God still be Creator? Surely it is a sensible, an economical, a beautiful way, of introducing variety in the flora and fauna of the earth; and if it is God's way—and it surely is, if it is the way at all—let us accept it as a truth with all reverence and humility.

It would be interesting to follow this theme further, but the scope of this work compels me to narrow my discussion to what immediately concerns man. Elsewhere I have maintained that the solar system, and especially this world, was created in obedience to a necessity similar to that which impels us mortals to build colleges and universities; whence the inference is self-evident that the earth and all it contains was created as a means of educating mankind. This was substantially one of the doctrines that fell when physical science overthrew the Augustinian theology. It should not have fallen, however; for it is the only concept that gives definite meaning—that is to say, unity and perspective from man's point of view to the work of creation.

But physical science, intoxicated with its success in the role of iconoclast, did not stop to balance conclusions with other departments of truth. It rushed headlong to the opposite extreme, declaring that man is a mere incident in the scheme of things; that his pre-eminence over other animals was primarily accidental—due to a lucky differentiation, whereby evolution in him took the form of brain-modification; that the same accident might have happened to the lion, the eagle, or even the star-fish. [^3]

There are, of course, many general aspects of nature which lend themselves to this view of creation. It is difficult, for instance, to see what the thousand-fold variety of the butterfly, or the myriad-form aspect of other insects, has to do with man's evolution; other, perhaps, than to furnish him problems for the development of his mental life. But, after all, is not this development the very summum bonum of existence—that highest good for which all utilitarian goods exist merely as stepping-stones? And toward this summum bonum, which of the so-called negative tendencies in life,—weeds and tares in the field of existence—does not contribute its quota of strength and character, if properly met and overcome by man? But if not overcome? Well, it is necessary to eternal progress that offenses come, but woe unto him who does not rise above them.

It is only because man takes a narrow view of life, that created things have no sense of unity to him. If he can understand that the profusion and variety of natural beings are necessary to call out his highest, deepest, psychic powers, this fact alone should make him content to believe God's word, that all things were created for man; if he can look more deeply, and see that this life does not end all; that it is necessary for God to furnish mental activity during all future time for His children; that the multiplication of animated forms on the earth-plane, may in fact be the expression of creative work on the spiritual plane,—work which beings like ourselves are even now engaged in, and which awaits us when our turn shall come to pass on;—if he can take so wide a view of human life and destiny as this, he will have no need to turn pessimist and take man's primacy in nature as accidental.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] That God needs the help of intelligences lower than Himself, may seem startling to those who have been accustomed to characterize mankind as vile worms of the dust, which Omnipotence is shaping for heaven or hell, according to His divine pleasure. In a transcendent way, it is true enough that he does not need man's aid; but if He wants a world filled with men—His children; and if He desires those children to evolve in themselves the intelligence of their Father, He must have their aid; i. e., they must do what He would have them do, otherwise they spoil on His hands, to use a homely phrase, in spite of everything He can do to save them. It is simply the necessity,—to which God as well as man must conform,—of doing a thing in the way it can be done, not in the way it can't.
[^2] On the face of things, this does not seem to say much; but as a matter of fact, it recognizes that there is a "could n't" even for Omnipotence: that things in themselves contradictory are not possible even to the Creator; e. g., the mediaeval notion, still held by some Christian sects, that God made the world out of nothing. It also hints that such a passage as that "God is able out of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham," is to be taken as an hyperbole; or if taken literally, that the miracle would imply the reducing of the stones to the atomic state, and then their incorporation first into the plant-world as food for man, and next into the living human tissue,—quite according to natural law. God can, indeed, do all things not contradictory in themselves; but he must do them in the way they can be done, and not in the way they can't.
[^3] 3. In accordance with which latter idea, Mr. H. G. Wells has, in his romance entitled The War of the Worlds, pictured the inhabitants of Mars as immense, spider-like creatures, with tub-shaped bodies, from which radiate in a dozen directions, scaly tentacles capable of surprising manipulation. Brain-evolution happened to go in that direction on the red planet; producing rational beings of the octopus order, but vastly superior to human beings, nevertheless.
