Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER IX

THE DUAL EVOLUTION OF THE NATURAL WORLD

THOUGH perhaps inevitable, from the depths of superstition into which religion had sunk, it was nevertheless a profound pity that the great work of Darwin and his earliest followers should have proceeded by ignoring the spiritual basis of life. We should have had a vastly different arrangement of the body of scientific facts collected by them had these men paid attention to those intuitions which come from the infinite to all men who seek truth in a reverent spirit.

Consider in connection with this thought two important facts in the philosophy of Mormonism. The first relates to the purpose of existence, as set forth by our Saviour, namely, "Be ye perfect as your Father in heaven is perfect." If this means anything, it means an eternity of scientific investigation on the part of man; not only into the channels, but into the very well-springs of creation. How else should such perfection come?

The second relates to the obvious fact that life is the result of a dual creation—a creation of spirit and a creation of body. The second chapter of Genesis asserts that God "made every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb before it grew." As first shaped by the hand of the Creator, the plant was a spiritual creation—perfectly tangible to him, but no doubt quite impalpable to finite minds. Man could know it only as it grew, i. e., only as it took a body of earth-materials.

This same mystery has hung over life ever since the creation, leading the poet to exclaim:

Flower in the crannied wall,

I pluck you from the crannies.

I hold you here, root and all, in my hand,

Little flower; but if I could understand

What you are, root and all, all in all,

I should know what God is and man is.

Now while we cannot explain this mystery, something may perhaps be gained if we put it into the terms of science. What, then, probably took place in that first or spiritual creation of the plant?

Given creative intelligence, i. e., the power to invent mentally toward a definite end; given next the "infinite and eternal energy" referred to by Spencer, or the universe of spirit in the terms of Scripture, as material to work upon; given lastly creative power, i. e., power to impress will—probably in the form of motion—upon this universal medium, then this may be what took place in that first spiritual creation,—adopting the terms of molecular physics: A fraction of the universal spiritual medium was impressed by the Creator with a distinct vibration, both (let us say) as to quality, rotary or otherwise, and also as to rate, say, a fixed number of millions or billions per second. This—or some other manipulation of the life medium,—for it is beyond man to do aught else than speculate,—constituted the beginning of life. Into the whorl of spirit so set going, earth-matter shaped itself into definite form and outline by process of natural growth. This was the second creation. Scripture bears us out abundantly that the natural is ever shaped upon the spiritual.

But a greater marvel was involved after the union of the two: for at stated nodes in this evolution of spirit, the first creation reproduces itself. Every virile seed, whether of plant or of animal, is to be regarded as containing a repetition of that first or divinely-ordained spiritual vibration, coiled like a spring within its earthly matrix, and locked ready to be set free when the proper conditions surround it.

Now, whether God created but one such spiritual germ, and produced all the other forms by modifications afterward, or whether He created—creates, let us rather say—many such original organisms, who shall tell? In any event, why should there be bitterness about it? Whichever plan we assume, one thing is fixed: it is God's way of transmuting the formless and limitless into the formed and limited; and we shall not lack plausible speculations as to how he succeeds in doing it.

So also with respect to adaptations, which undeniably take place from age to age in almost every type of life: they are to be regarded as modifications—retardations, accelerations, or changes in quality—of the original spiritual vibrations constituting God's idea. But whether creative intelligence makes this change by acting on the seed of some individual organism, thus suddenly setting free a distinct variety, or by means of meteorological forces applied in mass, thus effecting changes scarcely perceptible save by centuries,—is matter for the investigation, but not for the religio-scientific rancor, of God's children. Here it need only be insisted that whichever way it shall be settled, it is God's way—not the way of chance.

Let us now bring these two facts together, namely (1) the necessity of an eternity of opportunity for investigation, if man is to become perfect as God is perfect, and (2) the obvious double aspect, mortal and spiritual, of all forms of life.

If in this, our second or earthly estate, we have untrammelled opportunity, so long as life shall last, for studying the bodies of things, is it unreasonable to hope that in some future estate, we shall have equally untrammelled access to study the soul of things? Indeed, is not such a change in the divine curriculum one of the necessities in the evolution of a child of God? How could he attain to the perfection of his Father without such an opportunity?

If the reader takes this step with me, then he is to conclude that even now, behind the veil which separates the natural and the spiritual world—a land very near to us, no doubt—are perhaps millions of "Workers" to whom God trusts problems in the economy of His creations. Such assistance is necessary to Him in working out His purposes respecting the earth; [^1] to them it is essential as being the only means of attaining perfection.

Let us go one step further. Do we not see the inventive, that is to say, the creative faculty phenomenally active in man during this life? Shaping dead forms, forsooth—mechanical contrivances without the spiritual counterpart. These inventions we call art, and so they are—the highest art which the limitations of earth life permit us to attempt. But in that life to come, when we shall investigate the very springs of creation, shall our inventions be limited to lifeless or mere mechanical forms? Is it not more reasonable to believe that as we approach the perfection of our Father, so we shall begin to do the things which He does?

But pause for a moment, to realize what this thought implies respecting those millions of advance workers of our race just referred to. Wherever God is at work shaping or modifying, or otherwise controlling, the operations of the natural world, there, no doubt, assisting Him in minor posts of duty, will be intelligent beings of our human type. And the results of their activity will doubtless appear in phenomena of the natural world. In my garden, for instance, are now blooming easily fifty varieties of the pansy, and on the face of any one of them are more subtly charming adjustments of color than the most exquisite artist of earth has been able to make in silk and satin. And all this, let it be remembered, is self-woven! What fair weaver among the immortals, I ask myself, is adjusting this marvellous loom of life?

Here, Dr. Loeb, will come your opportunity. To play with life as with a toy, has by your own admission, been the passion of all your years of investigation. You have even succeeded in fertilizing the egg of the sea-urchin without contact of the male germ. Shall you ever be able to poise, in delicate proportion, the chemical ingredients that make up the egg or the seed of a given form of life? No doubt about it—from a mechanical point of view. But will it hatch or sprout? Can you coil into it, and lock there, that other creation, the spiritual? We shall wait and see.

In the meanwhile, the whole aspect of our present plane of existence seems to deny such a possibility; seems to point out that God's secondary creation, the bodies of things, is peculiarly the subject-matter appointed for our study during this journeyman's course in his wonderful university. And surely there is material enough in this world of forms, even were our days prolonged to the combined life of all the antedeluvian patriarchs. From which consideration we may well conclude that our study of the shells of life will reach far over into the hereafter. But on the other hand, there must come a time, it seems to me, when life itself shall yield to man's power of analysis; and if to his power of analysis, then also to his power of synthesis.

As will thus be seen, becoming like God is, in the belief of Latter-day Saints, no mere fatuous dream of something to be accomplished by a passive compliance with ceremony or ritual; it implies an eternity of righteousness; that is, of right endeavor constantly heaven-directed. And we are now in the very midst of it. Let him who would understand the method of it, look about him, and take the most obvious, the most common-sense view of life. Let him realize that it is by means of our environment that we are shaped: made God-like to the extent that we conquer and rise superior to it, but weakened and made craven to the extent that it overcomes us. Then let him reflect that as it is now, so it has been in the ages gone, and so will it be in the eons to come: God shapes our environment and points the way; we retrograde or advance according as we drift with the current or swim toward the goal.

And if environment is the means of educating us, then it must change according to our needs—quite as modern science has shown that it does change. Nor should we expect the changes to be cataclysmal, that is, of so violent a nature as to disrupt the vital and intellectual correspondences of the race. We should rather expect them to be evolutionary, changing as the intelligences dependent upon them shall advance; which is precisely again what science declares has taken place since the creation of the solar system.

Whence we conclude also: (1) that the environments of pre-existence were such as to grade naturally into earth-life—though the fact of our having forgotten that previous life, were it explicable in no other way, might imply a complete break in our correspondences; and (2) that the environments of the spirit-world, into which we are ushered by death, will be a logical, unbroken consequence of our present environments; of which two states I shall have more to say in later chapters.

And so also of those tremendous changes prefigured in Scripture "before the end shall come." Viewed, as the prophets probably viewed them, without the perspective of intermediate events, they no doubt looked cataclysmal; but there seems no good reason to believe that they will be more so than events already recorded in the geological record.

This must close my cursory glance at our interpretation of evolution as respects the earthly habitat of man, the child of God. If I have shown that so far from being at variance with evolution, or so far from being even in the attitude of waiting to take its cue from the investigations of science, Mormonism is in fact able to organize the truths of evolution into a larger whole, and supply intelligent motive, moreover, for the origin, trend, and final destiny of the cosmos,—then my purpose has been effected, and I am ready to take up the second aspect into which I divided my theme, viz., the evolution of the human race as modified by its past, present, and future environments. Happily, as was inevitable, this aspect has already received much incidental elucidation in connection with its correlative them, whose treatment we must now close.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The words in brackets are my own, and are inserted for two reasons: First, the context plainly requires them. It is easy to understand that "the intelligence of the spirit" would be shortened to "spirit" in a rapid discourse. Besides, Joseph Smith was not a technical scholar, at least, in the sense of a close, discriminative use of words; he spoke with a largeness of view and freedom of expression, which the general spirit of his teachings never fails to make clear. The other reason is that the prophet abundantly taught elsewhere that God is the father of our spirits; i. e., of the spiritual bodies, into which the eternal mind or intelligence above referred to, was incarnated.
