Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER X

MAN'S SPIRITUAL LIFE A PROCESS OF EVOLUTION

IN a discourse, preached April 7, 1844, Joseph Smith takes occasion to answer the question: "The mind of man—the immortal spirit—where did it come from?" in the following manner:

All learned men and doctors of divinity say that God created it in the beginning. But this is not so; the very idea lessens in man my estimation. I do not believe the doctrine. I know better. Hear it, all ye ends of the world, for God has told me so. . . .

The mind or the intelligence which man possesses is co-eternal with God himself. . . . I am dwelling on the immortality [i. e., the intelligence or immortal essence] of the spirit of man. Is it logical to say that the intelligence of spirits is immortal, and yet that it had a beginning? The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end. That is good logic. That which has a beginning may have an end. . . . I take my ring from my finger and liken it to the mind of man,—the immortal part,—because it has no beginning. Suppose you cut it in two; then it has a beginning and an end. But join it again and it continues one eternal round.

So with [the intelligence of] the spirit of man. As the Lord liveth, if it had a beginning it will have an end. All the fools and learned and wise men from the beginning of creation, who say that [the intelligence of] the spirit of man had a beginning, prove that it must have an end; and if that doctrine is true, then the doctrine of annihilation would be true.

But if I am right, I might with boldness proclaim from the house tops that God never had the power to create [the intelligence of] the spirit of man at all. God himself could not create himself. Intelligence is eternal, and exists upon a self-existent principle. . . . [The intelligence of] the spirit of man is not a created being; it existed from eternity and will exist to eternity. [^1]

These are bold words; and the ideas they involve form the nucleus of a philosophy which is new to the world. Were you a Mormon, that is to say, were you in an attitude to exercise the requisite degree of faith, the truth they contain might be borne in upon you by the testimony of the same spirit which revealed them to him. Even without that mental attitude, however, they are ideas which must challenge the respectful consideration of thinking men and women; and if they are so considered they will not fail of vindication.

But let us first try to understand the thought involved. Mormonism teaches that there is in each human being an ultimate principle of life, a vis viva, which is co-eternal with the universe. The word "intelligence" describes this principle somewhat ambiguously, since it has also other meanings; as, for instance, in the aphorism, "The glory of God is intelligence," where it stands for the sum total of the developed powers and attributes of Deity.

Had the Prophet been familiar with the concepts of modern psychology, he would probably have called this ultimate principle the ego, or principle of self-consciousness. Our Father in heaven evidently refers to this eternal principle in Himself when He describes His identity in the words: "I AM THAT I AM," and says to Moses, "Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me to you" (Exodus 3:14); and by Mormon philosophy, God could have no principle of existence in Himself the germ of which His children do not share.

I assume, then, that it is this principle,—the principle of self-consciousness, or ability to distinguish between the self and the not-self, which Joseph Smith declares to be eternal; and if he is right, then there never was a time when man could not say, "This is I, this is the universe." Nor will there ever come such a time, whatever be the exigencies of heaven or hell, since what was never created can never be destroyed.

Now, respecting the physical form of that ultimate principle—since form it must have had, being a reality—there is little to be gained by speculation. Judging by analogy, it was perhaps a fainter type of the spirit, as the spirit is a fainter type of the body. But respecting other attributes of the ego, we are on safer ground:

I. This ultimate uncreated being was a free agent. I reach that conclusion from the following reasoning: Being eternal, and therefore co-eternal with the universe, it was beholden to no power whatever for its existence; and being indestructible, it might, in a negative way, defy all the powers outside of itself combined. That is, if all the forces of the universe and of all other intelligent beings beside itself, should combine to make it say yes, it might still say no, and maintain its attitude. This evidently is the real meaning of free agency; without such ultimate negative power, no being can be said to be free.

Man still possesses this power, but a difference has sprung into being: he has now something to lose. He has the same right as ever to oppose the powers not himself; but he does so at the risk of being stripped of all that those powers have put upon him: his mortal body, his spiritual body, and all those correspondences with the universe which obedience to law has invested him with. But after being again reduced to the primal state of naked ego, he could maintain his negative attitude indefinitely and without fear of further changes.

II. This uncreated being, though negatively omnipotent, that is, able to resist the coercion of all other forces combined, was nevertheless devoid, perhaps, of all positive power. The reasons for this conclusion are not so immediately self-evident, still they seem to me entirely cogent and adequate. By positive power, I mean the ability to react upon spirit or upon matter so as to create what one may invent. In God we call this power omnipotence—the power by which He shapes the formed and limited universe out of the formless and limitless. Man is not without this power in minor degrees, as witness the triumph of our present civilization.

Now, if all forms of positive power be melted down in the crucible of analysis, we shall discover them to have invariably the same source—obedience to law, whereby, and whereby only, we can enter into correspondences with the universe. But law, let us not forget, is the will of God; and by the very terms of our conception, the ego has as yet obeyed no being outside of itself. It has therefore no creative power whatever. Again, if by analysis we seek the spring of all human endeavor, we shall discover it to be a desire for increase of power—a progressive approach toward the omnipotence of God—whatever other names we may give to our motives. If this, then, be the reason for man's—that is to say, the embodied ego's—eagerness to discover and comply with law during the present epoch of its being, it was evidently the reason also for its setting out upon or beginning the cycle of evolution which thus far has brought it here. But if it already had power, what motive could it have in thus coming into relations of subordination to God? There could be no reason. The ego was therefore a powerless being, in point of execution, whatever it may have been in point of conception.

III. The ego, or uncreated being, had the power of faith and repentance, or at least the capacity to receive these powers from God. What the extent of its knowledge (as a mere memorative collection of facts disassociated from power) was, we may not know. It could easily have been enormous, it must at least have been rudimentary. The very fact of self-consciousness involves, as a correlative, the consciousness of one's environment; it would also involve judgment, or the power to distinguish between the effect of this and that. Now, the essential characteristic of faith is the ability to recognize a power greater than one's self, and to trust that power; and the essential characteristic of repentance is to put oneself in harmony with the power so recognized and trusted. Whence I conclude that the ego had both these powers or the capacity to receive them from God, just as man has them now; for in consequence of its exercise of them it became man in fact and may become God.

Probably the first important occasion presented to the ego for saying, "I will," was that of being born into a spiritual tabernacle. Let us pause to consider its relative status after this tremendous event in its evolution.

First, by its own free will and consent, it had become subject to God. It had discovered the meaning of law and taken its first step in subordination thereto. It had learned to say, in the language of our Saviour, "Father, Thy will not mine be done." For what is this only creed of the Saviour but a concrete formula for coming into harmony with the universe?

In the next place, it had exchanged what must have been a limitless, untrammelled, but also aimless state of being,—a state in which it could react on nothing, nor could anything, without its consent, react on it,—for what was probably an environment circumscribed and presenting obstacles on every hand. The nature of this first spiritual environment I hope some day to find time to discuss under the title: "Lucifer, the Son of the Morning." Here it must suffice to point out in general what it must have been.

It seems self-evident, does it not, that without an environment presenting attrition to its native powers or germs of power, the soul would have nothing to overcome, and could therefore develop no strength or character. That law must have held in pre-existence as surely as it holds here. Now, to be ideally limited and circumscribed an environment must present just that range of difficulties which the powers of the spirit are fitted to surmount; phenomena of that complexity which the mind by the exertion of the will can comprehend and form correspondences with. Under no other circumstances can there be growth and development.

But as there actually have been growth and development, we may infer that God provided the requisite environment; not only for this first stage in pre-existence, but for every successive stage previous to earth life. It is also a legitimate inference, that however remotely different was that first environment, yet, as the ages rolled on which brought that life closer to this, so the environment grew more and more similar to our own. From another point of view we should say that the laws of nature were gradually changed, and these reacting on God's spiritual children modified them according to His infinite purposes. For after all, what are laws of any kind, natural or spiritual, but God's media for creating and adapting the environment to the growing intelligence of the race?

As for the rest, the spirit being free, forged ahead or lagged behind, during the millions of years of its pre-existence, quite in the same way that it does here,—and with precisely similar results. That is to say, if proper exercise, or, in other words, proper obedience to law, develops any power of the soul here, so it must have done there; whence we infer that these powers known as birth-traits are due only in a small degree to physical heredity. They are rather the results of work done or neglected during pre-mortal life; as much so, as traits we shall manifest in the hereafter will be results of this life plus that previous one.

As to the first appearance of man on this planet, we do not accept the theory of evolution. Not that there would be anything shocking in a simian ancestry on the physical side, for the ape, like man, is the work of God, and anything from God's hand is worthy our reverence. And if he had chosen the body of the highest mammal into which to incarnate an immortal, pre-existent soul,—thereby beginning on earth the race of man,—we should accept such an origin as altogether beautiful and good.

But Mormonism has a nobler conception. There never was a time in the universe when there was not a man and woman capable of physical generation, for, generically speaking, God is man, and man may become God. Adam and Eve were probably translated beings brought to this earth from another world for the express purpose of beginning the work of furnishing tabernacles for spirits awaiting a mortal career.

Our first parents were, indeed, created out of the dust of the earth, but in no sense differently from the way we ourselves are created out of it; save that it was perhaps the dust of some other earth! This dust, however, was refined and organized in nature's marvellous laboratory, ere it entered into the body of Adam and Eve. Through the medium of the grasses it first became milk and butter, or, as in the offering of Sarah to the heavenly visitors in Abraham's tent—"young calf, tender and good"; through the combined agencies of the growing wheat, the milk, and the oven, it turned up as well browned and steaming breakfast rolls; the flowers contributed dust to the growing Adam and Eve as honey, the orchards as rosy-cheeked apples and luscious grapes, and so on of all other natural—which is to say divine—contributory factors. Does it not infinitely dignify God to picture Him in this role of Creator, rather than in that other clumsy, mechanical trade of the potter fashioning a mud man, and breathing into him the breath of life?

Respecting the evolution of man in this life and the next, whether as an individual or as a race, the chapters which follow will speak somewhat more at length.

Suffice it here to point out in brief that Mormonism interprets, correlates, and thinks into one vast and progressive unity all the experiences that can come to the human family during the passage of the ages. And I can conclude this chapter in no fitter way than to refer to what I regard as the sublimest utterance of modern times, if not of all time; the dominant note of Mormonism, and an epitome of its philosophy; a climax in the trend of evolution, which even the bravest of evolutionists have not dared to utter; a truth which when understood in all its bearings, gives unity and perspective to life, and becomes a key to the meaning of the universe; an aphorism which resembles indeed and deserves to stand by the side of those immortal words with which Christ points out that the final purpose of life is to become perfect as our Father in heaven is perfect. This is the utterance: "As MAN IS GOD ONCE WAS: AS GOD IS MAN MAY BECOME."

To men and women unacquainted with our religion, this sounds like blasphemy. But consider for a moment that mind is infinite, and time endless; besides "This is life eternal," said the Saviour, "to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." How can we truly know God, save as we become like Him? And if we are His children, does not all analogy proclaim it possible to become like Him? Admit this possibility and the aphorism above quoted follows; at any rate, let the reader hold the sublime thought in view, and see what comes of it in the discussion which follows.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Daniel, fourth chapter. It seems to me hardly a legitimate inference, from this single example, that every king or kingling holds his transitory supremacy by God's appointment or conscious sufferance. That would lead to the doctrine of divine rights of kings. God is no doubt aware of the social changes among men, since He notes the sparrow's fall; but His manner of ruling among the nations is rather that of letting people alone—leaving them free to work out their wills—but taking care of general results. Is it not a nobler conception to believe that He moulds a nation as He shapes a landscape—by the constant application of cosmic forces? I cannot believe that yonder tremendous cliff, which a waterfall is slowly wearing away, is an object of God's immediate concern. No more, then, is the ordinary princeling who gets really too much honor by this comparison. But just as this mighty gorge is being hollowed out of the solid mountain by natural forces, so both prince and people are yielding, generation after generation, to God's steadfast purposes.
