Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XI

HOW GOD IS SHAPING THE DESTINY OF MANKIND

NEARLY three thousand years ago there lived in Asia a man in whom human egotism and arrogance had almost reached their apotheosis. As he walked one day in the "palace of the kingdom," the swelling pride of his heart found voice in this piece of vainglory: "Is not this great Babylon, which I have built for the royal dwelling place, by the might of my power and for the glory of my majesty?"

But hardly had the word left his mouth when there fell a voice from heaven saying, "O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken: The kingdom is departed from thee. And thou shalt be driven from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field; thou shalt be made to eat grass as oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee; until thou know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men." . . . "In the same hour was the thing fulfilled. . . . He was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hair was grown like eagles' feathers, and his nails like birds' claws."

The lesson proved effective. "At the end of the days," said the humbled monarch, "I lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and my understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the Most High, and praised and honored him that liveth forever. . . . He doeth according to his will . . . among the inhabitants of the earth; . . . for all his works are truth, and his ways judgment: and those that walk in pride, he is able to abase." [^1]

Thus was mankind given a striking object lesson of God's regnancy among even godless nations. And if He can so correlate environment as to bridge the extremes of human and brute life in a short "seven times" (years?), how much more easily can He shape the destiny of a people,—by forces ever persistent and yet so subtle that they shall never guess their trend and tendency! In a former chapter, it was maintained that the earth with all its furniture constitutes a divine university for the education of God's children. This conception would certainly imply His general control, not only of its mighty laboratories, but also of the students themselves; not, indeed, in that close, personal, not to say tyrannical supervision, which even our foremost schools are beginning to perceive is abortive and fruitless; but such a control as is consistent with complete individual freedom. If this view is well taken, such divine regnancy in the social affairs of mankind ought to be apparent in history. Let us therefore take a swift glance along the ages. Fortunately for us, our vistas are longer and more clearly defined than were those open to the eyes of Daniel.

In the comparisons to which I shall presently invite the attention of the reader, it will be well to have some criterion of judgment,—the noblest, most far-reaching ideal, if possible, which the race has yet conceived. I shall spend no time in arguing that this ideal is precisely that set forth in the Declaration of Independence: "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, and endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." The equal freedom, the equal dignity of the individual—an ideal perceived glimmeringly but not yet attained by the race—is then to be our criterion. It is part of the Gospel ideal, as I shall demonstrate in a later chapter,—"the perfect law of liberty."

Compare, then, in respect of this principle, the history of the first half of the world with that of the last half. They will be seen to be completely antipodal. The relationship may be compared to that of two recumbent pyramids, side by side, the bases at opposite ends. The pyramid pointing this way represents the old-world civilization—a civilization the outcome, not of right, but of might. Tyranny and sycophancy represent respectively the two phases of nearly every dominant Old World nation. Turn the coin over as many times as you will, and these qualities merely change places—tyranny above, sycophancy below. No amount of suffering could teach the slave leniency, when fate happened to make him master. The two qualities are in fact reciprocal: every tyrant is merely a dominant slave, every slave a fawning tyrant. The freeman at heart can be neither; for if fortune put him in chains, he will prefer to die rather than kiss the hand that bruises him; if it elevate him to power, he must give freedom to others, for freedom is in his heart.

The point to note is this: the tyrant and the slave are not the products of a certain kind of civilization. The opposite is more nearly true; the tyrant-slave social status is merely the expression of the universal slave-tyrant spirit of its peoples. No matter what age of the world they should have lived in, their civilization would have been the same. "Men do not gather figs from thorns nor grapes from thistles." That which constitutes the essence of the soul will inevitably bloom into act and ripen into institution. [^2]

The general proof of this lies in the fact that individual liberty, as we are coming to understand it, is by no means an evolution of those ancient races, but of an entirely different race—whence the reader will note that my second pyramid, though alongside is yet separate from the first. Moreover, the modern descendants of those ancient world-powers, the hordes of Africa and Asia, do not differ to-day from their ancestors in the slave-tyrant spirit: they differ only in psychic puissance, being mere echoes of their mighty progenitors.

But let us come into closer quarters with these ancient peoples. Has it occurred to believers in the Mosaic account that the descendants of Cain the murderer, were perhaps incomparably superior to the descendants of Seth, in point of material civilization? I base this conclusion on three facts in the antedeluvian record. First, Cain's posterity were workers in brass and iron (Genesis 4:22). It needs no argument to show that brass and iron imply a high state of mechanical development—cities, manufactures, trades, arts. Second, they were the makers and users of musical instruments (Genesis 4:21), hence, by parity of reasoning, they had attained a social life of no mean artistic refinement. Third, it became necessary to forbid the sons of God—Seth's descendants—from intermarrying with the sons of men,—Cain's descendants. [^3]

Yet in spite of the divine prohibition, "the sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose" (Genesis 6:3). Is not this precisely what we should expect from the conclusion I have drawn as to the respective rank in civilization of the two races? For where a people attain a relatively high status in material art and artistic refinement, there the daughters—and sons as well—will be "fair to look upon" and attractive, even though they bear the mark of Cain; so much so, that the sons and daughters of a race, higher perhaps in spiritual ideals, but lower in the trappings of this world's ideals, will inevitably be won over by them.

This civilization was continued after the Flood in Egypt and Babylon; a civilization tinctured through and through with the slave-tyrant conception of life. What are the remnants of its massive architecture, but monuments to the absolute supremacy of the monarch, the absolute subserviency of the people? The same tale is told by its sculpture and painting: the slave-tyrant spirit made these arts stand still, by national decree, ere their evolution had fairly begun. And so of their religions: salvation, the result of coming into harmony with universal law, was not dreamed of by them. It is divine vengeance—angered tyranny—that is always to be avoided, and divine favor—placated tyranny—that is always to be sought. And what but a race of slaves at heart could descend to the depths of superstition and degradation to which they fell, in their supposed attainment of these ends? Nor does their literature change this general estimate of them. As fast as it is recovered, it only echoes feebly what the monuments of their history have already proclaimed with a trumpet.

For convenience's sake—though a name is not of vital significance—this civilization may be called that of Ham. Its zenith was perhaps attained in the days of the Pyramid builders; unless indeed a greater was overwhelmed by the Flood. Slumbering in the dust is now the flower of that race once so mighty in intellect and will, but removed, in the cravenness of their souls, only a few degrees above their brethren, the Devil and his angels, who were cast out of heaven. Gone forever is the menace of their evil institutions, thanks to the God of heaven. For their descendants, though perhaps not materially diminished in numbers, crawl feebly about like ants among the columns of Karnac. No sadder commentary on their mental inferiority is possible than the hovels they sometimes build from the crumbling fragments of prince's palaces, and in the very halls of departed royalty!

Nor shall they ever again be factors in world-shaping. Education may put on them the veneer of the prevailing civilization, and here and there a belated spirit may rise to centre with pride the eyes of the race; but the ingrained attitude of their souls, biased by a million ages of pre-existent false ideals, will not be materially changed by superficial contact with nobler conceptions during the brief passage of time. Let us be grateful, then, for the feebleness in conception and will, which prevents them from combining to give expression to that bias in the resuscitation of their ancient institutions.

Let us next give attention to the other pyramid, under which figure I seek to indicate the gradual growth of our foremost modern ideal, the essential freedom and equality of the individual. This may be called the civilization of Shem. Its glory has already eclipsed the combined glories of ancient world powers and the end is not yet. The base of this pyramid shall indeed be supported by the Millennium itself, the Kingdom of God on the earth.

Its apex was Adam; the ideal for which it stands was kept alive to the days of Shem through the lineage of Seth and the antedeluvian patriarchs. Respecting the social institutions of this race there is no hint in the sacred record. [^4] But in the absence of evidence to the contrary, we are justified in believing it was similar to that of Abraham—a pastoral life, close to the heart of nature, and answering admirably to the dominant instinct of individual liberty. The very simplicity of such a life, free as it was from all the trappings of power, could excite only contempt in monarchs of the Hamitic type. Its obscurity was therefore its protection. All of the race that remained true to their spiritual ideals would, however, cling to it in spite of such contempt. The rest would inevitably be caught by the external glitter of the superior material civilization, and so be gradually absorbed by the dominant race. As this is precisely what happened, it is indirectly an evidence of the view above taken, that the individual-liberty ideal should date from the father of the race.

Trace now the gradual widening of our second pyramid throughout the history of Israel. Observe the individual-liberty ideal flash out: in Joseph tempted by Potiphar's wife; in the laws of Moses, securing justice to the most defenseless; in the reign of the Judges for over four hundred years; in most of the incidents in the life of David and in his writings; in the fearless denunciation by the ancient prophets; in Daniel refusing to bow down to Nebuchadnezzar's golden image; in the song of Hannah and Mary: "He hath brought down the mighty and exalted them of low degree."

Even when Israel swerved from this ideal, seduced by the example of neighboring nations, and set up a king, they never became basely subservient. This is especially apparent in the demand made by the Ten Tribes of Rehoboam, that he ease the yoke which Solomon had put upon them; and when this ill-advised young lion's whelp answered: "Whereas my father did lade you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke: my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions,"—an immediate cry went up: "To your tents, O Israel," and they all revolted in a day.

Is there not in this sturdy resistance to oppression something akin to the spirit of the Barons of England who won the Magna Charta from King John at Runymede; or the still more immortal Continental Congress which fashioned the Declaration of Independence? Nor are these mere coincidences in history, for when the links in the social evolution of the Semitic race shall all be taken up, it will be found that the Anglo-Saxon peoples are lineal descendants of that same Ten Tribes who defied the arrogancy of Solomon's successor.

But it remained for Jesus Christ to give the supreme and final expression to this law of human liberty, and so to interweave it with man's hope of eternal life that it shall never be improved upon throughout eternity. When He proclaimed the Golden Rule: "Do ye unto others, as ye would have others do unto you," He associated the law with perfect justice; but this was only an approach to its final expression. When He declared him greatest among mankind who most served mankind, He carried the law beyond mere justice. But when He taught mankind not to resent evil, but, on the contrary, to return good for evil; to love your enemies, and do good to them that despitefully use you, He associated it with the love of God, which passeth human understanding.

As these teachings shall become real and vital in the lives of men, so will the ills and wrongs of society disappear, and that perfect social equality dreamed of by poet, prophet, and philosopher as the Millennium,—that state foreshadowed in the Lord's Prayer: "Thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven,"—take the place of the multiform social distractions which now divide and embitter mankind.

We have thus traced the sudden rise and gradual waning of the old-world or slave-tyrant ideal of human sovereignty, and contrasted it step by step with the gradual crescence of its antipodal ideal, that of individual liberty and equality; finding that the two are in no way related as cause and effect, but that, on the contrary, each is the spontaneous expression of a distinct class of spirits, which, for convenience, have been named respectively after Ham and Shem. But as in all problems involving extremes, so here we have still to deal with the means,—a compromise civilization, which may be named after Japheth, the third son of Noah.

Call to mind first the prophetic blessing and cursing which the old patriarch pronounced upon his three sons, or rather upon his two eldest sons, and the son of his youngest: "Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren. Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant. God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant."

Whether all the future of Ham—who may have had other sons—was bound up in the curse of Canaan does not appear. History would say not; but that the latter end of Ham is thus decreed, the foregoing discussion will surely have made plain. In Shem's blessing, note the peculiar use of the phrase "Lord God"; prefiguring, what history has since demonstrated, that this race was to be the conservators of our great religious ideals: bequeathing to the world the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Koran, and the Zend-Avesta. Japheth was to be "enlarged," and to "dwell in the tents of Shem." The first idea would imply that he was to be second to Shem in greatness; the second evidently that his ideals should be borrowed from Shem. What else than institutions and ideals could the figure "tent" stand for, applied in the large sense of racial evolution?

At any rate, the civilization of Greece and Rome presents just such a compromise relationship with the civilization of Shem. Here, indeed, was fraternity, but it lacked the deep spiritual source inculcated by the Nazarene, and actually forming the matrix of Anglo-Saxon democracy. It depended rather on birth and equality in martial prowess. Greeks to Greeks, and Romans to Romans, were freemen; but all other nations were barbarians, and were, in fact, made slaves without a trace of moral compunction. Moreover, there was a constant tendency to veer toward monarchy: Caesars and Napoleons are, indeed, perilously dear to the race even to-day.

In religion the same compromise is visible. They consented here also to "dwell in the tents of Shem," but they impress one as being guests rather than natives. Unlike dwellers to the tent born, truth as an abstract entity has little significance to them. Though they accepted the tenets of Christ, they retained their pagan forms; for the race is dearly in love with pomp and circumstance. Whence also the propagation of their faith is rather by person-worship and fetichworship than through the apperception of principle; by ritual and ceremonial rather than through the realization of divine law.

As respects industrial civilization, what inventions have they not borrowed from Shem? [^5] In political institutions the tendency also is toward the free forms of the North; but does any student of political science seriously believe that republics can flourish south of the Alps and Carpathians? In Latin America we have a number of petty experiments in free government, nearly all proverbial for their instability. Mexico, the only real exception, is a republic only in name. Although its chief executive is by courtesy called President, there has been no national election for twenty-five years. Such a policy on the part of President Diaz has no doubt been the wisest compromise possible, considering the nature of the people over whom he presides; nevertheless, when compared with the fearless methods of America, Canada, and Australia, it serves only to emphasize the position of the Latin races as "dwellers in the tents of Shem."

In this very fact, however, lies the promise of safety to the social evolution of the world. Time was when the race dominated all the kingdoms of the earth; but it has evidently passed its zenith long ago; and mankind need therefore fear no future disturbance of world-wide consequence. That certain branches are farther gone in decadence than others was painfully manifested in the pusillanimity exhibited by the Spaniards in the late war with the United States; but that even the foremost branch could, as a nation, acquiesce in and maintain a lie in the Dreyfus trial, shows that the French themselves are headed downward.

The future of the Hamitic race is undoubtedly that pointed out by Noah: "A servant of servants shall he be to his brethren." Not in the sense of bondage,—for slavery debases the slave-holder more than it harms the slave,—but in the sense of the "hewer of wood and the drawer of water" for his brother. In other words, he will be the artisan of the world. The future of the Japhetic race will probably be that of gradual absorption and assimilation with the dominant civilization. The future of the Semitic race—who can paint its transcendent outcome! For the day-star of its greatness has but barely risen.

Thus has the "Most High ruled among the kingdoms of men." How He has brought about so marvellous an evolution of mankind will be discussed in the next chapter.

NOTE.—This edition being a reprint from the stereotyped plates of the Putnam edition; it is not easy to make changes, nevertheless, the above reference to our gallant Allies written at a time when all the world wondered at the Nation's attitude, seems now—fifteen years later—distinctly unfortunate; and the author therefore takes this somewhat unusual method of making amends. No one, after witnessing their heroic struggles and unparalleled sacrifices during four years of war, can doubt the innate strength and virtue of the French people, or that this branch of Japheth is entirely worthy "to dwell in the tents of Shem."—N. L. N.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Vide Caesar's Column, by Ignatius Donelly.
[^2] I do not forget that environment never ceases to modify, and consequently that the slave-tyrant civilization here pointed out as a universal effect of pre-existent spiritual bias, becomes by reaction an active cause in the same direction. Relatively, however, this secondary bias is very small—just what we should expect when we measure the time of its operation with the almost infinite stretches during which the dominant bias accumulated. If a given fraction, say one per cent. only, of our present population, were belated spirits of the slave-tyrant type, we should perhaps materially modify them, so persistent and dynamic would be the influence of our free ideals. Conversely, if a single generation of the spirits now being born could have exchanged places with the ancients, each would in turn have attempted the overthrow of existing institutions; but at what cost of revolution and bloodshed!
[^3] That such a prohibition must have been made by the Lord is evident, not only from the fact that intermarriages of this kind are mentioned among the reasons for the Flood (Genesis 6:2, 3, 12), but also from other passages, making similar intermarriages a sin. (See Ez. 9:6; Nehemiah 13:26, 27; 2 Corinthians 6:14). New and wonderful light is thrown upon the relationships of the peoples before and after the Flood, by revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Thence we learn that the expression "All flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth," signifies that the pure race of Seth, which alone could hold the Priesthood and therefore be the oracles of God, was all but extinct through transgressions of God's command not to intermarry with the cursed race; that, indeed, the Flood became necessary in order that the two races might start on more equal footing for posterity. Even as it was, Ham's wife was of Cain's seed. (Whence the real reason for Cain's curse being perpetuated through Canaan, Ham's son.) But this was no accident; it became necessary in order that a lineage might be continued on the earth for the rest of the spirits in heaven entitled to no better earth-life than that of Cain's posterity.
[^4] 4. Save in the case of Enoch, the sixth from Adam. The enigmatical statement in Genesis (vi. 22, 24) that "Enoch walked with God for three hundred years . . . and was not, for God took him," is explained in a revelation to Joseph Smith, to signify that Enoch instituted a communistic order, on the lines of that set forth by Edward Bellamy in his Looking Backward, which developed such perfect social harmony that the founder and his city were taken from this earth as translated beings, even as was Elijah in a later day. This revelation only emphasizes, however, the attitude above taken; for what is such an order of society, but the complete triumph of individual liberty and equality?
[^5] 5. I have no desire to minimize the greatness of Japheth's contributions to civilization; these contributions are, however, such as spring out of a race genius for externalities—sculpture, painting, music, discipline—rather than out of such profound, spiritual ideals as those for which Shem is noted.
