Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XII

HOW GOD RULES AMONG THE NATIONS

AS will have been gathered by the thoughtful reader of the last chapter, God shapes the destiny of nations, during this middle epoch, or second estate of man, by the inevitable self-classification of spirits during their pre-mortal life. The doctrine of pre-existence, in so far as it is revealed by Scripture, is reserved for treatment in the Appendix (see A), since this exposition proceeds by scientific rather than by dogmatic arguments. Here the doctrine is put forward merely as an hypothesis, and no other warrant is claimed for its acceptance, than what obtains in other probable reasoning. If it explains phenomena otherwise inexplicable, or but faultily explicable by other theories, it will appeal to the searcher after final causes; if not, it may be passed by.

Not that I shall be able, in so brief and indirect a treatment as can be accorded it here, to exhaust the reasons for its acceptance; other reasons—notably those which theosophists marshall in support of reincarnation—will occur to the student who tries to account for the mysteries of life; especially those mysteries which are manifested in the phenomena clustering around heredity. I may add, furthermore, that, as in the case of many other tenets of religion, the final testimony of its truth must come, when it does come, rather by the inborn revelation of the Infinite to each individual soul, than upon the evidence either of Scripture or of reason.

Assuming, then, that all men who have functioned or will function on this earth had a pre-existence, in which the laws of psychic development were the same as here; and that, being free, such spirits must react on, and be shaped by environment according to their interpretation of phenomena—precisely also as in mortal life,—is it not more than probable that many—perhaps most—would locate Authority, or the compelling force of the universe, in personality, the concrete form, rather than in divine law, the abstract truth entity behind that form? Mortals do that, in spite of all God's efforts to make them love the truth rather than the dispenser of the truth. This would account for Lucifer's seducing, by the contagion of a persuasive personality, one third of the spirits in heaven into open rebellion against the impregnable forces of universal law. It would also account for the slave-tyrant bias out of which sprang the old civilization of the world: for the Alexander and Caesar vortexes in ancient times and for the Napoleonic cyclones in our own day.

Apply now the simple law that like adheres to like, and we should inevitably have self-classification of spirits in heaven. Next take into account that in any vast aggregation of spirits brought together by concurrent conceptions as to the final location of authority, there must be all degrees of masterfulness—for this quality is based purely on intellectual weight. Approaches now the time, when the demands of psychic evolution require a more restricted environment, a new or mortal world, such as we are now in.

What will happen in that new world? It would hardly need the wisdom of God to foresee that there will be endless conflicts, where final authority is conceived to be located in persons rather than in law. Would not infinite justice demand, then, that these spirits be mortalized at such a time and in such an order, as least to upset God's plans; i. e., as least to injure the evolution of souls who were beginning to perceive the true source of authority in law?

The flower of the Hamitic race were accordingly sent to earth when the world was young and empty; when, outside their own ranks, they must war upon rocks and trees and the wild beasts of the forest. It was surely wiser to bank their fury in pyramids of stone than in a Caesar's column of human skulls. [^1] Reflect for a moment how impossible would have been the present and future civilization of Shem if the Hamitic spirits had come to earth in reverse order, or even if Japheth's "enlargement" had been placed elsewhere than in the swelling tide of Greece and Rome. The lovers of freedom, who are to-day paving God's highways to the Millennium, would instead be grappling in death throes with the Pharaohs, the Nebuchadnezzars, and the Alexanders of slavetyrant memory, and anarchy such as the world has never dreamed of would reign supreme.

Nor is it in the supreme perspective of history alone that God is shaping results; for while it is chiefly important that the world shall eventuate as He has planned, it is certainly a second consideration that peoples shall be thrown successively into such environment as to free them from the false bias of a previous environment. With such a principle of interpretation, the historical perspective of individual nations takes on a new significance. Space will permit of but a few examples illustrating this conception; but these, I believe, will be found strictly characteristic; that is to say, similar examples can be found in the history of every people.

Take, for instance, the confusion of tongues at the Tower of Babel. It is inconceivable that the reason for this event is that which is directly inferrable on the face of the divine record. The ultimate purpose of so scattering mankind must have been the good of the human race. And one need not look long before he discover that good. Had mankind remained one homogeneous whole, the very weight of what might be called the psychic dead level would have operated to prevent those differentiations of character and soul-expression, the reaction of which has been the source of the evolution of society.

Take from ancient history two examples, both resulting from this scattering. Let the first be that of Greece. Here, bounded by insignificant geographical limits, was incarnated a group of spirits so allied in psychic tendencies that they speedily became a light unto the world. Acted upon by a physical environment singularly propitious, and freed from the dullness of the world's dead level, as well as from the paralyzing effect of an absolute standard of art, such as hampered their neighbors, the Egyptians, they evolved ideals in literature, painting, and sculpture, from which the world still draws inspiration. Would this have been possible had these gifted spirits been distributed, say, throughout the humdrum hordes of China?

The converse conception is equally improbable. Take a similar quota of spirits segregated by divine justice for Chinese nationality, and let them be born successively in the isles of Greece, would they have produced the Iliad and Odyssey or built the Parthenon? But, says the objector, suppose they had been subjected to all the psychic influences that played upon the Greeks, would it not have made Greeks of them? The supposition is impossible. These psychic influences were nothing else than the spirit of the Greeks themselves made visible. Take away these people and you take away their whole social environment. There would, of course, have remained the same sun, but think you it would have been conceived as Phoebus Apollo driving daily across heaven's blue meadows in a golden chariot? There would have remained the same mountains, but would they have been peopled by that same glorious assemblage of gods and goddesses? There would have been the same groves and streams, the same sunlit waves bathing the golden shores; but fancy a group of Chinese spirits peopling them with nymphs and naiads, sirens and tritons!

The conclusion is almost inevitable that each segregated group of spirits expresses in earth-life primarily what they are, and only secondarily what they become; and since what is good and true and beautiful, being in harmony with the universe, has a tendency to live and spread; and what is intrinsically evil, to die and be stamped out, such groups can, by national momentum, benefit the world to a degree impossible were their virtues applied sporadically over vast areas; and at the same time they tend to do least harm to the general evolution of righteousness, since the vices and sins which constitute their weakness breathe out their ephemeral life for the most part at home.

Take next the Jewish nation as another conspicuous example illustrating this general law. Here was a people fitted by the very quintessence of their soul-bias to keep alive the most important truths that man can know, the nature and attributes of the one true God, maker of heaven and earth, and the relationship of liberty which ought to subsist among all men. How could these truths have been upheld until they have all but overthrown idolatry and tyranny, if God had not segregated for a single nation the spirits imbued with them during pre-existence? And, note you, when this ideal had been fixed, these spirits were again scattered among the nations, unconscious missionaries, carrying with them their innate love of the one true God, and its reciprocal idea, the love of man, or the individual liberty ideal that is shaping modern institutions. Thus does the God of heaven seek to leaven the dull, heavy, cruel lump of humanity; thus fulfil His promise that in Abraham and in his seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.

Take now two modern instances. Do you think it purely accidental that the Western continent was hidden from the world for so many thousand years? Or that when discovered, the foremost peoples to seek refuge in it should be the Pilgrims and Quakers? Was it accidental that such a group of masterful spirits as the framers of our Declaration of Independence were born in the same age and thrown together by mutual sympathies? Could the spirits now banded together as Tammany Hall have conceived and launched this glorious nation, this new "Liberty enlightening the world"?

The ideals for which the American commonwealth stands would have been strangled at birth in any other land or at any other time in the world's history. And when mankind shall have the same reverence for the Book of Mormon that they have for the Bible, it will be recognized not only that all this was planned by the Almighty, ere Jacob blessed his sons or Moses smote the rock in the wilderness, but also that it was foretold by holy prophets over two thousand years ago.

The last example I shall adduce is that of the Mormon people themselves. Called by the voice of the Spirit "two of a family and one of a city," and led and driven alternately to the barren wastes of the Rocky Mountains, they are to-day holding up the highest standard of righteousness that the world has ever seen. Judged superficially they may, indeed, seem what their traducers call them, the poor, the unlettered, the despised of the world; for, in the language of Paul, "not many wise men, after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble" have the moral courage to accept the real Gospel of Jesus Christ. As in the days of Christ, they have been chosen from the ranks of the fishermen, the farmers, the artisans of the world; but humble as they are, they are raised to the rank of true manhood and womanhood by a virtue which you that read, scholar and fine gentleman that you are, perchance may not possess—the moral courage to forsake houses and lands, break the dearest ties of kindred, face the obloquy of a surprised and outraged social circle, and cast in your lot with a people counted the "filth and offscourings of all things"—for the sake of an ideal.

Call them low-bred, if you will,—ignorant, uncouth, mistaken zealots, fanatics, anything that will relieve your sense of propriety,—your pitiful infatuation for sham and conventionality; but dare not call them cowards. For animating those ungraceful figures bent with toil; guiding the caresses of those calloused hands, unfit for palette or keyboard; strangely lighting those rugged countenances, when no apparent cause is visible, are the souls of heroes and heroines; not, indeed, of the kind that do and dare for the plaudits of the world; but of the kind utterly unconscious that they are brave; fearing only the eye of their Maker, and seeking solace of Him in secret places, with tears and broken sobs, when all the world spurns them!

Such are the foundation stones that Mormonism has dug from the mud and debris 'neath the feet of the gay and fashionable world. Such have been the Elders it has commissioned in the past to carry its message back to their fellows in bondage. Little wonder that they avoided the great and the learned and labored among the poor. But now their sons and daughters are here. These fear no comparison even by the world's standards. Tall and straight and comely, gifted with intellectual vigor and spiritual insight, they are among the flower of Shem reserved for this last conflict with falsehood and artificiality. Nor do they lack the courage of their fathers and mothers. At this very moment two thousand such young men are travelling throughout the world at the sacrifice of their own hard-earned means; preaching the message of the new dispensation to all who will listen; and finding ineffable joy even when a stone and bed of leaves by the wayside serves them for rest, and the infinite starry canopy is the only roof above their heads. And at home in the valleys, as the shades of night deepen, hundreds of young mothers are calling flocks of rosy-cheeked children into neat but unpretentious homes; and there in the little parlor they will kneel together and pray the Father that papa may be protected against mobs and evil designing men.

And there are fifty thousand other young men ready to go when the call shall come; and as many young women ready to do their part in keeping up the table, rearing their children to fear and love the Lord,—even sewing and washing, if need be, to send their husbands money with which to buy shoes. Nor is this fanaticism; it results from a dynamic realization of that reciprocal and indissoluble ideal—love of God and love of man; it is only a sane and rational approach toward that altruism which shall in time be world-wide,—a clear sensing of the law that he who would lose his life shall save it, he who would save his life shall lose it. And though the results measured in converts are meagre enough, yet measured in their reactions on the character of the Latter-day Saints as a people, they are above the price of rubies.

But it is precisely in this latter respect—the conservation of its own great religious ideals—that Mormonism will finally become a "light unto the nations": in its natural growth from within; in its standard of equal purity for both sexes; in its maintenance of the inviolable sacredness of the fountain of life—neither curtailing offspring, nor, in the phrase of Paul, "changing the natural use for that which is against nature"; in its recrudescence of the Bible ideal that "Children are the heritage of the Lord,—happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them"; in its insistence that every man, and every woman, has an inalienable right to this heritage; in its belief in continuous revelation, the reciprocal communication between man and God, as between personal beings,—Father and child; in short, in its mergence of life with religion as one conception, thereby bridging the gulf between profession and practice, and doing away with the shams and pretenses of an artificial holiness, to the end that the highest functions of religion may co-exist, if need were, with jumpers and overalls,—that is, with any necessary social status.

Such then is the very heart of Mormonism so universally vilified and traduced among men. Need I point out that it, too, is one of the factors—a very important one—with which God is shaping the destiny of mankind? In this respect, therefore, it illustrates the general law that God segregates into groups the spirits to be born on earth, so that their reactions upon each other shall bring about His supreme purposes in the regeneration and salvation of mankind.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Of the positive type, which type alone represents power. Negative spiritual tendencies, represent merely the absence of power.
