Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XIII

HOW GOD SHAPES THE DESTINY OF THE INDIVIDUAL

In the two previous chapters I have shown respectively how the Lord is shaping the social destiny of the world, and also the social destinies of peoples. In this chapter I shall attempt to indicate how He also shapes the ends of individuals "rough hew them how we will."

If the thoughts and deeds of each day and hour pass immediate judgment on our souls, adding to or taking from the sum total of our power in the universe, how much more must the combined results of pre-existence fix the status which divine justice assigns to us in this new world. Being born, therefore, is being judged; for is it not a second opening of the book of life? There will be other openings in the hereafter, wherein the "deeds done in the body" will newly classify us, both as to companionship and habitat; but the point to note here is; that such a classification has already taken place, both in world-scope and in nation-scope as we have seen, and also in the scope of individuals, as I hope now to show.

"Thou shalt have no other gods before me," said Jehovah, and followed the commandment by what has always been regarded as a divine threat, in case of disobedience, viz., that He would "visit the iniquities of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generations" of them that hate Him; which, however, is no threat at all, but merely a statement of the simple workings of eternal justice.

Consider all the bearings in the case. There is first the sin of idolatry,—the most grievous of all sins, since by it men are alienated from God, and so are cut off, like branches, from the very source of that spiritual life which constitutes the essential bond of their unity with the universe. A thousand evils follow in the wake of him who has thus strayed into darkness.

In the next place, the penalty for committing this sin must manifestly be upon them that commit it, not upon unborn generations. What should we think of a human law which hanged the grandson because his father's father escaped justice? Somehow, then, this is the penalty for turning away from God,—to be cursed with children of like proclivities. We are not yet able to see clearly in what way eternal bliss is bound up with the salvation of our posterity; but just as the supreme punishment brought upon himself by Judas was not so much his death, as that he should have no seed—that he should run out, as it were, like a stream in a desert,—so being cursed with Godless children is next to being cursed like Judas; for as these children will, like the parents, probably not repent, and will therefore be lost to the generations of heaven, it is equivalent, from the eternal point of view, to having no seed whatever.

Consider next the aspect of the children to be born. Could divine justice consign to the parental care of idolators, spirits who had learned to love the Lord their God, or even spirits who were neutral on this foremost attitude of the soul; with the certainty that such souls would be biased during mortal life to their own undoing? Plainly not. Justice must seek out spirits deserving of no better parentage; spirits perilously near the border-line of those who fought against God and were cast out of heaven.

Being born under such parents would be no punishment to them,—merely justice; but it is a punishment to the parents, who, knowing God, and having made covenants with him, turn away to worship idols,—of wood or stone in the days gone by, and of wealth or social position, or whatever else in modern times takes the place of oldworld idolatry.

But because justice consigns such spirits to godless parents, the love of God does not desert them. It is ever busy contriving environments that shall tend to save; sickness, sorrow, reverses in fortune, happiness, and prosperity, or the terrible knocks of fate,—anything either positive or negative that shall bring them face to face with the meaning of law, and from the teachings of law to faith in the Lawgiver. That is evidently the meaning of those other words, in the same divine fiat: "Showing mercy to thousands that love me and keep my commandments."

The immediate generalization to be drawn from this text is that parents will draw to themselves the kind of spirits they deserve,—the kind that their own psychic qualities shall have prepared the way for. The godless will perpetuate their godlessness in their offspring; the virtuous, the pious, the loving will attract like souls to themselves; and this law may be extended indefinitely.

It was no accident that Mozart came to a line of ancestors who had progressively prepared a body for him with a musical brain and an exquisite nervous organization. Would it have been justice to consign such a soul into the darkness of a tuneless mortal abode—a body admirably fitted perhaps for mounting clods, or felling trees, or hauling in a seine, but unable to respond to music more complex than the dinner horn? And so of the great poets, the great scientists, the great mechanics, the great inventors, the great statesmen. Obviously divine justice, in pronouncing judgment upon a soul's attainment during pre-existence, must work in harmony with, not in opposition to, the law of physical heredity. The new environment must be a continuation of the old, in so far as it shall conserve and accumulate a positive tendency. And justice may demand a similar sequence for negative tendencies; though here, whatever can be stripped from justice by love and mercy will surely be done.

While this may be counted the general law, it does not by any means explain the whole of God's providences for the evolution of the individual. Take that curious dilemma put by the disciples of Christ: "Master, who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?" (John 9:2). Two possible causes for blindness are mooted in this question. The first has reference to spiritual heredity. If blindness came because of the man's sin, it could have been no other than a sin during pre-existence; a neglect to develop the psychic sub-basis of vision, or an abuse of this psychic attribute that should destroy its power during mortal life. The second points to physical heredity. Parents may so sin as to transmit an impaired nervous mechanism of sight. In our Saviour's answer a third possible cause presents itself: "Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest." The third alternative therefore is that the man was blind by God's providence.

Before developing these three possibilities in their relations to the phenomena of heredity, let us consider the nature of the change that takes place when spirits pass from their first to their second estate.

The prime characteristic is manifestly an occlusion of memory; not a complete shutting off, but almost so. The light from that previous life has ceased to be transparent, but still flickers in the memory of most men in a very subdued translucence, hardly above opacity. The dim sense of familiarity on meeting strangers, or hearing new truths; the vague sensation that a given situation has been perceived before,—constitute probably the lingering echoes of our first estate. Says the poet:

Yet oft times a secret something,

Whispered, You're a stranger here;

And I felt that I had wandered

From a more exalted sphere.

In the history of psychology are well authenticated cases of complete loss of memory; accompanied, however, with that same haunting sense of familiarity when the subjects were brought into contact with previous associations. The fact of our oblivion to pre-existence is therefore no evidence that we had no such previous life. It argues merely a deep and beneficent purpose on the part of Him who is shaping our destiny. What that purpose is in part we may guess from a consideration of the cases of lapsed memory above mentioned. In order to reacquire their lost knowledge, they were compelled to come into contact again with the elements of that knowledge; often with a decided advantage in the matter of thoroughness. Would not half the human race be benefited, from the standpoint of truth, if the hazy foundations of their mentality were entirely erased, and they were obliged to re-examine fundamental environment with more critical accuracy? So we may believe respecting the pupils of heaven advanced to this middle school: with all the objects of pre-existent environment in memory, much of earth-life would be merely guessed at from its inevitable familiarity; but with every object of comparison blotted out of mind, the charm of novelty would reinvest it. A deeper reason, however, for this veil of oblivion is associated with the very nature of repentance and forgiveness, and will be discussed later on.

How this veil was drawn down over humanity, need surely not disturb us in view of the fact that the hypnotist can induce the same blank in memory for a limited period of time. But certain facts connected with it will be pertinent to the discussion. Take the case of our Saviour. Either he was an exception in the matter of being oblivious to pre-existence, or else the veil was withdrawn on that memorable night preceding Calvary; for he prayed "Father, glorify thou me with the glory I had with thee, before the world was."

Again, in respect of Christ, it is inconceivable that He who attained the fullness of Godhood should not be more perfect intellectually than any other man that has lived: a greater statesman than Moses, a sweeter singer than David, a profounder philosopher than Plato, a sublimer poet than Shakespeare. Where, then, were these traits of mental superiority? All hidden by the wisdom of God; eclipsed that the sun of His spiritual righteousness might alone shine out upon the darkened world.

Whence we may conclude that though the exercise of a sublime gift is proof that such a gift is in the soul, yet it is by no means certain that it is the only, or even the greatest, gift of the soul; nor that he who manifests no transcendent gift in mortal life has none in respect of eternity. For it is more than probable that all spirits are innately more glorious than they appear through the imperfect medium of earth-life; and that transcendent gifts are often hidden,—save when they are needed to give light to the world,—in order that some neglected, mediocre talent may have opportunity to grow.

Let no man therefore sit in harsh judgment on his fellow-man. Of positive qualities we may safely say, They are his because he earned them, either in this life or in a previous life; of some negative qualities also we may know the genesis, either through the man's sins or the sins of his parents; and that this man is born blind, that one deaf and dumb, the third one stupid, may indeed be—probably is—the result of doing or failing to do in pre-existence; but it may also be a dispensation of God, who, foreseeing the effect for evil of a certain attribute of the soul, mercifully veils its power to function during mortal life. "If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell."

With these three-fold antecedents, spiritual heredity, physical heredity, and foreordination by God, we shall be able to explain phenomena which are inexplicable by the data on which science now relies; as, for instance, the wide divergence in character and aptitudes of children from the same parents, where the physical antecedents are practically the same; and the marked diversity in gift and inclination often discernible in twins, whose prenatal environments were identical. We are also able to understand those apparent exceptions to all laws of heredity: a Moses cradled in the rushes of the Nile; a David, the most obscure son of an obscure man; a Mohammed, camel-driver in the great caravans of the desert; a Luther, one among a thousand halfburied monks; a Shakespeare, born ostensibly to comb wool and manufacture gloves; a Lincoln who by law of heredity should have remained a rail-splitter and tenth-rate farmer; a Joseph Smith, whose life opened as a hired hand in the backwoods of Vermont.

All these men, and thousands of others whose characters have been epoch-making either in great or in small degree, represent spirits the momentum of whose pre-existent lives was such that no mortal obstacles could stay its impact. Like John the Baptist, chosen before conception, and filled with the Holy Ghost from his birth (Luke 1.); like Jeremiah, whom God foreknew and ordained a prophet unto the nations before he was formed in the womb (Jeremiah i. 5); like Christ, supremest of God's children, yet descending below the meanest in the lowliness of his birth,—all these mighty ones were foreordained by God to the missions of world-shaping that they so nobly fulfilled.

Such is also the explanation of all men and women who are born ahead of their time; prophets and seers whose voices, tuned to a higher, sublimer melody, ring out discordant on a dull contented world; harbingers of truths whose transcendent beauty only blinds and infuriates for the time being; heralds of a new and higher civilization, whose martyrs they willingly become.

And this thought leads to another: the physical tabernacles into which these spirits were born were perhaps not fitted, or but poorly fitted, for the lofty functions to which they were destined. What then? The royal tenants remodelled them to their own purposes; developed new brain cells; broke through the ancestral tendency to ossify at given stages of life; moulded the physical vehicle to the needs of the dominant intelligence. Whence we may reach the general conclusion that in every contest to decide which shall predominate the life, the physical or the spiritual heredity, it is always in the power of the latter to conquer.

Supremacy lies, I repeat, always potential in spiritual heredity; [^1] but, alas, how rarely does it become dynamic. It is precisely in this contest that the soul has need of a teacher—some external companion more mature in the wisdom of experience, who shall foresee the battles, arouse the sleeping soul, and help buckle on its armor. Such a companion every man can be to his fellowman; and if life lays upon us any supreme duty, it is this, of helping each generation to rise above the last. Such soul-guides are provided naturally in parents, brothers and sisters, preceptors and teachers; and, indirectly, it is for this end, too, that scientists investigate, mechanics invent, philosophers interpret, and poets write. All these forces may be reckoned as means by which God is shaping the destiny of the individual.

But all these combined would of themselves go but a little way in this battle between what Paul calls the flesh and the spirit; for the reason that they are too general; they form rather a favorable setting for victory, than aids toward cocking and priming the will in the day and hour that the individual contests come. A guide and monitor, such as the last exigency would require, God furnishes to each soul in the form of a guardian angel. Such is the revelation of Scripture, such the faith of Latter-day Saints.

It is to this representative of the Father that we owe nine tenths of those adjustments in our personal or individual environment, which in the sum total do most to shape our lives; His is the "Still small voice," which admonishes us to resist temptation; His the soothing companionship which comforts us in trial and tribulation. And yet even in this the most direct approach that the Father of lights can make toward influencing us for good, we can and do constantly resist; for amidst all the creatures of the universe, we—that is to say, spiritual beings—alone are free. Nor is that freedom alienable even by God himself; and therefore, although it remains true—to repeat that flash of insight by the immortal poet—that "a destiny shapes our ends rough hew them how we will," yet at the final analysis, we are saved or damned according as we consent to or resist the shaping.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] There are but three classes of intelligent beings in the universe; the workers, the worked-with, and the damned. The workers represent all who, by their own free will, have entered into covenant with God. The worked-with are spirits yet undetermined, whom divine love is reaching out for. Many of them are, according to their light, workers with a zeal that ought to put to shame the more slack of the covenant class; these must inevitably enroll themselves with the workers by definite compact when they shall finally learn to look up from law to the Source of Law. The damned are spirits who, having become irrevocable enemies of both workers and worked-with,—enemies in fact of the universe,—can have no further evolution, but are in process of sinking back to the state whence they began to evolve. The terms used in this classification are my own, and do not necessarily belong to the technical terminology of Mormonism.
