Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XIV

THE SCIENTIFIC ASPECT OF FAITH IN GOD

IF the notion expressed in the phrase "survival of the fittest" represents essentially the spirit of evolution, then the outcome of mankind, as set forth in the three preceding chapters, must show that the conceptions of Mormonism respecting sociological evolution are in line with the foremost scientific thought of the age; not only in line, but leading the line, since its generalizations are wider and more far-reaching than those of any other hypotheses that have yet attempted to correlate and unify the progress of the race.

Hitherto, however, we have traced the evolution only as man has been, for the most part at least, unconsciously acted upon by the environment thrown around him by the Creator; in which respect, therefore, the history of his modification has differed from that of the non-psychic world—rocks, trees, and animals—only by the single factor of free-will on his part; which, though it has no doubt retarded the plans of the infinite Evolutor—if I may venture to coin a word—has not otherwise materially modified the outcome of those plans. As was inevitable, the futile rage of man's opposition during the ages to things as they are, could have no other effect than the retardation of his development, and collectively the retardation of the race; for to be ignorant of law is to be the toy, the plaything, the drift-wood of natural forces; just as to be acquainted with law, to live in harmony with law, which has measurably characterized the race in later times, has given him power and consequence,—armed him, as it were, with the omnipotence of God by so much.

But the unconscious evolution of the race cannot go on forever; a time comes when man must consent to be a conscious co-operator with God in his own psychic development; under penalty, should he refuse, of cutting short his eternal progress; in other words, of being damned. This is the irrefragable scientific truth on which the Gospel of Jesus Christ is based. For what is that Gospel but the definitely prescribed conditions under which man, in the exercise of his free will, may enter into covenant with God, and so become a co-worker with Jesus Christ in the perfecting of his own soul? Paul defines the Gospel as the "Power of God unto salvation." In the terms of scientific thought Paul's words would mean: the power which God places progressively into the hands of man for the working out of his psychic evolution.

On making such a compact man immediately changes his status in the universe; for whereas he was before one of the class to be worked with, he passes over at once and takes rank among the "workers." [^1] Here, for a million ages perhaps, under the supervision of Jesus Christ, he will fill posts of duty progressively suited to his growing powers; until by doing the works of God he eventually attains to the perfection of God. Such a change of status evidently underlies John's words (i. 12), wherein he says: "But as many as received him (i. e., made covenant with God), to them gave he power to become the Sons of God,"—"joint-heirs with Jesus Christ," as Paul puts it (Romans 8:17).

But are not men and women already children of God by right of birth in heaven? True enough; but they are not children of the covenant. They have not accepted the relationship of subordination to the Father by act of choice, and no one can be enrolled among the workers who is not there by virtue of his own sovereign will; for all these have set out to become "perfect as their Father in heaven is perfect," and the foremost prerogative of that perfection is absolute freedom.

All men, therefore, if they would be "heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ" must enter the Kingdom by solemn covenant. "We believe," says one of our articles of faith, "that all men may be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel. . . . We believe these laws and ordinances to be faith, repentance, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost." It shall be my purpose now to consider in sequence each of these conditions of adoption into the commonwealth of heaven, and show how simple and inevitable they are in the nature of thought itself, even without reference to the fiat of Jehovah.

Faith, the most obvious and universal of all the operations of mind, has been unnecessarily obscured by its association with the esoteric rites of religion, and by the profound attempts of theologians to explain its meaning. Even Paul's definition of it as the "Substance (assurance) of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen," while logically true enough, is not unlike Dr. Johnson's famous explication of the word network as "anything reticulated or decussated at equal intervals with interstices between the intersections,"—more difficult to comprehend than the word itself.

Let us rather get at the vital significance of faith by noting its operation. "Without faith," says Paul, "it is impossible to please God." And then he proceeds to give the reasons, which are manifestly self-evident: "For he that cometh to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him" (Hebrews 11:6). The reasoning is this: It is pleasing to God to have his children "seek Him," i. e., enroll themselves as workers in the Kingdom of heaven. But they will not take the first step toward so pleasing Him, unless they feel assured of two things respecting Him: first that He actually exists and second that He will reward their seeking. What could be more conclusive?

It follows therefore that faith in God must be the fundamental principle of religion. But just how absolutely and fundamentally essential it is to the psychic unity of mankind, and therefore to man's salvation, does not appear on the surface. Most men consequently place the necessity of faith in God on a mere personal relation, the need of placating a Being supreme-by-will, who holds in his hands the threads of our destiny to snap in two or prolong according to His divine pleasure. No error of interpretation could be more egregious, nor more fatal in its effect upon the shaping of our lives.

Consider, by way of analogy, which supreme fact it is that gives order, perspective, and ultimate relationship to all the diverse facts of physical science. Let me enumerate, from where I sit, a series of apparently unrelated phenomena, and then see how magically they fall into lines of sequence, when I shall name the controlling source of unity; that snow bank near the summit of Timpanogas, and the fact that it is slowly melting; yonder lightning-riven tree; the butterfly above me matching its wings with the sunlit maple leaves; that splendid slide of shale a halfmile long; the rotting of that fallen giant of the forest; the curling steam and smoke of that laboring locomotive; that charming series of waterfalls; the balsam-scented air that wafts its cadences to me;—and so of ten thousand other objects of sensation. To the ancients they were a heterogeneous mass of unrelated things, or related at best by an endless series of gods, goddesses, nymphs, gnomes, and fairies, and to a later day by astrology, necromancy, magic, what-not; but to us, even though we are but tyros in modern science, one supreme fact co-ordinates and subordinates them all—the influence of the sun. What a blessed sense of peace and finality has come to science with this perception, what gigantic strides in material civilization!

A similar peace, a similar unity, a similar sense of finality will bless mankind in the spiritual and social world, when they shall come to believe alike that "God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him." For, though the ages of mythology and idolatry are gone, how much nearer are we to a unity of faith in the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? Among the comparatively few who profess this faith there is endless variance, and the rest of mankind are either reverently agnostic or openly atheistic.

As long as these divisions shall remain, as long as this apathy respecting the Source of our psychic life shall benumb mankind, so long must the dream of the social reformer be deferred, so long must the Millennium remain a mirage. For race unity will depend upon something deeper than material well-being, however much the long-delayed equality in property rights may contribute to that end: the point where soul coalesces with soul is spirit, not flesh; least of all, then, the trappings of flesh.

Let us understand, then, once for all, that the reiterated passages in Holy Writ which enjoin faith in God as man's first duty, are not made insistent for the sake of God's glorification, but primarily, if not solely, for man's psychic evolution; for God is the Sun of the psychic world, the source of its life, the only possible bond of its unity; and not to come into unity with God is to be at variance with the universe, which means ultimately annihilation, so far as that is possible to man.

Let us next get some rational conception of what faith in God means. To believe that He is, implies vastly more than the passive acceptance of the dogma respecting His divine personality. "It is a fearful thing," says a text in scripture "to fall into the hands of the living God." If this be taken literally, that is, to imply merely physical contact, there need be little fear; but where "the living God" is understood to stand for law and order, whether as manifested in the natural world or in the ministrations of divine authority, it may well come home, freighted with dread and terror, to every soul. Faith in God as the Mohammetan holds it, means something; as the Christian holds it, it means more, including as it does, Jesus Christ; to the Mormon it means still more, including besides the objects of the Christian's faith the last dispensation of His will to man. It is not therefore a measureable quantity; to one man it may give power to look within the veil, as Joseph Smith did; to another, it may give only the first glimmerings of order and consistency in the universe. Certain it is that, in this wider sense, faith in God lies at the very basis of civilization; for what is civilization but the sum total of man's adjustments in accordance with his interpretations of law; and what is law but the living God—the only way in which He can live daily and hourly in our lives?

Let us next look at the quality of faith as variously manifested by mankind. Two of the most important types occurred in the ministry of the Saviour. The first was that manifested by Nathaniel (John 1:45-51): "Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!" exclaimed the Saviour on seeing him approach.—"Whence knowest thou me?" asked Nathaniel. Jesus answered that He had seen him under the fig tree before Philip called him. "Rabbi," exclaimed Nathaniel, overcome by the swiftness of his spiritual intuitions, "thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel."

Contrast now with this sudden, unreasoning, overwhelming conviction of Nathaniel, the slow, hesitating, investigating faith of Thomas. Eleven of the apostles had seen and conversed with the Lord after His resurrection, but their combined testimony did not affect Thomas. "Except I shall see in his hands the prints of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe." Eight days later the sceptic's opportunity came. "Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands," said the Saviour; "and reach hither thy hand and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless but believing." Then, and only then, did conviction reach the soul of Thomas, so that, like Nathaniel, he also exclaimed: "My Lord and my God!"

Note now our Saviour's comment on these two types of faith: "Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed." Nathaniel's was undoubtedly the superior, but both were positive forms of faith. What is the explanation of their differences? The first type is intuitional. Nathaniel perceived the Kingship of Christ by percisely the same law that Christ perceived the guilelessness of Nathaniel. It was a perception not dependent upon external marks; it was rather a flowing out, as it were, and commingling of soul with soul. But Thomas's soul was too densely barred by its fleshly tabernacle thus to flow out and meet the Saviour. There was consequently no alternative but that Christ must flow into him; and that, too, by the only channels open to him,—the physical senses. It is characteristic of the sturdy integrity of the man, and therefore of his worthiness to be an apostle, that he did not feign a belief when the temptation to do so must have been overwhelming.

Faith of the quality necessary to produce conviction may be generalized as the native susceptibility or openness of the soul to the indwelling of truthness or the power that lights up and drives away the lurking shadows of doubt. I use the word truthness rather than truth, because the latter implies light accompanied with the images that emit the light; whereas the former implies pure light,—light abstracted from all definite relations. With truthness as the basis of your conviction you can give no reasons other than so it is, and it cannot be otherwise. Such was the nature of Nathaniel's testimony. He could not have told why he knew Jesus was the Christ, save only in the words of Peter at a later day, that God had revealed it to him. Such is the nature of every true testimony of the Gospel. It is the lighting up of our souls with truthness, the indwelling of that infinite Spirit which is saturated with and redolent of the mind and will of the Father.

On the other hand, where the basis of conviction is a definite series of truth-relations, as was the case with Thomas, reasons may be given back and forth tending more or less to modify the conviction. At bottom, however, this conviction rests on the same basis as the other; the degree of assurance, or truthness that lights up the soul; for just as the soul may be gloriously illumined by the inpouring of truthness or unconditioned light through the spiritual avenue of its being, so it may be dimly lighted by truthness, the abstraction of truth relations shining in upon it through the apertures of its natural plane of being.

Faith, truthness, and conviction will thus be seen to be a series of interrelated causes and effects. Faith is the prehensile power of the soul—the power by which it reaches out and coils its tendrils about truth; or, to vary the figure, it is the soul's absorptive power—the power by virtue of which it can be saturated with truth; or, to return to our first figure, it is the openness or susceptibility of the soul, whereby the light of truth can pour in and illumine its inner being. In either way of looking at it, faith results in truthness, and truthness as naturally results in conviction.

It is in the first, or immediate effect of faith, that all the phenomena of healing lie; for manifestly to the extent that the soul is lighted up with truthness, to that extent must all the spectres flee; and a goodly portion of the spectres lurking in every darkened mind are the ghosts or apparitions of physical ailments—diseases that exist only in the mind. [^2] But even in real diseases or injuries—and Christian Science will scarcely succeed in persuading a man that a crushed skull, a broken leg, or a macerated hand is an illusion—faith is the best aid to nature in healing; for to the extent that truthness shall illumine the soul, to that extent will all negative tendencies—obstacles to nature's healing power—be in abeyance. Take the case of the man with a bullet hole in his breast. Life or death may hang entirely on his attitude of mind. Let him shrink and cower with fear and foreboding—in other words, rally round the wound all the hindrances to nature's recuperative power,—and he will probably die. But let him take the attitude: "It is nothing. Yes, a hole in the breast. What of it? I'll be out in a week. A little hole like that—not worth thinking about. I'll not think about it. I'm almost well now. It simply can't get me down. I'm superior to it, and I don't yield." Let him think those things—let him keep back the ghosts—and nature's sole business is to close up the wound—a trifling matter. He will probably get well.

Nor is there apparently any time limit for the resurgence of nature's elastic forces, provided all weights are removed by faith. From the extreme instances in the ministry of Christ, wherein leprosy was instantly cleansed and a withered hand restored to its normal condition, even while the man held it out, down to the slow recovery from wasting diseases, healing is evidently accelerated or retarded according as the faith which assists nature is dynamic—full of will power, or static—full of resignation. "Faith without works is dead," says the apostle; and I cannot think of a more hopeless case of unburied deadness than the goody-good faith which gives up, and, with a limp and passive leaning on the Lord, prays and prays and prays, but makes no effort of will to assist the natural recuperative powers. How could the Lord respond to such contemptible inertness! What would the product be worth after it is healed? The grave is surely the proper place for a living thing so manifestly dead.

Reverting to the two types of faith, I may remark that mankind divides itself naturally into Nathaniels and Thomases; and according as either type predominates, so will the civilization of any epoch be spiritual or material. The faith which questions is peculiarly fitted to discover truth in the natural world; and consequently it is only a just tribute to say that our present unparalleled material civilization is due chiefly to those sturdy but cautious seekers after truth, the doubting Thomases of science. On the other hand, the high ideals which tend to shape our social life, the spirit which breathes from art and literature, the faith in God and the hope of a life hereafter, are as truly products of the intuitional type of faith.

The purpose of this paragraph is to point out the folly of either type's discrediting the other. Is Darwin to be damned because he had no testimony that Jesus is the Christ? What folly to think that God's providence, which was millions of years in preparing a habitat for man's earthlife, has no other place than this needle point in the cycle of being to influence a soul toward the true spiritual ideal! On the other hand, shall the man of science sneer at him who, with glowing countenance, sings: "I know that my Redeemer liveth?" Because his soul is closed and barred on the spiritual plane, does it follow that no other soul can commune directly with God? Let us rather strive to exemplify in our lives both these types of faith; exerting the fullest and most hesitating caution, when the truthness or soul-light sought can come only as an abstraction of truths apprehended through the physical senses; and on the other hand throwing open the skylight of our souls with the guileless trust of a child, when we would seek that purer source of truthness which leaves no room for doubt or fear. So shall the spiritual world illuminate the natural, and the natural make more real the spiritual.

Now, while faith is a native power of the soul—and is at the last analysis probably very closely allied to that power of will called attention in psychology,—it is by no means a fixed quantity. It is instantly subject to modification by act of will. No other attribute perhaps is susceptible to such swift enlargement, to such sudden occlusion. Let a man love and live by the truthness which faith ushers into his soul, and that very faith of truth-begetting capacity is enormously increased; but let him prove recreant to his truth-ideals, and presently they are gone; for darkness has taken their place—the man has no longer faith in the things he believed before.

Nor can faith remain as a passive attribute of the soul. The very condition of its existence is work. To cease striving is to be thrown into the limbos of doubt. The man who knows to-day that Jesus is the Christ may, in one short year, deny that he ever knew it; and he will speak truly. For this conviction is not based upon memory; it is the result of a stream of truthness, which remains constant as long as he is true to the obligations it involves. When he ceases to strive, his faith, closing in, shuts off the heavenly consciousness, and with it go his convictions. There can be no such thing as holding a truth in our souls and at the same time shirking its correlative responsibility. They who seem to do it may be set down for shams and hypocrites. It would not be a truth, that is to say, a living, vital relation; it would be only the shell or the echo of a truth.

And this thought brings me to the last topic in my theme,—the nature of false faith or superstition. This takes many forms, but they are all reducible to one aspect—a trust in personality, or something else concrete, rather than in law. Nor does one need to search far for the cause. Superstition has its source in spiritual inertia; or, to put my thought in Anglo-Saxon, in soul laziness. To fill the mind with truthness—the essence of law—requires no small effort of the will; since truthness, out of which grows the mental attitude, must be abstracted and generalized from many and widely divergent truths. Or if it be of the intuitional type, it requires no less of spiritual wrestling with the Lord. Consequently the man of indolent mind finds it much easier to base his mental attitude on that of another than to go to the bottom of things and know for himself.

Thus it is, for instance, that ten thousand young men and women in Zion lazily believe Mormonism is true because their parents know it is true. But this is only a small patch in the widespread weakness of society resulting from this bastard form of faith. Priestcraft thrives because of it; saint and relic worship are the very embodiment of it. Mobs usurp the functions of law, because their lives hold no abstract truth ideals. Corruption thrives in public office, because men's faith is centred in bosses, boodlers, and grafters rather than in that abstract thing, the will of the people.

But the subject widens in whatever direction one looks. What was it but this makeshift for true faith that enabled Satan to create a rebellion in heaven? What but the same subserviency to personality rather than to law that characterized the slave-tyrant civilization of the old world? From faith in persons, it is but one step downward to fetichism, or faith in charms and amulets; and to what hordes of cringing souls in the shadows of civilization, as well as in the fastnesses of barbarism, does not this aspect of faith take us?

Faith in law tends to unify mankind, since law being truth is universal and always consistent with itself; but faith in persons or fetiches tends to scatter and divide mankind, since personal leadership is a constantly and increasingly varying quantity. Thus all the inequalities, all the wrongs, all the miseries characterizing the social life of the world, spring directly or indirectly out of that interpretation which accepts the person—rather the authority wielded by the person—as the basis of subordination and homage. Even God himself is made no exception; but here no evil results—save as the tendency becomes confirmed in relation to lesser authority—for in God personality and law are one and inseparable.

True faith is that power which opens the soul to truthness—a quality abstracted and generalized both from persons and things; it lies at the basis of every advance in civilization, and is the true and only harbinger of the Millennium.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] How this ideal is working out in the educational schemes of the Latter-day Saints cannot be discussed in the limits of this volume. It is reserved for a companion volume to be entitled, Social Aspect of Mormonism.
[^2] Some one has cleverly arranged the following order of sequence in repentance: (I) Recognition of sin. (2) Remorse of conscience. (3) Restitution of the wrong done. (4) Resolution to sin no more. (5) Reformation of the sinner's life. It should have six R's instead of five, the first being recognition of righteousness. The second fact, which is made so much of in revivalism, is merely a fringe or incident of repentance; which, while it usually accompanies conviction of sin in the social, moral, or spiritual world, is often absent in repentance of intellectual sin, (i. e., mistakes of judgment). The third condition is, for the most part, impossible; save as man offers to God a broken heart and a contrite spirit. The fourth is implied in the fifth. So that this classification may be boiled down to the three essential facts enumerated in the text.
