Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XV

TRUE EDUCATION AND TRUE REPENTANCE IDENTICAL OPERATIONS OF THE MIND

IT remains to be shown in a more definite way how the closing statement in the last chapter is true. As a preliminary, let me call attention to two parallel utterances, evidently intended to voice the same general truth. "Except ye repent," says Christ, "ye shall all likewise perish." Here is no equivocation. If His words are true, they are applicable to all mankind alike. Nor is it worth while to temporize with the word perish. It stands for the grim fact of damnation—our ultimate spiritual undoing. It is characteristic of the futility of dogmatic preaching, that this awful text no longer arouses fear and terror in the heart of the average listener. The reason evidently is that he cannot actively feel its truth.

Nearly two thousand years later in the world's history, Joseph Smith was led to utter the broad, unqualified assertion: "No man can be saved in ignorance"; re-emphasizing the fact in the explanation that "man is saved no faster than he gains intelligence." This attitude is apparently more cruel and relentless than that of our Saviour; especially as it seems to exclude from salvation a majority of those whom Christ's dictum includes; for is it not the lowly, the ignorant (according to the world's standard) that make up, for the most part, the hosts of the repentant? To be on the way to salvation by Christ's standard, and then to be side-tracked to damnation by the standard of Joseph Smith, seems to be spiritual confusion worse confounded.

To reconcile these apparent contradictions; to show that each standard of salvation is absolutely, irrevocably true; to demonstrate that the two expressions are identical in import,—being in fact only different points of view in relation to the same great truth,—shall be the immediate purpose of this chapter; whence, indirectly, it will be seen also that "faith—the power which opens the soul to truthness—lies at the basis of every advance in civilization, and is the true and only harbinger of the Millennium."

Manifestly our first business is with the concepts "ignorance" and "education." By the world's rating any man or woman would be ignorant who could not read and write; conversely, any man or woman would be educated who could read and write seven languages. But neither of these ratings might be just from God's point of view; for whereas man asks, "Has he been to school? What courses did he complete? Has he a degree?" God simply asks, "How has he made use of the world? Does he recognize and obey law? Is his life daily moulded and shaped by the harmonies of the universe that touch him on all sides? Does he tend to become perfect by suffering?"

We are sometimes very much puffed up by those artificial contrivances which we call our schools and colleges. What are they, in fact, but children's playhouses filled with toys, when compared with God's great university, the world itself, with its magnificent laboratories in sea and sky, in forest expanse and mountain deeps? Society will continue to demand scholarship as the badge of education; life demands power. Men will still ask, "What does he know?" Social evolution enquires only, "What can he do?"

Note the fact that Joseph Smith said, "Man is saved no faster than he gains 'intelligence'." By the conceptions of Mormonism, therefore, man does not cease to be ignorant merely by acquiring knowledge; he becomes educated only as he gets intelligence. The college-bred man may or may not be intelligent. If the juices of life have been squeezed out of him; if his heart-powers—his love for God and love for man—have dried and withered in the arid barrennesses of mere intellectuality; if when he gets out he has lost the power, as well as the inclination, to "catch on"; if he is a confirmed bookworm, stopping only to contemplate occasionally the evidence, framed on the library wall, that he is an "educated gentleman,"—a gentleman of leisure, thank God! and not one of the base proletariat ants that are crawling everywhere over the great globe, doing the menial work of the race: if this is the measure of the man, you may call him anything you like—a human exquisite—a rare exotic—worthy a golden frame or a crystal conservatory,—but do not imply that he is an intelligent being; for intelligence is power, not pride; character, not contempt for the destiny-shapers of the race. How, indeed, does this non-descript with a college degree affect the welfare of the world in a way differently from that of a mummy? Only in the fact that it eats, drinks, and otherwise lives upon the labor of beings it despises.

The only kind of education which squares with the ideals of Mormonism is that which trains a man to do. If it be asked, to do what, the answer is to do the things that need to be done. If it be further asked, who shall determine "the things needed to be done," the reply is that as respects the lower half of them they are self-evident. Man's first duty in life is to live, hence he must be taught to do along industrial lines. After securing a livelihood, his whole duty is to do the will of God. That means working for the salvation of his fellowman; for there is only one way by which a man can save his own soul; that is by giving it for others. But this does not imply preaching only; it means anything that needs to be done for the uplifting of the race,—with God as director of what shall be done. [^1]

True education is therefore training a man to do his part in the social world; in contradistinction to false education, which aims to polish him in certain conventional directions, so that he shall be able to pass muster before society as an "educated gentleman." Nor is intellectuality, though confessedly the basis of all forms of power, the crying need of true education. Relatively, indeed, this has already been overdone. Heart-power, with moral and spiritual force of character; the power that shall love men into the kingdom of God; the power pre-eminently manifested in the life of Christ,—this is what the world most needs, and what the schools of to-day are least fitted to give.

Let us now draw the lines a little closer between what I have denominated respectively the true and the false education. They will be made to stand out in minute and detailed contrast, if we trace the genesis and evolution of that power of the soul which the prophet mentions as intelligence.

Manifestly to the utterly ignorant being, if such a state were possible, all things—objects, forces, sensations—would have only the same transitory unrelated significance which we suppose them to have for the ox or any other member of the brute creation. And were his soul fitted with no other prehensile power than theirs, he must ever remain in a state of ignorance. But he has, as we have seen, the native power of gathering truthness from truths; also of getting truthness by direct inflow from the Source of all truths: in short, he has the power of faith, and therefore potentially the power of intelligence.

The first or immediate effect of the exercise of faith is to know; in other words, to perceive and feel that sense of consistency or harmony which we call truth. But knowledge is only half of intelligence. To stop here is to be falsely educated. If, however, the truth perceived becomes a dynamic fact in a man's character; if it is incorporated into his mental attitude, and reacts immediately upon his life; if, in short, it ceases to be something in a man, and becomes the man himself, changing the very color and texture of his soul, then knowledge has passed over into power—or character—or wisdom—or, to adopt the term used by Joseph Smith, has passed over into intelligence; and it is such a process alone that represents true education.

Thus are the two types of education put into sharp contrast: the false type,—represented alike by your college bookworm and your college tramp,—filling the mind of the student with truths which can never be his save to look at, and therefore so shaping his life as to make it resemble those vines which crawl in moist places and live by contact with the surface of things; the true type,—represented by the creators of food alike for your bookworm and your tramp,—helping the student to live progressively the truths he learns, and so shaping his life as to make it resemble, by comparison, the sturdy oak or majestic pine—symbols of character—which, gathering life by sunshine, incorporate it into strength by storm.

The two types might be classified in the terms of psychology as perceptives and apperceptives. The soul-energies of the first class,—the perceptives,—have, through constant abortions of sensation, come to spread themselves out on the surface of the body: lurking like insatiate demons at eye, and ear, and touch, and taste, and smell, and appetite; and producing nothing but increased desire for sensation from all they feed upon. Nine tenths of the human race belong wholly or in part to this class: the novel, the theatre, the excursion, and the globe-trotting fiends; the whiskey, the tobacco, the horse-racing, and the prize-fighting fiends; the roue, the prostitute, and their co-respondents,—sensation-mongers all to whom the pleasures of life mean surface contact with phenomena for excitation purposes alone. The second type, or apperceptives, are those to whom surface contact or perception is only a means to a nobler end—apperception. These latter incorporate into their lives the truths perceived through the senses, and so become the creators and moulders of civilization. The schools are fated by reason of fad and conventionality to turn out the former type: God's school, the university of strenuous effort accompanied with suffering, is ideally fitted to turn out the latter type. What, indeed, would the world come to, did we not all have a post-graduate course in this divine school of experience?

Now, before bringing these ideas relating to education into juxtaposition with Joseph Smith's standard of salvation, let us stop to get some rational conception of what salvation means.

No notion is held by the majority of mankind more luminously vague than this professed goal of all religious effort. From the rhapsodies of revivalism respecting heaven, the city celestial, pearly gates, golden harps, snowy wings, the beatific vision, the loving arms of Jesus, and so on, ad gloriosam, the thinker can only turn away with a feeling of metaphorical nausea. Let us therefore seize upon two elements latent in every conception of salvation, viz., the hope of eternal life, and the hope of eternal bliss, and see what comes of them.

As to the first idea, eternal life, we are thrown at once face to face with our ultimate conception of eternal existence, the universe itself. Manifestly anything formed and limited can have uninterrupted duration only on condition that it offer no friction to the universe; that is to say, only as it is in harmony with the universe. But the universe means nothing to man save as it touches his being in the form of law, or rather the effect of law—phenomena. To the extent therefore that his life is at variance with law, to that extent is he in danger of forfeiting eternal life; and consequently to the extent that he values eternal life, will he seek to discover and put himself in harmony with law. But the differentiations involved in our smaller universe are the creations of God. He is the author of law as it touches us. Hence eternal life in an organized form is possible only as man learns and obeys His will.

No man, therefore, can be saved in ignorance; for what is ignorance but the very negative of law, the state antecedent even to the beginning of harmony with the universe. Unless the density of chaos,—ignorance as personified in man—be permeated by the vibration of law; unless it begins and continues to respond, how can it remain a formed and limited creation in the bosom of the uncreated? The forces of law and order must inevitably undo,—scatter—annihilate it, reduce it, to the primal, the formless, or uncreated state.

The discovery, therefore, of law (or truth), which involves the exercise of faith or the prehensile power of the soul; and the consequent obedience to law, which involves the exercise of an equally native power of the soul (assisted by the grace of God, of which more hereafter),—constitutes the progressive alternation which leads from ignorance to salvation. Nor need I stop to point out that it is owing to precisely such a series of psychic alternations that we have our present civilization.

But salvation involves eternal bliss as well as eternal life; and if we may judge from the sensations of our brief earth experience, bliss forms no part of that sensation which can lead to satiety; that is, to the gratification of desire. Pleasure, the ephemeral and bastard earth-cousin of joy, holds this place. Bliss (or joy) is inseparable from the discovery of truth,—the perception of how God creates; or the evolution of truth,—the revelation of man's own power to create. Eternal bliss is therefore impossible without endless opportunity for invention; indeed the absence of such opportunity could imply nothing else than monotony. But bliss in this sense is inseparable from power to do; and power to do is, as we have seen, an invariable accompaniment of the growth of intelligence. It follows, then, as Joseph Smith says: "Man is saved no faster than he gains intelligence."

Let us now turn to the correlative idea of repentance. Before a man can repent of his sins he must be made aware of them. But to be made aware of them implies that a higher standard of righteousness has entered his soul. The sequence then in the sinner's mind is this—first, a revelation of the righteousness of God; second, a comparison of his own life therewith, which results in a recognition or conviction of sin; third,—and this is the vital part of repentance,—the conforming of his life to the new standard. [^2]

Let us next examine this phrase: righteousness of God. The suffix ness implies "the quality of being"; so also does the suffix ous. Righteousness therefore signifies the quality of being right. Now what is right but truth? What is truth but law? What is law but an expression of the harmony of the universe? And who but God has shaped our universe so that we can feel the harmonies of law? Righteousness is thus the will of God.

How does a man get a revelation of righteousness? By faith—precisely as he apprehends law. Such a revelation is nothing else in fact than the apprehending of law. But I need not go on. The reader has already perceived that the process of getting rid of sin and the process of getting rid of ignorance are identical, and that consequently it is no more possible to be saved without repentance than it is to be saved in ignorance. Education—of the kind which leads to intelligence—is therefore a means, if not the only means, of salvation.

Had this relationship of likeness between repentance, a dogma of the religious world, and the acquirement of intelligence, the central fact of every educational system, been perceived by ministers in the days of St. Augustine, and developed progressively as the world advanced, the clergy might have been at the head of all movements—secular and otherwise—for the propagation of truth and the spread of civilization; instead of being to-day the wardens—I was about to say the curators—of a cult more narrow and restricted than that of medicine, and less useful to the race by how much its dicta lack coherency and definite relationship to man's psychic needs.

But as they failed to perceive this supreme fact, it was preposterous on their part to expect that the momentum of progress could pause to be harnessed into a thousand man-made creeds: that the great stream of truth could cease plunging forward down the ages, because some of its incidental effects took shape as theological eddies; going round and round, each respectively with its fragmentary flotsam of confessional, proclaiming that it and it only represented the trend of the universe. God, who is "in all things, above all things, below all things, and through all things, the light of truth," could not be restricted in His revelations to man by papal bull or protestant heretic fires; faith, the angel with the key, could not delay throwing open to mankind his treasures of truth till labelled by pope and ear-marked by prelate; repentance swiftly sloughed his scriptural name rather than remain exclusively in cell and cloister, or even linger at chapel or mourner's bench; and eagerly did he go about the sceptical world, doing his glorious work under the simple guise of educational enthusiasm and integrity to ideal.

And so it was that full upon the track of these two morning stars burst civilization, the flood tide of God's benediction upon the world. Salvation shall need no other heralds.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] If indeed he can do that, which is doubtful; for, as the Scriptures say, no man can find out God. What he does get from the intelligent reaction of the world, is probably the earnest desire to find God; whence God, who always meets faith more than half way, reveals Himself.
[^2] Some one has cleverly arranged the following order of sequence in repentance: (I) Recognition of sin. (2) Remorse of conscience. (3) Restitution of the wrong done. (4) Resolution to sin no more. (5) Reformation of the sinner's life. It should have six R's instead of five, the first being recognition of righteousness. The second fact, which is made so much of in revivalism, is merely a fringe or incident of repentance; which, while it usually accompanies conviction of sin in the social, moral, or spiritual world, is often absent in repentance of intellectual sin, (i. e., mistakes of judgment). The third condition is, for the most part, impossible; save as man offers to God a broken heart and a contrite spirit. The fourth is implied in the fifth. So that this classification may be boiled down to the three essential facts enumerated in the text.
