Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XVI

LOGICAL NECESSITY OF REPENTANCE AND FORGIVENESS

"ETERNAL life shall need no other heralds," than alertness to the apprehension of truth and integrity to the ideals so apprehended; for these constitute the very means by which ignorance, which is only another name for sin, gives way progressively to intelligence and power. But ere eternal life shall have been attained, these heralds will have assumed again, for each advancing soul, their proper scriptural names of faith and repentance. And whenever that change of name shall take place, with it will come to each seeker after truth a strange, new emotion thrilling him to his soul's centre.

The last chapter was devoted to showing that true repentance and true education are synonymous, if not identical, operations; that in each case alike the beginning process is the reaching out of the soul's prehensile power (faith) after a new and higher ideal of truth or law; that so also, in each case alike, the closing process is the conforming of the life to the new ideal; and if, between the beginning and the closing, repentance often lingers in the field of remorse, while education hastens with gladness to slough the old life for the new, the sum total of effect on the soul was seen to be apparently the same.

Apparently; for it did not seem wise to obscure this great truth, concerning the similarity both in genesis and effect of secular and religious soul efforts, by distracting reservations and conditions.

The need of showing that it is the same divine love which reaches out to save both saint and sinner, must be my apology for leaving the chapter as I did. The time has now come, however, to show that the ultimate effects of the two operations are tremendously different; that repentance, while it includes all of true education, involves much besides.

Observe, first of all, that the soul-regeneration which comes from purely educational effort is nearly always indirect. That the learner is conforming to law, and therefore reaping power as a reward,—power the use of which he is responsible for to God,—is rarely recognized. It is rather some material motive that spurs him on; as, "If I attain to this qualification (say, bookkeeping), I shall be able to grasp that good," (say, a liberal salary). Thus too often an utterly selfish object is coupled with noble endeavor for power; with the result, that the power attained, while it adds to the sum total of efficiency in the material world cannot fail to react in a negative way upon the moral world; leading among other evil tendencies, to the cruel maxims of business which, summed up and generalized, constitute none other than that death-grip law of the ancient world: "Might makes right."

Against such reactionary tendencies as by-products of education, ethics, the religion without a God, is making a noble struggle, and not without visible results; for gradually mankind are beginning to see that every man is his brother's keeper; that to follow Cain in defiance of this law, is finally to be self-destructive; that injustice does not pay even as a business investment. And so from a thousand actions and reactions resulting from positive powers used in negative directions, there comes out of widespread social wrong, and pain, and suffering, a small increment of social right; which constitutes that fragment of the salt of civilization which has not lost the savor of God.

It is perhaps in this very circumstance, the failure to recognize the inevitableness of law in our educational efforts—the placing of motive in material rewards, such as riches, position, power, fame,—that all the mischief of misdirected power is wrought. If men were content to let virtue be its own reward; if after having climbed some summit of eternal truth, they should regard the increased power to climb as part of the reward, and the increased magnificence, almost the transformation, of all things from this new point of view, as the rest of the reward; instead of being blind to all this, and only stopping to ask, "What do they think of me below?" or perhaps taking advantage of their position, figuratively to roll rocks down on the heads of the more humble climbers,—if in short, men would recognize law as the criterion of their efforts, both for motive and reward, then the fruits of education, would not be so very far behind the fruits of repentance in saving power; for whereas in repentance God Himself is the unifying, directing force of character, in education with such a motive and such a reward law, or God indirect, would be the co-ordinating and subordinating power.

But rarely does educational effort attain to so high a motive, even in theory; which fact leads me to point out finally that the one aspect in which the results of repentance transcend the results of education is precisely this: that repentance takes a man out of the class fated to follow desultory motives, and brings him home to God; placing him among the workers, and giving his life an eternal perspective both in being and doing.

On the other side what, indeed, are the highest achievements of secular educational efforts, but the more or less feeble response of the race to the environments which God places around them? And as God's purpose in these environments is to induce men, of their own free will, to leave the worked-with class and join the workers, so we see that the two operations, education and repentance, though alike in method, are related to each other by subordination; for by the highest good of the one, the perception of law, a man may achieve only the lowest good of the other, the perception of the Author of law. [^1] Thus the two merge into each other as dawning into perfect day.

Repentance, as here used in contrast with education, besides being both a perception of truth and a conforming of our life thereto, involves a deeply personal encounter with the Author of our being. We are, in fact, prodigals, awakening at last to realize how far we have strayed from home, and how we have wasted our opportunities. Something in our souls whispers at the same time how good is our Father in heaven; how watchful, how loving, how forgiving He has been; with what tenderness and sorrow His pure eyes have followed our downward course; and how His heart has yearned to call us home.

It is an awakening like this that breaks up the ice-floes in the deeps of our bosoms, and causes our hearts to overflow in sobs and tears. We see ourselves as God sees us, and are utterly abased. The agony piercing our souls in that moment of self-recognition cannot be described. How dare we call ourselves His children—we that are not worthy of the husks cast out to the swine! Oh, if we were but clean enough to call on His holy name,—we whose lips would profane the word! If—but there is language no more. We have entered our Gethsemane, to learn the meaning of a broken heart and a contrite spirit.

Now for the first time does the life of Jesus the sinless One stand out for us, the "man of sorrows and acquainted with grief,"—our brother! How we pity His sufferings, how we love Him! For did He not die that such as we might live? Then we remember that He said: "Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden and I will give you rest." He, the man of sorrows, said it,—and Himself had pity for the weak and fallen. Our tears flow warmer—the black cloud is breaking. This new-found Friend will not turn away from us; and through Him our Father in heaven may receive us again.

And so eventually after days, and sometimes weeks, of soul-suffering, hope reigns in our hearts and joy ineffable.

Now, it is folly for the sceptic to pooh-pooh this experience as a mere neurotic state of the soul; for its recurrence in this or similar forms is so frequent among mankind that we are justified in considering it thoroughly characteristic and normal. Not that all must enter the kingdom of God through this dark gate,—for there are souls which, Nathaniel-like, have never strayed beyond the light of that kingdom; only those in whom selfishness has encrusted the soul and congealed the heart. To these, which constitute a very large majority of earth-spirits, what else but a violent tearing asunder of intrenched soul-habits, could be counted normal, in a movement involving a complete counter attitude in relation to God and the universe?

And if in the act of reconciliation with God,—the act by which man becomes a conscious co-worker with Christ, and without which his further psychic evolution is impossible: if, I repeat, in this necessary awakening, such soul-tragedies are not only normal but inevitable, then Christ as mediator and way of escape for such souls, is also a normal and inevitable expedient of divine mercy.

I do not attempt to explain here the esoteric doctrine that the equilibrium of heaven's perfect law having been broken by the fall of Adam, it could be restored only by the sacrifice of Christ. What, indeed, can man know concerning the necessity, looked at from heaven's point of view, of this awful tragedy? How presume to say whether it was eternal justice or earth-necessitated expediency that led to its divine predestination? That in some inscrutable way Christ's death was vital to the efficacy of the atonement, and reconciliation of man with God, we may well believe who have faith in the revelations of Scripture; for not only is He there prefigured as a "lamb slain from the foundations of the earth,"—an event also prophetically symbolized by all the sacrifices of the Mosaic covenant,—but the whole burden of the Gospel dispensation as recorded in the New Testament, turns upon the atonement so wrought out by His blood. Moreover, the sacrifices characteristic of all heathen religions from the beginning of time, become meaningless also if we deny the necessity and significance of the one great Sacrifice.

But while we cannot look from God's point of view at this pivotal event—and therefore it becomes us rather to hold the fact reverently than attempt futile explanations—we are not without a philosophical basis when we look at it from man's point of view. Should our faith in the atonement need bolstering, a sufficient rational explanation of Christ's passion is to be found in the fact that it needed among us a Being whose life and death should be such as to break through the stoniest heart in man down to the imprisoned love of God, even as Moses reached the water 'neath the Rock of Horeb.

How without Christ's life should we have known that God is a personal being, directly related to man as a divine Father? How without the voluntary sacrifice of His life should we have had an object lesson sufficiently striking to rescue us from the fatality of self-seeking and teach us love of God and love of man? For that He, the sinless One, who need not die, should willingly drain this bitter cup to demonstrate His love for man—what else than this could give birth to universal altruism? How without His resurrection should our faith in a hereafter have leaped that awful, that terrifying mystery—Death? How without his own attainment to the fulness of Godhood, dare man look forward to a psychic evolution involving nothing less than becoming "perfect as our Father in heaven is perfect?" Truly does the beloved apostle exclaim: "God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have ever-lasting life."

Theosophists maintain that there was no need for Christ to die. Truly not—for their Christ, one of the Mahatmas, a diluted Buddha, not quite so far along toward the annihilation of Nirvana. But Christ the Saviour, the regenerator of the heart, not the mystifier of the head,—picture Him growing old and prosperous and famous and gray and decrepit, with bulletins posted every hour as to the last flickerings of His life: picture such a man, and ask yourself if a life and death so peaceful, so ordinary, could stir the heart-strings of millions yet unborn? Indeed, bring together from all the great teachers known to man ideal fragments of a life; and after you have combined them, how insignificant in spiritual dynamic power the whole would be, compared with the virile divinity stamped on even the smallest details in the earth-mission of the Messiah!

So much for His life as a regenerative object-lesson to His less perfect brethren and sisters. But it is not owing immediately to this fact that His status with reference to man as King of kings and Lord of lords, is fixed for eternity. It is the more substantial fact, that upon Him rests by delegation of the Father the fulness of divine Authority. Divine law, which can no more execute itself than can human law, has made Him its executor. He is the harmony of the universe concreted for man. Without Him there is no approaching the Father, and consequently no salvation. In Him is the fulness of Priesthood or divine governing power, which therefore amounts to Godhood.

And this brings us back to a further consideration of the phenomena of repentance. All this display of emotion, this penance in the valley of remorse, and the final emergence therefrom with elastic step and glowing countenance—this is not the real fact of repentance; it is only the smoke and fire and noise of the conflict. The real fact lies precisely in this: that the soul has had a revelation of a new and supreme truth—a revelation of God. It has perceived that in Him, a personal being, inheres the authority of the universe. He is the adequate Cause of all things, and therefore the absolute and final Source of power: without Him is nothing but "utter darkness and the gnashing of teeth"—annihilation. If this vision has borne fruits—that is to say, if the repentance is genuine,—the soul will have taken the second step: it will absolutely have conformed its own attitude to this newly-perceived and supreme fact; will have learned to say, from the depths of its being: "Father, thy will be done."

Now the soul that has thus repented—howsoever contradictory it may seem—is absolved by the very fact of its repentance. It has complied with the law, and must therefore inevitably secure the reward. No power, not even God Himself, can rob it of the security of its newly-won relationship to the universe. It is inevitable in the nature of things that obedience to law carries with it absolution from former opposition to law. And this equilibrium is instant: we need fear no locked-up vengeance to be sprung upon us—no reprisals to satisfy an offended God.

Why then should the soul feel remorse, as we have seen that it does? Why should it yearn for forgiveness, as if the new status did not, after all, depend upon law, but upon divine caprice? Why is the soul not at rest, till assured of reconciliation with God? Why not be content in the conviction that in the very nature of things its repentance alone has absolved it?

This feeling of insecurity results from man's dual relationship to Deity; first, his relationship to God, which is essentially his relationship to God-hood, or the absolute power of the universe. This is purely an abstract, that is to say, a truth relation; to the extent that it has a concrete aspect at all, it is the relationship of a nascent or growing intelligence to a perfected Intelligence, and its only expression is therefore justice—the Karma of the Buddhists and the nemesis of the Greeks. Accordingly as the soul has conformed to law, so it is forgiven,—that is, absolved from all retroactive effects of its former disobedience; for such effects would be possible only from a God supreme-by-will, rather than supreme-by-law.

Man's second relationship is to the Father of spirits, which therefore is a purely personal relation—that of child to parent. As an inevitable consequence, the expression of this relationship is mercy, love, forbearance, long-suffering,—all the Christ-type of divine attributes. Herein then lies the source of the sinner's remorse: his awakened soul feels (rather than knows) how it has disgraced its divine ancestry, how it has spurned and outraged divine love. Confronted with a revelation of such baseness and ingratitude, how could it feel otherwise? But it perceives also that in the new relationship with God its life will be cast among the workers, Jesus Christ at their head; whose very bond of fellowship is love of God and love of man. It may not consciously reason to all this, but the truth-essence of it is there in the revelation which caused the soul-awakening. How can it enter this realm of the pure in heart, unless assured that it is forgiven?

Now, while absolution by divine justice is the very sine qua non of reconciliation with God, it alone could not avail for further progress unless the soul should also be assured of its absolution by love; for not to be so assured would be to carry a load of evil consciousness that would paralyze all efforts at improvement. It is this psychic fact, I think, that made the Lord take away all memory of pre-existence. He did not wish to load us down in a new world with the lock-step memories of a past one. No other status than this—of oblivion to the past—would comport with the category of innocence which the Scriptures attribute to the new-born babe; a status of forgiveness followed by a status of oblivion to things forgiven.

But forgiveness, be it noted, adds nothing positive to man's psychic evolution; it merely unloads the soul of remorse, thus freeing it for action, and tending to make it forget the scars of past transgression. In short, it restores innocence, which involves a consciousness of reciprocal love, but does not add power; consequently, and precisely as we should expect, children, though all born innocent alike, are by no means all gifted with power alike; and the same fact is true of souls restored to innocence by baptism.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Among such fugitive peace expedients belong manifestly those pitiful tokens of absolution called indulgences, which so aroused the lions of the Reformation, but which are taken tamely and quite as matters of fact in Spain to-day. And if these general forms of forgiveness—blanks of salvation to be filled in the name of John Doe, et al, bona-fide purchasers—are thus to be classed, how much better are the specific forms of the same thing—the absolutions of the auricular confessional? To self-chosen tokens of divine absolution, belong also all penances, pilgrimages, gifts to clergy, endowments of churches, etc., in so far as they are relied upon for the peace of heaven; also, all those facile adaptations of the ritual of Scripture now so common in modern Christian sects, to suit the prejudices, or aesthetic tastes of dilettante communicants.
