Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XVII

THE LOGICAL NECESSITY OF BAPTISM

HOW can this assurance of forgiveness come to the troubled soul? "By the testimony of the spirit" will be the answer of all who have passed through the valley of the shadow of death; "by the peace of God which comes to give it rest—the peace which passeth all understanding." This is, of course, the final, the only answer; nothing short of such peace could give the assurance of reconciliation with God. But how does it come to man? Must he not do something in order to receive it?

In reasoning out this question, let us not depart from analogy. A and B, let us say, are dear friends. A in a moment of anger grievously wrongs B, but stung with remorse as sorely repents, resumes his amiable relations with B, but from a false sense of pride does not confess the wrong and ask forgiveness. B on his part has generously forgiven A, but out of delicacy cannot say so—indeed, would rather spare his friend further pain by burying the incident forever.

But that last is precisely what neither can do. The wrong is dead, truly enough, but it will not under. Oblivion cannot hide it till some token of forgiveness has passed between them. This token may be never so slight—a grasp of the hand, a moment of silence during which soul speaks to soul, or something even less tangible still; but unless there is a token, the ghost of wrong will not be laid. It haunts their every association, and more especially on occasions of mutual admiration. "And I could wrong such a friend—cur that I was," says the inner voice of A. "It was n't this noble, generous friend that did it," says the sub-consciousness of B; "A's better self could never have stooped so low."

If these friends do not take heed, this ghost will estrange them—out of sheer desire on the part of each to be at ease. For the truth of this analogy, I appeal to the experience of every man and woman that reads this chapter.

It is precisely so with the greatest of all acts of reconciliation, that between God and man. Nor is it the part of man to choose what that peace-winged token shall be; for although a fugitive peace has come to thousands, through implicit faith in tokens of their own choosing, the ghost of unrest will rise again, whenever by the clearer dawning of truth it shall come to them that such tokens were neither of God's choosing, nor probably accepted by Him. [^1] Nor can this false security ever be made so subtile that God's light shall not discover it at last.

Now while God has invariably had a token of forgiveness in all His dealings with man, it has not always been the same thing. To Noah and his family it was the bow of promise; to the children of the Mosaic dispensation it took various forms according to the nature of the sin; sacrifices, burnt offerings, the scapegoat, the sprinkling of blood. In every Gospel dispensation the token of forgiveness has been baptism for him who is about to enter the kingdom, and prayer,—the confessional with God Himself, or perhaps represented by our guardian angel, as confessor,—for those who sin after entering the kingdom.

But baptism is more than a sign of reconciliation; it is the visible token of that covenant whereby man leaves the worked-with class, and is accepted among the workers. If the reader admits that the psychic evolution of the soul cannot go on forever in an indirect way,—the unconscious result of environment; if he admits that the time must inevitably arrive when man must come face to face with his Master, and there after consent or refuse to become a conscious cooperator in his own salvation,—then it follows that man must make at last a definite contract or covenant with God, even as one personal being with another.

But such a contract is inconceivable without a token. Nor is man at liberty to choose that token; the greater of the two contracting parties always decides upon the terms. To ignore this fact is to be guided by the most childish form of self-stultification. How must we rate the intelligence of an immigrant who should choose a token of his own for becoming a citizen of the United States? Is the kingdom of God to be supposed less exacting in its order? How would the unity and harmony of heaven be reconcilable with such looseness in the laws of adoption?

Of course, if the supreme being with whom men make covenants be conceived as a universal, impalpable essence,—everywhere yet nowhere,—the covenants themselves may be vague and indefinite; the vaguer, the more indefinite, they are, the better; or at least the more consistent they would be with the nature of the chief contracting party. Indeed, no contract at all, is still better, or one made simply with one's self; for if God is such a universal essence, and the basis of all phenomena, man is as much God as that mountain, or this stream, or that star,—and therefore, as Theosophists say truly enough, the only God with whom he can ever come into psychic relation. But, on the other hand, if God is the prototype of man; if all man's ideas of order and harmony, as exhibited in governments and other social institutions, are in fact only the ragged echoes of the infinite order of heaven's institutions,—then surely the token of admission into that higher social order cannot be less definite, less exacting than similar tokens in earthly governments.

With this brief outline of explanation, I assume the two following series of facts to be irrefragable: first, man's psychic evolution becomes at length impossible without conscious co-operation with God; second, that co-operation, involving as it does the eternal responsibility resulting from accepting God as final and absolute authority in all his future being and doing, cannot begin save by an untrammelled act of free will on man's part,—in other words, a definite compact with God; third, such a compact between personal beings is impossible without a token; fourth, it being God's kingdom of workers into which man seeks to enter, God alone can determine what the token of admission shall be. Or, from another point of view: first, deliverance from the bondage of sin is possible only through repentance; second, such deliverance is effective for further progress only as the sinner is also freed from the consciousness of his sins, i. e., only as he feels himself forgiven; but, third, such an act of reconciliation between personal beings is impossible without a token; fourth, God only has a right to determine that token.

Thus by each series the same conclusion is reached: a token between God and man is essential to salvation; and no other token than that chosen by God is effective; either as the seal of God's peace to the wracked soul of the sinner, or as the badge of his citizenship in the kingdom of heaven. In order, then, to establish in the domain of probable reasoning,—and that without reference to the fiat of Jehovah, though that fiat alone should be conclusive,—the logical necessity of baptism, it remains only for me to show that this token alike of forgiveness and of citizenship is actually the token chosen by God. At first it would seem that the only evidence of this latter fact is the overwhelming, the uncontradicted testimony of Scripture; but on second thought, it must occur to all that a token chosen by God would exhibit evidences of the wisdom of God. Let us then look at the question from this point of view.

To exhibit such divine evidences, a token must, in my humble opinion, be characterized by three general facts: (1) it must be uniformly intelligible, so as to conduce to the unity of mankind; (2) it must be widely, if not uniformly, applicable, so as to be within reach of all mankind; and (3) besides doing its essential work as a token, it must be rich in soul suggestions.

If it be objected in respect of the first condition that baptism, as interpreted by Christian sects, has tended to scatter mankind, the reply is, that there is nothing difficult whatever in the scriptural idea itself; and the proof of this is that the simplest mind turned loose upon the sacred pages and untrammelled by sect prejudice can come to no other than the one right conclusion. The fact that certain texts are tortured past recognition in support of other forms of baptism is no proof that those other forms sprang originally from interpretations of the Bible; it only shows to what desperate lengths men will go, after having gratuitously changed the divine token, to find color and sanction for their substitution. Besides, baptism counts for nothing save as administered by divine authority; and when such authority is upon the earth, there is unbroken communication with heaven, to settle questions of this kind, which, if left unsettled, would tend to divide mankind,—just, in fact, as there was in the days of the apostles. God never intended baptism should be administered under any other circumstances.

As to the second condition, there can be no question of the almost uniform accessibility of baptism to the human race. Had the token been a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, it must have excluded the majority of mankind; had it been even so simple a thing as recording allegiance to God in the Bible, it would not have been within the reach of all; but water is everywhere, and, like air, is one of the gifts of God uniformly free,—at least for such purposes,—to rich and poor alike.

As to the third condition, the first rich soul suggestion I find is that baptism typifies or symbolizes our mortal birth [^2] and parallels all its implications. Does the spirit in being born leave an old world—pre-existence—to enter a new? So does the person baptized. Does the fact of a spirit's mortal birth restore his innocence? So does baptism. Does birth bring a spirit to the protecting arms of a loving father (and mother)? So does baptism. Does birth start a spirit upon a new and wonderful life, under the guidance of loving parentage? So does baptism. Is birth the universally recognized badge of relationship to that parentage? So by baptism, are sons and daughters born to God, of their own free will.

As a second example of rich suggestion, I may mention that baptism is compared by Paul to a planting (Romans 6:5). What happens when a seed is placed in proper soil? Its soul energies are stirred; a new life within it is set free, which springs upward, seeking to become like its parent. Is not this precisely a parallel of that spiritual potentiality in us which, set free by baptism, seeks to become perfect as its Father is perfect?

Let us next consider the fact that baptism is compared to a cleansing. "And now why tarriest thou?" said Ananias to Paul, "Arise and be baptized and wash away thy sins." Surely the parallel here pointed out is obvious. "The like figure whereunto baptism doth now save us," says Peter (1 Peter 3:21). "Not the putting away of the filth of the flesh"—for that would be merely the natural effect of the water; "but the answer of a good conscience toward God"; in other words, a parallel cleansing of the soul by the act for which baptism is a token.

We have seen then that baptism symbolizes birth, and growth, and regeneration or cleansing; now we are to see that it also typifies two other tremendous facts in the soul's evolution, viz., death and resurrection. "We are buried with Christ by baptism unto death," says Paul, "that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life" (Romans 6:4). Draw out the parallel as far as you like here, the effect is only intensified. What can be more horrible than the body which mortifies and decomposes in the earth? Well, sin, which figuratively is left in the watery grave, is no less repulsive to God. Again, what can be more radiantly pure than a resurrected being, whom even the sun's rays could not further purify? Such by comparison is the change wrought, or made possible, by a life of regeneration to which baptism is the door.

Where, then, in the whole range of natural objects touching man, could another phenomenon be chosen which, besides being a token, should exhibit, in a flash, man's whole psychic life and destiny? Let the sceptic sit down and ponder this question, then try object after object, and at last confess that immersion in water is a token the choice of which is worthy the wisdom of God Himself. And let those proud prelates of the Middle Ages who sought, by substituting sprinkling, to improve upon God's token—and all their defenders in our day,—be forever ashamed of their vain presumption. And let mankind, who have been led astray by these presumptuous teachers, awake from the fugitive peace into which this false token has lulled them, and seek the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with whom only is salvation.

Baptism is thus seen to be a logical necessity in the psychic evolution of the soul,—a condition essential to salvation. In this day, when the tendency is to dismantle the ship of salvation of every characteristic thing by which it can take hold of wind or wave on its own account, leaving the crew only a floating hulk in which to sing, and pray, and groan, and gaze heavenward for help—a spectacle of infinite comedy to the Devil on a neighboring peak; a day, in which the tendency is toward a so-called unity so utterly emasculated and characterless, that it is disturbed by coughing aloud,—this doctrine (and others like it), the reassertion by logic of the thundertones of revelation, ought to try men's faith like a trip hammer; to test whether there is yet any virile rebound in it, or whether it has degenerated into a mere jelly-like mass of sentimental sham and pretense.

Mormons desire Christian unity also; but not at the sacrifice of the trunk and limbs of the tree, and the holding of a love feast around the piledup leaves. [^3] Real unity is possible only on the basis of truth—grim, unrelenting, uncompromising truth. Better a thousand times the tonic bitterness of division, than the insipid sweet of a boneless, sinewless, nerveless affectation of universal brotherly love.

This must close my discussion of the first or external epoch in the psychic evolution of the soul. From pre-existence up till the time it "found itself,"—that is, up till the time it recognized God as God, and entered into covenant with Him, the forces shaping it were for the most part indirect; the nearest approach to direct or self-conscious evolution being at those periods when law was recognized as criterion both for inspiration and reward. Following the course of this evolution, we have seen how, responding little by little to a thousand adjustments of environment involving time, place, and general condition of birth such as parentage, associates, occupation; and involving also all the individual vicissitudes of life, as these are shaped by Providence, ever without violating its free agency,—the soul at last "comes to God"—must come to God, if its evolution is to continue forever.

I like the phrase of Paul's "coming to God"; it implies not only psychic unity with God, but progressive approach to His perfection and power. From the time of baptism onward, an internal or self-conscious epoch of evolution will begin: the man has been born again. And while evolution will go on also by indirect forces to the end of time, it will take on a new significance by reason of being interpreted from a spiritual point of view.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Among such fugitive peace expedients belong manifestly those pitiful tokens of absolution called indulgences, which so aroused the lions of the Reformation, but which are taken tamely and quite as matters of fact in Spain to-day. And if these general forms of forgiveness—blanks of salvation to be filled in the name of John Doe, et al, bona-fide purchasers—are thus to be classed, how much better are the specific forms of the same thing—the absolutions of the auricular confessional? To self-chosen tokens of divine absolution, belong also all penances, pilgrimages, gifts to clergy, endowments of churches, etc., in so far as they are relied upon for the peace of heaven; also, all those facile adaptations of the ritual of Scripture now so common in modern Christian sects, to suit the prejudices, or aesthetic tastes of dilettante communicants.
[^2] It was Christ Himself who pointed out this parallel: "Except a man be born of the water and of the spirit," said he to Nicodemus, "he cannot enter the kingdom of heaven."—John 3:5.
[^3] In this figure the trunk stands for God,—that is to say divine authority as represented by the Priesthood; the limbs and branches stand therefore for the expression of that authority in Church organization and social forms; the leaves would thus be the response in faith-profession of the members; and the fruit would be the reaction of that faith-profession in works of repentance. Now, it is precisely this faith-profession (not works or Church forms) that is proposed as a basis for Christian unity; and as leaves cut from their branches are dead, so such profession can never be anything else than sham or maudlin sentiment. I append this note to defend the justness of my analogy; also, lest it might be thought a better figure to have the innocuous universal love-feast happen around the stripped and barren pole (of mere confession that Jesus is the Christ).
