Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XVIII

THE NATURE OF SPIRITUAL EVOLUTION

NATURAL as the language of imagery is to the oriental mind, it is doubtful whether the Jews, learned though they were in esoteric exegesis, grasped even faintly the significance of Christ's definition of the kingdom of God. Indeed, the Apostles themselves, who were daily with the Master, did not fully understand it, till after the Resurrection when they were endued with power from on high; and Judas, who did not live till the day of Pentecost, probably never knew, unless perhaps it was the sudden revelation of it that overwhelmed him into his own death.

The occasion for the definition was this: The Pharisees, chafing under the bondage of Rome, and reading for consolation the prophetic scrolls concerning Israel's deliverance and final triumph, were especially eager for the advent of the kingdom of God, which they naturally regarded as the day of their salvation. But when Jesus was approached on the subject He made this enigmatical answer: "The kingdom of God cometh not with outward show: neither shall they say 'Lo here!' or 'Lo there!' for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you."

Here was a conception of power and supremacy utterly new to the old-world civilization, and coming as it did in the very mid-day radiance of the Hamitic ideal that might makes right, small wonder if it was incomprehensible. The idea that a something latent in the human heart was powerful enough to destroy the legions of Rome, and break in pieces the iron kingdom, would be the last thought to come into their minds. Theirs was the notion of an external kingdom, the restoration of Solomon's empire. "Lo here!"—the army of deliverance terrible in its panoply of war; "Lo there!"—the pomp and circumstance of an oriental monarch, the dynasty of David come again to power,—such were the visions that filled the Jewish imagination. And when a few days later Christ, as had been prophesied of their deliverer, rode into Jerusalem on an ass, it was the hope of such a kingdom that made the multitude strew garments and palm branches in his way, and shout: "Hosanna to the son of David: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord!"

"The kingdom of God is within you." We have lived to see the triumph of this power which steals among mankind in the darkness of the night, as it were, and not with outward show. Simply a truth-ideal, microscopic in its first faint flutterings of life; a faint and far-away song awakened in the soul of man wherever faith has opened the door to the angel of light. We have seen the great and the mighty of Ham and Japheth fall before this invisible yet invincible host of Shem. Nor has the triumph of this inner kingdom more than fairly begun: its glory shall yet encompass the earth and eventually baptize her with a new name—heaven.

How remarkably this spiritual awakening, this beginning of the psychic evolution of the soul is repeated by analogy in almost every living thing! Take the oak as a simple example. Out on the tips of its branches is born—by flowering and fertilization—first a husk, or body of tough, fibrous material, next a soul of meat, and lastly, hidden away somewhere in the latter, a microscopic oak—the one potentiality that shall enable it to become perfect, as its parent oak is perfect. Likewise is hidden away in the soul of man a miniature kingdom of God; or, to be more exact, the potentiality of becoming perfect as his Father in heaven is perfect.

Man's outer husk has been slowly growing since his birth in heaven; so has his soul been filling out with the meat of almost endless experiences. Is this husk of body, filled with its meat of soul, to begin evolving, even as it has for ages been involving? Or is it destined to rot on the rock of doubt, barely covered with the blackening leaves of mere physical or earth-experiences? That depends entirely on whether it falls in good soil, and then whether its germ-potentiality, the kingdom of God within it, begins to grow and come out of it.

But let us at this point of the analogy note an important difference. The acorn rests where it falls; unlike man, therefore, a chance determines largely whether it shall become an oak. Nor has it more than one brief season in which to succeed or fail. Were I a revivalist, I should perhaps insist most strongly on the likeness of this last aspect. But I am not. Like Paul, I feel to say: "If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable." Soul evolution may begin hereafter in the spirit world; yet no doubt the longer it is delayed the more perilous will be the outcome. Nevertheless, it holds finally true that unless evolution does begin, there happens to the soul what happens to the acorn that fails to sprout: it goes back to the elements whence it was created.

Let us next look at some other significant parallels. In the first place, while the acorn holds within itself the potentiality of an oak, it is absolutely dependent on an external power, the sun, not only to set free that miniature life within it, but to nurture and protect it, season after season, until it actually attains its complete evolution. So also without the grace of God to awaken it and the constant providence of God to fortify and develop it, the heaven-potentiality in man must equally remain dormant, to the soul's final undoing.

But here again comes in a difference. The conditions being favorable, it is not given to the soul of the oak to resist the forces of its evolution. It is, or it is not, by the will of God alone. Not so with the soul of man. Not only must he will to co-operate with grace, both in the awakening and in the development of the God-ideal within him, if these operations are to go on at all; but, should he choose to do so, he can cease assisting and effectually oppose and destroy this divine power at any point in his evolution. For man is free,—free as God in a negative sense; potentially as free in a positive sense; and dynamically as free, to the extent that his psychic evolution has been completed.

In the light of these simple analogies, let us compare some passages of Scripture which, like baptism, have been the means of splitting Christianity up into the wrangle and jangle of sectism.

"For by grace," says Paul, "are ye saved through faith, and that not of yourselves,—it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast." (Ephesians 2:8, 9). In this passage four important concepts occur: grace, salvation, faith, and works. The question is, How are they related? Manifestly the order of sequence is this: (1) faith, the exercise of that native power which opens the soul to truth; (2) grace or the inpouring of the spirit of God, in consequence of the opening of man's soul to truthness; (3) salvation, involving two things, the awakening of the God-ideal in man, and the progressive evolution of that ideal under the fostering power of grace; (4) works. In the sense of the exertion of man's will, these are implied in two of the previous operations: in the faith that opens the door to grace, and in the progressive soul-adjustments which are involved in the evolution of the God-ideal. Works in this latter sense are distinctly pointed out by Paul as necessary, in the verse next to those above quoted. "For we are his workmanship, created in Jesus Christ unto good works,"—the works being, as indicated above, those which flow out of grace, i. e., those which we "are created into Christ Jesus" to perform.

Which, then, are the works set in opposition to grace—the works Paul seems to condemn? We shall see presently.

The apostle James 100ontends, and I think irrefragably, that only by works is faith made perfect. "What doth it profit, though a man say he have faith, and have not works? Can faith save him? If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them: 'Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled'—nevertheless ye give them not those things which are needful to the body: what doth it profit? Even so faith, if it hath not works is dead, being alone."

Truly enough, Brother James; but dead things are not always buried; for to this order of corpses belong all the shams and artificialities that curse the world to-day. Indeed, dead faith,—the kind that can be galvanized into just enough life to sing and pray and groan and profess that it can do nothing for itself, but must rely solely on the merits of Jesus—is by far the most popular species of deadly self-delusion that the race has ever yet stumbled upon; developing forms of religion which are in the nature of specialized cults, quite separate and apart from life itself.

Recollect for a moment how absolutely true the apostles' words are. If we agree even that the faith be real to the extent that it results in grace, that is, in the awakening or planting of a truth ideal, how shall that ideal become effectual for salvation unless the soul conforms its order of life to it? A thing impossible without strenuous soul-effort in the nature either of self-sacrifice, if it be an evil habit that must be cut away, or self-advancement, if it be some power of righteousness to be attained.

Suppose the acorn to be endowed with volition, that its growth and development, like man's, depend not upon God's will, but its own; and that as soon as it has passed through the ecstacy of sprouting, it should lie back with a languid affectation of loving helplessness and say: "I can do nothing for myself, I must rely solely on the blessed power of the sun." How far would such a programme advance its evolution? Why, supineness of that kind would not suffice for the backbone of a mushroom, let alone the strength of an oak.

How can it be otherwise with man? If he has received grace, what is it but a trumpet call to work? And if he lies down under the delusion that such effeminacy is pleasing to God, what becomes of His grace? Just as the warmth of the sun, which serves to develop the growing acorn, becomes the very means of its destruction, should it cease to grow, so grace, which continues to bless and build a living faith, becomes damnation to a dead one.

Nor can a manly self-reliance be offensive to God, as the morbid sentimentalists among Christians would have us believe. The acorn can never become an oak without the help of the sun, truly enough. On the other hand, the sun can never produce an oak without the help of an acorn. And if such reciprocal relationship holds with non-volitional beings, how much more with beings of equally free will? Can man become perfect without the help of God? Manifestly not. Can God make a perfect man without that man's active co-operation? No; for if He could evolve him physically and mentally by His will, as He does the birds and fishes, the man would at last be only an automaton, lacking the essential glory of a psychic being,—a perfected free will.

Both reason and the common experience of the race therefore stand behind the declaration of James that grace (or faith) without works is dead. Nor does any other text in Scripture contradict it. Paul's words, above quoted, while often interpreted so as to contradict James, do in fact only emphasize the same truth turned round. Paul's attitude is this: "Works without grace (or faith) are dead"—a truth no less important, as I shall now proceed to show.

The work of sending roots earthward, and trunk, limbs, branches, and twigs skyward—if that may be called work which is without volition—is a typical example of organic vegetable growth; in other words, of evolution. The analogous case of man receiving grace upon grace from God, and successively harmonizing his life thereto, presents no less an instance of organic human growth or soul-evolution, since idealization and expression are indissolubly locked as cause and effect. But consider now that a tolerable imitation of a growing oak can be made by a skilful artificer by sheer means of hammer and glue. But it would not be alive, however much it might deceive the beholder; for the reason—if it is not utterly ridiculous to give a reason,—that its parts would not be related by organic evolution.

In like manner there may be, in religion, works without faith; works growing purely out of the head, not out of the heart of hearts, which is the altar of grace. Take two men, one of whom by fervent devotion receives the grace of God, and in obedience thereto is baptized and begins to readjust his habits so as to live a godly life: doing whatever the Lord reveals to be right as naturally as stem follows leaf on the oak. The other man imitates—for various reasons: just to be doing; or for worldly advantage; or for fear of hell-fire; or because he thinks his friend a good man, and it is best to be on the safe side if there should happen to be anything in religion.

Thus during the course of a life-time the works of these two men are so nearly alike as to deceive their fellow-communicants; and while the life of the first counts everything for salvation, the life of the other counts nothing. It is the case of the natural and the artificial oak over again. In spite of a life full of good deeds, the soul of the latter has not yet begun to sprout. Of what avail is it for purposes of salvation to have branches or twigs of righteousness nailed onto the soul? "For by grace are ye saved through faith . . . not by works, lest any man should boast."

There can be no salvation that does not begin by cementing the union between God and man. But this man who imitates has not yet found God; how then could the life of God flow into his life? Nor do his many good deeds flow out of his own soul, as flows the life of a tree from trunk to branches, leaves, and fruit. In a word, his religion has consisted of a series of mechanical adjustments, while that of his brother has been a series of related acts all tied together as one organic evolution of the soul. There is only death in the one while there is life eternal in the other.

Nor need we look far to discover Paul's reason for taking an attitude so uncompromising toward righteousness of the mechanical order; for was it not this very species of lifeless works that characterized the religion of the Jews? Paul's words are in fact but a very faint echo of Christ's denunciation of this barren religion of the head. Listen to His awful words:

Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye pay tithe of mint and anise, and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, faith; these ought ye to have done, and not left the others undone. Ye blind guides! which strain at a gnat and swallow a camel. . . . Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward but are within full of dead men's bones and all uncleanness.

Nothing could be more searchingly true of religions which, losing the power of Godliness, continue punctiliously to observe the forms of Godliness, making the latter, indeed, a screen for the diablerie of hell; or, as Christ puts it, a painted sarcophagus to hide the festering corruption of their dead hearts. Nor is this hypocrisy peculiar to old-world religions. The tendency to mechanical forms is always directly in the ratio of the fickleness of man's purpose; for, while natural forms of life, such as the trees of a forest, are dependent upon God's will, and are consequently kept green and growing, psychic forms, such as those of religious societies, are dependent primarily upon the will of man; not only for the faith which leads to the outpouring of grace, but for that progressive repentance on which condition alone grace can continue. What wonder then that religions present to God the aspect of dried-up forests oftener than otherwise along down the ages! That there are many such psychic forests now waiting the torch of God's justice, who can doubt, that has made any comparisons between form and substance in the numerous sects of the day?

Coming back to Christ's declaration that the kingdom of God is potentially within man, even as the oak is in the acorn, we may first note in respect of causes that the law of evolution holds as well in the spiritual as in the natural world; that as the sun is the source of the natural, so the spirit of God, or grace, is the source of the spiritual evolution; but that, while God's will as expressed in natural law acts without reference to the consent of any form of life subject to it, His will as expressed in grace is operative only as earnestly desired by man, and may be in fact made of no effect toward spiritual evolution if opposed by man; that as natural evolution is but the unfolding of God's ideal into the eternal harmony of things, so spiritual evolution is but the unfolding of His ideals in the eternal social relationships of psychic beings; that in fact the kingdom of God within man, is nothing else than God's prophecy of a kingdom to be evolved external to man; whence the consistency of Christ's definition with that other conception of Paul and the apostles, which involves a perfect church organization of apostles, prophets, bishops, elders, pastors, teachers, deacons, helps, governments,—all the machinery necessary to carry out God's will in the social evolution of the race.

We may next note, in respect of effects, that two dangers stand between the inner kingdom, or God's ideal, and its evolution to an outer kingdom, or expression of God's ideal. The first danger is pointed out by James: Faith without works is dead. The operation of this danger tends to produce those religions characterized by mere maudlin sentimentalism: like some green thing which, refusing to grow upward in the strength and symmetry of a tree, merely spreads and sprawls over the ground in useless leaves. The second danger is pointed out by Paul: Works without faith (or grace) are dead,—a danger characterized by all merely mechanical forms, rites, and ceremonies of religion, and well represented by a tree the limbs and branches of which are nailed on, painted, and furnished with artificial leaves,—the incarnation of sham and hypocrisy.

The Church of God steers clear of both these dangers; recognizing the grace of God as the only source of spiritual ideals, and daily and hourly repentance as the only means of evolving those ideals to their full function of salvation.
