Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XIX

SPIRITUAL FORCES ONLY HIGHER POWERS OF FORCES KNOWN TO PHYSICS

THERE remains then the concept "grace" to be further explained. In the foregoing chapter it was used to signify that inpouring of truthness or the spirit of God into the soul of man, whereby he is enabled to know, without doubt, that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, or any other eternal truth necessary to the beginning of his conscious psychic evolution. As used there it involves also the nurture and development of the truth-ideals so revealed; whence the analogy was drawn between the sun's relationship to the germination and development of plant life, and God's relationship, through the medium of grace, to the conversion and ultimate salvation of man. Were I writing an exposition on purely religious grounds, I should let the term go at that; but the scientist may well ask: What is this thing called grace or the Spirit of God? How is it related to the known forces of physics? How is it apprehensible by man?

By the conception of Mormonism, all the processes which go on, whether in the natural or in the spiritual world, are God's processes. If man has discovered the nature of these processes in the natural world, he has a basis for reasoning to the nature of those in the spiritual world. For the line between the two is evidently no chasm: it represents to man merely the present boundary of the known—the point where science ends and faith begins; but as this line has been receding from the known into the unknown world by every new and important discovery, who shall say that, to God at least, there is such a line at all? Is it not more rational to believe that the natural world grades into the spiritual, as darkness into day?

Science has reached the conclusion that all forces are but variously tensed forms of one final, supreme spiritual energy filling the universe. Differentiation in this "infinite and eternal energy," whereby are manifested the progressively related phenomena of heat, light, actinism, chemism, and so on, proceeds on the basis of a relative increase in the rate of vibration per second. Beginning with sound, which is a wave motion of the air, we receive the first psychic impression when the beats are about sixteen to the second, and continue to hear, in a gradually increasing pitch, until the vibrations attain to about 41,000 per second, when they are lost to the ear. Nor do they reach the consciousness through any other channel, until they increase to a rate of one billion wave-beats per second,—not of the air, but of that finer, universal medium,—when a second psychic sensation is recorded as electricity.

The next gap occurs beyond the billion mark. After leaving electrical phenomena we get no other sensation till we reach heat, at a lowest limit perhaps of three hundred trillion wave-beats per second. The unknown region between involves therefore an interval represented by 299,999,000,000,000, silent or unregistered vibrations per second!

From 300 trillion vibrations per second, the lowest point of heat, to 400 trillions, the lowest point of light (the red ray), the scale is continuous. So also it passes by a progressive increase of rate through orange, yellow, green, blue, and indigo, reaching again a limit of psychic interpretation in violet, which has 756 trillion vibrations per second. But the sun's energy does not cease at the highest point of light. By delicate instruments the dark rays above violet have been explored over a range sixteen times as wide as the zone of light! It is in this region that actinism and chemism work their marvels in the natural world.

But there comes next another gap of total psychic darkness, in spite of the fact that man's natural senses have been so marvellously multiplied in effectiveness by scientific inventions. This gap is represented by the vibrations occurring in the interval between 1 quadrillion and about 250 quadrillions per second. Then come the X- rays, beginning at 288 quadrillions per second and ending at four and a half quintillion (4,500,000,000,000,000,000!) After that, nothing is known to science; but the inference is obvious that there may be waves of the eternal medium of still higher vibratory power. [^1]

Let us realize clearly what all this means. These avenues of insight into the harmony of the universe are not open or closed to mortal senses by chance; God arranged them so. Why He lifts the curtain only at places, leaving vast gaps of darkness,—where beings differently organized might perceive wonderful things,—we can only surmise at best; perhaps because man's energies are not great enough to adjust his life to a wider range of truthness than what the natural world affords.

At any rate, so it is; and he is wise who lets God,—that is to say, Nature or things as they are,—decide his range of investigation; just as he is foolish who, in cell or cloister or hermit's cave, tortures his psychic powers into dim perceptions along avenues not yet lighted up by infinite Wisdom. A few glimpses into ghostland are but a poor recompense for marvellous opportunities in the natural world neglected. A religion which encourages such stolen peeps at things locked and barred to ordinary psychic powers is, on the face of it, a false religion. What should we think of teachers who would encourage pupils to neglect their primary studies and waste time prying through key-holes into the class-work of the high school? On the other hand, what value should we place on the scraps of advanced knowledge so purloined? And yet there are people who stand in awe of mahatmas, clairvoyants, and spirit mediums.

Of course where a general knowledge of the past or of the future is necessary to balance properly our life pursuits in the present, God will raise the curtains for seers and prophets; whose visions thus become our guides, in so far as guides of that kind are necessary. For the rest, if the nature and constitution of things as they are stand for anything, then they proclaim this truth: that mortal experiences are peculiarly the present duty of mortal beings; to the end that by their proper reaction they shall further the psychic advancement of the soul.

But in order that there may be such a true reaction, it is necessary that there be a true interpretation: one must know what is right before one can do what is right. Here then precisely comes in the need of grace, or that continuous stream of truthness from God, in the light of which mortal experiences take a true relative value and perspective; whence rises again the question, whether such an addition to the normal consciousness of man is possible.

From a posteriori grounds the case would be simple enough, if men would accept that kind of evidence. That any one can refuse credence to the testimony of ten thousand times ten thousand witnesses, who declare they know God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that the Gospel is true, or that any given action or requirement is from God,—may seem astounding enough, but so it is. Unfortunately—perhaps fortunately—we are not fitted to know because others know; the faith engendered by such testimony is at best but cold and apathetic. It may incline us to believe that grace is possible, without making us wish to share the blessing; or it may simply lead us to pity what we, in our arrogation of superior mental strength, may regard as merely the self-hypnosis of religious enthusiasm. Let us see, then, what support is offered on a priori grounds.

If God can so tense the eternal medium as to touch our psychic life in the aspects of gravitation, sound, heat, light, actinism, chemism, and so on, is it to be thought incredible that He can impress it with a rate of vibration which shall carry assurances of Himself or of His mind and will to our souls? The energy of the universe so impressed by the mind and will of the Father is the Holy Ghost of Scripture. That it does not respond to the laboratory tests for lower differentiations of the eternal medium,—what of it? Does not each of these require its own peculiar test? Because one form is discoverable by an electrometer, is another form to be discredited because it responds only in the human soul?

But the Holy Ghost has differentiations within itself, which appeal respectively to different aspects of the soul, as these shall be in need of light or sustenance: As the Spirit of God, it is colored or suffused with the Father's personality; as the Spirit of Christ (Romans 8:9; I Peter 1.), it bears to man the warm love of the Saviour; as the Comforter (John 14:16, 26), it carries balm to the bruised heart; as the Spirit of truth (John 15:26; also 16:13), it may be defined as the pure white light of intellectuality; so also it is called the Spirit of holiness, of grace, of wisdom, of might, of counsel, of promise and of prophecy; and named by its fruits, it is called a spirit of love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance (Galatians 5:22, 23). "But all these worketh that one and the self-same spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will."

What could be more natural than to look upon grace, or the inpouring of truthness, as a higher, perhaps the highest, power of that same infinite energy whose lower powers constitute the subject-matter of physics? But lest it be thought that Mormonism reached this conclusion from a further generalization of scientific research, it needs to be said that Joseph Smith came first with his doctrine; nor was he ever sufficiently acquainted with the discoveries of physics to have reached it in any other way. The law of the conservation of energy, on which the interrelation of cosmic forces is predicated, was announced by F. K. Mohr in 1837; the revelation on which the above conclusion is based was given to Joseph Smith in 1833. [^2] Furthermore, it is doubtful whether one Latter-day Saint in ten is aware to-day of the co-incidence between science and revelation above pointed out.

But we may come into yet closer touch with the nature of the Spirit of God in its operation on the heart and mind of man. As our Father in heaven, who conditions this medium of grace so that it shall transmit His mind and will, is a personal being; and as man, whose soul is touched and stirred by grace, is equally a personal being, it will be seen that coming into communion with God is purely a case of divine telepathy,—if I may use a scientific term for so sacred a relation. And if, now, we enlarge our executive conception of God so as to include not only our Father in heaven but Jesus Christ and all the hosts that make up the working organization of Divine Authority,—including also our guardian angels, as representatives of God nearest to man,—all using the Holy Ghost as a medium; and then consider man en rapport with whatever part of this divine executive personnel that his life may need,—we shall be ready to conceive a system of heavenly communication beside which all telegraphic systems, wireless or otherwise, are crude in the extreme.

For whereas these latter, being mere mechanical contrivances, can convey only the signs of ideas; the other system, being organically related to spiritually organized intelligences, and having for receiver and transmitter the quivering soul itself, can send through the eternal ether, not mere clumsy symbols, which may or may not yield their content, but the naked, unclothed thoughts and emotions themselves,—truthness both in idea and in feeling,—which shall leave no room for the spectres of doubt, nor fail to give joy, peace, long-suffering, patience, fortitude, or whatever other virtue or power the soul may be in need of.

Such is the capability of the system, and such is probably the use made of it in the commonwealth of heaven; man, however, partakes of its perfect communion only to the extent that he can, through faith and diligence, elevate his life into the sphere of its influence. Theoretically it is a perfect guide to every man who has made covenants with God; practically it can guide him only as his mind is in harmony with the mind of God. Faith must consequently open the door to it, and faith, be it remembered, is dependent upon will. Moreover, a life of undeviating truth,—that is, a life of repentance, a life devoted to carrying out the ideals which grace progressively brings to man,—is the only condition on which it will remain with him. It is therefore at once the means and the reward of perfect individual freedom.

It is at this point, perhaps, that we shall best be able to understand the philosophy of prayer. The notion that divine worship is for the glorification of God has for its correlative the idea that God is supreme-by-will, rather than supreme-by-law; also that he loves flattery and adulation, like some vain earthly monarch of the Alexander-type. If now we remember,—what must surely be the truth,—that selfishness is at a minimum and altruism at a maximum with God, we must readjust this notion respecting the object of divine worship. Somehow, all the good of it, all the glory of it, must accrue to him who worships; while the joy experienced by Him who is worshipped, can be nothing else than the pure joy of knowing that His children are doing the one thing that shall most quickly advance them toward their salvation. For it is by prayer that we come into communion with God, and so open the channel of that divine telepathy whence the riches of grace can flow into our souls to the full extent of their capacity; and as the grace of God is the only means of our progressive spiritual evolution, so accordingly should we value prayer, the means whereby we may attain it.

But is it enough merely to feel the spirit of worship and keep silent, as some Christian liberalists teach? The acorn no doubt swells with ecstatic sensations of life, but still it goes on to sprout; the rosebud may feel, instinct within it, a spirit of beauty and fragrance, but it does not for that reason fail to bloom. Should either of these organisms refuse to express itself, it must die ere it is born. So also of the spirit of prayer: he who will not voice his love of God and love of man, must inevitably smother the noble impulse in the darkness of his own bosom; for, like the plants, man is a creature of evolution, and his psychic life, being the main part of the man himself, must evolve—come out from the darkness of his inner being—in word and deed, if it is to live at all.

Divine worship, being thus a condition of grace, is consequently a condition of salvation; but such worship is far from being adoration, which centres in and is addressed merely to persons. On the contrary, the components of true worship are reverence for law, as incarnated in God; love for our Father in heaven, as a divine Parent; fraternal sympathy and companionship with the workers; and loyalty to the leadership of Jesus Christ. To feel these emotions is to have the spirit of prayer; to express them in word, or song, or deed, or tears of joy, is to place oneself en rapport with God and the workers, and so be fitted to receive grace upon grace, until the soul shall become perfect as its Father in heaven is perfect.

It is only by virtue of man's being able so to get into communion with God, that we have the holy Scriptures. It becomes interesting, therefore, to consider the various effects of this superior light as reflected in the words and works of mankind. That is a very narrow conception of God's providence which denies inspiration to any other than the sacred writings. These are expressions of God's truth in the social, moral, and spiritual world, truly enough; but is it thinkable that the equal Father of all would confine the light of His word to one narrow people?

If the Bible is more perfectly a revelation of God than is the Koran, it is not because God was partial to the Jews; it was doubtless owing to the fact that Israel was fitted for purer light, no less also than that its prophets were purer mediums. But the Bible, in its turn, is less perfectly a revelation of the divine word than are the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants; representing as these later scriptures do, the revelations of God to a dispensation capable of more exacting truth ideals.

The mystifying element in holy writ disappears largely when we bear in mind that Scripture is at best a compromise between the pure white light of absolute truth, and the more or less colored personal medium through which, perforce, it must shine for man. Sometimes the personal element all but predominates, as when Paul confessed, on one or two occasions, that it was he, not the spirit, which wrote a particular doctrine. Again, passages occur in which the medium seems almost completely in abeyance; as when, after "Thus saith the Lord," the words are directly those of God or Jesus Christ. Between these extremes all Scripture evidently oscillates.

But we need definite terms to describe degrees of infallibility in Scripture. When grace gives merely that sensation of truthness which satisfies for conviction, it ought to be called inspiration; but when the divine telepathy brings into consciousness, not only the truth effluence, but the very objects giving off that effluence (i. e., as when the mind has an open vision, or hears the voice of its divine correspondent), it ought to be called revelation. Scripture is made up of both these forms of truth-expression; from the crude product of mere human judgment, faintly tinged—or perhaps untinged at all—with the light of heaven, up through the varying translucency of inspiration to the transparency of revelation; a translucency and transparency which, however, do not necessarily appear, save to him whose soul is lighted by grace.

But to modify in such a way as this the cast-iron mediaeval doctrine of the absolute infallibility of Scripture—will it not overthrow one of the very pillars of religion? Perhaps—if the religion be of a kind supported by pillars; that is to say, if it be of a mechanical order. But the social evolution of the race is hastened in the ratio that such religions fall; for it is this very dogma of scriptural finality, this absolutism of interpretation, this notion that revelation is all in and cured, once for all,—that has stranded modern Christian sects just where Egyptian art was stranded for a similar reason.

Let us realize that God never intended the life and light of inspiration to be conserved by means of the dovetailing, glue-jointing interpretations of theological carpentry,—such as make up the manifold creeds and confessions of modern sectism. Scriptural texts are rather to be regarded in the light of things planted and growing: capable of indefinite organic expansion and application, but sure to lose their spirit the moment you cut and fit them into a mechanical theology.

"The things of God," says Paul, "knoweth no man but the spirit of God." Grace is the only possible interpreter of grace,—but it is a very safe interpreter. "If thine eye be single," says our Saviour, "thy body shall be full of light." To the extent that this light of grace is within us, to that extent shall we be able to assimilate the light of revelation, whether in nature or in Scripture; and if we attempt to build a theological system by any other impulse than this light gives, the structure will be a mere mechanical contrivance,—a wooden something made up of dead works,—not a living, growing organism.

Nor need we feel called upon to stultify ourselves by assuming that any Scripture, coming as it does from God, must necessarily be perfect. For if the revelation of vegetable life in yonder tree, in the fashioning of which God has had untrammelled sway, is nevertheless, by the interaction of natural forces, far from perfect, why should we expect a revelation of psychic life to be faultless, trammelled as it must be, by the inertia of a will negatively as free as God's own, and reflected from a mind very rudimentary in its development? Nevertheless, as we perceive the principle of life in the tree to be perfect, so by the eye of grace shall we be able to catch glimpses of the perfect mind of God, behind and beneath the imperfect form of its expression in Scripture.

Coming back now to the central theme of this chapter, that grace or unbroken communion with God is the only means of psychic evolution, the question arises, In what avenues of life may we expect grace to be our guide? This, as will be seen, is only a restatement of the question raised in the second chapter, viz., as to how far man must be guided by relative truth, the result of his own generalizations, and how far he may expect guidance by absolute truth, the result of God's generalizations. Will grace or absolute truth assist him in prospecting for gold and silver? In winning an election? In building a railroad? In settling the question whether Bacon wrote Shakespeare's plays?

The answer, though necessarily general, is unequivocal. Since after making covenants with God, grace is the medium of man's evolution, he will have an unbroken stream of it to the extent that he responds successively to what God would have him do next; in other words, to the extent that he acts on Christ's maxim: "Thy will not mine be done." This may often be so primitive a thing as building a log school-house, or digging a canal, or even so unspiritual a thing as running for Congress,—for God is in all the affairs of men, whether great or small, which have to do with the evolution of the human race. On the other hand, grace will fail him, and he will have to move forward by mere human light, to the extent that he switches off—as he is free to do—on schemes not in the direct line of God's purposes,—schemes not necessarily wrong—simply desultory, out of place, and therefore wasteful.

By what other policy than this could God bring into one grand, final, consummate unity, all the centrifugal tendencies of His children? Christ's mission is an example of a life guided at all points by absolute truth, or the mind of God; but it is easy to conceive, though hard to believe, Him turning aside for mere earthly fame; in which case He would have been left to His own innate powers and on equal footing with other men of similar talent.

As to knowing when one is on the individual quest and when on the Lord's quest, it is not a matter that can be settled by rules of procedure. Grace is the sole interpreter of grace. He who lives so near to heaven that his life is enveloped in heaven's halo, will know when he leaves the Master's service for his own; and no sophistry, however specious, about end and means, will succeed in blinding his soul to the withdrawal of the divine light, and as a consequence leaving unillumined his mere earth-born wisdom. However, the object of departure,—wealth, position, fame,—may throw around itself such a glamour of goodness and justification that for a time,—perhaps, alas! for all time—the quest will be followed to the very cul de sac of its barren inconsequence.

If, when that point has been reached, the soul has any truth integrity left, it will exclaim with Solomon, "Vanity, vanity," and return to God's service; if not, it will continue following its earthideals, and, in lieu of real joy, go on flaunting its apples of Sodom in order to squeeze out a little counterfeit happiness from the envy and greed excited in the eyes outside the wall of its own mundane achievement.

There remains then the question of how man comes into possession of grace; not as of a light loaned him previous to conversion, to guide him into the path of truth; but as of a lamp, his very own, to keep filled, to trim, and to use wherever the service of the Master shall lead him. Manifestly such a dispensation of the gift and power of the Holy Ghost would be a conscious dispensation, and must, therefore, like forgiveness and the covenant of baptism, involve a token. That token is the laying on of hands and the conferring of the Holy Ghost in the name of Jesus Christ; for so has God ordained.

Note that here, too, symbolism plays an important part. The person receiving this ordinance, indicates by his attitude that he has subordinated his will to the authority of the kingdom of God, of which presently he shall become a free citizen; the person laying on hands acts the part of God, who alone has authority to confer the right to receive the gift of grace. He must therefore be a man divinely commissioned, if the ordinance is to be anything else than a solemn mockery. The Holy Ghost so conferred upon man becomes the servant of his will to the extent that he is the servant of God's will. It is the medium by which he shall work out his own salvation.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Rev. C. Van Der Donckt of Pocatello, Idaho, in the Improvement Era, August, 1902, Deseret News Co., Salt Lake City.
[^2] See Doctrine and Covenants, Section 88:7-13.
