Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XX

WHAT INTELLIGENT BEINGS WILL DO IN THE HEREAFTER

THE first and chief element in the happiness of heaven [says a Catholic writer] [^1] will consist in the beatific vision; that is, in seeing God face to face, unveiled as He really is. The "face to face," however, is literally true only of our blessed Saviour, who ascended into heaven with His sacred body. Otherwise, as God is a spirit, He has no body and consequently no face. In paradise, spirits (angels and our souls) see spirits. We shall see God and angels, not with the eye of the body, nor by the vibration of cosmic light, but with the spiritual eye, with the soul's intellectual perception, elevated by a super-natural influx from God. As in ordinary vision the image of an object is impressed on the retina, so in the beatific vision, the perfect image of God will be reflected on the soul, impressing on it a vivid representation of Him. We shall thus enjoy an intellectual possession of Him, very different from our possession of earthly things.

This doctrine of the beatific vision is by no means confined to the Catholic Church. Here is the way in which a noted Presbyterian delivered himself on this theme:

The question is often asked, "What shall we do when we get to heaven? Wherein will consist our happiness?" I shall answer this question for myself. When I get to heaven, I shall spend the first five million years of my life in gazing upon the face of God; then if my wife is near I shall turn and look at her for five minutes. Then I shall gaze upon the glory of God again for a million million years; and when the longing of my eyes shall have been satisfied, and my soul is suffused with the beatific vision, I shall snatch up my harp and begin playing.

Will this reverend gentleman go on playing during the rest of eternity? Or will he occasionally take a breathing spell, to gaze again for a few odd hundred million years? Perhaps, too, his wife will have become relatively dearer by that time, and so will furnish another means of relieving the eternal ennui. I fully understand, as did the audience, no doubt, that he meant no personal slight nor any undervaluation of the conjugal tie; it was merely a case of not loving his wife less, but of loving the Lord more.

I realize, too, that this extravagant forecast of heaven is not to be taken as the best and most rational exposition that could be made of the "beatific-vision" idea of eternal bliss. But after all allowance has been made for hyperbole and religious hallucination, what is there in the notion to commend it even faintly to common-sense? Wherein does it touch the experience of the race, even by the remotest analogy? Is there anything in life to suggest that one can gaze with rapture even for a single hour? How then dare we commit our hope of eternity to such a chimera of fancy?

On the other hand, what kind of being must God be, if we suppose Him to get pleasure from having a billion billion eyes,—the animated periphery of a hollow glory sphere with God as its centre,—glued upon Him from all sides for millions of years at a stretch? And then to have a certain quadrant of the enraptured gazers suddenly seized with harp-madness for other millions of years! Surely He will need the full measure of His infinite patience and long suffering!

Such a notion of heavenly bliss on the one side, and of God on the other, are the outcome of the mediaeval conceptions of the earth as a place cursed, of mortal life as penal servitude, of work as the penalty of sin, and of God as a supreme-by-will Being who was to be placated by much praying and singing. Naturally, therefore, heaven would be figured in a manner antipodal to all experiences here below. Instead of the earth cursed, an ethereal heaven is imagined somewhere in space, to which the soul flies at death; instead of the toil and labor of earth-life, "there is sweet rest in heaven,"—an eternity of idleness; and for the praying and singing exacted in the world, there is substituted the eternal program of gazing and harping in the world to come.

How these iridescent soap-bubbles blown by religion-makers break and vanish with the first ray of common sense! "This is life eternal" said the Saviour, truly enough, "that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." But what a piece of fatuous reasoning, to conclude that knowing God and Christ is a matter of idle gazing upon them for eternity. As well expect a clam to comprehend the unity of the solar system by opening its mudvalve to the sun's rays!

What the Saviour said is absolutely and philosophically true: eternal life is in us to the extent that we know God and Jesus Christ. But knowing our Father in heaven is nothing less than becoming like Him. Knowing law is knowing God objectively; living in harmony with law is knowing God subjectively. The first gives knowledge, the second, power; and the end of such a course of successive knowing and doing is nothing less than omniscience, or perfect power to know, and omnipotence, or perfect power to do. Could anything less than these powers comprehend God? Grace is thus seen to be the progressive medium of knowing God: the light by which we see law, the power by which our feeble wills are re-enforced to the living of law.

Now, as man enters the spirit world knowing God no further than he knew Him when he said good-by to mortality, it follows that he has no time to idle away with the "beatific vision," if he values eternal life; or even if he could see God objectively, he would be able to assimilate Him only to the extent that he has Godliness within him; or, to use the phrase of psychology, only to the extent of his apperceptive material. So far, therefore, from escaping work by escaping from the world, he must greatly increase his diligence, if he desires to be saved.

It is on the basis of this thought that Mormonism predicates an eternity of scientific endeavor for man; a future life devoted progressively to the apprehension of and obedience to law, till all the secrets of creation are known, and the untrammelled power to create has been attained. Such is the glorious career that lies before the workers.

The nature of this future work, as also the order in which it will come, will of course be determined by divine wisdom. Some speculations in relation to it may, however, be indulged in with profit. Since God is in all the processes of nature, it is more than probable that there are unnumbered posts of minor responsibility where intelligence such as ours can serve His purposes, and, by serving, help to attain creative perfection. The mere naming of such a possibility flashes before the mind opportunities in the natural world,—or, rather, in the workshop out of which the natural world grows—that millions of years could not exhaust! What nobler conception of future existence could there possibly be than this? What life more filled with truth-surprises, and therefore with the very essence of eternal bliss?

Next, contemplate the world of art,—the possibilities yet undreamed of in literature, music, painting, sculpture, architecture, and similar lines of creation. It is not likely, however, that such studies will be carried on there as here—widely divorced from investigations of the natural forms whence alone they can draw true life and inspiration. Our souls will probably find, in these expressions of art, a happy means of overflow for the excess harmonies attained in the study of God's world and works. Nor is it likely that we shall ever evolve beyond the susceptibilities out of which art grows, and to which it ministers; for our life there must necessarily resemble our life here. The "many mansions" mentioned by our Saviour is suggestive of this, as is also the Eternal City described by John the Revelator. It must be self-evident also that the art products which shall be part of our environment in heaven will be the work of our own hands, just as they are here. To suppose our souls unrelated to them by creation is nothing less than to say we are equally unrelated to them by appreciation: for he who does not make, is but poorly fitted to enjoy.

There is next the social world, involving the problem of learning to live in perfect harmony with our superiors, our equals, and our inferiors; a problem that has hardly approached solution as yet among mankind. It is a question that involves the co-ordination and subordination of the individual in a thousand complex relationships, and always along lines both of justice and of love. Surely there is work of the highest order of sociology in the hereafter; for what is our noblest conception of heaven but that of a place of perfect social harmony?

And we must create the heaven we expect to enjoy—else how could we enjoy it? God can aid us in this all-important work, but He cannot do it for us; for if He should arbitrarily co-ordinate and subordinate us, would the result be a state of bliss without alloy? Or should we chafe, as we do here, under God's appointment? And, being free, how long should we stay in the niche prepared for us by infinite wisdom? The fact is, heaven becomes impossible on any other lines than the social co-ordinating and subordinating evolution of its inhabitants under the influence of grace.

It is for this reason, no doubt, that the first serious work demanded of him who has entered into covenant with God, is to accustom himself to the broad lines of heavenly government as foreshadowed in the organization of the Church; and he who cannot curb his propensity to fly off at tangents in respect of divine authority upon the earth, demonstrates, above all things, his unfitness to be placed among the workers in heaven.

Nor would I have the reader believe that in the Church government, which thus marks out crudely the order of heaven, there is coercion of any man's free will. Such a policy would defeat itself,—making at once both tyrants and slaves, neither of whom could exist a day in heaven. This fact will be made entirely clear in a companion volume, The Social Aspect of Mormonism, wherein I hope to show forth a system of divine government entirely worthy the authorship of God who revealed it.

Now, while Latter-day Saints thus look forward to a thoroughly socialized future, a future made up of physical, mental, moral, and spiritual activities along lines the beginnings of which are already laid in life, they do not by any means surrender the idea of coming into the presence of holy angels, the Saviour, and the eternal Father. But they expect to meet these exalted beings, not in idle, deadlock, convention-ecstacies protracted to millions of years, but in the sensible, rational way in which workers meet leaders. Moreover, the presence of the Father and the Son with any man does not depend upon sight nor any other physical sense; for the Holy Ghost is instinct with the glory of their personalities, and whoever lives so pure a life as to be filled with this spirit, dwells in the divine presence in a much more real sense, than if he jostled with a million-million other souls in the endeavor to get an ocular vision. Indeed, it is pretty safe to say that he who has not thus lived in their presence on earth, need never expect to get the face-to-face vision in heaven.

As to the natural epochs in the future life, two only have been indicated by revelation. The first is that of the spirit-world, occupying the time between death and the resurrection; the second is the life after the resurrection. Perhaps it will not be out of place to discuss briefly these two states and the transitions which lead to them.

To understand the nature of the world of spirits, it is necessary to remember the dual nature of all animated beings. God first created things spiritually, and then naturally, so we are told in Genesis. The negative testimony of all experience lends credence to this view of life; negative because we must infer the presence of spirit or life in the living from the fact of its absence in the dead. The bird in yonder tree, for instance, is just now singing and flitting about by reason of a power beyond reach of analysis. Anon the gun of the collector will bring it fluttering to the ground; only half of it, however, to be quite exact; for that which enabled it to sing and flit will be gone forever. So of all living things: we are ever in the presence of spirit, and recognize it by a thousand happenings to be inseparably associated with life; but isolated from its earthly counterpart, it eludes every known scientific power of investigation.

Assuming then that everything which lives,—plant, animal, man—does so by reason of a spirit which is either life itself or the vehicle of life, we reach the conclusion that the spirit-world is right here, bound up with the natural world,—hidden away in it as sugar is in water. That is to say, life has two aspects, an outer, which is mortal, and an inner, which is spiritual. This conception is well illustrated by the instantaneous appearances and disappearances of our Saviour after His resurrection; showing that he could function now in the spiritual, now in the natural, world without essential change of location.

If it be accepted, then, that the spirit world is, in flora, fauna, and natural topography, the spiritual counterpart of the natural world, differing only perhaps in being a more perfect expression of the divine idea, it must follow that the psychic life of the individual will go on uninterrupted by death. Indeed, it is doubtful whether, on awakening in that next world, the spirit will at first be aware of the change, so familiar will the environments seem. Nor is there reason to believe that contact with objects in the new world will produce reactions relatively different from those on the natural plane. It will only be by a certain ease and swiftness of movement, and perhaps by the absence of shams and make-believes, that the fact of death, or transition from mortal life, will become most pronounced.

Some years ago I had occasion to admire a clump of cedars growing under the spray of the Shoshone Falls. They were as straight as sunbeams and as symmetrical as angels' spears. At first I wondered how the Oregon timber cedar could get to such a place; but as the trees graded upward from that awful chasm by natural transitions on the mountain side, till they ended in the low, crooked, and gnarled species so common to the American desert, I made a more careful examination and found them to be all of one family. Here was food for reflection. Who could have dreamed that God's idea of the scrub cedar was so beautiful! Those perfect specimens, perennially tipped with the rainbow, represent spirit cedars completely expressed. This, then, is what every scrub cedar would be were its inner life fully evolved. And so of all other dwarfed vegetable or animal forms.

Then I thought of scrub human beings—the crippled, the stunted, the deformed, in mind and body, the crooked, gnarled, half-cured specimens that cumber the deserts of life. These, too, have fallen short of God's idea—short of the full expression of their spiritual stature. What then? When they return to the spirit world, will their deformities go with them? Will the deaf, the dumb, the lame, be deaf, dumb, and lame there as here?

Hardly. The measure of truthness in their souls, the sum total of their spiritual likeness to God, will be neither increased nor decreased by the fact of death; but there seems to be no reason why defects peculiar to earth-life—defects only incidentally related to psychic evolution—should be perpetuated there. The spirit counterpart of the withered arm will not be withered and shrunken. In form and outline it will perhaps resemble the other; only in texture will the educated spiritual arm be superior to that which has hung limp and idle during earth-life. But eternity will present opportunities without end for the adjustment of all such inequalities.

One other difference of man's next estate has already been suggested. If there is one more distinctively characteristic of the present world than any other, it is perhaps the opportunities it affords for shams and artificialities. It is as if the Lord gave man a covering for hypocrisy, just to make love of truth a cosmic virtue,—the doing of right purely for right's sake. But there is reason to believe that this world's multiform refuge of lies will be left among the grim trophies of death and hell; souls that pass on will be as naked to truth as when they were born. As Paul says: "Here we see through a glass darkly, there face to face."

In virtue of what principle, then, will it become impossible to hide "under Gospel colors," or any other colors, "just for a screen?" In virtue of the principle of soul-radiancy, I think. The glory of God's person is represented as brighter than that of the sun,—and "the glory of God is intelligence." When the angel Moroni appeared in the darkness to Joseph Smith, the light emanating from his person was sufficient to illumine the boy's humble chamber as brightly as at noon-day. Accordingly, we may infer that as is the intelligence of any being, so is the radiancy of his soul. "Shining raiment" is evidently no figure of speech in descriptions of heaven. By contrast what must be the opacity of souls doomed to hell!

This fact—that our souls will be radiant according to the righteousness of God in them—will inevitably lead to voluntary classifications; for "Light cleaveth unto light, darkness unto darkness." Even in earth-life this tendency is already well-marked, in spite of our facilities for shams and make-believes. There it will be pronounced. The Scriptures name two localities in the spirit-world: paradise, where spirits dwell that have accepted Christ; and hades, a prison for spirits still in darkness. "To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise," said Jesus to the repentant thief; He could just as truly have said to the other male-factor, "To-day shalt thou be with me in hades," for he visited both places during the time his body lay in the tomb; moreover, from the latter place, so it is recorded, He "led captivity captive"—out of purgatory into paradise.

Hades is not to be pictured as a dungeon where shrinking, terror-stricken souls are shut in by bolts and bars; on the contrary, spirits go there by choice,—on the principle that men choose darkness rather than light because their deeds are evil. Nor could you drag one of these dark or tawny ones into paradise; any more than you can drive bats into the glare of daylight. If Christ led souls out, it was because the light of repentance had first given them the radiancy of paradise. Light is the only power that can release from the bondage of sin. Accordingly, part of that future life of altruism which awaits the workers will be to carry the Gospel light into these benighted regions; "till every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess, that Jesus is the Christ."

A few words now respecting the resurrection and this chapter must close. Very little that is definite has been revealed on this subject; other than the assurance that our spirits shall eventually be clothed with glorious bodies of flesh and bone; bodies as palpable to the sense of touch as was that of Christ, when he bade Thomas feel the print of the nails and thrust his hand into his Master's side. "For a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have."

How is it to be accomplished? Just as we set aside the mechanical conception of creation, so we may safely spiritualize the mechanical notion that graves will yawn at the sound of a trumpet. Unlike man, God does not work by any other than organic processes; and when that tremendous event shall have been accomplished, we shall see that the principle was one of evolution, and as inevitable as that which from a mere microscopic cell formed the natural body. Indeed, could the growth of a resurrected body well be more marvellous than this?

Such was evidently the conception of Paul when he compared death and the resurrection to a seed planted and reproducing itself. In the seed was the inherent possibility of a new body, but it had to die in order to get it. It was not the old body that was resuscitated. This gave merely the potentiality to draw from the storehouse of nature a new body. The drawing of the new body was the process of changing potentiality into fact.

It will probably be the same with man. The fact of having lived a mortal life, if only for an instant, gives the spirit the potentiality of drawing to itself a resurrected body when the time shall be ripe for it; and I use the word ripe because, the resurrection being a potentiality, the time for its realization will manifestly vary according to the fitness of the spirit to live the advanced life which the new estate brings. "First Christ, then they who are Christ's, at his coming," is the way this thought is put in Scripture.

Whether the body so organically drawn from the storehouse of the universe will be composed of matter newly compounded, or be made up of atoms so definitely individualized by the old body during mortal life that they can fit into no other organism, is a question I leave to men who love disputations better than I do. The Bible would seem to favor the latter idea; but the subject is practically beyond scientific investigation, and therefore so far from affecting the present truth- status of our souls, that it has really no vital significance whatever.

Putting resurrection as a potentiality of the spirit, disposes of that multitude of perplexing questions, as to whether the cripple will have his deformed body again, the aged their decrepit frames, the young their immaturity, and so on. Manifestly, if it is in the spirit to draw a body, then the body drawn will be of the exact texture of the spirit itself—glorious or otherwise according to its own radiancy; but there seems no good reason why the imperfect expressions—the congestions—of earth-life should be repeated. Perhaps in the case of infants, the bodies resurrected, or drawn from the materials of the universe, will resemble in dimensions those laid down; since it was here an organic process which death interrupted; but these bodies would thereafter as surely grow to maturity as if they were still living on the earth-plane.

Another thought, unavoidable from such a conception, is that resurrection is now going on, and probably has been since the days of the Saviour; the question of time being as inevitably subject to law as any other event in God's providence. Such, at any rate, is a common-sense view of what is at best an extremely speculative subject; and no serious disturbance can come into the order of our lives when we keep within hailing distance of common sense.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Christian ministers are quick, however, to perceive and point out this fact, when modern instances of God's manifestations, such as those claimed by Joseph Smith, are in question.
