Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XXI

PHILOSOPHICAL DIFFICULTIES TO THE CONCEPT OF A PERSONAL GOD

IN a previous chapter the proposition was laid down that Mormonism is a transcendent system of evolution; transcendent because it not only includes and thinks into line the facts of scientific evolution, but organizes them into an endless perspective, both as to the past and as to the future. This claim, it is hoped, has been fully justified by the foregoing discussion. For the rest, Mormonism has no favors to ask, no concessions to make, in respect of any other system of thought; and this for the simple reason that it is an organic not a mechanical religion. Its doctrines do not hang together by virtue of the decrees of ecclesiastical councils. On the contrary, they grow out of each other as naturally as the branches and leaves of a tree; for, as becomes a living, growing organism, religion is not conceived by Latter-day Saints as something superimposed upon life, nor even as something integrated with life, but as life itself, from God's point of view.

Moreover, Mormonism has no cut-and-dried limitations of social growth and development to defend; so far from this being the case, it is pledged by one of its articles of faith to accept all truth, irrespective of who may bring it. As basic or fundamental doctrine it insists on only one tenet, viz.,—in the words of Paul—"Let God be true, even though it make every man a liar." This is only a concrete way of placing Truth above conventionality; for the "living God" to each man is the measure of truthness within him, however it came there, whether from sifting nature or opening his soul to revelation. How else can God live in our lives? And God can be true for each man only as that man resolutely lives his ideals, even, if need be, at the cost of his life.

A distinguished writer has said, in respect of the conventions and institutions of men, that the very fact of their having existed for thousands of years is the foremost reason for demanding that they demonstrate their right to exist longer. Each life, so far from being shaped and moulded by what men have been before, should be the immediate expression of the kingdom of God within it,—an evolution of the truth ideals implanted within it by its perception and generalization of Law or divine harmony. "Come out of Babylon" is the burden of Scripture. This is possible only by shortening the train of sequences in our lives. If a man would cut loose from the world, his acts must spring directly out of his interpretation of nature and the intuitions he gets direct from nature's God, and not from the shams and artificialities of convention. Let God indeed be true for every man, be the social consequences what they may! Let history's grim claws be kept off the human race.

The statement of this basic tenet serves also to narrow the discussion again to the question, What is God? Now, it is inconceivable that any lover of truth reading the foregoing discussion respecting the psychic evolution of man should not wish with all his heart that it might be true. Unfortunately, he perceives that the whole beautiful system depends on one primal fact, that God is what the Bible reveals Him to be, a personal being, the perfected man. Destroy this concept, and Mormonism goes down, leaving mankind again in spiritual chaos; amid a wilderness of facts without perspective; knowing neither whence we came, why we are here, nor whither we tend,—save perhaps as we place credence in the speculations of Buddha; for whatever in Christianity definitely answers any of these categories in a way differently from the answer of the Hindoo sage, is based upon that same ultimate premise, however much concealed or ignored or repudiated,—the premise of a personal God.

Elsewhere I have taken the ground that a great mistake was made when science overthrew the personal or Christ-type of God; that the demands of philosophy for the Buddhistic type—that of a universal spiritual essence—were mistaken demands. I did not intend, by any means, to beg this question; the need of discussing aspects more immediately urgent, however, led me to dismiss the subject with the remark, that experience being the criterion of judgment in science, mankind are not really justified in postulating any other type of creative intelligence than the man-type; for what other type have they ever, or can they ever, come into relation with?

This did not settle the question, however, as I fully realized at the time; and the opportunity has now come for entering fully and frankly into the logical difficulties which led theologians to give up the "God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob" for a sort of Christianized form of the God of Buddha.

These difficulties at first sight seem all but overwhelming; nevertheless, I shall proceed to put them in as strong and vital a form as my antagonist could possibly wish—satisfied, as I am, that they are not insuperable. But my antagonist ought, by the by, never to be anyone attributing Godhood to Jesus Christ; for if the Father cannot hold his place throughout eternity in the character of a personal being, no more can the Son; and if the Son cannot, how can we, who depend upon the Son for our salvation? Every Christian ought therefore to be glad, if the thesis of God's personality can be sustained. So also ought every scientist; for it would demonstrate, even in analogies relating to this highest generalization in the realm of intelligence, that the law of experience is the safest guide to correct reasoning.

The first difficulty relates to the infinitude of God. The Scriptures reveal the fact that God is infinite, and even did they not, a moment's reflection must make the fact self-evident; for if the universe is infinite,—and we cannot think it otherwise,—and God be figured even as simply co-equal with it, He also must be infinite; by how much more then must He be possessed of infinitude when we postulate Him as superior to the universe.

But to be infinite is to be unbounded, unlimited, unconditioned. How then can infinitude be predicated of Jesus Christ, who, as we know, is limited as to form, and who was conditioned by birth, death, and resurrection? And if not to the Son, how to the Father, whom we postulate to be the exact prototype of the Son? It would seem impossible.

Our next difficulty turns on the predication that God is eternal. This fact is revealed in many passages of Scripture, but it is also self-evident—being only another statement, indeed, of the notion of infinitude; for if the universe is boundless, it must be so equally as regards both time and space; and therefore God, who must be thought of as superior to the universe, cannot be less boundless in time than in space. In other words, He must be eternal.

But to be eternal is to have neither beginning nor end. Christ evidently had a beginning in His capacity as God, for the relationship of Son itself implies not only a beginning of organized life, but a limitation of power; and although He could pray, "Father, glorify thou me with the glory I had with thee before the world was," and Paul gives evidence of this same pre-eminence in heaven, by declaring that by Him and through Him the worlds were made,—yet had He things to learn in mortal life: He grew in stature and in wisdom, was made perfect through suffering, and finally took His place on the right hand of the Majesty on high. If anything therefore seems fixed and certain from our apprehension of His life and the revelations concerning Him, it is that His Godhood had a beginning. But since God is an eternal being, how could Jesus Christ be God?

The difficulty applies equally to the Father; for is it to be supposed that He belongs to a race which gives birth to sons, yet He Himself was unborn; that He existed from out the depths of eternity creating galaxies of worlds without number, supremely alone, until He came to our insignificant planet and to the year A.D. 1, when He caused to be born a being like Himself, who became co-equal in divine power and glory? Mormonism is more modest: it believes that the Father, like the Son, is a perfected man; or, to quote again its supreme aphorism of psychic evolution, "As man is, God once was; as God is, man may become."

But note now the dilemma when we oppose to this aphorism the absolute and irrevocable demand of reason, that God must be eternal. For, if this aphorism be true, there was a time when our Father was not God. Who then was God? His Father, do you say? We 1, by the same necessity, there must have been a time when He, too, was not God. Who then?

This brings us face to face with another difficulty: there is but one God. Reason and revelation alike dec are this fact; for not to be God and Lord alone is to be limited and conditioned by some other power, and is therefore not to be infinite. As the universe is one, so God, the psychic power of the universe, must be one. But if the aphorism above quoted be true, there must be an infinite number of beings related to each other by sequence, yet all reigning co-ordinately as Gods.

Let not the Christian be too swift, however, in disclaiming belief in a doctrine apparently so preposterous, for his own system involves at least two such Gods, the Father and the Son; and whatever reasoning can reconcile the unity of God with the Christian's limited polytheism, can equally reconcile it with the Mormon's unlimited polytheism.

But pointing out, in mere terms of infinity, the apparent discrepancy between Jehovah, the "God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob," and that infinite, eternal One, that Being without bounds, without limits, without conditions,—

Whom none can comprehend and none explore,

Who fills existence with himself alone,

Embracing all, supporting, ruling o'er

Being whom we call God, and know no more.

—a mere enumeration, I repeat, in abstract terms, of the apparent contradictions between the God of the Bible and that ultimate source of being and power which must be postulated in conceptions involving the universe as a whole,—gives the reader but very faint and inadequate notions of the real difficulty which this discussion aims to bridge over. Let us therefore be brave enough to approach these apparent contradictions in a more concrete fashion.

We shall do well to examine first our conception of the world on which we live. It is a real, solid earth, is it not? The stupendous cliffs rising, terrace above terrace, on three sides of me as I write, and leaving me only a triangular skyline, are no delusions of my senses. The capstone of yonder peak two thousand feet above me has weight, and should it come crashing down the gorge, would crush all living things in its path. The pines that half hide the seams and scars on the terrace butments and make a sombre fringe against yonder sunlit cloud; the cascades that thunder down three separate canyons uniting within a stone's throw of me, after making a hundred waterfalls and filling the gorge with music; the woodpecker hammering into yonder rotting stump; the badger lazily crawling up that dusty trail, the chipmonks chattering in that pine tree; the spider that is just now spinning the rope by which it lowers itself from the roof of my cave; the snowbanks on the opposite mountain slope; the July breeze from somewhere above that makes me put on my overcoat; and Provo River, a half mile almost perpendicularly below me, flowing contentedly at last after its million years of titanic labor,—all these things are realities, if I who write and you to whom I write are realities. And if we are not, then nothing matters; Christian Scientists may have their way, for then, like the rest of creation, they, too, would be delusions.

The point I wish to make is that this world and all things in it that appeal to the senses of man are real, tangible creations. There may be spiritual spheres, astral planes, and what not, in the universe, for its mysteries are many and unfathomable. What we should not forget is, that there is,—it is ridiculous to say there may be,—a real, solid, tangible world, one which it is entirely safe to take as a sample of God's work as Creator. Here, right around us, not in metaphysical creations, lies then the making or marring of our eternal lives. Is our world such a one as the Buddhistic- or Christian-Science type of God would create for the perfecting of psychic beings?

Our next consideration must be the relationship of our world to the rest of creation. There was a time when our forefathers,—pardonably, let us say,—regarded the earth as the solid centre of all things, and all the rest of the universe—sun, moon, stars, and sky—as only a feathery canopy. Since then science has humbled us. Now we recognize our earth as only one of the smaller planets of the solar system, and our sun as only one of the inferior stars. So, also, we have learned that there are millions of these shining orbs, even to our poor, finite vision,—a million millions therefore in the spaces beyond our telescopes, which only our imagination can explore. Each of these myriad blazing suns, to reason by analogy, controls its retinue of worlds. It is not impossible, therefore, that there may be a billion earths far greater and more glorious than ours, each filled with beings of our own race, but inconceivably advanced beyond us in divine intelligence.

How then have we fallen and been humbled to the dust, poor benighted earth-spirits that we are! But the saddest part of our abasement is in this fact: that in the ratio that the world has shrunk to insignificance, its Creator has become vague and shadowy. Once He walked and talked with men in the gardens and on the rugged mountains of the earth; now He traverses only the Milky Way. Then He conversed with prophets and holy men, as a father might counsel with his sons; now He is become, in the words of the poet, a conception—

Whom none can comprehend and none explore

Being whom we call God and know no more.

The gulf which Mormonism seeks to bridge is that between the demands of a vital, living faith, such as a child may have in its father, and the demands of reason as its eye sweeps the stellar universe. The first is soothed and cheered by the history of God's manifestations unto man: by the voice of the "Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the evening"; or admonishing Moses to take off his shoes because he was on holy ground; or calling in the darkness of the night to the boy Samuel, during the days when the "word of the Lord was precious in the land"; or answering the stricken Job out of the whirlwind; or bearing witness to John the Baptist, "This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased." But how do these special manifestations comport with the demands of reason for a being infinite, eternal, unconditioned—

Whose presence bright

All space doth occupy, all motions guide?

To limit such a being even to so wondrous a galaxy of allied solar systems as the Pleiades seem to present, would be to withdraw Him from the universe and confine Him to what by comparison would be less than a grain of sand to the bulk of the sun; what, then, of the conception which limits Him to the role of Jehovah in connection with the history of the earth? Is the God depicted in Derzhaven's poem, from which I have quoted above, the same Being that gave directions to Noah for making an ark out of gopher wood; or that wrote with His finger the Ten Commandments on the tablet of stone; or that instructed Moses how to build the Tabernacle in the wilderness; or that spoke to the high priest once a year out of the Ark of the Covenant; or that figured in the visions of Isaiah and Daniel, Paul, and John the Revelator? If faith must give up these objects, how barren and perfunctory would religion become! Yet if reason must square its concepts by them, what (apparent) confusion would immediately enter into science!

And so of all the concepts relating to Jesus Christ as Saviour of mankind. His atonement is spoken of as an infinite sacrifice. Are we to suppose that nowhere in the universe was salvation possible till brought about by the tragedy on Mount Calvary? That on no sphere in space could beings pass that psychic epoch known as resurrection, till Christ led the way on our earth?

Such, then, is an outline of the apparent contradictions between the God of the Bible and the God demanded by reason. Of the two sides to this controversy, the men of science are the more honest; for, while they are feign to admit the necessity of an ultimate Source of psychic being, they cannot reconcile the unity, eternity, and infinitude of such a Being with the limitations demanded by the personal Creator and controller of our earth, or by a being who can act the role of Providence, and be influenced by prayer; and so they do not try, preferring to derive the earth and all things in it from what they are pleased to call the persistence and transmutation of energy. Modern Christians, on the other hand, while agreeing to the scientific conception of God, are continually, yet very illogically, quoting the Biblical manifestations before referred to as evidence of His existence; either not perceiving or else wilfully disregarding the fact that every example so adduced, of special providence or intervention in behalf of things earthly, is a fact immediately limiting or conditioning Him, and therefore opposed to His infinitude. [^1]

Mormonism is under no such pressure toward soul-stultification as that of accepting the philosophic aspect of Deity, and then of promulgating subordinate doctrines in direct contradiction thereto, in order to have a religion at all; for Mormonism sees the essential truth of both these conceptions, and has no difficulty in reconciling them, as I shall attempt to show in the chapters which follow.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "I soon found," writes the Prophet, "that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to increase. And though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen and fifteen years of age, and my circumstances in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me, and create a hot persecution; and this was common among all the sects—all united to persecute me. . . . It was nevertheless a fact that I had seen a vision. I have thought since that I felt much like Paul when he made his defense before king Agrippa. . . . Some said he was dishonest, others that he was mad, and so he was ridiculed and reviled; but all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen a light and heard a voice,—he knew he had; and all the persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise. . . . So it was with me; I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying so, yet it was true: and . . . I was led to say in my heart, Why persecute for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision, and who am I that I can withstand God? Or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision. I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dare I do it, lest I offend God and come under condemnation."
