Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XXII

GODHOOD AS INCARNATED

WHILE I was laboring, [writes the Prophet Joseph Smith,] under these extreme difficulties caused by the contests of religionists, [as to which sect was right], I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter, and fifth verse, which says, "If any of you lack wisdom let him ask of God, that giveth unto all men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him." Never did any passage of Scripture come with more power to the heart of man than did this to mine. It seemed to enter into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act, I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I should never know; for religious teachers of the various sects understood the same passage so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible.

At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. At length I determined to ask of God; concluding that if He gives wisdom to them that lack wisdom,—gives liberally and does not upbraid,—I might venture. In accordance with this determination I retired to the woods.

It was on the morning of a beautiful clear day, early in the spring of eighteen hundred and twenty, and the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt; for amidst all my anxieties, I had never as yet made the attempt to pray vocally. After I had reached the place previously chosen, and looked around to be sure that I was alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God.

I had scarcely done so, when suddenly I was seized by some power which entirely overcame me, even exerting such astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and for a time it seemed as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

But, exerting all my powers in calling on God to deliver me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair, and abandon myself to destruction,—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the grasp of some actual being from the unseen world who had power over me such as I had never felt before,—I saw exactly over my head a pillar of light above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which had held me bound. When the light rested upon me, I saw two personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spoke unto me, calling me by name, and said pointing to the other, "This is my beloved son, hear him."

By the truth or falsity of this vision, Mormonism rises or falls. The Prophet, at the time of receiving it, was scarcely more mature in years than was Samuel of old when the Lord called to him in the darkness of the night. But mere child that he was, there was in him a spirit such as always marks the beginning of an epoch in the affairs of men. What fourteen-year boy of your acquaintance was ever profoundly agitated as to the true way of eternal life? Measure him by the mental traits of your own sons. What boy in his early teens ever before had the acumen to weigh the conflicting messages of his religious teachers, the resolution to cut loose from them, and the simple faith to go direct to the fountain head of wisdom for his inspiration?

Nor must it be imagined that this vision was reshaped during later years. Contemporaneous accounts of it agree exactly with the simple narrative above recorded; for, with the innocent trust of childhood, Joseph had gone to a certain minister of the Gospel, who was a friend to the family, and related what he had seen and heard. He was not prepared for the storm of denunciation which immediately broke from half-a-dozen pulpits in the neighborhood. But he soon learned what pains of travail must accompany the birth of Truth. From that day till his martyrdom in 1844, he was a marked and persecuted man.

It will be noted that in this vision are involved, directly or indirectly, the doctrine of special providence or answer to prayer; the active opposition of negative spiritual powers to the salvation of men; the supremacy of the positive forces of the universe; the personal or anthropomorphic form of both the Father and Son; the authority of Jesus Christ in the affairs of this earth by the delegation of the Father.

But the essential fact of the vision was the explication of Christ's words to Nathaniel, "Who hath seen me, hath seen the Father,"—the reaffirmation of Paul's explanation of these words, when he spoke of Jesus as being the "brightness of his Father's glory, the express image of his person." There was nothing in the religious teachings of the day that could have given Joseph Smith the conception that appears in this vision. Had he been a conscious impostor he would have chosen figures in keeping with the ideas of his time. He could not have known, as we know now, the vital significance of this new revelation of the Father and the Son. He could not have realized that this open vision was the one thing needed to overthrow a thousand years of vain attempts to merge the speculations of Buddha and Plato with the teachings of the Bible. It is significant, however, of the simple but sturdy integrity of the boy that no amount of wheedling, ridicule, or denunciation could swerve him one iota from the reality of what he had seen and heard. [^1]

And for the earnest seeker after truth,—for the man or woman whose soul's salvation has become the foremost question of life,—I should be willing to rest this discussion by simply referring him, for the truth of Joseph Smith's first vision, to that same passage in James: "If any man lack wisdom let him ask of God that giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him"; especially in view of the fact that complete and final conviction on this point, when it does come, must come from God, and from Him only. But as this book is an attempt to look at the tenets of Mormonism from a scientific point of view, I shall proceed with my argument and attempt to show, by a course of probable reasoning, that a Being so limited and circumscribed is not inconsistent with the demands of reason that the Ruler of the universe must be a power absolute, infinite, and eternal.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] For an example of the inextricable dilemmas resulting from such efforts, see Appendix B.
