Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XXIII

THE REAL MEANING OF GODHOOD

IT is an old saying in monarchies that the king can never die. The incumbent of the kingly office is subject to all the vicissitudes of other mortals; nevertheless, so long as the kingdom holds intact, the aphorism is undoubtedly true.

So in our own country we might say the President cannot be assassinated, although three of our fellow-citizens, while holding that exalted office, have been taken away by the bullet of the assassin. The President, or, to be more exact, the Presidency, is not a power subject to the fluctuations of the individual. It is a something formed out of the combined psychic life of the nation. As long as the nation endures, it endures. Were the nation eternal, it would be eternal; were the nation infinite, it would be infinite.

This simple analogy ought to make clear in what sense God is infinite, eternal, self-existent, and absolute or alone. These ultimate categories are predicable of God, because they are predicable of that which makes Him God, viz., of Godhood. Take Godhood from Jehovah, and He might still (theoretically) remain our Father in heaven, but He would not be God; any more than Roosevelt, stripped of the power delegated by the suffrages of this nation, would remain President.

It is somewhat remarkable that an explanation so obvious has not before been made use of to reconcile the contradictions between God as creator and providence and God as the supreme and final conception of power. The failure to do so only emphasizes, however, the all but universal extent to which mankind has been imbued with the autocratic notion of Deity. This notion stands pronounced even in the terms expressing God's divinity. Godhead, not Godhood—the supreme-by-will, rather than the supreme-by-law—has been the interpretation of His omnipotence by mankind. As a consequence He has for the most part been viewed in the light of a tyrant to be feared and placated, rather than as the supreme executive of law and order, to be revered and loved; and religion, instead of being a natural social system based on the interpretation of the harmony of the universe—man's interpretation constantly corrected by God's—has degenerated into a ridiculously artificial system of rites and ceremonies, prayers and genuflections; which, if not correlated in thought with a supreme, but vain and whimsical autocrat, on whose sceptre alone hangs salvation or damnation, have no meaning whatever. To bring this thought home, suppose one of your own species elevated to the rank of recipient of this homage, and endowed with the qualities of mind necessary to find pleasure in it. What kind of being should you have? Is God such a being?

Godhood, then, in the sense of ordainer and executor of law,—not Godhead, in the sense of Head-god, or tyrant by right of supreme will,—is what makes a "just man made perfect" God (e. g., Jesus Christ); and when he has attained to this supreme rank of intelligence he is God omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent, eternal, infinite, absolute—for all these powers are the powers of Godhood with which he has been invested.

I am quite willing that this explanation shall be taken with a proper reservation, till all its implications and corollaries be examined.

The first implication necessarily relates to the nature of Godhood itself. Philosophers from time out of mind have been busy trying to construct a final cause—always with pitiable results, either in circle-arguments, or downright self-stultification. [^1] Is it not time that mankind recognized the innate absurdity of such attempts? Is it because Causation is apprehensible by segments, while Time and Space are seen to be continuous, that it is not immediately perceived, even as they are, to be an eternal relation?

Reflect upon this question for a moment. How could there possibly be a first cause? The moment we try to single out any cause as first, we perceive it to be either the effect of some antecedent cause—in which case it is not first—or an act of will of some intelligent being. But an intelligent being must be a personal being, innately eternal and free, as an ego, and superior to the universe by reason of initiative and the mastery of universal forces—in short a being like unto God. [^2] As such, his omnipotence or power to create would be a product of psychic evolution (see Chapters VIII, IX, and X), and consequently not a first cause. There is therefore no first cause. Causation is an eternal constituent of the universe—the central fact of Godhood itself.

If this conclusion is not immediately self-evident, it may be strengthened by supposing the universe reduced to the uncreated or formless state—the state of chaos or homogeneous nothingness [^3]—and then considering Causation absent as an eternal relation. How would creation begin? It could not. But the universe exhibits on every hand the actual evidences of creation. Godhood, or the power to create, must therefore have been eternally present.

It follows from this conception that there is only one such supreme power in the universe; in other words, there can be but one true God (in the sense of Godhood) who is absolute and alone. The forces in opposition to God, known as sin and the Devil, are retrograde movements incidental to, and made possible only by some tremendous psychic evolution set going by Omnipotence Himself. They are to God's purposes what the backward rush of water up some bayou of the Mississippi is to the onward sweep of that stream. Not only would such backward movements be impossible without the correlative forward movement, but in their very nature they must be transitory; for just as the Mississippi will in the course of a few geologic years wipe out the stench and miasma along its course, by filling up the breeding holes, so must all negative forces that poison the moral and spiritual atmosphere of life, be finally obliterated by the resistless onward sweep of God's purposes.

But while the Devil and his cohorts of evil, together with those forms of sin which are incidental to unperfected human nature—sins which would exist even if there were no tempter—will thus ultimately be swept out of existence, even as the Scriptures foretell, this is not saying that there will not be similar reactionary forces in any future scheme of psychic evolution like that exhibited by our present world. Indeed, a little reflection must make it seem probable that negative forces like those with which we are familiar, are inseparable from, not to say necessary to, all such world projects of Deity.

To realize that this must be so, consider for a moment how such negative forces arise. A countless number of self-conscious beings, innately eternal and free, but powerless in their primal state to condition the universe around them, begin that course of psychic evolution the outcome of which is the progressive accumulation of power (see Chapters VIII, IX, and X). After millions of ages devoted to the apprehension of and compliance with law—in other words, of obedience to the will of God—they have reached a stage not unfairly represented by ourselves on this earth; a stage, not indeed of omnipotence, but of varying degrees of conscious power; a power which they are free to exert just as the bias of their prevailing ideas shall suggest.

Now is it not more than probable that in every such aggregate of intelligent beings some proud Lucifer will arise, and, forgetting the source of the power which swells his bosom, seek again to establish his throne above that of the Almighty? And should he do so, will he not also get a third—or a fifth, or a tenth—of the hosts of heaven to follow him in the forlorn cause? And would they not equally be cast down into hell? Such a world would thus have its quota of devils precisely as we have ours: spirits who have forever lost the power to say, "Father, thy will be done," and consequently have no other alternative than to expend their power in opposition to God, to the final and inevitable undoing of themselves.

So much for the effect of the sin unpardonable (because unrepentable); but what of the two-thirds—or three-fourths, nine-tenths, or whatever the proportion might be—of the spirits who would remain loyal in such a supreme conflict? Is it not altogether likely that they would do as we are doing—take a zig-zag course, occasionally living up to the truth impressed upon them directly (by God) or indirectly (by nature), but ready at the slightest whim of self-gratification, to spend the power accumulated during cycles of slow evolution in opposition to the very Source and origin of it all? Who can doubt that such will always be the case—making that Scripture an eternal axiom which says: "Many are called but few are chosen."

But, to come back to our point of departure, while such reactionary forces may seem formidable obstacles to the doctrine that God is absolute, they can seem so only to mortals, who, being in the midst of them, cannot see them in eternal perspective; to Godhood itself, viewing with infinite eye the trend of the universe, they must seem less potent even than the very shadows of trifles.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] I do not put this interpretation forward as authoritative,—that would be extremely foolish in any one save God Himself, through the medium of His inspired oracles. I merely wish to suggest that the Beloved Disciple, who was perhaps more deeply versed in the mysteries of God's economy than any other of the Apostles, designed, by the mysterious use of the word logos, to indicate something more than the mere personality of the Son. My interpretation does not preclude the idea that He was with the Father—as indeed we all were—in the beginning, before the world was. But it does make the passage consistent with the fact that our Elder Brother, though he stands foremost among God's children and is the first to receive Godhood, does not differ essentially in the course of His psychic life from that of Peter, Paul, Isaiah, or any other of His brothers or sisters.
[^2] That he could not be the impalpable essence of Buddhism and Creator at the same time, see Chapters IV. and V., also appendix B, where this question is argued out.
[^3] Buddhism actually postulates such a state, which it calls Pralaya or universal night, alternating with a state of Creation, called Manvantana, or universal day, at intervals represented in terms of our years, by a period of fifteen digits respectively; but of course the creative principle or God, which is represented by the universe itself, is postulated as the efficient cause of both states. What possible purpose infinite being could have in these monotonous appearances and disappearances throughout eternity, theosophists do not inform us.
