Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XXIV

GODHOOD INOPERATIVE UNLESS INCARNATED

REVERTING now to my analogy of the previous chapter, I may remark that while the President is beyond the reach of the assassin—since he is not born of woman but is begotten directly by the will of a mighty people—this is what the murderer's bullet can do: it can suspend the executive will of the nation, till its power can be relocated; for magnificent as is this power,—the combined will of eighty millions of people,—it is practically nil, a thing inoperative,—suspended, as it were, in the air,—unless it be invested in a man.

In like manner Godhood, our supreme concept of power, carrying with it omnipotence, omniscience, omnipresence—all the categories which reason correlates with the universe—is incapable of the simplest creative act, save as it is exercised by a being like our Father in heaven or His son Jesus Christ. For by our very manner of conceiving it as separate and distinct from an organized psychic being, we imply, as in the case of Presidency, a power potential but lacking the first requisites of creative power—the capacity to invent, and the ability so to co-ordinate and differentiate the application of power as to bring into being the thing invented.

Godhood alone is therefore not God, any more than Presidency alone is President. Without Godhood a psychic being might invent a solar system, but it could never be projected beyond his own mind; without a psychic being to rest upon, Godhood must remain inoperative, a mere static or potential power, throughout eternity. Strictly speaking, therefore, the categories above named, omnipotence, omniscience, etc., are predicable of Godhood only when invested upon a perfected man; in other words, they are predicable only of God.

We have thus explained how Jesus Christ could become God. For though Catholics insist that He was always God, we cannot so reconcile the fact that He was first the Son of God, the only begotten of the Father, the first-born among many brethren—all which terms imply a time when He was not God; and therefore, instead of the prevalent idea which is read into the first verse of John's Gospel, viz., "In the beginning was Christ, and Christ was with God, and Christ was God,"—I prefer to render the mystery which John hid in the word logos, and which has been translated "the Word," by a term which shall not impugn the passages just quoted relating to his birth, and which shall, moreover, be consistent with his manner of becoming God, viz., "In the beginning (i. e., always, eternally) was Godhood, and Godhood was with (i. e., part of) God . . . and Godhood was made flesh (i. e., was conferred upon man), and dwelt among us, full of grace and truth." [^1]

Note the fact that the words "full of grace and truth" favor my interpretation; for where else than in Godhood or Godliness do these attributes inhere? Even the parenthetical expression, "and we beheld his glory, the glory as of that of the only begotten of the Father," indicates the reception of divine attributes as the very heart of the mystery. At any rate the fact that Christ's organized spiritual life began with the Father—at which time He was consequently not God—is to be reconciled with this other fact proclaimed by Paul that now, "In him dwelleth bodily (i. e., in bodily form) the fulness of Godhood" (Colossians 2:9). My explanation reconciles these apparent contradictories; and that, too, without the need of that soft palliation for religious self-stultification—mystery. So, too, we can now understand how Jesus Christ may be referred to as the eternal God—eternal being one of the categories of the power that makes him God.

Having made plain how one man born of woman became God, I have justified our Saviour's supreme injunction: "Be ye perfect as your Father in heaven is perfect"; also the supreme aphorism of Mormonism: "As man is, God once was; as God is, man may become." I have, moreover, indicated how there may be an infinite number of psychic beings who have attained this supreme rank, and yet, in the sense of the power which ranks them, how there can be only one true God everlasting—"without body, parts, or passions," if you will; how beings yet unborn may, through attaining to the "fullness of Godhood bodily," in future ages be spoken of respectively as "God everlasting—from eternity to eternity."

Many interesting questions spring up at this point which it will be profitable to consider somewhat at length.

In a previous part of this discussion it was pointed out that the Mormon aphorism as to the sequential relations of man and God, implies the possibility of an infinite number of divine beings, related to each other by sequence, and reigning co-ordinately (at least in time if not in authority) as Gods in the universe. The same idea is implied in the opening paragraphs of this chapter; for if the power to create is an eternal relation, and yet no creative act can issue, save as this power is united with a psychic being perfected enough to wield it, it follows that the universe was never without a perfected psychic being; but as "perfected" implies a course of psychic evolution such as we are passing through now, it follows that there must be an infinite line of such psychic beings.

A line of beings related by sequence—such an idea experience enables us to understand; but an infinite line—that is beyond comprehension. A succession without a beginning absolutely staggers the human mind. How could there not be a first! we exclaim. The only answer is the echo of how. But the contradictory alternative, How could there be a first? is equally incomprehensible. For the moment we assume a first God, we immediately ask, What God enabled this being to attain to the rank of Godhood?

It was the mistaken notion that the human mind absolutely demands a resting place, that led philosophers to postulate as final cause, an infinitely extended, uncaused, unconditioned, or Necessary Being—not a being, however, for that would imply limitation, but being unqualified. Now if it were possible to believe such being could invent and execute a creation—an hypothesis transcending all experience,—the moment it succeeded, it would cease to be necessary being, for it would be conditioned in relation to its creation as cause to effect; but the fact that such a condition was inherent in it shows that it never was necessary being. For the tangle of contradictions involved in such a scheme of deriving the visible universe, see Dean Mansel's exposition of the Necessary Being as Creator (Appendix B).

But supposing that such a notion could be made to seem rational, the practical question is, What would our ideals gain thereby? Conceive a time when Creation began. Well, what was before that? Darkness—chaos. A million years before? Darkness—chaos. A million million—not years—but ages? Darkness—chaos. A billion billion cycle of ages? Darkness—chaos. Deity sleeps—he has not yet stirred from all eternity!

The Buddhist notion is at least a trifle better. It gives us a rhythmic, albeit a senseless, purposeless, motion in the universe: a night of 100,000,000,000,000 years, during which Deity inbreathes, drawing into the universal darkness of Chaos men and worlds alike; then a day of equal length during which He breathes them out again!

Compare either of these notions with the Mormon conception of infinitely extending galaxies of worlds peopled by intelligent beings in process of psychic evolution! Granting that all three notions are incomprehensible, which is the nobler conception? Again, which agrees with our experience, limited though it be?

But coming back, the idea that the human mind demands a resting place in the series of causation is a mistaken notion. Are we troubled because our ideas of space and time are necessarily infinite? Yet these present exactly the analogues of the disturbing elements in Causation. For instance, How can there not be a beginning to space (or time)? Unanswerable. Well, let us try it. Let us go in a straight line eastward on the wings of light (185,000 miles per second). After a million million years we rest. Surely, this is the beginning of space. Well, if it is, what is just beyond? Try again,—this time a billion ages. Again we rest, and look eastward. No eternal wall here, no evidence yet of a beginning. We increase our speed a million-fold, and fly for a billion billion ages. We are not an inch nearer the beginning than when we started; nor have we taken one second of time from the beginning and added it to the end; for there is neither beginning nor end to space and time.

What then? Simply this: there is space immediately around us to breathe God's air, build the home nest, and draw from mother earth our simple subsistence; what care we then that the same space extends infinitely in all directions around us? There is time each day to do the simple tasks required of us by our Creator: let the infinite past and future then take care of themselves.

So also harvest follows seed-time—effect follows cause by law inevitable. Why should we be disturbed that the chain extends infinitely both behind and in front of us? Our only concern need be that the links we forge be of steel and not of grass.

One more question in this illimitable excursion we have been taking, and this chapter must close. If, as seems possible, there should be an infinite number of beings like Christ exercising co-ordinately, perhaps independently, the functions of Godhood, what is to preserve unity among them—what to prevent the clash of power which association with human sovereignties has taught us to expect?

If our judgment in the matter were based solely on human analogy, then the question might well be asked. Fancy half a dozen Presidents governing co-ordinately in these United States! Even where sovereignties have well-defined lines of demarkation, a generation rarely passes without imbroglios. But the analogies between governments human and divine hold only in superficial relations. In human governments, the right to rule is rarely, save in republics, based on fitness to rule. In divine governments it is based on no other qualification; and not on relative but absolute fitness. What, indeed, is the essential fact of Godhood, if it is not absolute oneness with the universe? He, therefore, who attains to this power must so have subdued or co-ordinated his own personality, as to offer no friction to the universal constitution of things. Of such a being, it may be said, "He is a God of Truth and cannot lie." Such is the relation which constitutes the unity of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. There might be a million—or an infinite number—of such beings, so far as individual initiative in creation is concerned, and yet essentially only one true God in the universe. For if each shaped his creations in accordance with absolute truth, how could the universal unity be broken—how could a clash in sovereignty occur?

As to the minor question of the ways and means, it need not be entered into here. Sufficient to point out, that where space for world-building is infinite, and materials inexhaustible, and time eternal, there need arise no question of precedence or subordination. As a simple instance of what might be done in our own part of the universe, it is enough to say that within the hollow sphere formed on the radius between our sun and the nearest fixed star, there is ample room for a million solar systems like our own—and creative power has not yet ceased its activity with that.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "I am well aware," says a Catholic writer, "that the Latterday Saints interpret this text as meaning a spirit clothed with a body; but what nearly the whole of mankind, Christians, Jews, Mohammedans, have believed for ages cannot be upset by the gratuitous assertions of a religious innovator of the last century." Well, if it cannot, it cannot; if it can, it can—that is all there is to this argument. Those who see as the daring innovator sees, will follow him; others will not. "In the meanwhile it is well to bear in mind," says Max Muller, "that the universality of an error does not help in the least to make it a truth. It may prove useful to have learnt from history the elementary lesson that no opinion is true simply because it has been held by the greatest intellects, or by the largest number of human beings, at different periods in the history of the world."
