Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XXV

JEHOVAH, GOD OF ABRAHAM, ISAAC, AND JACOB

"WE know," says Paul in his first epistle to the Corinthians (1 Corinthians 8:4, 5, and 6), "that no idol is anything in this world, and that there is no God but one; for though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven or on earth,—as there are Gods many and Lords many,—yet to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things and we unto him, and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things and we through him."

It is a decided relief to feel one's self back again in our own immediate regions of the universe. For although the arguments in the last chapter became necessary because of the ignis fatuus chase which philosophers have led the world, yet, the mind of man being incapable, at this stage of its psychic evolution, to apprehend infinite relations, all such discussions are intrinsically profitless, and may, indeed, be harmful: for to pursue a proposition which at one moment assumes the form, "It must be," and the next, "It can't be," is to invite insanity. Most wisely therefore did the Apostle restrict our philosophizing to God the Father as the immediate cause of all things, and to Jesus Christ as the immediate intelligent agency through which God's will becomes effective.

For it is evident by the expression "one God" that Paul did not have in mind the abstract notion of divine unity, such as forms the concept of the philosopher and the scientist; his notion was restricted to the one, individual being—Jehovah, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, limited in form, infinite only as the executive of Godhood—to whom alone mankind owes allegiance: else why should he couple His personality with that of Jesus Christ, whom elsewhere he describes as the "brightness of the Father's glory, the express image of His person?"

I have taken the liberty of placing in italics certain words in this passage, in order to call attention to an idea often overlooked. That Paul meant to include among the beings that "are called Gods" all the idols worshipped by ancient nations, is plain on the surface; on the other hand, his tacit admission that there are Gods many and Lords many, as well in heaven as upon the earth, shows that he had in view the very possibility discussed in the last chapter; and took occasion, moreover, to exclude even such perfected divine beings from any part in our homage.

Mankind of to-day, therefore, with all their superior knowledge of the physical universe, are restricted to the same divine allegiance as were the peoples mentioned in the Old Testament (whom, by the by, it is becoming quite the fashion, in certain advanced (?) churches, to speak slightingly of as decidedly anthropomorphic and local in their ideas of Deity). It is a blessed restriction—one which I, at least, shall never be tempted to transcend; for that our Father's relations to the greater universe are founded on the rock of truth, I am willing to believe on the evidence that His creations endure; plainly, therefore, my whole duty in life consists in making my relations with Him equally fixed and steadfast, until Christ's injunction shall, if possible, be fulfilled, and I become "perfect as He is perfect." This supreme motive must dominate my life—become the guiding principle of my religion: life and religion being by this very fact merged into one. In my acting upon it day by day, every object, every experience, will have for me a definite meaning: I shall ever tread upon terra firma, for I have cast aside the cloud-gauze and phantasmagoria of metaphysical speculation.

There remains the question of testing so restricted an idea of God by the revelations which He has given of Himself in the holy Scriptures.

That God is infinite, eternal, omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent, absolute or alone, in the universe, I have already reconciled with His personality by showing that these attributes are true of the power which makes Him God,—incidentally showing therefore, in the only way it can be shown, how these same categories are also true of Christ. Let us therefore pass to other revelations, more directly affecting the Father as a personal being.

"God is a spirit," says John, "and they that worship him must worship in spirit and in truth."

Well, is not Christ also a spirit—are we not all spirits—in the same sense? Because a spirit becomes incarnated in a body, does he cease to be a spirit? Again, if we are to worship Him "in spirit," does that imply we are to cease being organized personalities? The fact which the Apostle wished to convey was merely this: As it is the eternal, spiritual essence which constitutes the life and mind of God, so we must approach. Him by that same spiritual essence in ourselves, and not by the purely corporal or physical rites so common among idolators. [^1] This passage therefore does not overthrow the personal idea of God,—especially as a hundred other passages confirm it.

We shall next consider those passages which teach the invisibility of God. "No man," says John, "hath seen God at any time" (John 4:12). So also: "Whom no man hath seen or can see," says Paul, after telling us that God dwells in light which no man can approach (I Timothy 6:15). The latter idea is confirmed in Exodus (Exo. 33:20), where the Lord says to Moses: "Thou canst not see my face, for there shall no man see me and live." His glory, expressed by Paul in terms of light, was so intense that it would have consumed Moses; so he was placed in the cleft of a rock and beheld the back of the Lord as he passed by.

Now if it could be proved that God is invisible to man—and this fact may be granted—would it thereby be proved that He is not a personal Being, an exalted Man? Not evidently to the mind of John, who, though he declares no man hath seen God, makes an exception of our Saviour (vi. 46), showing that the Father is in a form to be seen.

The fact is, that God and man are in different planes of being, the higher of which is invisible to the lower. If the idea be put in this form, viz., "Mortality cannot see immortality," all the apparent contradictions disappear, between the many instances recorded where God has been seen by man, and John's and Paul's emphatic denial that such a thing is possible; for then it will be seen that in all the instances where man has beheld God with his natural eyes, the latter did not appear in His glory, but functioned, for the time being, on the plane of mortality, and was therefore by so much not God; on the other hand, where man has seen God in His glory, it has been by dream, or vision, or other supernatural elevation of perception,—in which case man has, by so much, been more than mortal.

A notable instance of the latter is that of Moses, who, during the forty days and nights that he was with the Lord on Mt. Sinai, must have been raised to God's plane; for when he came down, his face shone with such effulgence that the people of Israel could not stand to look upon it. So also did Christ furnish examples of this law; for it seems that after His resurrection He became visible or invisible to whom He would; evidently according as He functioned on the mortal or the immortal plane.

Another argument against personality is sometimes drawn from the fact of God's immutability. The Scriptures represent Him as the same yesterday, to-day, and forever. "I am the Lord, and I change not," is the revelation of Him by Malachi (Malachi 3:6); while James (James 1:17) speaks of Him as the "Father of lights, with whom is no variableness or shadow of turning."

In so far as immutability is to be regarded as an absolute category, it inheres in Godhood, and is the very foundation of that infinite integrity on which is predicated the revelation that "God is a God of truth and cannot lie." Before our Father attained to Godhood, He passed through mutations such as are inevitable in a course of psychic evolution; but when He attained to Godhood,—when His soul became perfectly attuned to the infinite harmony of the universe,—how could He be other than immutable? For change would then imply degeneracy.

But in a relative sense, God is changeable. Read the history of His dealings with the human race, and you will find it one long tapestry of mutation and change: of laws established and abrogated, ordinances ordained and set aside, commands and counter-commands. How, indeed, could He act the role of Providence, did He not change? How could He insure the eternal progress of His children, save by a course of progressive adaptation of the divine requirements?

In what way, then, is His mutability reconciled with His immutability? In this way: As respects the eternal principles underlying His purposes, He never changes; these form the very warp and woof of His divine perfection; but as respects the methods or devices for bringing about these purposes, He changes as the exigency requires; and the variations possible to His invention are practically infinite. How else could He bring them about?

It is by reason of this very principle of mutation in God that we perceive all things to be in a state of evolution here on earth. Nothing stands still; the law of life seems to be: Go forward, or the very forces of the universe will drag you back He who does not progress, immediately begins to retrograde.

And were it not for our faith, these very mutations would overwhelm us with doubt and fear; as it is, we know—all may know who will—that though the world seems to be going wrong, yet down upon the seething turbulence of life shines steadfastly forever the purposes of God, even as shines the sun above and beyond the storm and stress of the elements, which its very shining has indirectly served to set moving.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "I am well aware," says a Catholic writer, "that the Latterday Saints interpret this text as meaning a spirit clothed with a body; but what nearly the whole of mankind, Christians, Jews, Mohammedans, have believed for ages cannot be upset by the gratuitous assertions of a religious innovator of the last century." Well, if it cannot, it cannot; if it can, it can—that is all there is to this argument. Those who see as the daring innovator sees, will follow him; others will not. "In the meanwhile it is well to bear in mind," says Max Muller, "that the universality of an error does not help in the least to make it a truth. It may prove useful to have learnt from history the elementary lesson that no opinion is true simply because it has been held by the greatest intellects, or by the largest number of human beings, at different periods in the history of the world."
