Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XXVII

THE FULLNESS OF PRIESTHOOD IS GODHOOD

LET us now consider more attentively the nature of those reciprocal relations, whereby God, on the one hand, prepares the environment for man's ascent, points out the way of using it, and even lends him the very power by which to rise; and whereby man, on the other hand, steadfastly subordinates his desires to his expanding sense of truth and right, making it the law of his life to say: "Father, thy will, not mine, be done."

It is very evident not only that co-operation between Instructor and instructed could not be closer, but also that without just such co-operation it would be impossible for man to become perfect as his Father is perfect. "Without me," said Christ, "ye can do nothing"—a truth which He enforced by this parable: "I am the vine, ye are the branches: as the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; neither can ye, except ye abide in me" (John 15:45).

No reasoning could be more cogent. As well cut off a branch and expect it to mature on its own account into a perfect tree, as to expect from any man, turned loose in the universe and refusing divine guidance, that he will in the end attain to Godhood.

Let us not, however, be of that narrow type of thinkers who believe that such reciprocal relations between God and man are not possible, to a limited extent at least, unless a man accepts the rites of religion. Darwin, Huxley, Tyndall, Spencer,—all the great naturalists,—are prophets in their way, as much as was Moses and Isaiah; for did they not bring truth into the world? Very important truth; truth that in one short century has transformed the civilization of the world.

What though they did not recognize the true God? It is rather creditable to their integrity—considering the impossible creature theologians made Him. Infidels, however, they were not; for, if they were agnostic as to the Law-giver, none surpassed them in reverence for the law; and so their Father in heaven, to whom they were blind in life, led them by the hand along rich paths of truth and will still lead.

Nevertheless, it is impossible that the laborers in the vineyard should go on forever without coming face to face with the Lord of the vineyard; and so the time is inevitable when these great lovers of truth must recognize with Whom, not merely with what, they have been in co-operation. Then they will have to make covenants directly with God, as one man with another, according to the rites and ordinances of the Gospel. Should they refuse, how could God assist them further in the acquirement of psychic power? For would He not, by doing so, be directly building up a power antagonistic to the unity and harmony of the universe? He not only would not—He could not do so; and, therefore, these men would from that day begin the process of undoing themselves. Being in opposition to God, they would have arrayed against them all the positive forces of the universe, and who could stand under such circumstances? For God, being the Creator of our environments, is essentially the universe to us.

It holds, therefore, as an absolute generalization, that without the Gospel or plan of salvation, no being can complete his psychic evolution. As to what the initiatory steps of this plan are,—the laws of adoption into the kingdom of God,—I must refer the reader to previous chapters. Here I desire to take up the theme implied by Paul when he said: "Wherefore let us cease to speak of the first principles of Christ, and press on to perfection; not laying again a foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, of the teaching of baptisms, and of laying on of hands, and of the resurrection from the dead, and of eternal judgment: and this will we do, if God permit."

As already pointed out elsewhere, Mormonism, so far from contemplating a vacuous, inane future, characterized by idleness, and relieved only by the doubtful diversion of golden harps and the "beatific vision," looks forward to an after life filled with untrammelled opportunities for noble endeavor: the scientific investigation, or analysis and synthesis, of all that goes to make up world-building; the development of more and more perfect social relations for mankind; and the gradual integration of the psychic life of this planet, with the perfect life of other spheres. For, in the ultimate outcome of man, no perfection is to be attained by miraculous endowment. Causes must ever be adequate to effects.

During these ages of preparation he is to be a co-worker with angels in carrying out the plans of the Creator. It follows, therefore, that from the moment he makes covenants as a conscious co-operator with Deity, he becomes an agent of the Almighty; and in order that his acts shall have the same eternal significance that they would were they performed by divine Authority itself, they must be done by God's sanction. In other words, the Father must delegate to him part of His Godhood; which looked at from man's point of view becomes Priesthood.

From my thesis, "The fullness of Priesthood is Godhood," may be drawn the inference that the attainment of Godhood is through successive degrees of Priesthood. But hitherto the thought has been maintained that this supreme outcome of evolution is attained by man to the extent, and only to the extent, that he discovers and obeys law. What is the meaning, then, of its being attained through the medium of ordination? Simply this: Priesthood is God's official sanction for man's use of the degree of Godhood with which his obedience to law has invested him. Put it in this way: A man by assiduous devotion to legal training has fitted himself, say, for the position of judge on the Supreme Bench; in other words, the power of judgehood, to coin a word, is in him; but that does not make him judge,—the President's appointment only can do that. In like manner, the ordination of a man to the Priesthood is God's recognition of his right to win and use, by devotion to truth, so much of Godhood.

Painfully aware as I am of the trivial and artificial associations which the word priesthood must arouse through the reader's acquaintance with its use in history, literature, and contemporary religions, I hesitated long before using it to signify divine authority, or God's official sanction of man's attainments through self-effort. I shall be pardoned, therefore, if I take a little time to enlarge and dignify the connotation of the word in this new sense.

Hitherto he can have understood the word at best as standing for an order of men set apart to administer rites and ordinances, which, though unrelated or but superficially related to life itself, are supposed to be vital to man's welfare in the hereafter. In Mormonism, Priesthood is the badge or official sign of that conscious co-operation between God and man above referred to, without which his psychic evolution is, as we have seen, impossible; not a mere tacit feeling that he is so related to God, but a real, vital contract entered into by sacred covenant in holy places.

Accordingly, all male members of the Church in good standing hold some degree of the Priesthood; for every man is equally entitled to God's co-operation and guidance in the fruition of his psychic life. And since such fruition involves all aspects of law, officiation by authority of this sacred endowment is not confined to spiritual matters alone: whatever in life affects the temporal or eternal welfare of man may come under the guardianship and care of this divine investment. Indeed, as Priesthood is God's license for the ultimate attainment of Godhood, every man holding the sacred office must, if he realizes its solemn obligations, halt and ask, "Would God do the thing in contemplation?" ere he ventures to act upon it. Needless to confess, however, that in this, as in all other endeavors toward righteousness, practice at best only falters after precept.

By degrees of the Priesthood, mentioned above, are meant the various offices established by Christ, viz., Deacons, Priests, Teachers, Elders, Seventies, High Priests, Apostles, and so on. Each has its range of duties in relation to the temporal and spiritual welfare of the Church as a social organization; but the Priesthood, out of which these offices grow, has, as shown above, an eternal significance to the bearer himself,—or else no significance whatever, according to whether or not he magnifies its possibilities. The Priesthood of an Elder, for instance, is God's license for such a range of activities in the winning of Godhood, that a million years of psychic evolution will not exhaust them; yet the ordination itself adds nothing to the man's inherent power; it only gives him opportunity.

The assertion, sometimes made, that Mormonism believes salvation and exaltation can be won by the laying on of hands will thus be seen to be a slander. The position of the Church is this: while rites and ordinations add nothing in and of themselves, yet are salvation and exaltation impossible without them; for, as we have seen, psychic perfection depends absolutely upon God's co-operation; but God, being a perfected man and not a vague abstraction, enters into co-operation with lesser psychic beings by definite contract; rites and ordinations are His divinely appointed tokens of such contract. Being therefore essential to God's co-operation, they are essential to man's salvation and exaltation; and consequently the man who will not make definite covenants with God—he who vaguely trusts that if he lives a good, honest life, things will come out all right in the end—may not lose eternal life,—since there are a million lower altitudes while only one summit; but he will surely fail of becoming perfect as God is perfect.

I have just stated that the reception of Priesthood adds no power to a man. This needs qualification. While it does not increase the man's innate capacity or ability, it gives him dominion, and with dominion a key to the use of God's power through the medium of the Holy Ghost. Of two men possessed of equal dominance by natural acquirement, the one holding the Priesthood can do things which the other must not attempt. This general truth was illustrated by an incident in the life of Paul. The Apostle had been casting out devils in the name of Jesus, when certain sons of one Sceva, a Jewish high priest, attempted to imitate him. The result was disastrous. "Jesus I know," cried the evil spirit, "and Paul I know; but who are ye? And the man in whom the evil spirit was, leaped upon them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded."

Now as to the question of dominion resulting from the attainment of Priesthood, is not this precisely what John the Revelator meant when he said we should become "kings and priests unto God the Father" and reign forever and ever on the earth? (Revelation 1:6 and Revelation 5:10). Peter 1n like manner (I Peter 2:5, 9), speaks of the saints as "an elect race, a royal Priesthood." But Priesthood without dominion is meaningless; and Paul, as well as John 1n the above quoted passage, suggests the dominion, when he tells us that Christ's eternal place is above all "principality and power, and might, and dominion" (Ephesians 1:4), whether in this world or in the world to come. What, then, are these principalities and powers in the world to come, if not subordinate delegations of divine authority? And if they are such delegations then they must be forms of dominion exercised by man in virtue of the attainment of Priesthood.

Again, what could be the purpose of such dominion, other than the dispensation to man of opportunities for the attainment of perfection? That Peter, Paul, and John saw these opportunities only in their aspect of social evolution was quite in keeping with the bias of their time. The natural world meant nothing, or little more than nothing, to the ancients. We, with clearer vision, feel now that to be a great scientist, a great inventor, is intrinsically more Godlike than to be a great king; and hence, by parity of reasoning, we include in God's dispensations of dominion to man, opportunities for doing and becoming, not only in the social world, but also in the natural world,—in short, in all other aspects which constitute supreme creative power.

My point, however, so far as this chapter is concerned, is this: Part of Priesthood is invariably dominion; and all of dominion, when it results from divine authority, is Priesthood. If I can show a similar correlation in respect of Godhood, then my thesis will be established. Such correlation must be seen by direct intuition, if seen at all. I ask then, Is not the universe related to God, as God is related to man? When He began the work of creating the solar system, was it not by a dispensation of dominion? Is it thinkable that He could create out of harmony, and without reference to the unity, of the universe? Plainly, it is not.

Dominion is part of Godhood, then, just as it is part of Priesthood; and these two ideas are therefore related as my thesis indicates. But do you realize the significance of this conclusion? It means this: that Priesthood, though it is a dispensation of God to man, is not something created by God; it is part of the infinite constitution of the universe itself. It is Godhood in small—Godhood to the extent that man's perfections fit him to wield it; [^1] in other words, it is an eternal relation of intelligence; which fact I shall conclude by showing is also revealed in Scripture.

The reader cannot but have wondered at that curious passage in Hebrews (Hebrews 7:1, 2, 3), wherein Melchisedek, king of (Jeru) Salem, "priest of the Most High God . . . being first by interpretion king of righteousness, and after that . . . king of peace,"—is declared to be "without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life: but made like unto the son of God; abideth a priest continually." He can hardly so far have stultified his intelligence as to have believed these categories true of Melchisedek, the man; they are easily reconcilable of Melchisedek, the Priest. What, indeed, can the words, "made like unto the Son of God,"—mean other than this: that as Christ received the fullness of Godhood, so Melchisedek received part; both of which (as this discussion has, I hope, made plain) are literally and truly, "without father, without mother, without descent; having neither beginning of days nor end of life,"—in other words eternal.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Incidentally, and by way of correcting a widely advertised misinterpretation of Mormonism, attention is called to the conception that any man holding the Priesthood and actually exercising the functions of divine authority, is virtually God within the limits of that authority; in the same sense that an officer of the government is virtually President of the United States, within the legitimate scope of his office. Mormonism holds no man infallible—God only is that; nevertheless the official acts of the Priesthood, if based on righteousness and within the scope of the authority delegated by God—are infallible,—as much so, as if God Himself had done them. This ought to make clear an exclamation by Brigham Young, to the effect that "Adam is our father and our God and the only God with whom we shall have [immediately] to do." That He is our father must be plain to believers in the Bible; that He is our God, in the sense that He will forever preside over the world that He peopled, ought not to be a stumbling block; for such reverence to Adam in no way derogates from our Father in heaven, the Creator of many systems of worlds, nor from Jesus Christ, who by the appointment of the Father is supreme ruler over many worlds including our own.
