Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XXVIII

IF NOT MORMONISM—WHAT?

TO Latter-day Saints who have been accustomed to looking at the human race as exhibiting while on earth the essential present, or time-link, in an endless chain of divine being, the conclusions reached in the preceding chapters will be regarded quite as matters of fact; but to the modern Christian world, long imbued with the notion that mankind is a subsidiary creation,—an order of being quite different from and inferior to that of God Himself, I can well imagine they will seem little short of blasphemous; and therefore, also that, though they cannot be refuted, they will not readily be believed and accepted.

It seems pertinent, therefore, to close the discussion with a chapter based on this point of view: Granted that these conclusions are false, what follows? What other teleological vistas, forward and backward, are left to the race?

As a preliminary, it may be remarked that whatever be the nature of those other vistas,—however unscientific they may seem by comparison—any holding of them up to view will not materially affect the multiplication of religions; for in respect of the tenet-creating tendency human beings may not unfitly be likened to a thrifty young orchard. The religious feeling is in them even as the sap is in the trees,—a sort of dumb, emotional potentiality ever seeking opportunity to express itself in forms of devotion.

Now, as there is evidently a natural evolution of the trees—into forms representing God's ideals, and crowned with luscious fruit; so there must evidently be a natural evolution of this religious feeling. And as a judicious orchardist can, by proper digging and pruning, materially assist the unfolding and fructivity of the trees, so there is manifestly a place for the pastor in the natural and spiritual evolution of mankind.

But note now the alternative: if the orchardist be actuated by artificial ideas, he may prune the growing tendency of his trees into all sorts of abortive forms—resembling nothing else in the natural world; with this penalty, however, that he will get no fruit. So also may the religious enthusiast,—guided by fantastic interpretations of Scripture, or the still more erratic conclusions of occult speculation,—prune and shape the emotional tendencies of his congregation. May—did I say? Has,—does; for how else can you account for the ten thousand varieties of psychic contortion that pass and have passed for religion among mankind?

That such abortive religions will never yield fruits of eternal life—and by such fruits I mean increased present power in the individual: physically, intellectually, socially, morally, and spiritually—is best proved by the fact that they generally postpone such fruits to a hypothetical future; whereas, it is next thing to a truism that the religion which does not yield its rewards in the heaven of the Here and Now, will never—because it can never—yield them in eternity.

What, then, is the remedy for abortive religion-making? Precisely the same as that which we have already applied to abortive tree-culture. That remedy is to let God be true for every man; in other words, to let nature alone,—which involves finding out what is nature, and then removing all artificial obstructions, so that she may be alone. Are men less subject to natural law than trees? Do we prune and shape a growing tree by the speculations of seers and Mahatmas—or the vagaries of Christian Science? Then, in God's name, let us cease ignoring the laws of nature which constitute man's physical and spiritual environment; cease calling phenomena illusions—cease to go whoring after phantasmal "realities."

For if anything is fixed and certain, it is this: that he who rises above his present environment—his present sum total of impinging phenomena, if you please—is prepared for a higher, nobler sphere,—a sphere more difficult, and therefore more full of truth surprises. And the evidence is this, that his power of bliss is within him—not stored away in a hypothetical heaven; and he who lets present environments rise above him, must inevitably sink to a lower, cruder, more monotonous level. And again the evidence is this, that his weakness or damnation is within him—not locked up in some hypothetical hell.

Mormonism in taking such a stand merely voices what seem obviously the principles of common sense. They are, in fact, the principles which must underlie the application of scientific thinking to matters religious. If such thinking were made the criterion of religious truth, how, like punctured wind-bags, would the swelling spiritual "isms" of the day fall flat over the face of the earth!

To have weight or effect, however, such thinking would have to be applied by the religion-makers themselves, scientists being regarded as the natural enemies of religion. But if religious leaders were fitted by scientific training for such thinking, there would be no gas-blown theories of salvation to puncture. Men would have recognized long ago the natural connection between this world of ours with its varied phenomena and the education of the human soul for eternal life.

It will thus be found that religions of the unscientific kind have no teleological vistas either of the past or of the future; merely a precipitous starting-point, creation, with no indication of how or why, a more or less artificial earth-life, in which the supreme good seems to be to get as little entangled with things earthly as possible, and lastly a final jump off—into heaven or hell. And as to the significance of these final states, we get little more of rational perspective than is contained in the child's "good-place" and "bad-place." It is true that, of heaven and hell word-painting, designed to dazzle or terrorize the sinner, we have lurid examples enough in the sermons of revivalism; but the moment they are subjected to three consecutive scientific questions, they shrivel and fade into what they are—mere reckless products of imagination gone mad.

And it is for this reason, no doubt, that the religions of the day deny the right of science to question them. The domain of religion is postulated as being a vague spiritual country beyond the territory of reason; whose methods of cultivation are so diverse from those of the intellectual that they present no analogies even, let alone examples, of common ground. Even so astute a thinker as W. T. Harris, United States Commissioner of Education, in an article opposing religious instruction in the public schools, recently published in a prominent journal, has fallen into this psychological error, saying:

The principle of religious instruction is authority; that of secular instruction is demonstration and verification. It is obvious that these two principles should not be brought into the same school, but separated as widely as possible. Religious truth is revealed in allegoric and symbolic form, and is to be apprehended not merely by the intellect, but by the imagination and the heart. The analytic-understanding is necessarily hostile and skeptical in its attitude toward religious truth. The pupil is taught in mathematics to love demonstration and logical proof, and he is taught in history to verify the sources and to submit all tradition to probabilities of common experience. The facts of common experience dealing with the ordinary operations of causality are not sufficient to serve as symbols of what is spiritual. They are opaque facts and do not serve for symbols; symbols are facts which serve as lenses with which to see divine things. On themes so elevated as those religious faith deals with, the habit of thinking cultivated in secular instruction is out of place. Even the attitude of mind cultivated in secular instruction is unfitted for the approach to religious truth. Religious instruction should be surrounded with solemnity. It should be approached with ceremonial preparations so as to lift up the mind to the dignity of the lesson received.

When we consider the nature of the ultimate facts which religionists seek to maintain, there is small wonder that they are driven to such dilemmas as the above respecting the nature of spiritual life. The God they postulate is so unlike any concept of experience that, by their own confession, He transcends all analogy. Indeed, "A God understood is a God dethroned," has long stood for a truism among them. Nevertheless, they are driven, perforce, to make this primal Mystery act, since the world is to be created and peopled, and religion must somehow come to bless mankind. Accordingly, they postulate subaltern mysteries, one after another; such as, that the earth was made out of nothing; that man's soul is the breath of Deity; that the transition between the natural and the spiritual world is abysmal; that man is saved solely by the merits of Jesus without reference to works; that heaven is so unlike earth that we can form no conception of it; and so on through all the vague categories of modern Christianity.

And as is their conception of God, so of a piece are all its corollaries; with the result that religion has become a ghostly creature, compelled to lurk only in those dark corners where the light of science cannot penetrate, and its priests a body of soothsayers afraid to speak with authority, save on matters beyond the province of verification; or else it has degenerated into a system of symbolism demanding constant soul-stultification on the part of its adherents: the holding of opposite views in science and faith,—justified on the thin assumption that the two planes of being are different!

Contrast with all this vacuity the positiveness of Mormonism,—the logical inevitableness of its doctrines; and instead of the mechanical cosmogony of sectarianism, opposed alike to science and reason, trace through the scheme of salvation, as taught by Latter-day Saints, that same golden thread which has unified the researches of science, the principle of evolution, or, as we call it, the principle of eternal progress; not evolution drifting along the line of least resistance, but evolution directed at every step by creative intelligence: Then ask yourself this question: "If Mormonism does not present the true scheme of salvation, where shall man turn to find it?"
