Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

CHAPTER XXIX

WHAT SECTARIANISM HAS TO OFFER

IN connection with the theme of the last chapter, call to mind the fact that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was the one and only religion in all the world denied representation in the World's Congress of Religions during the late Chicago Fair. Was it not an unique, an enviable distinction to have thrust upon us? Christ spoke of a certain rock which had been rejected by all the builders, but which nevertheless became the chief corner-stone. Can you blame the Mormons for the unalterable conviction that in the restoration, through Joseph Smith, of the Gospel of Jesus Christ in its pristine purity, and with all its keys and powers, including authority to officiate in His name, God is fulfilling anew that very striking prediction?

And speaking of the modern builders' rejecting this stone of Mormonism, brings me to a consideration again of the occasion which led to the writing of this book: the concerted movements of various ministerial bodies with a view to "crushing" out our non-conformity. I trust that I have given these zealous imitators of Christ some rational idea of the real work before them. I hope that they will realize that the mud-slinging which they have indulged in during the past,—the Danite canards, the Mountain Meadow horror (deplored as much by Mormon as by Gentile), and the charges of Mormon ignorance and immorality,—will not suffice to aid them with any candid reader of these pages: They must meet the truths and arguments here set forth, or go back to their wooden creeds defeated.

Will they attempt it? No. Judged by their past record, they will appeal again to the refuge of lies; they will cull some fragments from this treatise which lend themselves to distortion and misrepresentation. These, taken from the context, they will overthrow and cover with ridicule, and then pose as champions. I do not speak thus bitterly against ministers in general; only against the tribe that conceive it to be evidence of holiness to attack and vilify the Mormons. May God still give me charity to remember that they are my brethren!

Mormonism presents to the world a new point of view for studying the meaning of life; a point of view so marvellous in its reach that it encompasses and ties together in one vast, rational unity all the truths known to the race.

But curiously enough, the ministers that come among us are the last people on earth who are willing or able to appreciate this point of view. Such has been the nature of their education for the ministry that Mormonism offends them at every point. "Egregious materialism!" they exclaim. It is the only relief they can find for their offended sense of ministerial dignity. [^1]

Poor stuffed and starched automatons of the theological seminary, with their upward-rolling eyes and teary voices, their ultra-specialized training and consequent narrow notions of religion as something connected with chapel services,—how could they be expected to estimate justly a religion which involves the sum total of man's ideas and activities; how appreciate the resultant social system, which is a more vital departure from the artificial holiness that, like the love-weed in our alfalfa, is blighting the healthy naturalism of our time,—than was the departure of science from the cosmogony of the Middle Ages?

How, with the bias of the seminary upon them, can they feel anything like Christian charity for a religion which figures neither as a divine gilding upon life, nor as a divine influx into life, but as a transplanting of divine life itself upon this planet; a religion which aims to sanctify and make holy every needful activity of man; a religion which counts law wherever found, whether in nature or in revelation, as equally the voice of the living God?

How, with their prim notions of ministerial broadcloth and immaculate shirt-bosoms, can they keep down a feeling of contempt for the Elder that plows and sows, the Seventy that shoes horses, the High Priest that plasters your house, the Apostle that superintends a factory or presides over a bank,—for a body of ministers, in short—comprising almost the total male membership of the church—that do, during week days, whatever the exigencies of life call upon them to do, and preach, if need be, on Sundays?

Even in the narrow field affected by these ministers, that of spiritual matters, Mormonism presents a depth and richness of soil which would bring a harvest to their starving congregations, could they but get away from their hackneyed texts and commentaries long enough to dig into it. As it is, what have they to offer in lieu of the systems they would crush? With what principles do they purpose to "reform, educate, and civilize" us?

It is conceivable that not all of these ministers have joined in the crushing crusade, but that some are in fact still intent upon our conversion by peaceable means. In order that these may be fore-armed, and so know how to approach us, I purpose confiding to them some prejudices of the thoughtful, intelligent Mormon, who is acquainted with the deeper principles of his own faith, and also with what may be gained of theirs from a study of their confessions of faith. [^2]

Well, then, to improvise an allegory, his own religion presents to him the aspect of a vigorous young tree; diversified in form and function, yet still bearing the stamp of a perfect unity; branch, and twig, and leaf, and flower, and fruit, each growing organically out of a greater something preceding; the whole filled and made alive by a mysterious power which is constantly sending its roots more deeply into the spiritual world, only to extend its beneficent sway more widely in the natural world.

Theirs—the religions of his would-be reformers—do not present to him the unity of even an artificial tree. They seem rather to be things wooden, built from timber cut for the most part during the dark ages, and nailed together—literally nailed—by the decrees of ecclesiastical councils. How some of these doctrines have hung to the rest of the illogical ensemble, during the enlightenment of the nineteenth century, is matter for wonder; as, for instance, the doctrine of the creation of the world from nothing, of the predestination of man to heaven or hell, and of the damnation of unbaptized infants. [^3]

I have said that such are the relative aspects of his own, as compared with other religions, to the thoughtful, philosophical Mormon. But the effect is precisely the same with the Mormon who never reasons back to final causes; for in his dumb way he still feels, by a kind of blanket intuition, the living unity and essential rationality of the one, and the artificiality and ineffectiveness of the other.

Having pleaded guilty for myself and my co-religionists, to which definitely biased state of mind, I dare say, I have done the worst thing possible for our future peace and well-being; for what shall now restrain the rest of the body ministerial from giving up their angelic intentions toward us, and deserting to the contemplated crushing campaign previously referred to? Have we not numerous examples of the facility with which sectaries unite, when the object of attack is Mormonism?

Seriously, what is this crushing business to signify? Is the attack to be Scriptural? It dare not be—these ministers know that too well. Educational? Equally impossible. Political? Perhaps. But how shallow is the study of Mormonism which concludes that it can be swerved from its ideals by mere political circumvention! When a Mormon gentleman was refused his seat in the House of Representatives, the average minister no doubt rubbed his hands and chuckled at the crushing blow that had been dealt to Mormonism. What a piece of inane fatuity! It affected the health of the "octopus" no more than would the plucking of a leaf affect a tree. The real injury in such a case would be to the liberty and integrity of our beloved country.

But perhaps these holy men are dreaming of something more drastic; to which, indeed, political hindrances might be made a prelude. Perhaps disfranchisement, confiscation, expulsion, mob-violence, bayonets, wholesale massacres,—are among the responses they get to their pious prayers in our behalf.

Well, if crushing is in the womb of time for us, let it come. We are ready to a man to die, if need be, for our convictions. But let our persecutors not imagine that Mormonism would suffer. Individually we should merely transfer our efforts for mankind to the Church of the First Born in the spirit world—for this life is not the only sphere where the work of salvation is being carried on; and the very ranks of our enemies might be trusted for recruits to take our places here.

However, before they start this new crusade for the glory of God, let me commend to them the advice of one Gamaliel, a wise man in his day: "Refrain from these men and let them alone: for if this counsel, or this work, be of men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it,—lest haply ye be found even to fight against God."

Footnotes

"Of course those who had these ideas of what a Prophet should be, were much disappointed in Joseph; for if a Prophet should talk, dress, and act in this manner, he was very unlike one. He wore no beard, did not have long hair, and was very cleanly in his person; he dressed with taste, had a pleasant face, a sweet smile, a cheerful and joyous manner, and was natural. He was the very opposite of what a religious bigot would think a Prophet ought to be; and he never took any pains to be otherwise.

"He was a great hater of shams. He disliked long-faced hypocrisy, and numerous stories are told of his peculiar manner of rebuking it. He knew that what many people call sin is not sin, and he did many things to break down superstition. He would wrestle, play ball, and enjoy himself in physical exercises, and he knew that he was not committing sin in so doing. The religion of heaven is not to make men sorrowful, not to curtail their enjoyment, and to make them groan, and sigh, and wear long faces, but to make them happy. This Joseph desired to teach the people; but in doing so, he, like our Savior, when he was on the earth, was a stumbling-block to bigots and hypocrites. They could not understand him; he shocked their prejudices and traditions."—GEORGE Q. CANNON.

---
Notas:
[^1] "In the days of Joseph, to appear like a Prophet a man should, according to the popular idea, wear a long beard, long hair, and dress in an outlandish style. If he did not wash himself and clean and pare his nails, it would be all the better. He should not smile and be merry. When he spoke, his voice should be deep and solemn; when he walked, his tread should be slow and measured. If he lived in a cave it would suit many people better than if he lived in a house. He should be different from other men in every respect.
[^2] I am fully aware, however, that such creeds are not a just criterion of the best work being done by ministers of the Gospel. Indeed, where men are really helping to shape the social destiny of the race, the chances are ten to one, that they have overthrown their creeds and are drawing inspiration from the scientific thought of the age. For such men I have the greatest reverence, and feel sure they will not take to themselves what I have said against the narrow, bigoted preachers that make so much disturbance about reforming Latter-day Saints.
[^3] It is gratifying to know that the same Sectarian Convention which resolved to open the crusade on the Mormons also pulled out from their creed the rusty nail represented by the last named doctrine.
