Nels L. Nelson, Scientific Aspects of Mormonism ( 1904)

APPENDIX A

SCRIPTURAL PROOFS OF PRE-EXISTENCE

THE doctrine of pre-existence, in the form invented by Buddha, has been held for thousands of years. Plato and Pythagoras taught it among the Greeks, it was a tenet of the esoteric religion of Egypt, and it is inculcated to-day by Theosophy. As presented by all these schools, the Hindoo notion remains essentially the same: man has a pre-existence by virtue of re-incarnation, again and again, in mortal or earth life.

The doctrine as held by the Latter-day Saints, while abundantly foreshadowed in holy writ, is new, so far as I have been able to discover, among the beliefs of mankind. The poet Wordsworth, in a moment of poetic inspiration, had this first estate of the soul revealed to him, as may be seen in the following noble stanza from his Intimations of Immortality.

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting:

The soul that rises with us—our life's star—

Hath had elsewhere its setting,

And cometh from afar,

Not in entire forgetfulness,

And not in utter nakedness,

But trailing clouds of glory do we come

From God, who is our home.

Heaven lies about us in our infancy;

Shades of the prison-house begin to close

Upon the growing boy;

But he beholds the light, and whence it flows,

He sees it in his joy;

The youth who daily farther from the east

Must travel still is nature's priest.

And by the vision splendid

Is on his way attended;

At length the man perceives it die away,

And fade into the light of common day.

What a pity that the poet should not trust the truthness thus directly shining from God into his soul, rather than defer to the theological opinions of his time. See how he discredits his own inspiration:

To that dream-like vividness and splendor which invest objects of sight in childhood, every one, I believe, if he would look back, could bear testimony, and I need not dwell upon it here; but having in the poem regarded it as a presumptive evidence of a prior state of existence, I think it right to protest against a conclusion which has given pain to some good and pious persons, that I meant to inculcate such a belief. It is far too shadowy a notion to be recommended to faith as more than an element in our instincts of immortality. But let us bear in mind that though the idea is not advanced in Revelation, there is nothing there to contradict it, and the fall of man presents an analogy in its favor.

Let us now proceed to examine whether the idea is or is not advanced in Revelation.

It will not be questioned that Jesus Christ had a pre-existence. The passages which prove this are so numerous, that every Bible reader must be familiar with them. He could not have been a "Lamb slain from the foundations of the earth," without having had a definite psychic existence, so as to accept such a divine mission. Indeed, He says Himself in so many words: "I came forth from the Father and am come into the world; again I leave the world, and go to the Father." Then, too, Christ's prayer: "Glorify thou me with the glory I had with thee before the world was," definitely fixes his pre-mortal status. (See John 16:28; also John 17:5).

But Christ is called the "first-born among many brethren" (Romans 8:29) also the "first-born of all creatures." Manifestly a first-born implies a second-born; and if a second-born, then a millionth-born. Whence we draw the conclusion that Christ is our elder Brother; a conclusion further strengthened by Paul's remark: "For both he that sanctifieth [Christ], and they who are sanctified [mankind] are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren."

This relationship between the Saviour and the saved is made clearer by other passages. For instance, Paul says: "Furthermore, we have had fathers in the flesh which corrected us and we gave them reverence; shall we not much rather be subject to the Father of spirits, and live?" (Hebrews 12:9) And Christ taught all men to pray, "Our Father which art in Heaven"; and lest there should be any doubt as to the significance of "our," He says on another occasion: "Say unto my brethren, I ascend to my Father and your Father; and to my God, and to your God." (John 20:17) Other passages might be quoted to sustain the equal fatherhood of God, and the equal brotherhood of man with Jesus Christ. If, therefore, Christ had a pre-existence, it is fair to presume that His brethren and sisters also had one.

This latter fact becomes more than a presumption when we consider passages like this: "Then the word of the Lord came unto me saying: 'Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee; and before thou camest out of the womb, I sanctified thee and ordained thee a prophet unto the nations'" (Jeremiah 1:4, 5.) Is it possible that such a commission could be made and the recipient not be in existence? John the Baptist was likewise chosen before his body was conceived upon the earth. So also was Ishmael; and so well was his character as a spirit known, and the character of the spirits allotted to his lineage, that the angel said: "His hand shall be against every man's hand and every man's hand against him" (Genesis 16:1)—a characteristic to which his race are true to this day.

Nor is Jesus Christ the only being called Son of God. Adam is equally so named. (Luke 3:38). John says moreover: "Beloved, now we are sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is." (I John 3:2); thus emphasizing the essential kinship of Christ and mankind.

Consider next this remarkable passage: "Then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind and said; 'Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge? Gird up now thy loins like a man, for I will demand of thee and answer thou me: Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? Declare if thou hast understanding.'"

Job was evidently in existence at this time—a time when the earth was still in chaos,—just as we have seen was the case with Jeremiah, John the Baptist, Ishmael, and Jesus Christ. That the rest of mankind were also in that primeval state is made plain by one of the next questions put by the Lord: "Or who laid the corner-stone thereof, when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" (Job 38:1-7) [^1]

Who could the sons of God have been other than the spirits begotten by our Father in heaven during pre-existence?—the very beings called sons of God afterward in their earthly estate. By no possibility of interpretation can the passage be made to apply to mortal beings; for the simple reason that the million (or billion) year epoch represented by the creation of the earth was just beginning. The figurative expression, "morning stars," would imply advanced spirits—spirits brighter or more intelligent by reason of longer existence in the organized spiritual estate. The fact that Lucifer was called a "son of the morning," gives additional color to this interpretation.

Note the fact that these spiritual beings "shouted for joy." That implies not only a high degree of intelligence, but an immediate occasion for jubilation. The first fact we should naturally expect from long ages of psychic evolution previous to this event; the latter, or the occasion for jubilation, we assume to be the event itself; namely, the creation of a habitat for the second or mortal estate of these same spirits. What event, indeed, would be more likely to inspire shouts of joy than a new world in which psychic evolution might go on? For these spirits understood, perhaps more clearly there than they do here the absolute need of a second or mortal estate in order to attain the perfection of their Father in heaven.

But out of this glorious inauguration of a new world grew discord as well as joy—if I may be permitted to bridge by modern revelation two important events mentioned in Scripture. In fact, it was precisely here that the war in heaven had its origin. For when the question of how mankind should be saved from the abyss into which it was necessary to plunge them, "Lucifer, a son of the morning," proposed to do it by taking away man's free agency and making him do right, as the birds fly southward in winter; this plan not being accepted, he declared war against God and Jesus Christ, leading one-third of the spirits of heaven with him. How they were cast out of heaven and became the Devil and his angels of darkness is told in the twelfth chapter of Revelations. Jude also alludes to this same event in these words: "And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day."

That the beings called angels in these two passages are in fact spirits, is manifest from many passages in which they are called evil spirits, unclean spirits, devils, and so on; as also from the fact that they could possess mortal bodies. The word angel in its generic sense, stands for any supernatural being, whether spirit or resurrected personality, who fulfils a commission of the Almighty. That angels may be spirits is expressly pointed out by Paul in the question: "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?" (Hebrews 1:14). By parity of reasoning, apostate spirits,—spirits who have ceased to minister in the service of God and have become enemies of that service, would naturally be called fallen angels, as we have seen they are.

The doctrine of pre-existence has now, I trust, been fully established by Scripture. Space will not permit me to enter more deeply into the social life of that first estate. But the mere fact of a pre-mortal life itself throws a wonderful light upon the present life of the spirit, and also upon the life which is to come.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] First Principles, pp. 36-43.
