When our son Joshua was 18 months old, we noticed strange things in his behavior. Josh could recite almost every word of each song in the television shows he watched, but he was late learning to speak. One day my mother-in-law said that Josh showed signs of autism. Specialists told us the same thing.

My wife, Elizabeth, immersed herself in literature about autism. She also enrolled Josh in programs to help him. She was determined that he have the best possible start in life we could give him.

On days I stressed over the future, Elizabeth would calm me down. She told me that we needed to take things one day at a time.

“We need to appreciate every new thing Josh learns instead of focusing on all of the unknowns of the future,” she said.

As he grew, Josh became unruly at church. To keep him from disrupting Primary or harming children, I held him on my lap. He struggled, scratched, and wrestled with me for all three hours of church. I often came home bruised and exhausted.

“Why don’t we just leave him home from church and take turns staying with him?” I suggested.

“If we don’t continue taking him,” Elizabeth replied, “he will learn that if he acts out, he gets to leave church.” I knew she was right.

One day the mother of another family with an autistic child told me, “When Josh turns eight and gets the Holy Ghost, he’ll sweeten right up!”

I doubted her words, but when he turned eight, he received the Holy Ghost and did sweeten up—a little.

When Josh got older, he received the priesthood. He passed the sacrament, and he learned the importance of service. Members of his priesthood quorum learned a dance to an ’80s music video with Josh and performed it at a ward party.

Our ward was wonderful to Josh. Members smiled when he would pass the sacrament while doing a few ’80s dance moves.

Josh is 17 now. He is a talented musician who writes songs. He loves acting and appears regularly in school and community theater.

We are grateful to be Josh’s parents and share in his journey. We are not sure what the future holds, but we are committed to fully live each day with him.
