Our Saviour and Redeemer Jesus Christ understood His mission to rescue God’s children, as He declared: “The Son of man is come to save that which was lost . . .

“[For] it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish (Matthew 18:11;14).

In the Intercessory Prayer addressed to His Father and Our Father, to help us understand the worth of each soul, Jesus Christ said, “While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost (John 17:12).” He commanded in modern revelation that “none of them that my Father hath given me shall be lost” (D&C 50:42).

It is so important as disciples of Jesus Christ to emulate His love and compassion in increasing our personal capacity to hear the voices of many of our brothers, sisters, youth and children who pray to be rescued and call daily for help.

May I now take you on a journey down the road that was called during the Saviour’s time, the “red way” or “bloody path.” It descended 3,400 feet (more than one kilometre) in elevation and was infested with robbers and bandits. This is the road that went down from Jerusalem to Jericho. In response to the lawyer’s question, “And who is my neighbour?” (Luke 10:29), the Saviour gave the parable of the good Samaritan (see Luke 10:30–37). There was considerable animosity between the Jews and the Samaritans at the time of Christ. Under normal circumstances, these two groups avoided association with each other.

In the written law of Moses, priests and Levites were assigned to serve God and their neighbours, both in the temple and as teachers and exemplars of God’s law. These priesthood bearers were fully aware of the commandment to “love thy neighbour as thyself” (Leviticus 19:18).

In fact, Levites were specifically charged with helping travellers economically and in other ways (see Leviticus 25:35–36). In the Saviour’s parable, however, the priest and the Levite violated these commandments—both noticed the wounded man yet “passed by on the other side” (Luke 10:31, 32). The Samaritan, however, was filled with love and compassion. Let us ask ourselves the following questions in placing ourselves in this parable of the good Samaritan and consider how we would respond to those who need our help.

What would be your experience if you found yourself on the road of Jericho today? Would you fail to notice someone who has fallen among thieves and requires your help? Would you be the one who sees the injured and hears his plea, yet crosses to the other side? Or will you be the one who sees, who hears, who pauses, and who helps?

Nephi saw in vision the Church of the Lamb of God in the latter days. He said that the members of the Church of Jesus Christ would be armed with righteousness and power. This power is to love, change, obey, serve and minister to those who need our help and rescuing. By using this power, we are following the example of pure Christian love of Christ as described in the parable of the good Samaritan.

President Thomas S. Monson said: “Jesus provided our watchword: ‘Go, and do thou likewise.’ When we obey that declaration, there opens to our view a vista of joy seldom equaled and never surpassed. …

“When we walk in the steps of that good Samaritan, we walk the pathway that leads to perfection”.

The Samaritan had compassion as he had the urge to help, for He felt sympathetic to the wounded man’s problem. This kindly affection is brought forth in the heart of anyone who has been touched by the Spirit of the Lord. These empathetic feelings should be felt by each of us toward one another. Indeed, the Saviour said that covenant Israel should be known and distinguished by the love they show for one another (see John 13:35).

As we learn in Luke 10:34: the Samaritan “went to him.” He did not wait to be approached by the one in need, but rather perceived the need and stepped forth without being asked to do so.

The Samaritan “bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine.” He provided medical attention and refreshed the sufferer’s thirst. This immediate relief may well have saved the man’s life.

The Samaritan “set him on his own beast”—that is, he provided transportation and “brought him to an inn,” a place of rest and care. By providing this appropriate accommodation he ensured the proper conditions for healing to take place.

The Samaritan “took care of him” (Luke 10:34). Notice that during the critical stages of healing, the Samaritan did not turn the care of the wounded man over to others but sacrificed of his own time and energy to perform this healing service himself.

The Samaritan “on the morrow … took out two pence, and gave them to the host.” He took of his own money, not someone else’s, and paid for the services he could not render himself.

The Samaritan, needing to continue earning his own living, told the innkeeper to “take care of him.” In this way he enlisted others—human resources —to help and to continue the care.

The Samaritan then promised that “whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee” (Luke 10:35). Here the ultimate compassion is shown! He puts no limit on the extent to which he will help. And, perhaps even more significant, he does not drop it there and forget it, but commits himself to return and to ensure that all that could be done has been done.

Serving in a stake presidency, I was touched by an experience shared by Elder Mervyn B. Arnold of the Seventy in the April 2004 general conference as he shared the story of Brother Marques who rescued a young man by the name of Fernando who had become less active and did not attend Church meetings on Sundays.

Fernando “‘became involved in surfing competitions on Sunday mornings and stopped going to … Church meetings. One Sunday morning Brother Marques knocked on [his] door and asked [his] nonmember mother if he could talk to [him]. When she told him [Fernando] was sleeping, he asked for permission to wake [him]. He said to [him], “Fernando, you are late for church!” Not listening to [his] excuses, he took [him] to church.

“‘The next Sunday the same thing happened, so on the third Sunday [Fernando] decided to leave early to avoid him. As [Fernando] opened the gate, [he] found [Brother Marques] sitting on his car, reading the scriptures. When he saw [him] he said, “Good! You are up early. Today we will go and find another young man!” [Fernando] appealed to [his] agency, but [Brother Marques] said, “We can talk about that later.”

“‘After eight Sundays [Fernando] could not get rid of him, so [he] decided to sleep at a friend’s house. [Fernando] was at the beach the next morning when [he] saw a man dressed in a suit and tie walking towards [him]. When [he] saw that it was Brother Marques, [he] ran into the water. All of a sudden, [he] felt someone’s hand on [his] shoulder. It was Brother Marques, in water up to his chest! He took [him] by the hand and said, “You are late! Let’s go.” When [Fernando] argued that [he] didn’t have any clothes to wear, [Brother Marques] replied, “They are in the car.”

“‘That day as [they] walked out of the ocean, [Fernando] was touched by Brother Marques’s sincere love and worry for [him]. He truly understood the Savior’s words: “I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick” (Ezekiel 34:16).’”

Dear brothers and sisters, as we go to the rescue, God gives us power, encouragement, and blessings, so we can help others.

May I invite you to not delay going to the rescue as many are in need but do not know where to turn for help. Do not give up as it is never too late to do good for someone. Find joy in rescuing others, keeping the end in mind (See Doctrine and Covenants 18:15–16). No matter our age, we are all invited to go and rescue.

President Henry B. Eyring declared, “Whatever our age, capacity, Church calling, or location, we are as one called to the work to help [the Saviour] in His harvest of souls until He comes again.”

I pray that we sincerely, honestly, and earnestly heed the invitation of the Saviour to go and do likewise. I testify that Jesus Christ saves those in need of help. He has compassion and heals the spiritual wounds of sin. He saves us from death. I testify that through His Atonement, Jesus Christ has personally paid the price for our recovery.
