There is truth, power, and many blessings that come through faithful reading and application of the Book of Mormon. President Russell M. Nelson has taught:

“When I think of the Book of Mormon, I think of the word power. The truths of the Book of Mormon have the power to heal, comfort, restore, succor, strengthen, console, and cheer our souls.

“My dear brothers and sisters, I promise that as you prayerfully study the Book of Mormon every day, you will make better decisions—every day. I promise that as you ponder what you study, the windows of heaven will open, and you will receive answers to your own questions and direction for your own life. I promise that as you daily immerse yourself in the Book of Mormon, you can be immunized against the evils of the day.”

Members of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles have spoken in general conference of the power and role of the Book of Mormon. They have also shared messages about this topic on social media, including the following:

“The Lord ... wants us to understand the central core of His doctrine and message, which is why He has given us the gift of the Book of Mormon.

“The Book of Mormon centers on Jesus Christ. It contains the very heart of His message. It was written for us, in our day, for our lives. As we study, ponder, and apply the principles taught within its pages, we will receive strength to center our lives in Jesus Christ and enjoy the joyful blessings that He promises us, now and forever.”

President Russell M. Nelson, Facebook, Oct. 17, 2021, facebook.com/russell.m.nelson.

“In 2020 our prophet, President Russell M. Nelson, has encouraged us to #HearHim—to seek the Lord’s guidance and direction for our individual lives. One of the best ways to seek personal revelation is by studying the scriptures. The word of the Lord in the scriptures is like a lamp to guide our feet (see Psalm 119:105), and revelation is like a mighty force that increases the lamp’s illumination manyfold.

“The idea that scripture reading can lead to inspiration and revelation opens the door to the truth that a scripture is not limited to what it meant when it was written but may also include what that scripture means to a reader today. What a scripture in the Book of Mormon meant to me when I first read it at age 16 is not conclusive upon me as I read it at age 85. With the benefit of my life’s experiences and with my greater familiarity with revelation, I can learn things that were not available to me yesterday by reading the scriptures today.

“Because we believe that scripture reading can help us receive revelation, we are encouraged to read the scriptures again and again. That is one reason Latter-day Saints believe in daily scripture study. By that means, we obtain access to what our Heavenly Father would have us know and do in our personal lives today.”

President Dallin H. Oaks, Facebook, June 25, 2020, facebook.com/dallin.h.oaks.

“I am always inspired by scriptures that describe, in a remarkable way, the times in which we presently live.

“‘And in that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men’s hearts shall fail them, … and the love of men shall wax cold, and iniquity shall abound’ (Doctrine and Covenants 45:26–27).

“One of the words that stands out to me in verse 26 is ‘commotion,’ which is synonymous with disturbance, uproar, turmoil, disorder, confusion, upheaval, unrest, and disruption. Surely, we are witnesses almost every day to increasing commotion around the world.

“Where can we find peace and reassurance amidst all the commotion?

“The Book of Mormon.

“We are not the only people to live in troubled times. I testify that the Book of Mormon is the word of God and was written for our day. It is the source of assurance and peace in our troubled latter days.

“As you take time to study the Book of Mormon, I promise you will notice an increased measure of peace in your lives.

“How has studying the Book of Mormon brought you peace?”

Elder David A. Bednar, Facebook, Apr. 30, 2022, facebook.com/davida.bednar.

“The Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ testifies of the living reality and divinity of our Savior and Redeemer. It is the word of God and warns and prepares us for the world we live in now. I love the words Mormon shares with his son in Moroni 9:25: 

“‘My son, be faithful in Christ; and may not the things which I have written grieve thee, to weigh thee down unto death; but may Christ lift thee up, and may his sufferings and death, and the showing his body unto our fathers, and his mercy and long-suffering, and the hope of his glory and of eternal life, rest in your mind forever.’

“The teachings of Christ will lift us up. The hope He provides will help us through life’s challenges. I invite you to read of Him, to learn of Him, and to follow Him.”

Elder David A. Bednar, Facebook, Nov. 23, 2021, facebook.com/davida.bednar.

“During the past eight years, one of my assignments was to review and read all the remarkable Joseph Smith Papers and documents and the research that led to the publication of Saints—a book that documents the history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

“My testimony and admiration of the Prophet Joseph Smith has been greatly strengthened and enhanced after reading the inspiring details of his life and foreordained prophetic ministry.

“Joseph’s translation of the Book of Mormon by the gift and power of God was foundational to the Restoration. The Book of Mormon is internally consistent, beautifully written, and contains the answers to life’s great questions. It is a companion to the Holy Bible and is another testament of Jesus Christ.”

Elder Quentin L. Cook, Facebook, June 1, 2022, facebook.com/quentin.lcook.

“There are hundreds, even thousands, of teachings and experiences in the Book of Mormon that can help us in becoming who we want to be. As you open the Book of Mormon daily, you will be blessed to see those lessons you should learn.”

Elder Neil L. Andersen, Sept. 27, 2022, facebook.com/neill.andersen.

“As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, our study of the Book of Mormon as another testament of Jesus Christ and as a companion to the Holy Bible is a fundamental element of our faith. …

“I invite you to read the Book of Mormon and to follow the teachings of Jesus Christ contained in this holy book. As you do so, you can find increased joy and peace in this life and in the life to come. I know this is true.”

Elder Ronald A. Rasband, June 18, 2022, facebook.com/RonaldARasband.

“In a recent meeting with missionaries I was asked, ‘What is the Book of Mormon for you?’

“To answer, I turn in the Book of Mormon to the introduction to the Book of Mormon. Near the end it reads: ‘We invite all men everywhere to read the Book of Mormon, to ponder in their hearts the message it contains, and then to ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ if the book is true. Those who pursue this course and ask in faith will gain a testimony of its truth and divinity by the power of the Holy Ghost.”’

“That’s me. That’s what the Book of Mormon is to me. I came to know by the power of the Holy Ghost the Book of Mormon is true.

“Then the last paragraph reads, ‘Those who gain this divine witness from the Holy Spirit will also come to know by the same power that Jesus Christ is the Savior of the world, that Joseph Smith is His revelator and prophet in these last days, and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the Lord’s kingdom once again established on the earth, preparatory to the Second Coming of the Messiah.’

“Every aspect of those two paragraphs in the Book of Mormon introduction apply to me. It is the beginning of how I came to know that Jesus is the Christ. It is the beginning of me knowing about the Church, a beginning of me knowing about Joseph Smith. It is the keystone of my religion. It is the basis of it.

“I love the Book of Mormon, and I know a person will come closer to Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ by abiding by its precepts than by any other means. I know this is true for me and it is true for you.”

Elder Dale G. Renlund, Facebook, Feb. 28, 2022, facebook.com/DaleGRenlund.
