President Howard W. Hunter (1907–95): “I commend to you the revelations of God as the standard by which we must live our lives and by which we must measure every decision and every deed. Accordingly, when you have worries and challenges, face them by turning to the scriptures and the prophets” (“Fear Not, Little Flock,” in 1988–89 Devotional and Fireside Speeches [1989], 112).

President Ezra Taft Benson (1899–1994): “Success in righteousness, the power to avoid deception and resist temptation, guidance in our daily lives, healing of the soul—these are but a few of the promises the Lord has given to those who will come to His word. … Certain blessings are to be found only in the scriptures, only in coming to the word of the Lord and holding fast to it. …

“… Recommit yourselves to a study of the scriptures. Immerse yourselves in them daily so you will have the power of the Spirit to attend you in your callings. Read them in your families and teach your children to love and treasure them” (“The Power of the Word,” Ensign, May 1986, 82).

President Spencer W. Kimball (1895–1985): “As you become more and more familiar with the truths of the scriptures, you will be more and more effective in keeping the second great commandment, to love your neighbor as yourself. Become scholars of the scriptures—not to put others down, but to lift them up! After all, who has any greater need to ‘treasure up’ the truths of the gospel (on which they may call in their moments of need) than do women and mothers who do so much nurturing and teaching?” (“The Role of Righteous Women,” Ensign, Nov. 1979, 102).

2 Nephi 4:15: “For my soul delighteth in the scriptures, and my heart pondereth them, and writeth them for the learning and the profit of my children.”

Julie B. Beck, Relief Society general president: “One good way to start studying the scriptures is to ‘liken’ them to ourselves (see 1 Nephi 19:23). Some people start by choosing a subject in the Topical Guide that they need to know more about. Or they start at the beginning of a book of scripture and look for specific teachings. …

“Whichever way a person starts studying the scriptures, the key to unlocking important knowledge is to keep studying. I never tire of discovering the rich treasures of truth in the scriptures because they teach with ‘plainness, even as plain as word can be’ (2 Nephi 32:7). The scriptures testify of Christ (see John 5:39). They tell us all things we should do (see 2 Nephi 32:3). They ‘make [us] wise unto salvation’ (2 Timothy 3:15).

“Through my scripture reading and the prayers that accompany my study, I have gained knowledge which brings me peace and helps me keep my energies focused on eternal priorities. Because I started reading the scriptures daily, I have learned about my Heavenly Father, His Son Jesus Christ, and what I need to do to be like Them” (“My Soul Delighteth in the Scriptures,” Liahona and Ensign, May 2004, 108–9).

President Thomas S. Monson: “The holy scriptures adorn our bookshelves. Make certain they provide nourishment to our minds and guidance for our lives” (“The Mighty Strength of the Relief Society,” Ensign, Nov. 1997, 95).
