Gene R. Cook, Receiving Answers to Our Prayers ( 1996)

Chapter 1

The Power of Prayer

A few years ago our family was invited to vacation at a ranch in Wyoming. One of my sons had just come back from a mission to South America, and we were eager to get away from home so we could spend some time with him and the rest of our children.

We had a wonderful time, even though we were able to ride the horses only during the cool of the day. As the day heated up, the horseflies began to attack, biting the horses so viciously that the blood would literally flow down the horses' sides. Then the horses would get excited and would try to buck us off.

The night before we were to leave, as we were heading back to the ranch house, this son asked if he could keep riding with one of the rancher's sons. "We're going to round up some horses," he said, "and then I'll come in and join the family."

About an hour later he came in very upset. "What's the matter, Son?" I asked.

"I'm really mad," he said. "I lost my hat out there in the fields, and I know we'll never be able to find it."

I knew which hat he was talking about. It was a hat he'd purchased in South America as a remembrance of his mission, and it was irreplaceable to him.

He fretted and complained for a time about his lost hat, and then he brightened a bit and said, "Dad, what would you think if we got the family together before we left for home in the morning, had a family prayer, and then went out to try to find it?"

"That's a great idea," I said. "We'll get up an hour earlier than we'd planned and see what we can do."

Early the next morning I was out packing the car when he came striding across the courtyard from the bunkhouse where he'd been sleeping. I could tell by his expression that he was even more upset than he'd been the night before.

"Dad, I've had it," he said. "I not only lost my hat, but now my wallet's missing too. They both must be out there in the fields." Then he went into great detail about what his wallet contained—his temple recommend (he'd just had his interviews), his driver's license (just obtained), eighty dollars, which was all the money he had in the world (he'd spent all his money on his mission; the eighty dollars was a gift from his grandparents to help him get started again).

"This is the worst vacation I've ever been on," he said. "I wish I'd never come." And then he added a famous statement we've all heard before: "Why do things like this always happen to me?"

"Well, Son, I don't know about your hat or your wallet," I said, "but I do know one thing for sure—I'm not getting the family together to pray about them."

"Why not?"

"Because you can't hear the voice of the Spirit when you're mad. It won't work, and I'm not going to bring the family together while you have that attitude."

He didn't answer, just turned and stomped off toward the house.

Fifteen or twenty minutes later he came back out. His countenance had changed, and he said, "Dad, I want to apologize. I shouldn't have said those things. This has been a good vacation, and I'm sorry I complained so much about it."

As we talked I learned he'd been on his knees, confessing his bad attitude to the Lord, asking for forgiveness, and asking for help in finding his hat and wallet. Then he came back to me with a broken heart and a humble spirit.

I put my arm around his shoulder and said, "Son, let's call the family together now. Maybe if we all exercise our faith together we can find your lost items."

We all gathered, knelt, and prayed. We knew we were asking the impossible. We had ridden over hundreds of acres of ground the day before, and most of it was covered with high Wyoming wheat so tall it brushed the horses' bellies as we rode by. Still, we wanted to make the attempt, and we prayed as fervently as we could that the Lord would help us.

My son knew we might not succeed. But he had decided he would accept the Lord's will, that he would be satisfied with the outcome of our search, no matter what it was. He said, "I could always get a new hat, even though I'd feel bad. I could replace the temple recommend and the driver's license. And I could replace the money my grandparents have given me. But I truly hope the Lord will answer our prayer."

After the family prayer, we got on the horses and rode out toward the fields we'd been riding in the day before. When we reached the first field, we got off the horses, stood in a circle, and offered prayer again, asking the Lord to guide us to the spot we needed to find. I had two or three of us take turns praying, knowing that would help to strengthen our faith. We told the Lord that ultimately it didn't matter too much whether or not we succeeded—it was just a hat and a wallet. But we also believed the words that said, "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you." (3 Nephi 18:20.)

I was on the lead horse as we entered that first field to begin our search. The wheat was brushing against my horse's belly, and almost without thinking I blurted out, "You could never see a wallet in this deep, tall, dark grass. How could you ever see a wallet in something like this?"

There was dead silence in the family for a moment, and then another son said, "You know, Dad, I guess it doesn't matter how deep the grass is, does it? The Lord knows where the wallet is." Then he added, "Actually, you could double or triple it, if you wanted. It really wouldn't matter, because He knows, doesn't He?"

I knew he was right, and his gentle reminder helped to chasten me for an unbelieving attitude. I said, "You know, children, he is exactly right. Double it, triple it—it doesn't matter. The Lord knows where it is. Just ride and pray. Ride and pray and let's go."

We took off across the fields then, half a dozen of us riding over an area that was as wide as you could see. Not more than a minute or two passed before this son who had just expressed his faith shouted, jumped off his horse, and called out, "I've got the hat!" He grabbed it up and waved it in the air for all of us to see.

We all rushed over to where he was, with the owner of the hat leading the way. "The Lord answered our prayers!" he said. "He heard us and answered us!" Then he gave a little talk to the family about continuing to pray and having more faith. "Now let's find that wallet!"

We took off riding again, but we couldn't find a thing. The time began to drag on and on, and the initial excitement we'd felt at finding the hat began to wane. We searched for an hour, then an hour and a quarter, and could find nothing at all.

Then, as the day began to warm up, the flies began to bite at the horses and at us. In fear and irritation, the horses began to kick and buck, and we all began to be afraid of being thrown into the grass. My younger daughters particularly began to get nervous. Finally I said, "Well, we've got to go back, children. We can't search anymore."

We got on the road and started back to the ranch house. As we rode back I decided, as the father of the family, to sidle up alongside the son who'd lost the hat and wallet to take his temperature spiritually, to see where he was at this key moment.

"Well, Son, how are you feeling about all this?" I asked.

He said, "I'm just so thankful the Lord gave me my hat back. I know it's just a hat to anybody else, but it means a lot to me." He paused, then said, "I wish we'd found the wallet, too. Maybe when they harvest the field they'll find it and send it to me. But I want you to know, Dad, that it was really worth it and I'm thankful I've got my hat."

We rode on in to the ranch house, and I gave thanks to the Lord that his heart was right, that his sail was set correctly. Even though we hadn't found the wallet, he knew the Lord loved him and cared about him—and he continued to have faith that it might still be found.

We arrived back at the ranch house and separated to make our final preparations to go. Most of the children were in the car, and I was saying goodbye to our hosts. All of a sudden this son came running across the courtyard, waving his hand in the air and yelling, "I've got my wallet! I've got my wallet!"

After all the excitement, we asked him how he'd found it. He said, "I went into the bunkhouse to get my suitcase and, while I was alone, I just felt I ought to kneel and tell the Lord thanks for helping me to find my hat.

"When I got up off my knees to leave, I had a feeling I should go over by those old, dirty coats that were hanging against one wall." There was a long row of these coats, maybe ten to fifteen of them. As he stood there, not knowing why, suddenly he heard something fall to the floor at his feet. He looked down and saw his comb.

"When I saw that, my heart just leaped. I never split up my comb and my wallet, and I realized that I had lost my comb with my wallet. I reached over and shook the coats and my wallet fell out onto the floor."

We have no idea how that wallet got into those coats. None of my children ever played near them—the coats were too dusty and dirty. But somehow, because of faith and prayer, the Lord made it possible for my son to find the wallet he'd lost.

He was overjoyed. He knelt and offered another prayer of thanks in the bunkhouse, and then came running out with the wallet to tell everyone that our prayers had been answered and that our faith in the Lord had been fulfilled.

We got in the car then and drove away, but as soon as we were off the rancher's property we pulled the car over again and offered a prayer of pure gratitude, thanking the Lord for his willingness to hear us and bless us.

But perhaps the most important "effects" of this experience were yet to come. As great as it was to find our son's wallet, a greater blessing was the additional faith our family members gained as a result of the experience. They also grew in their knowledge of how to obtain answers to prayer. Surely the members of our family could never deny the fact that they saw, in a rather miraculous way, the hand of the Lord revealed on our behalf.

The Second Lost Wallet

A week after we arrived home, a younger son, who was sixteen, was invited to go with a friend's family on their yearly trip to Lake Powell. They had just bought a new boat and were anxious to try it out.

After three or four days of boating, they left their camping spot and went back to the marina. My son brought his wallet, but he didn't have any pockets, so he asked his friend to put the wallet in his shirt pocket and button it. The wallet contained about twenty-five dollars, all his personal cards—driver's license, library card, gym card, and school cards—and, most importantly, a little dental retainer piece that was worth more than seventy-five dollars.

Later in the day they went back to camp and went swimming. They dove off many cliffs and jumped off scores of ledges. All of a sudden my son's friend remembered the wallet in his pocket—and he realized it was gone.

By that time they had been all over that part of the lake. It seemed simply impossible that they would ever find it. But my son said to himself, "If the Lord knew where my brother's wallet was on a big ranch, he knows where mine is in this lake." And he began to pray in his heart. After a few minutes he decided that wasn't enough—and he went behind some tall rocks and knelt down in prayer, asking the Lord to help him find the lost wallet.

They continued to look, diving time after time down to the murky mud at the bottom of that lagoon. They searched through the afternoon and evening but found nothing. Finally it was too dark to continue, and they returned to camp.

That night he offered a prayer. He promised the Lord that if he would help him find his wallet, he would read the scriptures more faithfully, control his thoughts better, not listen to inappropriate music, pray more often, and have better prayers. Then, very importantly, he pledged to honor those promises even if he didn't recover the wallet.

After his prayer he had a very positive feeling from the Spirit. When people asked him if he had found the wallet, he just said, "No, not yet."

That same night he and his friend talked. The friend said he feared it would be impossible to find the wallet. The water was just too deep, and the wallet would have sunk into the dirt and moss at the bottom of the lagoon. My son agreed that the water was deep. But he said that finding the wallet had nothing to do with how deep the water was or how much dirt was on top of it or anything else. He said all that mattered was if they had enough faith and if the Lord wanted them to find it.

After breakfast he and his friend went out looking again. The others in the camp were very discouraging, saying that the wallet would surely never be found and that he ought to just give up.

Finally my son hiked up a hill, found a solitary place, and knelt down and offered another prayer. He told the Lord again that he would keep the promises he'd made whether he found the wallet or not. After the prayer he felt reassured that everything would be all right. He prayed constantly as they continued to dive, looking, but they had no success. They were almost ready to give up when my son's friend yelled, "I found it!"

My son was thrilled—and he was glad his friend was the one who found the wallet, since he still blamed himself for losing it. After thanking his friend, he hiked up the hill again and thanked the Lord with all his heart for showing them where to look. And again he pledged to keep the promises he'd made.

Later, he recorded his testimony of his experience. He testified that:

The Lord helps us in our lives and answers our prayers if we—

I testify to you that if you do these things and it is right for you, the Lord will answer your prayer. I know that it was not by luck or chance that we found the wallet, and I know the Lord really did guide me to find it when I was ready. I testify to you that this is true and it really did happen. . . . I have a testimony that the Lord lives and loves each one of us and will help us if we will only reach out to him and obey his commandments.

It was rewarding to see the whole family unite to try to find the hat and wallet of our first son. But it was particularly satisfying to see our younger son exercise sufficient faith to have that kind of experience on his own.

That night he came into our bedroom to tell us about his experience. I will never forget what he said. His words were, "Dad and Mom, I wasn't too surprised when the whole family prayed and we found my brother's hat and wallet. But this time it was just me, just me praying. I'm only sixteen and yet the Lord answered me!"

This son learned that the Lord is truly gracious to all those who will humble themselves and ask in faith. This successful experience has helped him to come to other such experiences. Now, when he needs to seek the Lord's blessings with things that are of much greater significance than a lost wallet, he knows how to ask and is learning how to ask in faith.

Testimony of Prayer

Of course, these stories aren't really about wallets and hats. I tell them to show how prayer can be a true force in our lives. In the pages that follow we will try to illustrate some principles the Lord has taught that I hope will help us to have more effective prayers. But to close this chapter, I'd like to bear my testimony that prayer really does work.

I bear testimony that the principles of receiving answers to prayer that we've seen illustrated in these stories are true principles.

I bear witness we live far below our possibilities in working with the Lord. We're too quick to turn to our own strength and not rely on him. Maybe we fear it won't work, or we fear our own inadequacies. But I bear testimony we can all learn how to utilize prayer more effectively and improve our ability to receive answers to our prayers.

I bear witness that we can learn from the Father through the Spirit of the Lord. The Father is able to communicate with his children; he does it clearly; and he does it every day. Whether we hear his promptings or not, he's still speaking to us every day—to warn us, to help us, to strengthen us, to encourage us, to fill us with joy and peace, to help us overcome obstacles and challenges.

I believe one of the primary responsibilities we have here on earth is to learn better how to hear those promptings and to hear the voice of the Lord as he speaks directly to us. Only then can we understand what he requires of us, and only then will we have the strength to be able to accomplish what he desires of us.

I believe that in the whole history of the world God has never failed to answer a humble, sincere prayer—no matter who offered it, whether male or female, young or old, weak or strong, member or nonmember. That's the way the Lord is. He is so kind. He is so anxious to respond. Of course, his answer might have been "No." Or he may have said, "Yes, but not now." Or he may have responded in a still, small voice that the person failed to hear. But answer he did, and I believe when we pass through the veil and see more clearly how prayer and revelation work, we will humbly fall upon our knees and ask the Lord's forgiveness for not more fully recognizing his hand in our lives.

Surely the Lord is anxious to respond to the petitions of his people, if they will but humbly ask in faith, be believing, and not doubt. They may then expect the arm of the Lord to be revealed in their behalf.

As Moroni testified: "As surely as Christ liveth he spake these words unto our fathers, saying: Whatsoever thing ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is good, in faith believing that ye shall receive, behold, it shall be done unto you." (Moroni 7:26.)

An Exercise in Faith to Seek a Righteous Desire

Before we move to the principles that bring power in prayer, I'd like to recommend that you choose a righteous desire to seek with diligence in prayer. In the Doctrine and Covenants it says that ours is not only the only true church, but it is "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth." (D&C 1:30; italics added.) The doctrines are alive. The Lord is alive. The Spirit is alive. And so can we be if we'll be more energized and become more involved with him.

As I think about the teachings of the Church and the gospel, I feel that what makes them not only true but living is our desire and our ability to put them into practice. To me, knowledge is not nearly as important as knowledge combined with the willingness to apply it. When we learn, then, we must decide to repent, to exercise faith, and to do whatever else is required to make what we've learned operational in our lives.

Here's what I'd like you to do. Get a piece of paper and write on it something very personal that you want from the Lord—something you want very much. Don't just pick something easy. The harder it is, the better, so you can have a real experience with faith. Maybe you're concerned about your spouse. Maybe one of your children has rejected what you've taught him, and you're worried. Maybe you're struggling with a health problem. Maybe you're in the midst of great financial troubles. Maybe you just want more faith, more testimony, more strength to be able to repent and change, more ability to overcome a personal weakness. Write your desire on a piece of paper, and work on it as you proceed through this book.

Don't think you're not good enough to receive the Lord's help. As I travel around the world I meet too many members of the Church who think they can never qualify to receive answers to prayer. They say, "Sure, if I were a General Authority or the stake president or the bishop I could get answers, but I'm too . . . [fill in the blank]."

I bear witness that that's not true at all. The Lord loves all of us, and he is anxious to respond to every one of us, to help us with the righteous desires of our hearts. I've given two stories about how the Lord helped with little things, finding a hat and wallets. He truly does desire to help us in such ways—but how much more he wants to help us with the big things in our lives.

I promise you in the name of the Lord that if you really desire what you've written down, if your desire is righteous, and if you're asking according to the will of the Lord, he will grant you that desire—if you will learn and obey the principles and the laws that govern what you want. I have no doubt whatsoever about that. I bear testimony that it's true because the Lord has said so.

Questions to Ponder
