Gene R. Cook, Receiving Answers to Our Prayers ( 1996)

Chapter 2

Preparing Your Heart and Mind for Prayer

One morning while we were living in Quito, Ecuador, I called home to tell my wife that an important guest was arriving at the airport in about an hour and that I would like to bring him home for lunch. She cheerfully said she would do her best to try to have the house clean and a nice meal prepared.

At that time we had a woman named Roza who lived with us and assisted my wife with cooking and other household chores. Roza was about thirty years old and was very strong in her own religion. We had tried repeatedly to talk to her about the Church and the gospel, but she would not listen to us at all. In fact, our attempts were usually met with a very cold reception.

That particular morning as my wife and Roza were scurrying about the kitchen trying to get the meal prepared, they discovered that Roza had lost the beater they needed to make a cake. It was a frustrating moment. In those days in Ecuador, you couldn't just make a cake from a package; you had to do it from scratch. And they didn't have the implement they needed to do it.

About this time our seven-year-old boy came into the kitchen and heard what was going on. He listened for a moment, then said to Roza, innocently, "So you lost the beater, huh?" That made her a little more angry. Then he said, "Well, if you really want to find it, why don't you ask the Lord? He knows where it is."

She answered him sharply, "You don't pray for things like that! Now get out of the kitchen so we can find it."

He hurried out, but after a few minutes she felt bad for having offended a little child and went to find him. She found him in his bedroom on his knees saying a prayer. "Heavenly Father, there is a real problem in the kitchen. Dad is bringing home an important person for lunch. Mom is upset. Roza lost the beater and she doesn't think you know where it is. If you would just show us where the beater is, the whole problem could be solved."

Within moments the lost beater was found. Some would say it was by chance, but I believe it was by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, the faith of a little child. Roza was amazed that the Lord would answer the prayer of such a little child—and especially about something so seemingly insignificant as a beater. That experience left her with some very strong spiritual impressions about the value of prayer.

The sweetest part of this experience was that about two or three weeks later I had the privilege of baptizing Roza a member of the Church. I performed the ordinance, but a seven-year-old boy was the Lord's instrument in converting her to the truth. He taught her that whatever the problem might be, if we are really worried about it, so is the Lord. He will help us with any matter of real concern to us.

It's true that the Lord answers the prayers of little children, even in small things. It's also true that he answers the prayers of adults and that he is interested in helping us in all aspects of our lives. But our ability to receive answers to our prayers will increase as we prepare our hearts and minds to communicate with our Father in Heaven, and as we prepare ourselves, in turn, to receive from him.

Here are some important ways we can prepare our minds and hearts for prayer.

Have Faith in Christ

The most important thing we can do as we seek to communicate with our Heavenly Father is to have faith in Jesus Christ. If we have faith in Christ, we will have faith in our Father in Heaven, because Christ so clearly testified of him.

Some people think of faith as a positive attitude. That's only a small part of what faith really is. Faith is the power that holds the worlds in place. Faith is the power by which God works. When we have faith, we have access to his power.

But remember that the commandment is not just to have faith in a general sense. We are to have faith in a person, faith in Jesus Christ. When we seek to understand that better, we'll understand why we are to end all of our prayers "in the name of Jesus Christ." When we pray in that manner, we're asking for the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ to intervene on our behalf. If we can keep our faith centered in him it will help us to have much more power than if we pray without such faith.

When Nephi was bound with cords by his brothers, and they sought to kill him, he cried out in prayer, saying:

O Lord, according to my faith which is in thee, wilt thou deliver me from the hands of my brethren; yea, even give me strength that I may burst these bands with which I am bound.

And it came to pass that when I had said these words, behold, the bands were loosed from off my hands and feet. (1 Nephi 7:17-18.)

Alma and Amulek had a similar experience when they, too, were bound with cords.

And Alma cried, saying: . . . O Lord, give us strength according to our faith which is in Christ, even unto deliverance. And they broke the cords with which they were bound. (Alma 14:26.)

Note that they did not have faith in their own strength; they trusted in the Lord and relied on his strength. It is faith in Christ that will deliver us from our own bonds; it is increasing our faith in Christ that will give us added power in prayer.

We can build faith by knowing:

If your faith is weak, you can lean on the testimony of someone else—a parent or teacher or leader—as you seek to build your own faith.

Repent of Your Sins

Repentance is a key element in obtaining blessings from the Lord.

The story of the lost hat illustrates the need for repentance as it applies directly to the problem you're addressing in prayer. First, my son was angry at the loss of his hat and wallet, and he had to repent before we could proceed. Second, I momentarily doubted that we could find the lost items in the tall grass, and I had to repent of that feeling.

We also need to repent in other ways if we hope to qualify to receive the Lord's blessings. The more worthy we are, the more we can approach the Lord with confidence and receive answers to our prayers.

It's often not enough to simply be "temple worthy." Repentance may bring us to a state of increased fasting, more prayer, added humility, searching the scriptures, and so forth. To the degree that we are willing to change and offer up our own sins, so that the Savior can cleanse us, we can vicariously affect events and other people. If we sacrifice and pay the price, and if it is in accordance with the will of the Lord, we can receive what we righteously desire.

Part of repentance is confession, wherein we acknowledge our sins to another. Some serious sins need to be confessed to the bishop, but virtually all sins need to be confessed to the Lord. What the Lord said of Martin Harris applies to all of us:

And now, except he humble himself and acknowledge unto me the things that he has done which are wrong, and covenant with me that he will keep my commandments, and exercise faith in me, behold, I say unto him, he shall [not receive the blessing he seeks]. (D&C 5:28.)

Humble Yourself Before the Lord

In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord directly connected humility to answered prayers when he said,

Be thou humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand, and give thee answer to thy prayers. (D&C 112:10.)

When we're humble, we feel our dependency on the Lord. Because of this feeling of dependency, we reach out to him for help and guidance in many areas—and have open hearts and minds to receive it.

Some people argue that we shouldn't trouble the Lord about little things. In a way, that's a spirit of pride, a spirit of wanting to do things on one's own, rather than a desire to discover and do the Lord's will.

We hear much in the world about being self-sufficient and self-confident. We hear much about learning to do things on our own—after all, didn't the Lord bless us with good minds and the ability to think things through and reason them out on our own?

Yet that attitude takes us away from the spirit of humility and a reliance on the Lord. Certainly the Lord would have us do all that is in our power to do, but if we take the attitude of self-reliance to an extreme, we will begin to think that we can live our lives without his help.

Nephi addressed this very issue: Are there some things I ought not to pray about? Or should I pray about everything? If that's true, why don't we do it? Why is it we go on day after day, depending on our own strength?

Nephi laments about this as he talks to the brethren of the church. After teaching them that the Holy Ghost will "show unto you all things what ye should do" (2 Nephi 32:5), he says, "And now, my beloved brethren, I perceive that ye ponder still in your hearts; and it grieveth me that I must speak concerning this thing." In other words, he says, "I hate to have to bring this up about prayer, brethren, because you already ought to know that that's the way we can receive such guidance from the Holy Ghost. It grieves me that I have to mention it to you, but I'm going to anyway because you need it."

Then he makes this significant statement:

For if ye would hearken unto the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray ye would know that ye must pray; for the evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray, but teacheth him that he must not pray. (2 Nephi 32:8.)

The Lord wants us to grow and become strong and be able to do much good, but through it all he wants us to be dependent on the Spirit of the Lord for direction.

But Satan wants us to be dependent on him. The devil teaches us not to pray. Now that doesn't just mean nonmembers of the Church; it means he's working on each one of us: "Come on, John, you don't need to pray about that; that's too little. Don't trouble the Lord." Or, "You can handle this on your own, Mary." Or, "I know you're tired tonight, so you can skip your prayer; tomorrow will be all right. You can spend extra time in prayer tomorrow." And thus does the devil whisper to us, because the evil spirit teacheth a man not to pray. At the same time, the Holy Spirit is teaching us to pray.

Now consider the next verse: "But behold, I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint." When should I pray? Pray always! "Ye must not perform anything"—what's the word? Anything!

Ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ, that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee, that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul. (2 Nephi 32:9.)

That's not just talking about praying before we do our Church work. We should pray for guidance, direction, and blessing about every aspect of our lives. As Alma taught:

Cry unto God for all thy support; yea, let all thy doings be unto the Lord, and whithersoever thou goest let it be in the Lord; yea, let all thy thoughts be directed unto the Lord; yea, let the affections of thy heart be placed upon the Lord forever.

Counsel with the Lord in all thy doings, and he will direct thee for good. (Alma 37:36-37.)

There's a lot in those verses. The Lord knows that there are things we could do on our own if we so desired. (Although on a deeper level we can't do anything on our own, because we belong to him, the air we breathe belongs to him—everything about our lives is a gift from God.) But the Lord says, "I understand that you can do many things on your own, but if you want your actions to be for your spiritual well-being, you must pray and consecrate them unto me." Sometimes the purpose of such a prayer is simply to check in with Him, to tell him what you're planning to do, and to ask for his blessings. But at the same time, we should ask for instructions and guidance: Am I on the right course? Is there anything thou wouldst desire me to change about what I'm going to do? Is it all pleasing? Is there another approach that would be better?

There is always a danger in stressing so fervently these ideas about our being totally dependent upon the Lord. For some, it is all too easy to become fanatical; some feel that they should be on their knees praying all the time when instead they should be out working, having prayed already and continuing to pray in their hearts.

Some people expect the Lord to do all the work and reveal things to them that they haven't bothered to study out in their minds beforehand (see D&C 9). Some become extreme and perhaps say, rather pridefully, "I prayed through the entire night the last two nights; I didn't sleep at all," or "I fasted for three days straight." Or a young returned missionary might say, "I've been waiting for a wife now for five years. I've been praying and praying, but the Lord still hasn't sent her to me. I haven't done much dating, but I'm sure that when the Lord finds her, he will have her come and find me."

Others may be paralyzed into inaction, waiting for an answer from the heavens, when in actuality the Lord may be requiring them to move ahead, proceeding the best way they know how, before he will confirm their course.

Brigham Young once said:

If I do not know the will of my Father, and what He requires of me in a certain transaction, if I ask Him to give me wisdom concerning any requirement in life, or in regard to my own course, or that of my friends, my family, my children, or those that I preside over, and get no answer from Him, and then do the very best that my judgment will teach me, He is bound to own and honor that transaction, and He will do so to all intents and purposes. (Journal of Discourses, 3:205.)

As we acknowledge our dependence on the Lord, we increase in our humility—and we enhance our ability to truly communicate with the Lord. Those who truly are humble will also do all in their power to do their part, knowing that answers to prayer are a mutual endeavor, requiring effort by both man and God.

Obey the Commandments

King Benjamin taught:

I would desire that ye should consider on the blessed and happy state of those that keep the commandments of God. For behold, they are blessed in all things, both temporal and spiritual. (Mosiah 2:41.)

The more we keep the commandments, the more we'll be able to receive the blessings of the Lord, including answers to prayer.

This connection between obedience and obtaining answers to prayer is clearly taught in the scriptures. I'll give you just two examples:

If ye will not harden your hearts, and ask me in faith, believing that ye shall receive, with diligence in keeping my commandments, surely these things shall be made known unto you. (1 Nephi 15:11.)

Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. (1 John 3:22.)

Be Willing to Sacrifice

Blessings usually don't come for free. In return the Lord typically requires obedience and sacrifice. We must "sacrifice, pay the price."

Most sacrifice comes in the form of repentance—we give up the sins and bad habits that we so much want to cling to. But when we give them up, we're greatly blessed, not only in getting rid of the sins but also in an increased influence of the Spirit in our lives.

The sacrifice of repentance is part of what the Lord was referring to when he said,

Thou shalt offer a sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in righteousness, even that of a broken heart and a contrite spirit. (D&C 59:8.)

Sacrifice truly can increase the power of our prayers, if we will consecrate that sacrifice to the Lord. Suppose, for example, you are a mother or father with a son who is straying from the path of righteousness. I believe you can do much to pray him home. You can do much to fast him home. You can repent enough of your own sins that, through your sacrifice, the Lord may intervene more in his life and save the boy. It's not that you're paying for your own sins—Jesus did that. But through your agency, through your sacrifice, you are able to receive blessings that you otherwise would not be able to obtain. (Of course, these things still depend on the agency of others—our prayers can't supersede the agency of those we're praying for. But sacrifice and fervent prayer can do much to help. With such prayer we can accomplish much—even if it doesn't bring our loved ones all the way home. Without such prayer, we're lost.)

One must also remember to always pray to be subject to the will of the Lord in all things. The Lord's will certainly will always be done. We can list all of these keys to improving our prayers, elements over which we have some control, but we must always remember that, in spite of our desires and in spite of diligent efforts to do our part, the Lord's will is the final controlling factor.

Increase Your Desire

The Lord has said that he would grant unto us according to our desires. (See, for example, Enos 1:12; Alma 9:20; 18:35; 29:5; 41:3-5; D&C 11:17.) As we prepare our minds and hearts for prayer, we can increase our desire to talk to the Lord, we can seek more fully to align our desires with those of God, and we can desire more fully to receive answers from him.

When the Nephite disciples were praying in the presence of Jesus, "they did not multiply many words, for it was given unto them what they should pray, and they were filled with desire." (3 Nephi 19:24.)

And the Lord has promised in our day:

Behold, according to your desires, yea, even according to your faith shall it be done unto you. (D&C 11:17.)

These promises can be ours, if we will seek for them.

Part of being able to grow in desire is to be sincere in our seeking. We earlier noted the promise of the Lord to Martin Harris:

If he will bow down before me, and humble himself in mighty prayer and faith, in the sincerity of his heart, then will I grant unto him a view of the things which he desires to see. (D&C 5:24.)

Moroni also emphasized the need for sincerity in prayer when he said,

Ask God . . . if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you. (Moroni 10:4.)

Eliminate Anger and Contention from Your Heart

When my son wanted help with finding his hat and wallet, I knew we couldn't help him through prayer because he was too angry. You simply cannot get answers to prayer when you have anger in your heart. But after he had spent some time on his knees humbling himself and letting the Lord remove the anger from within him, then he was ready for us to try to help him seek the answer he desired.

Of course, this principle is true not only of anger but of all the negative emotions—lust, jealousy, covetousness, contention, revenge, bitterness, doubt, and so forth.

Discipline Your Mind

Jacob spoke of the blessing that comes with discipline of mind in prayer:

I, Jacob, would speak unto you that are pure in heart. Look unto God with firmness of mind, and pray unto him with exceeding faith, and he will console you in your afflictions, and he will plead your cause, and send down justice upon those who seek your destruction. (Jacob 3:1.)

The Lord counseled Oliver Cowdery that he would have more success at receiving inspiration to translate the Book of Mormon if he would first "study it out in [his] mind." (D&C 9:8.) Concentrating the mind on a problem helps to open us to the inspiration of the Lord.

James, in the New Testament, adds his testimony about the importance of a proper mental focus when it comes to answers to prayer:

If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed.

For let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.

A double minded man is unstable in all his ways. (James 1:5-8.)

Focusing and concentrating the mind on your prayer, and on the blessing you seek, is an important exercise of agency that helps you to qualify for the Lord's blessings. Such concentration is part of faith, and faith is essential to receiving answers to prayer.

Preparing the heart and the mind for the Lord's answers blesses us in two important ways:

First, it helps to qualify us for the blessing we seek. The Lord honors us when we seek to be righteous, both without and within, and he desires to answer our prayers and help us with our problems.

Second, as we turn our hearts and minds to the Lord, we're more able to receive the answers he sends. The Lord said through Joseph Smith:

Behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart.

Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation. (D&C 8:2-3.)

King Limhi told his people that they would receive the blessings they sought from the Lord if they would "turn to the Lord with full purpose of heart, and put [their] trust in him, and serve him with all diligence of mind." (Mosiah 7:33.)

So will it be with us. If we hope to receive answers to our prayers, as my sweet little son did in the story of the lost beater, we must first prepare our hearts and our minds.

Receiving Answers Quickly

Before we conclude this chapter, I want to answer a question I'm often asked: Is there something that governs the rapidity with which the Lord answers?

Hidden behind the question is the observation that the Lord seems to answer the prayers of some people immediately, while others have to struggle for a long time.

I feel a good answer to this question can be found in Doctrine and Covenants 101:

They were slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God; therefore, the Lord their God is slow to hearken unto their prayers, to answer them in the day of their trouble.

In the day of their peace they esteemed lightly my counsel; but, in the day of their trouble, of necessity they feel after me. (Vv. 7-8.)

These verses are a lament from the Lord, a lament that most of us don't really get serious about something until we are in a dire emergency. Then we beg the Lord for help.

And he's saying, in essence, "Where were you when things were going better? Why didn't you come then?"

I believe that when we're slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord, the Lord is slow to hearken unto our prayers and to answer us in the day of our trouble.

Of course, even if in the past we've been slow to turn to God, we can repent. As the Lord continues:

Verily I say unto you, notwithstanding their sins, my bowels are filled with compassion towards them. (D&C 101:9.)

I believe that if you want to increase the rapidity with which the Lord responds to you, you need to increase the rapidity with which you respond to the voice of the Spirit.

There is a second requirement: We can't respond begrudgingly. "The Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind"; he requires that we not only be "obedient" but that we also be "willing." (D&C 64:34.) He requires further that we receive all his gifts with gratitude—even those gifts that seem to be trials:

Ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart, walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving. (D&C 46:7.)

Finally, if we want the Lord to respond quickly, we must be humble. Doctrine and Covenants 112 contains these beautiful words: "Be thou humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand, and give thee answer to thy prayers." (V. 10.) What a great jewel! If you are humble, he will lead you by the hand to show you what sacrifice is needed, and then he will give you an answer to your prayers.

But we must remember in all this that even if the Lord answers quickly, his answer may not always be "yes." According to his wisdom and his will, he may answer "no," or "maybe later."

In essence, then, the thing that usually determines our ability to receive answers quickly is ourselves—our own hearts and minds. When our hearts and minds are pure, when they're turned to the Lord, and when we're trying to apply the principles discussed in this chapter, we will learn how to increase our ability to get answers more quickly and clearly.

Questions to Ponder
