Gene R. Cook, Receiving Answers to Our Prayers ( 1996)

Chapter 3

Some Suggestions Regarding the Practice of Prayer

If we have prepared our hearts and minds for prayer, the Lord will hear and bless us. The state of our hearts is of greater importance than the actual approach we use.

Still, our blessings will increase if we will pray in the manner the Lord has prescribed. Let me share with you a few vital elements in the practice of prayer.

Address God as Our Father

In the Lord's Prayer, Jesus said we should begin by saying "Our Father which art in heaven." (Matt. 6:9.)

In a meeting in Kirtland, Ohio, Heber C. Kimball related an experience with his daughter that demonstrated the sweet power of addressing our Father in faith:

"My wife, one day, when going out on a visit, gave my daughter Helen Mar charge not to touch the dishes, for if she broke any during her absence she would give her a whipping when she returned. While my wife was absent my daughter broke a number of the dishes by letting the table leaf fall, and then she went out under an apple tree and prayed that her mother's heart might be softened, that when she returned she might not whip her. Her mother was very punctual when she made a promise to her children, to fulfill it, and when she returned she undertook, as a duty, to carry this promise into effect. She retired with her into her room, but found herself powerless to chastise her; her heart was so softened that it was impossible for her to raise her hand against the child. Afterwards, Helen told her mother she had prayed to the Lord that she might not whip her."

Heber paused in his simple narrative. Tears glistened in the eyes of his hearers. The Prophet Joseph was weeping like a child. He told the brethren that that was the kind of faith they needed—the faith of a little child, going in humility to its Parent, and asking for the desire of its heart. (Orson F. Whitney, The Life of Heber C. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1945], p. 69.)

We've had a similar experience in our own family. One day I arrived home from work to find my youngest son in a very sober mood. Looking extremely sad, he put his arms around me, then asked me to go with him into the bedroom.

There lying on the bed was my backyard thermometer along with about seven dollars in bills and coins—all the money he had. He told me through his tears that he was really sorry, but he had accidentally broken the thermometer by kicking his ball into it. To make matters worse, he had broken the front-yard thermometer just a week before. (I had been able to fix that one.) He knew that I had taken some trouble to calibrate the two thermometers so they worked together to measure the temperatures in different locations, and that I had calibrated them with the indoor thermostat as well. He was absolutely certain I was going to be really upset.

I put my arm around him and told him I forgave him. He was so repentant I didn't have the heart to make him pay for it, even though that is what I would normally have done.

Later that evening he told me that that morning he had prayed fervently to the Lord that his dad would not be angry with him. He knew his prayer had been answered.

A subsequent experience the next morning made all this extra sweet. As we read scriptures as a family, we began to talk about how the Spirit comes to us and blesses us. I asked the children, "When was the last time you really felt like the Spirit helped you?" This youngest son answered, with great feeling, "Just yesterday."

Then he told me that after I'd left the room the previous night, he had offered a second prayer. He had knelt down and thanked the Lord with all his heart for answering his prayer and helping his dad to not be upset with him. He said, "I really feel like the Spirit inspired me and that I was able to get my prayer answered. I'm glad I told the Lord I was thankful."

I'm thankful that we can go to our Father in simplicity, as shown in these stories and in the Lord's Prayer. He's not there to hear flowery words; he wants to hear in simple words from your heart what you're feeling. And if you recognize him to be your Father in Heaven and talk to him that way (and I put emphasis on your Father), you'll have much more power in your prayers.

Pray in the Name of Jesus Christ

Jesus is our Lord and Savior. He is our advocate with the Father. We should do all that we do in his name. This has been the rule of God from the beginning. As an angel taught Adam,

Thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore. (Moses 5:8.)

Nephi reiterated this principle:

Ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ. (2 Nephi 32:9.)

The Lord taught the same thing to his disciples when he was on the earth:

Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.

If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. (John 14:13-14.)

These are the fundamentals of prayer: To pray with a true heart and mind, to address the Father, and to pray in the name of Jesus Christ. If we will do these things, all else will fall into place.

But there is more we ought to consider. Here are some additional aspects of the practice of prayer you should keep in mind:

Find a Still Place

The Lord said to Oliver Cowdery:

If you desire a further witness, cast your mind upon the night that you cried unto me in your heart, that you might know concerning the truth of these things.

Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? (D&C 6:22-23.)

The Lord usually speaks to us in quiet whisperings. If we are not in a quiet, still place when we approach him, we might not hear (or feel) his answers.

Kneel Down

Kneeling, where possible, shows our humility and dependence on the Lord. It shows that we recognize his greatness and our "nothingness," as King Benjamin put it. (See Mosiah 4:11.)

We have already quoted the Lord's condemnation and promise to Martin Harris:

He exalts himself and does not humble himself sufficiently before me; but if he will bow down before me, and humble himself in mighty prayer and faith, in the sincerity of his heart, then will I grant unto him a view of the things which he desires to see. (D&C 5:24.)

Ponder and Study Things Out in Your Mind

When it comes to prayer and revelation, our minds need to be active and engaged if we hope to receive answers from the Lord. If we simply wait passively for something to come into our empty minds, we'll wait a long time. The Lord requires us to use our agency as an important prerequisite to receiving answers to prayer. Pondering and studying things out in our minds is part of that process.

The Lord said to Oliver Cowdery:

Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me.

But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right.

But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong; therefore, you cannot write that which is sacred save it be given you from me. (D&C 9:7-9.)

As you can see from this declaration of the Lord, he doesn't want us to just ask him, assuming that he will solve all of our problems. That would make us dependent and weak. Instead, he wants us to be a party to solving our problems, and thus we must think it out, ponder it, perhaps seek counsel from others, and then ask the Lord to confirm our decision or direction.

The Lord also makes it clear that if the direction or decision we have made is not right, he will give us a stupor of thought, which will cause us to forget that direction or decision we were pursuing. If something is not right and you will wait a little while, many times in a few days you will have feelings that are exactly opposite from those you previously had, and you thereby will have an answer to your prayer.

Ask!

The Lord rarely gives us answers to questions we don't ask. He rarely grants requests we don't seek.

Jesus taught this principle when he was on the earth. He said:

Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you:

For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.

Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?

Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?

If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him? (Matthew 7:7-11.)

The scriptures are filled with this promise. If you want to have a good exercise in seeing how fully the Lord promises us answers if we will ask, see James 4:2-3; 2 Nephi 32:4; 3 Nephi 27:28-29; and Doctrine and Covenants 6:5, 42:68, and 103:31.

But there are some conditions. We must be "believing" (Matthew 21:22; Enos 1:15); we must "abide" in Christ, and let his words abide in us (John 15:7); we must "keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight" (1 John 3:22); we must ask "according to his will" (1 John 5:14); we must "ask not amiss" (2 Nephi 4:35); we must ask that which "is right" (Mosiah 4:21; 3 Nephi 18:20); we must "[believe] in Christ, doubting nothing" (Mormon 9:21); we must ask that "which is good, in faith believing that [we] shall receive" (Moroni 7:26); and we must ask for those things that are "expedient" for us (D&C 88:64).

Nephi gives a good summary of these requirements:

If ye will not harden your hearts, and ask me in faith, believing that ye shall receive, with diligence in keeping my commandments, surely these things shall be made known unto you. (1 Nephi 15:11.)

Asking is so important that even the restoration of the gospel hinged upon it. Here is Joseph Smith's account of how his asking led to the First Vision—and all else that followed:

While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did. . . .

At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to "ask of God," concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture.

So, in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of eighteen hundred and twenty. (Joseph Smith-History 1:11-14; emphasis added.)

After the heavens had opened, and God had poured forth his light of truth, Joseph recorded,

I had found the testimony of James to be true—that a man who lacked wisdom might ask of God, and obtain, and not be upbraided. (Joseph Smith-History 1:26; emphasis added.)

My experience with many members is that they struggle for answers not because they're unworthy or fail to measure up, but because they don't ask—or they ask once or twice and give up, without really persisting and pleading with the Lord for an answer. Certainly personal worthiness is part of it, as we have discussed. But the promise is there: if we will ask with a sincere heart, we will receive.

As you struggle with feelings of unworthiness, then, feeling you're not good enough or that you don't measure up, remember that the Lord doesn't require us to be perfect or near perfect before he'll give us answers to prayers. He wants to give us answers to help us along that long path to perfection. But he does require us to ask—and not just to ask once and be done with it, but to ask over and over again, with true desire and persistence.

Let us also remember that there is a significant difference between asking the Lord for knowledge and asking him to intervene in life's events or circumstances like the weather, illness, the behavior of other individuals, and so forth.

On the one hand, the Lord has promised numerous times that he is waiting to pour out knowledge on the heads of the Latter-day Saints. In this instance, there seem to be few barriers to one's receiving answers if he will just humble himself and ask.

On the other hand, to ask the Lord to change events or circumstances involving one's self or others is much more complicated, because there are so many variables. In the case of trying to alter circumstances (the weather, one's trials, events in life), it may be that many of those circumstances or events were decreed to serve purposes of the Lord that are unknown to you.

In the case of praying to alter the conduct of another, the agency of that person must be honored, or perhaps the Lord has an individualized curriculum underway for his development, or others are being influenced or blessed as a result of praying for him, and so forth.

Because of all that is unknown to us, when we are asking the Lord to change events or circumstances we would do well to truly pray and always rely on the Lord that he will do what is best for all concerned.

Use Prayer Language

God is pleased when we show respect to him by using formal prayer language. Instead of using the overly familiar "you," "your," and so forth, we should use the language of the scriptures: "thee," "thine," and so forth.

Some people are uncomfortable with this kind of language, feeling they can't use it well. But the more we pray that way and learn that kind of respectful language by immersing ourselves in the scriptures, the more we're able to use it in our prayers.

After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. (Matthew 6:9.)

Don't Multiply Words

When the Nephite disciples were praying in the presence of Jesus, they set a good example for us all. The record says,

They did still continue, without ceasing, to pray unto him; and they did not multiply many words, for it was given unto them what they should pray, and they were filled with desire. (3 Nephi 19:24.)

This is consistent with the commandment the Lord gave to the Jews during his mortal ministry. He said, "When ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking." (Matthew 6:7; also see 3 Nephi 13:7.)

When we pray publicly, let us be careful to never be swept away in the desire for the honors of men, which might cause us to pray without real intent or to unnecessarily extend the length of our prayers. The same caution applies to those who pray for a mortal audience rather than simply to be heard by the Lord. We must always be careful to avoid "flowery" prayers or prayers to impress. Surely the Lord is not pleased with such an approach, nor will he answer the prayers of one who is not focused on the Lord or who prays without real intent.

Pray Vocally

The Lord said something to Martin Harris that applies to all of us:

I command thee that thou shalt pray vocally as well as in thy heart; yea, before the world as well as in secret, in public as well as in private. (D&C 19:28.)

There's something powerful in vocal prayer. It helps to concentrate our thoughts and focus our feelings.

Some of the most significant prayers we have on record were vocal prayers. Of the Lord's great intercessory prayer, uttered just before he entered the Garden of Gethsemane, John says, "These words spake Jesus." (John 17:1.) We have some of the words Jesus spoke in the Garden, indicating that at least some of that prayer was vocal. (See Matthew 26:39-44.) When Jesus was among the Nephites, he prayed aloud, using words that "cannot be written." (3 Nephi 17:15.)

It appears others may have also prayed vocally. Nephi wrote, "By day have I waxed bold in mighty prayer before him; yea, my voice have I sent up on high." (2 Nephi 4:24.) Enos said,

I kneeled down before my Maker, and I cried unto him in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul; and all the day long did I cry unto him; yea, and when the night came I did still raise my voice high that it reached the heavens. (Enos 1:4.)

Nephi, son of Helaman, went into a tower in his garden to pray, which prayer was heard by passers-by. (See Helaman 7:6-11.) When Alma and his people were in bondage to the Lamanites, they cried out unto God for deliverance, until guards were assigned to kill all those who prayed aloud. (See Mosiah 24:10-12.)

Finally, Joseph Smith prayed vocally in the Sacred Grove, opening the door to the great restoration of the gospel in this last dispensation of time. (See Joseph Smith-History 1:14.)

As important as these instructions are regarding vocal prayer, the Lord also consistently teaches about secret prayer. Sometimes it may only be a thought, a feeling, or an expression of gratitude, but these can be effective prayers as well. A prayer can be something as simple as an utterance in your heart—"Heavenly Father, please help me" or "Speak, Lord, thy servant heareth"—knowing that the Lord truly answers that kind of prayer too. The Lord said to Oliver Cowdery:

Thou hast inquired of me, and behold, as often as thou hast inquired thou hast received instruction of my Spirit. . . .

Behold, thou knowest that thou hast inquired of me and I did enlighten thy mind; and now I tell thee these things that thou mayest know that thou hast been enlightened by the Spirit of truth;

Yea, I tell thee, that thou mayest know that there is none else save God that knowest thy thoughts and the intents of thy heart. (D&C 6:14-16.)

It is evident here that Oliver Cowdery had inquired of the Lord and had not realized that he had received an answer. The Lord then reveals that he knew Oliver had prayed to him and that he had answered his prayer. He also made it clear that only God knows the thoughts and intents of one's heart.

There are many times when it is appropriate to pray silently, and there are other times when we'll want to pray vocally. Whatever our practice, over the years the prophets have taught that at least twice a day, morning and evening, we should find a private place, kneel down, and pour out our hearts to our Father in Heaven. Then, throughout the day, we can do our best to keep a prayer in our hearts. As we do, if our hearts are right, we will find that our prayers have increased power and focus, and we'll discover that we're in a better position to receive answers.

Pray Repeatedly

The Lord doesn't like vain repetitions, but when we're praying from the heart, our requests are not "vain," even if they're often repeated.

When we were trying to find my son's hat and wallet, we felt it was appropriate to approach the Lord repeatedly. We had a prayer together, then prayed again after we'd reached the field. As we rode we kept a prayer in our hearts. After we'd found the lost items, we offered a prayer of thanksgiving.

Right after the Lord taught us how to pray in the Lord's prayer, he gave us a parable that helps us understand this idea. He said:

Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves;

For a friend of mine in his journey is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him?

And he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not: the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee.

I say unto you, Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him as many as he needeth.

And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. (Luke 11:5-9.)

The Lord is saying here that we can approach our Father in Heaven repeatedly on the same thing. By doing so, we show that we are sincere and filled with desire. Some might be concerned that in this process we might overly repeat ourselves. The Lord knows we are going to ask for many of the same things over the years in our prayers, perhaps even in many of the same words. That is not the problem. In my judgment, repetition is a problem only when we're using it without real intent, just saying words—then it's called vain repetition, which the Lord condemns.

Listen for Answers

Since the Lord usually speaks in a still, small voice, we often won't hear his answers unless we take the time to listen. I believe the best prayers are often filled with spaces of silence—we're not only talking to our Father, but we're also listening to his responses. Then, when the prayer is over, we can continue to seek feelings and answers by remaining on our knees for a few moments before we move on with the concerns of the day.

Questions to Ponder
