Gene R. Cook, Receiving Answers to Our Prayers ( 1996)

Chapter 4

Principles That Add Power to Your Prayers

Not too long ago one of our sons wrote home from his mission and told us of a sweet experience he'd had with prayer.

He was riding his bike in the dark behind his companion somewhere in the Pachuca, Mexico, area. They were late for a discussion. He said, "As we were racing through the dark, I felt impressed to pray. I did so, offering a prayer of gratitude for being a missionary, for being in Mexico, for being able to serve the Lamanites. I tried my best to express my thanks to the Lord.

"Right in the middle of the prayer, I felt the Spirit say to me, 'Put your other hand on the handlebars.' (As you remember, I always ride with one hand.) I obeyed, and within a matter of seconds, the bike nearly crashed into a deep hole in the middle of the road. Because I was using two hands, I was able to swerve the bike around the hole and continue safely."

He might have been seriously hurt, but instead he was uninjured. He drew two important conclusions from this incident. He said, "I have been constantly reminded how quiet the voice of the Spirit is. It is so quiet that if you are not quiet you will not hear it." He also testified, "I believe if I had not been praying at that very moment, I would not have heard the voice. Because I was praying, I heard."

We're better able to hear the Spirit's voice when we're being constant in prayer; and when we recognize and obey that voice, we receive more power in prayer.

I believe, then, that we learn to hear the Spirit better when we learn how to pray without ceasing. I feel we need to learn to pray our way through each day, to pray over big things and little things, to just check in, just have a conversation, let the Lord know what we're feeling and what we're doing.

But that's not the end of it. We then should be open to any direction he desires to give us. Sometimes that direction will flow in impressive ways; sometimes we may not receive much. But we always need to be open to it.

I would like to emphasize that to the degree that you learn to really pray without ceasing—to have your heart drawn out to the Lord and to let your heart be broken and your spirit contrite—to that same degree you establish an environment where the Lord can speak directly to you and you can hear his voice.

The Lord wants us to be a prayerful friend to him on good days as well as bad days. We must attempt to "look unto [God] in every thought." (D&C 6:36.)

This is a great principle in prayer: to recognize our dependence on God, and to constantly seek his power and blessing in our lives. In this chapter, we'll talk about that principle of prayer and a number of others as well.

Recognize Your Dependence on the Lord

It seems that most of us to try to solve our problems on our own, with our own strength. Yet the Lord has truly commanded us to pray over all things:

Therefore may God grant unto you, my brethren, that ye may begin to exercise your faith unto repentance, that ye begin to call upon his holy name, that he would have mercy upon you;

Yea, cry unto him for mercy; for he is mighty to save.

Yea, humble yourselves, and continue in prayer unto him.

Cry unto him when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your flocks.

Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning, mid-day, and evening.

Yea, cry unto him against the power of your enemies.

Yea, cry unto him against the devil, who is an enemy to all righteousness.

Cry unto him over the crops of your fields, that ye may prosper in them.

Cry over the flocks of your fields, that they may increase.

But this is not all; ye must pour out your souls in your closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness.

Yea, and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually for your welfare, and also for the welfare of those who are around you. (Alma 34:17-27.)

There seems to be no question that we are to pray over all things. As the Lord has said in this dispensation,

Ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart, walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving. (D&C 46:7.)

I have a feeling that many of us go through our days trying to resolve our own problems—spiritual, temporal, and otherwise—and do not turn to the Lord as we should. We can receive all sorts of blessings from the Lord, but we must ask, we must ask in faith, and we must know that we are utterly dependent on the Lord for all our support.

Pray without Ceasing

"Pray always, that you may come off conqueror," the Lord has said, "yea, that you may conquer Satan." (D&C 10:5.)

In that great sermon on prayer we've just quoted, Amulek reminds us, "When you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually." (Alma 34:27.)

When our hearts are constantly turned to the Lord, we more fully open the channel between us and him, which helps us to be more receptive to his answers to our prayers.

Pray Fervently

James wrote: "The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much." (James 5:16.) And Moroni promised that our prayers would be answered if we "ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ." (Moroni 10:4.)

When we pray with fervency we pray with real intent. We pray from the heart. We really mean what we say, and we say what we feel. This brings an added humility, an increased power to our prayers that we never have when we pray in a surface manner only, perhaps only speaking words.

Be Specific in Your Requests

The Lord will be involved in the specifics of your life if you invite him to be. In my own life, I've seen time and again how true this is. I may be struggling with a problem and trying all sorts of solutions. Then, after the frustration that usually comes from relying on my own strength, I finally humble myself and ask for help in a specific way. I testify that consistently the Lord gives me ideas or thoughts or feelings that help me to come to the resolution of the problem. I am surely thankful for a loving, gracious Father in Heaven, who will answer prayers and do so immediately.

I bear testimony that the problem with most of us is that we do not ask specifically enough or perhaps with the strength of real intent. How much the Lord wants to bless us, and yet many of us will not ask.

I further bear testimony that the Lord does answer the prayers of his children, when they are offered in faith. He will answer on any issue that is of concern to us, because of his great love for each of his children. May each of us pray more specifically and with real intent that the heavens may more effectively respond to us.

Cast Out Doubt and Fear

I'm always impressed as I think of the negative power of doubt and fear on the power of faith. Joseph Smith said, in essence, "Doubt and fear cannot reside in the mind of man at the same time as faith. One or the other will leave." (See N. B. Lundwall, comp., Lectures on Faith [Salt Lake City, n.d.], lecture 4, paragraph 13.)

One of the greatest difficulties of trying to accomplish something through faith and prayer is to really believe it will happen. Doubt and fear are so powerful that they can sometimes dissuade you from starting the endeavor in the first place, or when you get started they can motivate you to quit.

We all know the story of Peter walking on the water. He saw Jesus approaching them on the surface of the sea, and, in a great act of faith, said, "Bid me come unto thee." (Matthew 14:28.) Jesus bade him to come, and Peter stepped out of the boat. You can imagine his feelings as he put all his weight on his foot and started to step into the Sea of Galilee. Then all of a sudden he was walking, the second man in the history of the world (as far as we know) to walk on water! Then it appears the devil moved into the picture. The wind stirred up, and waves lifted higher, and Peter began to doubt; he was filled with fear; and down he went into that dark, frightening water.

Then Jesus reached out and saved him, saying, "O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?" (Matthew 14:31.) Jesus could also have added, "Peter, you were tied to my power, as long as you were believing and walking and having faith. But the moment you let doubt in, see what happens?"

What a great lesson! And how essential! I'd have to say that as my wife and I have tried over the years to increase our own faith and our family's faith, the greatest challenge we've faced is to really believe with all our hearts, to believe beforehand, to not doubt or fear, and to not give up. If you can do that and have an unshakable faith, you'll receive the blessings you seek—assuming, of course, that what you seek is in harmony with the will of the Lord.

I've heard some people say, "I'll try it, but I'm sure it won't work." And they're right. They're filled with doubt. And I've heard others say, "I don't know howthis will work, but the Lord has promised, and I have confidence it will." And they're right, because they're filled with faith.

Believe That Nothing Is Impossible with the Lord

When the Lord promised that Abraham and Sarah would have a child in their old age, and Sarah questioned it, the Lord responded, "Is any thing too hard for the Lord?" (Genesis 18:14.) And when the angel promised that Elisabeth would bear a son "in her old age," though she had always been barren, he said, "For with God nothing shall be impossible." (Luke 1:36-37.)

As we seek to receive answers to prayer, we must really believe that this principle is true. It seems the Lord does his best work in circumstances that are impossible—or near to it!

Do All That Is in Your Power; Let the Lord Do the Rest

There is another way to express this principle: Pray as though everything depends on the Lord, then work as though everything depends on you.

If you will recall the experience we had in looking for the lost hat and wallet, we prayed repeatedly, then we got on the horses and looked. And we didn't just look for a moment, then quit. We looked as long as we could, praying in our hearts as we went.

When we obtain blessings from the Lord, it's not just because of the work we do. The work doesn't necessarily bring the blessing, but it does show our true desire, which enables the Lord to bless us.

Here is the principle, then: We must do all that is in our power, and then let the Lord do the rest. That suggests we need to find out what the Lord requires, then do it.

One thing I've learned over the years is that you need to count the cost up front. You need to clearly decide what you will do before you go after the blessing. What sacrifices and offerings does the Lord require? What are you willing to give? If you don't receive the blessing you seek, what are you going to do? Will you harden your heart? Will you become angry with the Lord? Will you say prayers don't work, or will you say, "Heavenly Father, I don't know why it didn't work. I gave it all I could and it still hasn't worked, but I know that it's not thy fault. Either it's not thy will or I have fallen short."

In my experience, the problem usually lies in ourselves. Often we have not sacrificed enough (i.e., paid the price) and thus the heavens cannot respond. But if you are willing to pay the price, the Lord will whisper to you and tell you some specific things you still need to do—a little here and a little there, then another month or two or three goes by and then you have it. Because you have offered what the Lord required, he can now respond. Of course, we must remember that all these principles are subject to the overriding will of the Lord. He will always do what is best for us.

Do What the Lord Requires, But Don't Feel You Must Do More

This is a corollary principle to the one we just discussed. We need to give the Lord all that he requires, but we do not need to give him more than he requires. Let me give you an example.

Some years ago I was living in Quito, Ecuador. I had to catch a flight to get to a stake conference in Caracas, Venezuela. The number of problems I had with flights that day was unbelievable.

I was scheduled to fly on Ecuatoriana to Cali, Colombia, where I would connect with a flight to Caracas, but that flight was cancelled and I had to change flights and fly on Braniff. Unfortunately, Braniff failed to tell me that they had an hour stopover in Guayaquil, Ecuador. By the time I got to Cali, I had missed my connecting plane to Venezuela. I felt even worse when I saw the Ecuatoriana flight—the one that supposedly had been cancelled—there sitting on the runway in Cali. About that time I was getting really frustrated. I continued to try my best, with the help of the local mission president, to get to Caracas through Panama or by some other route, but I could not do it. After I'd missed my flight, airport officials told the two of us that they were having two days of national holidays in Colombia and that all the other flights out of Cali were booked. I was out of ideas and simply didn't know what to do.

At the mission home that night, I prayed to the Lord and said, "This is thy stake conference. I've done all that I know how to do to get there, and I have no more alternatives. What should I do now?"

That evening the mission president mentioned that a flight went from Bogota to Caracas—if I could just get to Bogota. He said the flight from Cali to Bogota would take just half an hour. Unfortunately, we both knew that all flights were booked. The mission president then said, "If you really want to do all in your power, you could get on a bus right now and ride all night to Bogota. Then you'd be there in the morning in time to catch the plane to Caracas."

I knew he was right. But I felt my evening would be better spent if I stayed with the mission president and counseled and taught him rather than ride alone on the bus; and I also knew that the all-night bus trip would wear me out and make me tired and ineffective for the meetings of the stake conference. We prayed together and decided it would be best for me to spend the night in Cali; then in the morning I would try again to get a flight. I felt that the bus ride simply was not something the Lord required of me.

I knew there was risk with that decision. I might get stuck in Cali and miss the conference altogether. But I felt that that was the answer to my prayer: Wait until morning, then try again.

The next day there were still no seats, but the Lord opened the door and I got onto the flight to Caracas anyway—I was able to talk the pilot into letting me fly with him in the cockpit! I avoided the exhausting bus trip and had the whole evening to continue to work with that mission president.

When we're deciding how much the Lord requires, we need to be very careful. We want to do all he asks, but if we do more, we may be wasting time, energy, or money—and he may have other things he wants us to accomplish instead.

This principle of doing all we can, but not more than the Lord requires, relates to the truth that the Lord often exacts a spiritual price from us when we ask for blessings. Remember that the price you have to pay (the sacrifice) will vary from circumstance to circumstance. Sometimes you have to pay it straight out, while sometimes others will pay it for you, vicariously, or others will assist with their faith.

Exercise Confidence in Your Ability to Gain Access to the Powers of Heaven

I believe that many people are confident that the Lord's will will be done and that the Lord can do anything, but they're not confident that he will do it for them or that he wants to do it now.

This lack of confidence in our ability to gain access to the powers of heaven is a major reason why more of our prayers aren't answered. In fact, as I travel around the Church I often meet people who say, "My prayer wasn't answered because it just wasn't the will of the Lord." They want to place the responsibility for their unanswered prayer on the Lord. But often the truth is that they just didn't exercise enough faith; they didn't have enough confidence in their ability to receive an answer.

It is true that we must ask according to the will of God. As John wrote:

This is the confidence that we have in him, that, if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us:

And if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we desired of him. (1 John 5:14-15.)

But too often we use this as an excuse. Instead of trying to place the responsibility on the Lord when we don't get the answers we want ("obviously it wasn't the will of God"), we should learn to have confidence before him so that we can "come boldly unto the throne of grace" (Hebrews 4:16) and receive the desires of our hearts.

How can we grow in confidence before the Lord? The scriptures provide some enlightenment that may help.

If you feel that you lack confidence in your ability to receive answers from God, don't place the responsibility on him. You can choose to draw nearer to him, seeking to do those things I've just mentioned, and your confidence will grow.

Now here's a wonderful thing—you don't have to be perfect in these things to have confidence before God. You just have to be trying, honestly, as you go from day to day, and your confidence in him and in yourself will increasingly grow.

Pray for What's Right

We touched on this when we talked about growing in confidence. Our power in prayer grows when we know we're praying for those things that are in accordance with God's will for us.

Sometimes we pray for things with real intent that are not right for us. For example, before I went on my mission, I had a young lady whom I thought I really wanted to marry, and I was convinced that that was the right thing to do. I remember praying that the Lord would bless us that if it were right our relationship would prosper. But I was convinced it was right and felt there was almost no need to pray for it.

Then I got back from my mission and saw that she had her wedding dress and everything else ready, and it really scared me. That's when we truly got serious about seeking the Lord's will. The bottom line is that the marriage wasn't supposed to happen, and it didn't. She was a lovely young woman and continues to be a good friend of my family. But it wasn't right that I marry her, and how thankful we both are that the Lord provided us the mates we needed. How thankful I am the Lord didn't give me what I asked for.

Be Humble, Accepting the Lord's Will in All Things

When you're dealing with the Lord, you simply have to have a humble heart. A prideful heart will very literally keep you from receiving answers. Part of humility is to be willing to subject yourself to the will of the Lord, whatever it is. If your heart is set right in the beginning, you can humbly say to the Lord, "According to my best understanding this is what I want, and I'm going to pray with all my heart to have it. But I know that I do not know all things (as thou, Father, dost), and if there is something I don't understand about this, I cheerfully submit my will to thine."

I think of a great example in the scriptures that teaches this principle. In Daniel 3, the king was preparing to throw three faithful Hebrew boys into the fiery furnace.

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter.

If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and [then] he will deliver us out of thine hand, O king.

But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up. (Daniel 3:16-18.)

My, what a great lesson is taught there. Those boys knew that God had power to deliver them, but they weren't positive that that was his will. Yet, in humility, they relied on the mercy of their Lord and trusted him to do what was best.

You remember in the story that the king then became so angry he heated the furnace up seven times hotter, so hot that the men who threw the Hebrew youths into the furnace died from the heat. Then Nebuchadnezzar looked into the furnace and said, "Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire?" And his men answered, "True, O king." Then he said, "Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God." (Daniel 3:24-25.)

Jesus Christ, in his grace, intervened and saved these boys because of their faith and their humility before God. They were willing to accept his will, and in this case his will was to protect, preserve, and save them.

Be Filled with Gratitude for the Lord's Blessings

To be filled with gratitude is one of the most important principles of receiving answers to prayer. As the Lord said in the Doctrine and Covenants, "Ye must give thanks unto God in the Spirit for whatsoever blessing ye are blessed with." (D&C 46:32.) Later he said, "He who receiveth all things with thankfulness shall be made glorious; and the things of this earth shall be added unto him, even an hundred fold, yea, more." (D&C 78:19.)

So what will happen if I'm grateful for what the Lord gives me? What did the passage say? I will receive more, "even an hundred fold."

In the story of the lost hat and wallet, we were blessed over and over again by this principle of gratitude. The family was grateful we had found the hat, even though we hadn't yet found the wallet. We thanked the Lord over and over again for the blessing of finding both missing objects. We even stopped the car after we left the ranch to offer another prayer of thanks.

My son particularly seemed to sense this truth. When he went into the bunkhouse after finding the hat, he knelt and prayed again. He said later, "I do not believe I would have heard the prompting to go over and stand by the coats had I not been offering a prayer of gratitude." I suspect the same thing happened for our missionary son as he rode his bike down that dark street in Mexico. Because he was pouring out his heart in thanks to the Lord, the channel between him and God was open and he was able to hear the warning voice that helped to save him from injury.

I don't believe it's possible to overdo gratitude with the Lord. He gives us so many blessings (most of which we're not even aware of) that I don't think we can ever thank him enough.

The Lord sets a wonderful example for us in being a great anonymous giver. You have to work at it to discover him doing good for you, yet he's doing it constantly.

Unfortunately, many men who lack faith say, "Well, God has never helped me. I've never been blessed in my life. Whatever I have, I've gotten on my own strength." It's my feeling they don't know what they're talking about, because the Lord blesses us constantly, as King Benjamin taught. (See Mosiah 2:19-25.)

Part of gratitude is to acknowledge the hand of the Lord in our lives. As the Lord said,

In nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments. (D&C 59:21.)

I remember as a younger man I used to struggle with this issue of the Lord's hand in my life. "Was it really him or not? What if I tell him thanks and it wasn't even him?" I long since gave that up; I have become convinced that, just as the scriptures say, any good that ever comes to us comes because of the mercy and the love of the Lord Jesus Christ and his Father. I don't think it's possible to thank him for anything good that he has not been a party to.

The Lord has lamented that he cannot bless men if they do not acknowledge him as the giver of all good gifts:

For what doth it profit a man if a gift is bestowed upon him, and he receive not the gift? Behold, he rejoices not in that which is given unto him, neither rejoices in him who is the giver of the gift. (D&C 88:33.)

In other words, the Lord is saying, "What good is it for me to answer your prayers if you won't receive the answer, because you don't recognize the answer as having come from me?" When that occurs, we do not rejoice that we have received a gift, neither do we rejoice in the Lord, who gave the gift. The gift might as well not have been given. Conversely, if we recognize the hand of the Lord in our lives, asking for blessings and rejoicing in the receipt of every good gift, then the Lord will respond.

Pray in Faith, Believing You Will Receive

In chapter two we talked about having faith in Jesus Christ. In addition, we must believe that we will receive the thing we seek. For those seeking the Holy Ghost, the Lord has said, "ask the Father in my name, in faith believing that you shall receive, and you shall have the Holy Ghost, which manifesteth all things which are expedient unto the children of men." (D&C 18:18.)

The Lord further taught that "whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you."(3 Nephi 18:20.)

Here is a great example of the Lord counseling us to believe and we will receive—yet, as always, the promise is conditioned on that "which is right," or the will of the Lord.

If you feel your faith is weak, you can pray as did the man who asked Jesus to cast a "dumb spirit" out of his son. And "Jesus said unto him, If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that believeth. And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief." Then Jesus "rebuked the foul spirit" and healed the boy. (See Mark 9:14-29.)

Alma taught a great sermon about what to do if our belief is weak. He said:

We will compare the word unto a seed. Now, if ye give place, that a seed may be planted in your heart, behold, if it be a true seed, or a good seed, if ye do not cast it out by your unbelief, that ye will resist the Spirit of the Lord, behold, it will begin to swell within your breasts; and when you feel these swelling motions, ye will begin to say within yourselves—It must needs be that this is a good seed, or that the word is good, for it beginneth to enlarge my soul; yea, it beginneth to enlighten my understanding, yea, it beginneth to be delicious to me. (Alma 32:28.)

We can grow in our ability to believe as we receive the Lord's word into our hearts, give place to it, and let the Spirit work within us.

Utilize the Fast

"I give unto you a commandment that ye shall continue in prayer and fasting from this time forth." (D&C 88:76.)

The story I just mentioned, in which Jesus cast the evil spirit out of the boy, also teaches us about the vital importance of fasting. Before Jesus came on the scene in that story, his disciples had tried, without success, to cast the spirit from the boy. After Jesus had done so, "his disciples asked him privately, Why could not we cast him out? And he said unto them, This kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting." (Mark 9:28-29.)

Fasting is a small sacrifice we offer in an effort to receive greater blessings from the Lord. When we fast in an effort to receive an answer to prayer, we show the Lord the depth of our desire, and, because we have exercised our agency in the sacrifice, we put ourselves in a better position to receive the blessing we seek.

Be United with Others

To be unified in prayer brings more strength. If you can get a number of people praying for you—a family, your brothers and sisters, friends, ward members—the unity in strength that results will help to bring increased power to your request.

Over the years I've learned increasingly that when we have a serious problem that is not too personal, we should get all of our family to pray about it, especially the little ones. They may not understand all the details of what we need, but they can know enough to pray that Dad or Mom needs this. And when they pray, they seem to have a channel right into heaven. Not only can they help you receive an answer to your prayer, but the very process will teach them over and over again that the Lord does answer prayer.

As it is written—Whatsoever ye shall ask in faith, being united in prayer according to my command, ye shall receive. (D&C 29:6.)

Pray for Others

There is great power in praying for others, perhaps even more than in just praying for yourself. The Lord said to Thomas B. Marsh, who was then president of the Quorum of the Twelve:

I know thy heart, and have heard thy prayers concerning thy brethren. Be not partial towards them in love above many others, but let thy love be for them as for thyself; and let thy love abound unto all men, and unto all who love my name.

And pray for thy brethren of the Twelve. (D&C 112:11-12.)

When we pray for others with a fervent heart, we are obeying the second great commandment, to love our neighbors as ourselves. The Lord hears our pleas in their behalf and blesses them according to that which they are willing receive.

I've found it helpful to pray when I'm trying to help another, "Lord, deliver me his heart. How may I help this man now? How might I lighten his burden?" It's as important to pray specifically for others as it is for ourselves.

Pray for and with the Spirit

The Spirit is the Lord's agent in bringing many blessings into our lives. The more the Holy Ghost can be with us, the more powerful our prayers will be.

"The Spirit shall be given unto you," the Lord said, "by the prayer of faith." (D&C 42:14.)

The Holy Ghost can even help us to know what to pray for. "He that asketh in the Spirit asketh according to the will of God; wherefore it is done even as he asketh." (D&C 46:30.) If we can receive the Spirit through a prayer of faith, we can then ask "in the Spirit," which will help us to ask "according to the will of God." Such prayers are always answered.

The Spirit can aid the process of communication in other ways:

Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.

And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of God. (Romans 8:26-27.)

It's evident that the Spirit will help us by revealing that for which we should pray.

Learn to Recognize the Promptings of the Spirit

When you are attempting to obtain answers to your prayers and to be directed by the Lord, you need to learn to follow the promptings of the Spirit. Those promptings will help you know what the Lord requires of you as you seek the blessing. They will help you know what to pray for and where to go from there. The Spirit's promptings will also tell you as you go along how much more faith you may need to exercise in order to accomplish your desire. You may have promptings telling you what you need to repent of, how to draw closer to the Lord, specific steps toward the blessing, and so forth. In sum, the Lord will guide you through the experience if you will seek to follow the promptings he gives you.

You'll recall the story I told at the beginning of this chapter—how our missionary son was prompted to put both hands on his bicycle handles, and how that helped him avert a dangerous accident. That incident helped him to remember "how quiet the voice of the Spirit is. It is so quiet," he said, "that if you are not quiet you will not hear it." You may recall that he also said, "I believe if I had not been praying at that very moment, I would not have heard the voice. Because I was praying, I heard."

It is certainly true that when we are praying, we will hear the voice much more easily. As a rule, one must concentrate in order to hear the voice. It is generally felt more than it is heard. Because of that, if you are not calm and peaceful, you generally will not feel the words. Nephi said to his brothers:

Ye have heard his voice from time to time; and he hath spoken unto you in a still small voice, but ye were past feeling, that ye could not feel his words. (1 Nephi 17:45.)

It truly is a still, small voice. As we read in Helaman:

And it came to pass when they heard this voice, and beheld that it was not a voice of thunder, neither was it a voice of a great tumultuous noise, but behold, it was a still voice of perfect mildness, as if it had been a whisper, and it did pierce even to the very soul. (Helaman 5:30.)

Since the voice is so quiet, we have to really listen and expect to be able to hear it or we will not be able to. If we would like to increase our ability to hear the voice, it may best be accomplished by learning how to pray without ceasing. In my experience, the more we learn to pray throughout the day, the more the promptings will come and help us by inspiring us as to what to do.

I have seen the gift of recognizing promptings manifest many times in my wife, who often has a feeling or impression about something that is needed or lacking in one of our children. When we follow those promptings, they consistently lead us to additional experiences in faith; sometimes they've even saved a child from a life-threatening experience. Many other times they are more simple experiences where the child could have weathered things on his or her own, but because the Spirit of the Lord has been involved things turned out better than they otherwise would have.

In addition to the feelings we call promptings, the Spirit can also give us guidance, direction, and answers through enlightening our minds. The Lord said to Hyrum Smith,

I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy. (D&C 11:13.)

And to Oliver Cowdery he said,

Thou knowest that thou hast inquired of me and I did enlighten thy mind; and now I tell thee these things that thou mayest know that thou hast been enlightened by the Spirit of truth. (D&C 6:15.)

If we will draw close to the Lord and learn to hear the voice of the Spirit, we will be able to receive the guidance and help we need, which will lead us to answers to our prayers.

Questions to Ponder
