Gene R. Cook, Receiving Answers to Our Prayers ( 1996)

Chapter 5

The Blessings of Prayer

A couple of years ago one of our sons fell in love with a hamster he called Hammy. This son has always loved animals, but he particularly loved Hammy. My son would let him crawl all over his back and up his shirt sleeve and into his shirt. He loved to walk around the house with Hammy in his shirt pocket. He had him sleep by his bed at night in a cage. He loved playing with him when he was doing anything and everything around the house. Hammy became my son's "favorite pal."

There were a number of times when Hammy got away from my son and he had to search to find him, but he was always able to do so.

But one day Hammy became lost and we couldn't find him. A full day passed with Hammy missing, and we were afraid he had become stuck somewhere or that he was lost and would die without food. My son had prayed about it and had searched with the whole family, but the hamster was nowhere to be found.

Our son told us he had done everything he could think of, and that nothing had worked. But then it dawned on him that although he had prayed, he had not fervently asked the Lord for help. He very humbly knelt in his bedroom and pled with the Lord to save his hamster and bring him back to him. The moment he opened his eyes he saw his hamster sitting on the rug next to him, watching him as if to say, "You, my friend, prayed me here."

What a small, yet powerful, example this was of how prayer can work. I bear testimony, as would my son, as to why the Lord did indeed answer his humble prayer. He prayed in faith, and he pled unto the Lord with a humble heart—and then he saw the Lord respond in a rather unique way.

It would have been one thing to have found the hamster some hours later, or even a few minutes later, but to have the hamster appear and be sitting on his haunches right next to my son as he prayed made the experience particularly impressive.

Some would say that the Lord has no interest in the small things in our lives. I use this example to show that the Lord cares even about a little boy and his hamster. And if that is true, how much he desires to bless us in big things!

The Key to the Lord's Blessings

The Lord truly wants to bless us in all aspects of our lives—our temporal needs, our goals, our relationships, our spiritual desires, and everything else. The key to receiving these blessings is to ask in prayer. Those who ask in faith and then obey the direction he gives them will receive the blessings. Of course, if we choose not to obey the Lord, we receive no promise, as a result of our disobedience.

I think many of us have a tendency to have our morning or evening prayers, and maybe even pray a few other times in a day, but not really pray. I'd ask you this question: When you face a new challenge in your day, what's the first thing that comes to your mind? Where does your heart run first? I hope it's to the Lord. That will be the case if you're trying to pray without ceasing. If you're not, I would say you're "winging it" on your own. You're trying to work through the day's many problems with the hope that your prayer in the morning covered it all.

It is most helpful when you move into any new circumstance, or when you are trying to assist others, that you have a prayer in your heart. "How should I deal with this? What should I do? Are there any special concerns that I ought to know about? Heavenly Father, help me. Help me."

Unfortunately, many of us don't ask. So we go off on our own and don't obtain the help we could have received with the problems we face each day.

Once again I bear humble witness that if we ask, as the scriptures say over and over again, we will receive. Again I bear witness that not one single, sincere prayer has been offered since the beginning of time that the Lord didn't respond to. Not one. Our problem is we don't ask. (Of course, the answer may come in a way we don't recognize or a way we don't like.)

If we will ask, we can have a much greater abundance of the gifts of the Spirit. Yes, we may need to increase our worthiness, but usually we're already worthy enough to obtain more, if we would only ask. Then those gifts will help us to grow in worthiness, that we can receive even more.

Please remember what we discussed before about being fanatical in these things. The devil is very good at working in the extremes—he succeeds when he motivates us to avoid prayer entirely, and he succeeds when he motivates us to spend hours on our knees when we ought to be out working on our problems.

Because the devil is not temperate or moderate, he will often be found working in the extremes. He's usually not able to get to religious, spiritual men and women through blatant sin, but he might be able to tempt them to excesses in the very gifts they have, perhaps even in the name of spirituality. Perhaps he will tempt them to fast and pray excessively. When we become excessive in these things, we might well open ourselves to receive direction from the adversary himself. Because of this, I feel a need to repeat my caution that you be careful and moderate in your efforts in things of the Spirit.

Perhaps the real key to all of this is the heart. Where is your heart? What is it you really desire? Do you really desire direction from the Lord? Are you willing to do your part to be sure you receive the proper answers to your prayers?

In this chapter I'm going to share with you a number of experiences (mine and others) that show the many kinds of answers and blessings the Lord is pleased to give us. Of course, these are only a small sampling. I hope you'll also remember the other examples included in this book. And if you were to record your own experiences, the number of examples could be increased many times over.

Prayer for Strength to Overcome Bad Habits

Some time ago I received a very special letter from a member who described how prayer was an important element in his effort to overcome a problem with alcohol and tobacco. Here's what he said (I've changed the names):

I am writing to tell you of a very special blessing that has come into our home since Cindy entered the Missionary Training Center last October.

At the time Cindy went into the MTC, my wife and I both smoked and drank. We have been known to consume large quantities of alcoholic beverages. The Sunday after Cindy entered the MTC, I felt strongly compelled to quit smoking and drinking. It was Sunday night and we had consumed a great deal of alcohol that weekend. My wife's sister and her husband were visiting with us that night. I asked for help from anyone who could help. I didn't want to dishonor our beloved daughter's calling.

My wife's sister called a representative from Alcoholics Anonymous and talked to him. He offered to take me to their meetings and work with me if I wanted him to. I made arrangements to go to the next meeting.

My wife called our bishop, who came to our home, with his second counselor, that same night. The bishop suggested that we fast and pray for help with our smoking and drinking habits, then meet with him in his bishop's office for a special blessing.

I had been smoking for forty years and was a total alcoholic; my wife had been smoking for approximately twenty years and drank to keep me company. We fasted and prayed for twenty-four hours, then met with the bishop. He blessed us that we would be able to stop these habits and have no more desire for either alcohol or tobacco. The blessing was fulfilled immediately. When we left Bishop Stanley's office that night the desire for cigarettes and alcohol no longer existed.

I called the representative from Alcoholics Anonymous and told him I wouldn't need their help, since I had all the divine help I needed to conquer my habit.

I will be fifty-one years old in July, and now I know the power God has and the things that can be accomplished by him. I am sorry I waited so long to see the light. I have just been interviewed by our bishop to become an elder at our stake conference in June, and we hope to be married in the temple in August.

[This fine couple was indeed sealed in the temple that August, and their three children still living at home were sealed to them as well. One week after their missionary daughter returned from her mission, she also had the wonderful privilege of entering the temple and being sealed to her parents.]

It's valuable to review what helped this good brother and sister. Their daughter's missionary calling prepared their hearts, then prayer, fasting, and a priesthood blessing gave them the strength to follow through.

Prayer for Comfort and Peace of Mind in Trial

When I was a mission president, a missionary once called the mission home about 2:00 a.m. saying his companion had left for the evening with a local companion and had never come home. My assistants drove to my home to inform me; when I got word, I immediately called the missionary and asked if there had been any problems the night before. He said no. I asked if his companion had been in a good mood before he left to proselyte that night. He said yes.

I thanked him, hung up the phone, and then knelt in my living room with my two assistants and offered prayer. As I prayed, I had the assurance that Elder Jones was all right and that we needn't worry. I didn't have any idea where he was or when he would return, but I knew he was okay. After we prayed, the assistants wanted to know what they should do next. I said, "I think you should go home and get some sleep. Remember, at 9:00 a.m. we're scheduled to travel to Paraguay." One of them asked me, "Do you mean we will go even if Elder Jones has not returned yet?" and I said, "No, he will be back. Just exercise faith and he will be back."

By 8:30 the next morning, Elder Jones still had not returned. The assistants and I were in the assistants' office. We prayed again and told the Lord that we had some very important things to do in Paraguay, and we wanted to know what to do. I felt the same thing I had felt the night before. "Don't worry about it; he will return before you leave." We stood from that prayer and I told my assistants, "Brethren, let's not worry about it. He'll be back in time."

About ten minutes before nine, when we had our bags packed and were ready to leave, Elder Jones arrived at the door of the mission home. Of course we were all relieved to see him. I immediately took him into the office to interview him about where he'd been and what he'd been doing the whole night. It turned out that in his great zealousness to preach the gospel, he and his local companion had gone to a neighboring town where no missionaries were assigned. He had gone into the home of a member family, had organized a group of people to teach, and had preached to them late into the night. It had not even crossed his mind that his companion would be worried about him. He had come in to the mission home, quite excited, to suggest that I open up a new city and place missionaries there.

I was so grateful that the Lord had answered my prayer. I bear testimony that the feeling of peace and assurance I had cannot come from men; it comes from the Lord. It enables you to go ahead with your task or your life with assurance—even though you're short on facts—that everything will work out all right.

Prayer to Remove Obstacles to Righteous Goals

Righteous goals are never easy. There are always obstacles. And it seems that as soon as we set a goal to really improve or to accomplish something worthwhile, not only do we face the expected obstacles, but we also begin to get all kinds of new opposition. The best answers to opposition and other obstacles are perseverance and prayer. Let me give you some examples.

As mission president, I had a set of missionaries who were having great success. How were they doing it? At one point, one of the missionaries answered that by bearing his testimony:

"I love my companion, and we are 100 percent in the work of the Lord," he said. "We have not approached one single door without either having a prayer in our hearts or having prayed in our car." And he said that they were thrilled to see doors, barriers, traditions of men, the things that blind people—all these obstacles just faded away.

Another missionary sent me this letter:

I will never forget the beautiful experience we had of fulfilling a promise we made to a servant of the Lord, that of having ten baptisms in the month of March.

It wasn't an easy task, due to the strong opposition of Satan. Up until the twenty-eighth of March we had only five baptisms, and we began to be quite concerned. For the whole month we had worked very hard and had tried to keep the mission rules 100 percent.

On the twenty-ninth, my companion and I decided to fast so that nothing would go wrong with the baptism of a family of five we had scheduled that day. However, that afternoon only four of them decided to be baptized; that left us with only nine baptisms, and in spite of all our efforts, we wouldn't meet our goal. But the hand of the Lord manifested itself; while the four were being baptized, the family member who had decided against baptism approached us and said, "Elders, I want to be baptized now."

I am so grateful to the Lord it is hard to express it. My testimony concerning prayer and fasting has been enormously strengthened, and the satisfaction I feel in my heart for having kept a promise made to the Lord is great.

I have seen in my own life how the Lord removes obstacles to our righteous goals, particularly when we approach him in earnest prayer. I had a wonderful experience with this principle once when I was trying to make an important tour of one of our missions in Colombia. I had arrived in Ecuador with my family on October 10, with plans to go on to Colombia exactly one week later. The day after we arrived we assigned some missionaries to register our visas so they would be valid and so I could use mine to travel to Colombia. The elders were informed that it would take at least ten days to register our visas—and we had only three working days before I was to leave.

On Wednesday, October 12, I called the mission president and advised him to have an alternate plan in place, since it looked like I probably wouldn't be able to join him for the tour.

But we didn't just give up. We exercised our faith and prayers, and we knew that the mission president and missionaries in Colombia were doing the same. We contacted the American embassy in Ecuador to see if I could get a temporary travel permit, but it was not possible.

On Thursday, October 13, we visited the visa office to talk to the official who controlled the visas, to see if we could arrange some way for me to leave. When we reached the office he was out, but his boss offered to help us. We explained our problem. After listening to us for a few minutes, he confronted the person who had been causing our difficulty, asking if there was some reason why they could not register the visas. The man rather sheepishly said, "No, no reason. We can register them." The boss then suggested, "How about now?" So the man did it, and within the hour we had all seven visas registered and were out of the office.

I traveled to the mission in Cali, Colombia, on schedule.

I bear witness that the Lord is able to place his hand into difficult situations and turn them to our benefit—particularly when we ask him.

Let me give you one final example of how the Lord will remove obstacles to righteous goals if we will ask. Some time ago I was the General Authority visitor to a stake conference in a place quite far from the headquarters of the Church. The stake president approached me and said, "Elder Cook, as you know, this stake is quite new. The stake patriarch has been invited by the Church to go to Salt Lake City to conference in thirty days and, while there, to receive his endowments. He also wants his wife to go with him to be sealed, but he doesn't have any money. It will cost about $700. Does the Church have any funds to help so he can take his wife along?"

I had to tell him no, the Church doesn't provide funds for such purposes. He looked very discouraged and saddened. I then felt to add, "But President, if you will exercise your faith and have your patriarch and his wife do the same, he will go to conference and she will go with him. In fact, I promise you that if you will exercise your faith 100 percent, she will go. I promise you in the name of the Lord that the money will come forth and she will go."

As soon as I said that, the thought came into my mind, "Elder Cook, you are mighty free with my money. How come you are committing $700 of my money?" That was the gist of the message. In trying to respond to that impression, I quickly said to the stake president (who didn't know, of course, what was going on in my mind), "President, what I have told you is true. If by some chance you reach September 23 and you don't have the money, telephone me collect, because she is going." What I was really saying—without his knowing it—was that Elder and Sister Cook would pay the $700 if the Lord didn't. I didn't have $700 to spare. It would be difficult, but I would do it. It was as if the Lord said, "How much do you believe, Elder Cook?" And I responded, "I personally believe $700 worth that the money will be forthcoming." I suppose I didn't absolutely know what would happen. But I believed in my heart that she was going to conference.

Shortly before the thirty days had expired, a man came forward and offered to pay for the patriarch's wife to accompany him to Salt Lake City. To my knowledge, this good benefactor knew nothing of the president's request or of my promise. The Lord heard our prayers and touched this man's heart, and he responded.

The Lord desires that we be people who help make things happen. He doesn't want us to be thwarted by obstacles or opposition. He desires that we draw upon the all-powerful arm of God and add it to the power that resides in each of us. If we will do that, learning to do things in the Lord's own way, asking for help, the help will come.

Prayer to Help Humble a Heart

There is no greater miracle than a heart that is softened and humbled by the Spirit and then changed by the power of Christ. Prayer is a vital key in that process.

A few years ago a family named Jensen was baptized in New York state—except for one son. He seemed uninterested and continued with his worldly life. After some time one of the Jensen daughters began to attend Brigham Young University in Utah. She pestered her older, nonmember brother to attend, and he finally decided to try it. "Maybe there are a lot of cute girls there," he said.

He admits that upon his arrival at BYU his main thought was, "I sure hope they assign me a roommate who's a good drinking partner." Instead, he was assigned a faithful Latter-day Saint man, a young returned missionary who was paralyzed from the waist down and couldn't even walk.

As the weeks went by, Jensen came into the apartment night after night drunk, having been out with nonmember girls and having a good time. Finally his roommate, whom I'll call Smith, couldn't take it anymore. While lying in bed in the dark he said, "Jensen, you think you're pretty hot stuff, don't you?" he said.

"What do you mean?" said Jensen.

"You think you're really hot stuff. You can go out drinking every night, play around with the girls, and do whatever you want to do in this life, and you really think you're putting one over on BYU, the Lord, and everyone else. Well, I'm here to tell you that the Lord is going to call you to account, and you'd better repent or, frankly, you'll be going you know where."

Jensen shrugged it off. "I'm not so bad."

Smith wouldn't let it go. "What you need to do is repent. Tonight would be a good time to do it. You need to repent and put things straight with the Lord."

All of a sudden Jensen heard a thud. Smith had fallen to the floor. "Now he's praying for me," Jensen thought. He tried to ignore it. Finally he said, "Hurry up and finish your prayer and I'll help you back into bed."

Smith said, "I don't need to pray. I've already prayed. You're the man who needs to pray."

Jensen protested, but Smith wouldn't let up. Finally Jensen agreed and knelt alongside his roommate. It was the first prayer of his life, a simple prayer, but before it was over the Spirit touched Jensen, and he began to change at that very moment, even while he prayed. He agreed to immediately receive the missionary lessons.

Less than a month later he was baptized by his paralyzed roommate, with two other men helping to support him in the font. And a year later he was called on a mission. All as a result of one prayer offered in a students' apartment.

Prayer to Help Us Teach the Truth with Courage

When I was a freshman at Arizona State University, I was attending on a scholarship and was anxious to maintain a good grade-point average. Because of this, I signed up for a speech class that supposedly was quite easy. I felt it would enable me to earn the credits I needed, with good grades, without adding much to my workload.

After the last day had passed for being able to transfer out of the class, the teacher, a lady about sixty, said, "Students, you will be pleased to know that in the last twenty-five years of my teaching, I've given only five A's." At those words my heart sank, and a general gloom settled over the whole class. I tried to transfer out of the class, but because the deadline had passed it proved to be impossible. I was disheartened, but as I thought about it, I wanted to rise to the challenge and make sure I received her sixth A. But as the months passed, even though I worked very hard on every assignment, I received B's, B-minuses, and once in a while a B-plus—but never an A.

Thirty days from the end of the term the teacher stood up and said to the class, "You each have one last speech to give. It will determine half of your grade. I want you to select a very controversial subject and give a twenty-five minute speech on it in front of the class. When you're finished, the class will try to tear apart your argument and your means of presenting it, while you try to defend it. Afterward, each student will provide a written critique of how you did."

A great hush came over the class, mostly from self-doubt and fear. Then they began to consider what they might talk about—communism versus democracy, racial issues, birth control, anything that might be controversial. I had no idea what topic I should address.

Numbers were drawn to determine who would speak first. I drew number nine. I remember the first three or four students who took their turns with that assignment. Some of the girls ended in tears. It was rough going—the class was quite critical. One Chinese boy was particularly sharp and was seemingly able to dismantle about anything we said. As the days went by and I saw how grueling the experience was, great fear mounted in my heart about what I should do.

I prayed about a topic but couldn't seem to settle on anything. The days passed—my speech was in two days and still I didn't have a topic. But one impression kept coming back to me: "If you're looking for a controversial subject, choose the Book of Mormon. You ought to defend the Book of Mormon in that speech class."

That idea made the speech even more frightening. Besides me, there wasn't a single member of the Church in the class. The teacher was a devout member of a Protestant church; she had even used the Bible in her teaching and had made it clear that as far as she was concerned, the Bible was the only revelation from God to man. I hadn't yet served my mission; I was a priest in the Aaronic Priesthood. But I had served a stake mission the summer before, and I knew the old missionary lesson about how the Lord, who is no respecter of persons, called prophets in the New World as well as the Old World.

I struggled within myself. I'd never been particularly frightened at speaking, but I remember that this time I really was. I offered many prayers to help me prepare and many more asking for help with the actual presentation. Still, when I stood to give my speech I had cold hands and a shaking feeling. I announced my subject as the Book of Mormon, then began teaching semihistorically and semiacademically, desiring not to offend.

But early on in the talk the Spirit of the Lord began to impress upon me the thought, "I can't just tell them about this book historically. I don't care what they think of me or what happens to my grade. The Book of Mormon is true. They ought to all know it."

I began to teach the lesson pretty much as it was written to be given to investigators, bearing my testimony frequently. As I did, a calmness came over me as the Spirit began to bear witness to the twenty kids in the class that what I was saying was true. I spent the last three or four minutes answering the question, "How might a man really know if this book is true?" I read them Moroni's promise (see Moroni 10:4), and bore my testimony of its truthfulness. I said, "Say what you like, criticize what you want, but this book is true! And it came from God." I was so moved upon by the Spirit that I closed my talk "in the name of Jesus Christ, amen."

When I was finished there was such a stillness in the class that I wasn't sure if I was in real trouble or if the Spirit had truly enveloped the other students. I soon learned it was the Spirit. Finally the teacher broke the silence, trying to prompt and persuade them to attack, but they wouldn't. (I was pleased that one of the conditions she had laid down was that she herself, as teacher, couldn't participate.) When no one would comment, the teacher finally said, in frustration, "It looks like no one has anything to say. Be seated, Gene."

Later, as the students passed in their written evaluations, all their responses were positive. Four or five said, in essence, "Almost thou persuadest me." One girl said, "I am a Methodist, and I don't believe any of that about the Book of Mormon, but you almost convince me it is true." The Chinese boy who had been particularly critical said, "I've never heard of the Book of Mormon. Where could I get a copy?"

I know the Lord blessed me in that most difficult presentation. He does answer our prayers as we seek to teach others the truth. He blesses us as we keep the commandments and are not afraid to bear witness of him. As I went home that day these words from the Doctrine and Covenants came to me:

Therefore, verily I say unto you, lift up your voices unto this people; speak the thoughts that I shall put into your hearts, and you shall not be confounded before men;

For it shall be given you in the very hour, yea, in the very moment, what ye shall say.

But a commandment I give unto you, that ye shall declare whatsoever thing ye declare in my name, in solemnity of heart, in the spirit of meekness, in all things.

And I give unto you this promise, that inasmuch as ye do this the Holy Ghost shall be shed forth in bearing record unto all things whatsoever ye shall say. (D&C 100:5-8.)

I had surely seen the fulfillment of the promise mentioned.

Some weeks later I received a report card in the mail at my home. I opened it with some trepidation. How pleased I was to see an "A" written down for that speech class. My first thought was, "Truly she is a woman of integrity." I knew she didn't believe what I had taught about the Book of Mormon.

But then another thought came to me. "No, my son. I gave you that 'A.' "

What a wonderful preparation that experience was for a young man who found himself in the mission field some very few months later.

Prayer and a Priesthood Blessing

Prayer can help us in many ways when it comes to priesthood blessings. It can help the priesthood brethren know what to say in the blessing so they can speak the will of the Lord. It can help the sick person and his or her family have a witness of the truth of what's been said. It can help them have a feeling of peace and comfort. And it can help everyone involved grow in faith.

I'd like to share with you an experience we had with my wife. She has a history of cancer in her family, so she was very concerned when she discovered a growth that appeared to be some kind of tumor. The doctor scheduled surgery to remove it, and we began to seek the Lord's blessings in prayer.

My wife was very concerned. Her worry was so great that she couldn't sleep well at night, and the anxiety seemed to follow her through her days. We talked about it, and she agreed that what she was really experiencing was doubt and fear.

The doctor planned to do a biopsy to see if the growth was malignant. As we talked, I realized she was waiting for the results of that test to see how she should exercise her faith. We discussed the fact that we could show greater faith by trusting in the Lord even before we knew if the growth was malignant. In other words, if we would pay the price of faith "up front," she could perhaps have the peace she needed from the Lord rather than relying totally on the doctor's test. She was very believing and determined to stop waiting to exercise her faith. I tried to exercise my faith for her, as did the children.

It surely seems to me that when one has a problem, if he will turn to the Lord and humble himself in the first instance, he is giving the greatest evidence of spirituality and faith. On the other hand, if we delay our reliance on the Lord, we may receive a lesser blessing.

At the same time as my wife began to exercise greater faith, I sought to prepare myself to give her a blessing. I fasted on one day and then again two days later. On that second day of fasting, which was to be the day of the blessing, I prayed as I drove to work, asking to know what I should say in the blessing. The Lord helped me to understand that he would reveal his will at the time of the blessing. On occasion we can know his will before we even go to give a blessing, but in this case I had the impression that the Lord wanted me to wait. I prayed intently all through the day that the Lord would be merciful in telling me his will as I blessed my sweet wife.

When I returned home from work that evening, I gathered the whole family together. I called on our ten-year-old son to offer a prayer. He, in his tender and tearful way, prayed that his mother would be all right. Afterwards, an older son anointed his mother, and then I sealed the anointing and gave the blessing.

I had prayed throughout the day that I would not say anything in the blessing except that which would come into my mind at the very moment. As I proceeded, I knew I should tell her that they would find that the growth was benign, that all would go well, and that at that time the next day she would be feeling fine, happy, and very much encouraged. We all felt the Spirit strongly.

We all slept well through the night. In the morning, when we went to the hospital, we both had a true feeling of peace.

The surgery lasted only an hour, the growth was benign, and she recovered quickly and completely.

Sometimes the Lord will allow a priesthood holder to be an instrument in healing someone. When that happens, prayer can enable him to come to a knowledge of the Lord's will, and it can help him to increase in faith.

In this experience, I don't know whether or not the Lord healed my wife, changing a malignant growth to one that was benign—and that's not really the point. What I do know is that, through prayer, the Lord blessed us with a knowledge of what to expect, and he granted us peace of mind.

One of the most important things I relearned in this experience is that the promptings of the Spirit are so subtle and so quiet that sometimes it is very, very difficult to know whether an answer is "yes" or "no." Sometimes it's very difficult to know whether you have been spoken to by the Spirit or not.

When the Spirit speaks, it is almost never in an audible voice that we hear with our ears. Instead, the Spirit usually speaks in feelings, thoughts, ideas, and impressions. The voice of the Spirit is still and small, and if we're looking for something more, or if we're not being very quiet and attentive, we'll likely miss the answer when it comes.

In this case, I had understood that the Lord would give me thoughts during the blessing, and I prayed in faith that whatever thoughts came into my mind at that time would be the Lord's thoughts. As I blessed my wife, then, I spoke what came into my mind, which was itself an exercise of faith.

The Lord gives this command and promise in the Doctrine and Covenants, which can be applied not only to speaking but also to giving blessings: "Speak the thoughts that I shall put into your hearts, . . .

"For it shall be given you in the very hour, yea, in the very moment, what ye shall say." (D&C 100:5-6.)

Prayer for Temporal Assistance

The Lord doesn't want us to be too deeply involved or absorbed by temporal, superficial, or secondary things. These things must be dealt with, but we must do it in a spiritual way.

I know of a man who was newly self-employed but was finding it impossible to get started. He had almost no money coming in—and a family to support. In addition, he had committed to contribute money to help build a new temple in his area, a commitment he fulfilled even though his finances were very shaky.

"I prayed very strongly this particular week," he said, "with much faith that the Lord would help us come up with some money so we could earn our way." Two hours after his prayer he received a phone call offering him his first work as a self-employed man. One hour later, another job came into his hands.

It is my testimony that the Lord will deliver those who pray in faith. He desires to bless us temporally, spiritually, and in every other area of our lives.

One morning a few years ago, I was reading in the Book of Mormon in 3 Nephi, chapters 13 and 14. As I read, I felt how foolish it is for any of us to feel that the Lord is not willing to help with our needs. (See 3 Nephi 14:7-11, which applies to temporal as well as spiritual blessings.)

The most impressive thought came when I was reading in chapter 13, where the Lord tells the Twelve that they ought not to be concerned about temporal things (food and clothing). Instead, he promises his servants that if they will exercise faith, he will clothe them, feed them, and take care of their temporal needs so they can continue in his service and do his will.

For some reason that thought settled very deeply in my heart. I was relieved to feel that even with all the temporal concerns I have, the Lord is willing to help me solve them if I will continue to concentrate on doing his work. And I need to add that I believe that promise is not just for General Authorities. I feel that he will bless any and all of us if our desire is to obey him and serve him.

That very evening my wife told me of a difficult plumbing problem we had in the house that we needed to resolve quickly. I dreaded trying to tackle such a problem, but I really couldn't afford to call a plumber. To make matters worse, I had to leave for a stake conference the next morning and needed to take care of the problem before I left. Unfortunately, after spending only a few moments on it I became absorbed in other matters and completely forgot about it until the next morning.

As I was getting dressed the next morning, I prayed two or three times that the Lord would solve the problem for me. I don't like doing those kinds of things very much anyway. As I prayed, the thought again came into my mind that if I would concentrate on preaching the gospel and saving souls, the Lord would help me with my temporal problems, including a plumbing problem. As I prayed, I felt reassured that he truly would help me.

It took some effort on my part—the problem didn't solve itself—but when the problem was resolved I knew with all my heart that it had been an answer to my prayers.

To some, such a blessing might seem like a small thing, but to me repair work is difficult and sometimes I don't feel very confident in it. I strongly believe that if something is a problem to you, whatever it is, it is a problem to the Lord, and he will help you. This experience gave me a witness once again that if we will truly seek to serve the Lord, he will help us with our temporal problems.

I'd like to share one final story that helps to illustrate this truth.

Some time ago the Church had a serious problem with a local municipality in an overseas mission. The Church had had problems in this area for over a hundred years, and we needed a man and wife with great faith, as well as engineering expertise, to help us there.

We found a couple that fit the description. After they had been called and learned about the difficulties of their assignment, they were very much concerned about how they were going to resolve such a long-standing problem in just a year or two. We told them if they had faith the Lord would certainly help them accomplish it. I volunteered to give them a blessing to assist them in the difficult challenge before them.

A few days later we met for the blessing. This good man and his wife had a very humble spirit that day, and they indicated to me that even though they didn't know what they were going to do to solve the problem, they were totally confident.

"Why are you so confident?" I asked, and they said, "Because, we know the Lord will assist us."

Then this older man said, "Let me tell you a story.

"When I was a younger man, I was working for an engineering company in the United States. One day, when all of our technical experts were out of town on assignments, a company in Newfoundland called our engineering company asking for help. They had recently installed a huge, new industrial boiler, and it wasn't working. My boss didn't have anyone else to send and therefore said that he was going to send me. I was young and inexperienced and full of fear as he informed me of the assignment. I tried to talk my way out of it. He said, 'Well, you are the best we have. We have to send you.' And so it was that I traveled up to Newfoundland to try to help this company.

"As we walked around the plant, the plant managers watched me check things out, then said, 'Well, what is wrong with this big boiler? Why won't it work?' I didn't know what to say, and I was filled with doubt and fear more than ever. Finally I answered, 'I need a few minutes to think about it.' I walked away, just leaving those men standing there, and wandered until I found a dark storeroom. There I knelt in prayer and pleaded with the Lord that I would be inspired to know what to do. I told him that my boss and company were depending on me, as were these men in the plant. I said I had no idea what the real problem was and humbly asked the Lord to make it known to me. Then I closed my prayer and went back to where the men were waiting.

"We began again to walk around the big boiler. Finally one of the men said, 'Well, what is wrong?' The answer just seemed to come out of my mouth, and I said, 'There is no question about it; the boiler has been assembled backwards.' They said, 'What?' and I said, 'Yes, it has been assembled backwards. If you will call the plant that fabricated the boiler, they can tell you exactly what to do.'

"So they called the experts in the company that had originally constructed the boiler. They explained the problem and heard in response: 'Yes, it appears to us that the boiler has been assembled backwards. If you do such and such you will correct the problem.' "

After telling me this story, this faithful man, now retired, said, "Elder Cook, I know exactly what to do with this challenging assignment. I know that I must turn to the Lord, and then we will be able to solve this difficult problem we face." I could tell by his faith, testimony, and determination that that is exactly what would happen.

As the next couple of years passed by, it proved to be so. This good man and his wife truly worked a miracle in the area in which they were called to serve.

Once again it is evident that faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is sufficient to cover all our needs. The challenge that most of us have is relying early enough, and fervently enough, upon that power which the Lord offers to all of us.

Overcoming the Obstacles to Prayer

As I've asked families and individuals around the Church why they do not pray for such things as those discussed in this chapter, I've been amazed at their answers. Some are surprised that one would even think to pray about these kinds of things. Others perhaps do not desire to make the required effort. And still others may feel that they lack the faith. Yet I know that the Lord desires to help us in many things. When he offers a gift, it pleases him most when we accept it.

When I've asked people why they don't pray more consistently, I've heard a number of reasons:

—I don't have enough time.

—I just haven't gotten in the habit.

—My family just never did it, so I'm not in the praying mode.

—I believe I should. I guess I just haven't made a firm decision yet to do it.

—I hate to admit it, but sometimes I don't believe that prayer really makes that much difference.

Whatever your reason, I hope you'll remember that it is the devil who teaches us not to pray. (See 2 Nephi 32:8-9.) I believe the devil has some of his most elite emissaries trained in how to cause men not to pray. He says simple things like, "You're too tired." "You can do it tomorrow." "You can't take the time now—you have too many other priorities." "Think of your sins—surely you don't think you're worthy to pray!" "Prayer doesn't work. Don't you remember the time you prayed and nothing happened?" Thus, on and on he goes in trying to convince people that prayer does not work, or is not worth the effort. Of course, all of these whisperings are lies.

I hope you'll make up your mind not to listen to the devil but to listen to the Lord, who consistently invites us to pray unto our Father in Heaven, that he may bless us.

In my judgment, all of our excuses and reasons for not praying can be resolved if we will just:

With respect to schedules, if we're too busy to pray, we're just too busy. We may have to get up a little earlier in the morning, or we may have to stay up a little later in the evening. We may have to adjust the time we are giving to a hobby or the time we spend watching television or going out for recreation. We may need to make an adjustment here or an adjustment there. But whatever we decide, we need to realize that choosing not to pray should not be an alternative.

If you are not in the habit, it is time to get in the habit. If you don't believe you should pray about little things, review the stories and testimonies of this chapter. If you don't believe prayer will work, it is time to put it to the test anew. I promise you that if you will follow the Lord and seek him with all your heart, he will surely bless you—and he will surely give you answers to your prayers.

Questions to Ponder
