Gene R. Cook, Receiving Answers to Our Prayers ( 1996)

Chapter 6

Prayer as a Blessing for Parents and Leaders

What parent hasn't prayed over a sick or wayward child? What leader hasn't spent time on his knees praying for those he's been called to serve and bless? Prayer is one of the most powerful tools we have as we seek to obtain the Lord's blessings in behalf of others.

Here are a few experiences that have solidified my testimony of the many ways we can use the power of prayer in our stewardships as parents in Zion and as leaders in the kingdom of God.

Guidance in Dealing with Others

Once I had a very difficult interview with a man whom I'd known for a number of years. He had strayed from the teachings of the Church and had grown close to being excommunicated. Unfortunately, he wasn't being straight with his local leaders.

I struggled with him for about thirty minutes, trying to get him to open up to me—and to be willing to do the same with his stake president.

He was as hard as flint; he just wouldn't budge.

Finally, I could think of nothing more to say or do. I cried out to Heavenly Father for help, and as I prayed, the feeling came that I should go to him, put my arms around him, and tell him I love him. When I got up, he thought I was closing the interview. But instead I went over, took him in my arms, and told him I loved him with all my heart. When I did that, his heart melted and he yielded to the feelings of the Spirit. Finally he was willing to pour out all his troubles and all his sins—and, in the process, take the first steps to returning to worthiness and fellowship in the Church.

Discerning the Hearts of Others

Once when I was serving in a presidency, I learned I needed to replace one of my counselors. I discussed various possibilities with the local leaders and found myself leaning toward a Brother John Roberts (not his real name). I'd met him once and felt a good spirit about him.

When I discussed Brother Roberts with his stake president, however, he said, "He's never served real well. He was on a high council but didn't follow through and didn't always do what we asked him to do. He's now serving in a ward with the youth program."

I talked with leaders in the local area office of the Church, where he worked. They indicated some people had made some accusations against Brother Roberts in the past, suggesting that he had not been totally honest in his dealings with others. There was suspicion by these same people that some Church funds had been taken, but none of the allegations against him had ever been proven. I then learned that a General Authority who knew of the matter had come to Brother Roberts' defense, arguing that he was honest but hadn't been properly trained in accounting procedures.

I debated about it for some time. Should I call him or not? What was the truth about the allegations of dishonesty? As I prayed about it, I had a clear impression that he ought to be my counselor. I called my own General Authority adviser and discussed the matter at length with him. When I was finished, his counsel was, "If you feel good about him and the Spirit indicates he's the man, call him."

The Spirit had given that indication, and I obeyed. He'd been my counselor for less than a month when I recorded in my journal that he was capable of replacing me as the president. He had a great spirit, knew how to deal with other people, was faithful in his follow-through—he was everything I'd hoped for in a counselor.

It was a great delight later to see him called as a mission president.

The Lord knows his children much better than we do, and if we will go to him, in humility, he will help us to discern the hearts of those with whom we work. The lesson I learned from that experience was this: Follow the promptings of the Spirit, and all will be well.

Help in Reaching Others

Once when I was visiting the Chile Concepcion Mission, I met with most of the missionaries in a large meeting. As the meeting progressed, I found myself continuously praying on the stand concerning what I should talk about. I considered idea after idea and didn't feel good about anything I could think of.

Just before it was time for me to speak, all of a sudden two missionaries walked into the meeting at the back of the room—and they were trailing fourteen investigators behind them.

Since the meeting was to help us train missionaries, the mission president and I agreed that the missionaries ought to take the investigators into another room to teach them. The president went back to tell them, but a few minutes later he came back and said, "Elder Cook, the missionaries ask forgiveness for bringing these investigators here, but they've promised them they would get to hear a General Authority. They've come a long distance to hear you speak."

We decided to allow them to stay for a little while so they could hear my testimony. When my turn came to speak, I still had no idea what the Lord wanted me to say. As I stood at the pulpit, however, I had an impression to invite all fourteen of them to sit on the front rows. I asked them a few questions and learned that they had all had three or four discussions, except one family, which had had only one.

I tried to prepare the spirit of my part of the meeting by bearing my testimony and talking about how it feels when the Holy Ghost bears witness of the truth. Then I said to the investigators, "I'd very much like you to help me teach these missionaries a lesson. Would you be willing?" They were quite surprised and didn't know quite what to say. But I forged ahead. "Will you visitors please tell us what it feels like to begin to get a testimony?" I asked.

One lady who was about fifty said, "I know it's true because I've read half the Book of Mormon. I have no doubt because I feel the Book of Mormon's true and I know that all the rest is as well." She bore a very powerful testimony, saying she felt true peace and tranquility in the teachings of the gospel.

A man then bore testimony that the Lord had helped him overcome some serious problems, and that he'd never felt better or more joyful than in the two weeks since the missionaries had been coming to his home.

I discerned that one woman was particularly weak in a testimony, and I had her come up to express her feelings. She said that she hadn't been very convinced about the gospel, but feeling the strength of the others had increased her own testimony. She decided she was ready to be baptized.

Then I invited a fifteen-year-old girl to come up and asked, "How is it that a fifteen-year-old girl can know these things are true?" She bore testimony that she'd felt the Spirit come into her heart and testify about Joseph Smith. She said that their home had had more peace and harmony and a more spiritual feeling since the missionaries came than at any time she could ever remember.

The investigators spoke of their love for the missionaries, and then I asked the two elders to come up and bear their testimonies and express their love to their investigators. It was very touching, and I understood that all fourteen expressed a desire to be baptized within the following couple of weeks.

In all, we spent nearly an hour with those investigators; then we let them go. There was little else I needed to do in the meeting. The missionaries had been taught, and they had received what the Lord had for them. Afterwards, I asked them what they had felt and made sure they observed the importance of the experience. All in all, it was a very spiritual experience.

I bear testimony that if we will humbly pray, the Lord will give to us, in the very moment, that which we should speak, and it will change people's hearts. I'm certain we accomplished more in those minutes with the investigators than anything I could have talked about on my own.

Overcoming Weaknesses and Softening Hearts

After a stake conference I attended in Colombia, I received a letter from a regional representative. He bore testimony of how prayer can help us touch the hearts of others—and strengthen us in our weaknesses at the same time.

During the time we were together in the member conference in Cali, something very special happened to me that I want to share with you. . . .

Among the teachings you left with the missionaries in the missionary session, you emphasized firmness, decision, the will and the wish to achieve something, and the spirit that we should have to fulfill our goal.

This regional representative mentioned that these were attitudes or character traits he had been struggling with. He didn't really have the will to be firm with those he directed in the work of the Church. He indicated that there were some serious problems in his region, but he just hadn't taken them in hand.

I had prayed to the Lord, asking him to help me find a solution to this weakness in me. . . . That night, in the hotel, I asked the Lord to inspire me to know how to really receive help with this problem. Early Sunday morning, before leaving the hotel, I again asked in prayer for inspiration. . . . I know that the Lord always listens to me and answers me; that is why I had so much faith and was alert to hear his answer.

It was for me a moment of decision when, ten minutes before beginning the general session, you told me, "Jose, it is very likely that Priesthood Leader So-and-so will not arrive at the conference. Some people say that he will come, but I want to be sure. Please look after him."

I understood the magnitude of the challenge because I knew something of this priesthood leader's inactivity and resentment; but I also felt that it was of great importance to him and everyone else that he attend the session.

I set out with a young man on the journey, praying for the success of my assignment. Upon arriving at his house, I found him reading the newspaper with the television on. He was not dressed to go to church and, most sad of all, he had a very negative attitude. In a voice with which I had never heard myself speak before, but with strength and decision, I told him, "Brother, in the name of Jesus Christ and by special assignment given to me by Elder Cook, I came for you so that you can attend the conference."

His answer: "No way! With all the respect that you and Elder Cook deserve, I tell you that I will not go. Too many things have happened to me that .9.9.9" I interrupted him to express our love and our hope that he would reconsider his attitude, but at the same time I showed firmness in my purpose: I told him I would not leave his house without him. I said that on another occasion we would talk about the problems, but for now we needed to get to the conference.

At that moment a marvelous change took place in me. Suddenly I understood that your sending me to that house had been a direct answer to my prayers. I had prayed for greater fortitude and spiritual strength, and the Lord had placed me in a circumstance where these could be tested and developed. I understood better than ever what it means to act in the name of Jesus Christ, by the power of the priesthood, and by assignment of a leader who is a servant of the Lord.

The minutes had passed and I thought that surely the conference had begun. But I said to myself, "I will not return to the chapel alone. If because of lack of strength I cannot get this priesthood leader to accompany me, I will stay here until the conference is over; then I will go home without going back to the chapel. But I will not leave here alone." I felt inspired by these words from Nephi: "As the Lord liveth, and as we live, we will not go down unto our father in the wilderness until we have accomplished the thing which the Lord hath commanded us." (1 Nephi 3:15.)

Somehow this good man must have felt that decision, because even though he expressed thousands of reasons for not going, after we knelt in prayer he felt some remorse for having made me miss part of the conference. He said: "Oh, all right! I will go, but only with the condition that as soon as the conference is over I will return to my house."

I accepted with great joy, asking the Lord to help this priesthood leader to find so much love and understanding in the chapel that he would be willing to change his attitude.

Never have I seen a man get ready in as little time as he did. In five minutes he was ready to accompany me, and he looked the part of a leader, touched by the Spirit, ready to attend to his duties.

Strengthening Our Brethren

I know of a stake that advanced some 150 men to the Melchizedek Priesthood within a very short period of time. What did the ward and stake leaders do? What enabled them to awaken so many men who had been spiritually slumbering?

As we interviewed the leaders of this stake, we discovered that their success began with a spirit of resolve. As one bishop said: "As far as I'm concerned, the day it began was when the stake president decided that is what we would do. I don't mean he just thought it would be a good idea or that he would try. I mean he decided."

This stake president decided that he could no longer tolerate in his stake the kind of action that would allow increasing numbers of men to end up in the pool of prospective elders.

The Lord taught this principle, the spirit of resolve, through Nephi when he said, as we have just quoted,

As the Lord liveth, and as we live, we will not go down unto our father in the wilderness until we have accomplished the thing which the Lord hath commanded us. (1 Nephi 3:15.)

Once they'd made the decision, the leaders became totally reliant on the Lord. They humbled themselves. They sincerely and intently asked the Lord for help. One bishop said: "Once we sensed the spirit of the stake president, that he really meant it, we realized that we had never done anything like that before. We went to the Lord and fasted together and prayed, 'How will we do it? What shall we do?' "

As they sought to move forward with their desire, they continued to seek the inspiration of the Spirit. Another bishop said: "I didn't just focus on the six easy steps of interviewing I'd been taught. Instead, I decided the Lord would have to tell me what I had to do to help each man come to a change of heart. Some men I interviewed alone, as the bishop; others I interviewed with the stake president or my elders quorum president. In each instance we prayed without ceasing, pleading that the Lord would deliver up each man's heart to us."

The Lord has promised that he will use us as instruments in his hands to assist in the conversion of his people.

And if thou wilt inquire, thou shalt know mysteries which are great and marvelous . . . that thou mayest bring many to the knowledge of the truth, yea, convince them of the error of their ways. (D&C 6:11; italics added.)

Part of their plan was to interview every prospective elder in their stewardship. One bishop said, "With every man who came in, we knelt in prayer and I pleaded with the Lord in the presence of the man that he would feel the Spirit and desire to be reunited to full fellowship with the Lord and his Church. Most of these men were not easy ones. Most were long-term inactives, not new converts."

Another bishop said: "I literally interviewed every man, woman, and youth in my ward. I quit just talking about it and interviewed with the Spirit. I challenged whole families to come and be a part of the kingdom. We specifically challenged the husband and wife to attend a temple preparation seminar, which was set for a specific date. We told them the Lord expected them to be there, and that he had sent us to deliver that message to them. What a thrill it was to see them respond. Our brethren, the prospective elders, literally felt the love we extended to them. They could not do anything but respond. The love was constant and strong and very overpowering because it wasn't just us but the Spirit of the Lord in us."

The success in this stake came from three simple spiritual elements. First, the leaders had the spirit of resolve: "We will do it." Second, they centered their minds totally on the Lord, knowing that he is the one who delivers up the hearts of the people; and they specifically asked him for that blessing. Third, in the spirit of prayer, they worked hard, interviewing everybody by the Spirit to cause them to repent, feel loved, and return to the fold.

Touching and Changing Hearts

Another stake had a similar experience. At a stake conference I was amazed at the number of worthy young men who had not been on a mission, even though they were of age. There were so many at the conference that I had them stand up. Seventy-six of them stood. I was overwhelmed. And I wondered in my heart, where are our leaders?

After the conference I called a special meeting of the stake presidency and bishops. When we were finished I left them with a challenge: "Brethren, I'd like to ask you to interview every one of those young men, all seventy-six of them. Talk to them in the Spirit of the Lord and invite them to respond to his call. Please get back to me in a couple of months and give me a report on each one."

About six weeks later, the stake president came to me with a report. He said, "Elder Cook, we've completed every one of the interviews."

"That's great," I responded. "How many are going on missions?"

He paused. He was pleased that all the young people had been interviewed, but he didn't want to tell me how the interviews had turned out. Finally he said, "Well, there are three or four. And there are five or six others who will probably go next year."

I prayed. What should I say? Then I felt that the Lord wanted me to speak boldly, and I said, "President, I can come to only one of two conclusions."

"What's that?" he asked.

I said, "It may be that this is the most unworthy, unresponsive group of young people I've ever met."

He shook his head. "No, that's not right, Elder Cook. These are great young people."

"I know they are. I visited with a number of them at the conference."

We talked about the youth for a few moments, and then he said, "What's the other conclusion?"

I said, "I guess this one has to be true then, if the other one was false."

"And what is that?"

I would never have answered him if the Lord hadn't directed me to, but I could tell it was important that I be very forthright. I said, "I guess I've found the most ineffective group of priesthood leaders I've ever met." And I didn't crack a smile.

The stake president took it hard, and I knew he would. But the bottom line was that he needed it. He was not acting as humbly as he should have. He had gone out and operated like a man, and that's why he got the results he did.

As we concluded the interview, I put my arms around him and I loved him. We knelt and prayed together. Then I bore my witness to him: "President, you go out now and act in the authority of God, and he will respond. You go into the homes of those young men and kneel down and pray with them. You ask each one to explain to the Lord in your presence why he can't go on a mission. Then if the Lord says he doesn't have to go, it's okay with me. But if the Lord says he has to, then tell the boy to be honorable enough and get on with it." We agreed we'd meet in another six weeks and he would give me another report.

After the meeting I called his regional representative and said, "I just had this difficult meeting with President So-and-so. I'm sure he's feeling pretty low. Will you go to him and strengthen and bless him?"

Six weeks later this stake president came back with his report. Here's what he said:

"Brother Cook, I went out of your office terribly offended. I was humiliated and angry. I stewed for a whole week. During that whole time, I was absolutely miserable.

"Finally I mentioned it to my wife. She heard me out, and then said, 'My dear, I don't want to offend you either, but a servant of the Lord talked to you and I feel a burning in me that tells me he spoke for the Lord. He's only asking you to go and talk to them again. Quit fighting it. Do it.'

"I knew she was right. For the first time I humbled myself and desired to do it the Lord's way. We knelt and prayed together, and a great power came over me. I felt I could do anything, even move a mountain, and I said, 'I will go and do it without further excuse.' "

So he went out and, with the help of his bishops, began to interview these young men again. After six weeks he had interviewed twenty-seven men. Twenty-five of them had agreed to go on missions and were filling out their papers. Prayer had softened his heart and enabled him to go forth, and prayer softened the hearts of the young men, that they would respond.

Two examples will illustrate his experiences.

One young man who often visited the stake president's son was on the list of those to be interviewed. I'll call him John. He was only partially active and had no desire to go on a mission, but he was basically worthy and should have been preparing to go.

One day John came to visit the stake president's son. When the president saw him, he immediately started praying, "Heavenly Father, what should I do? What should I say to this young man? How can I touch his heart?" Then the president said out of the blue, "John, I hear you're going on a mission."

John was surprised. "President, you know I have no intention of going on a mission. Who told you that?"

Then the president, in great sincerity, said by the Spirit, "The Lord, my boy, and the Holy Ghost." John didn't know what to say. Then this good stake president said, "John, let's pray." They knelt down right then and prayed, and in a matter of four or five minutes, John decided he was going on a mission. What changed him? The Spirit of the Holy Ghost, which came to him strongly as he and the stake president prayed.

But that's not the end of the story. John was worried that his parents, who were inactive in the Church, would not support him on a mission. The president said, "Don't worry about that, John. If the Lord wants you to go, we're not worried about anybody else, are we?"

"Well, I guess not."

They visited his parents and prayed with them. In less than twenty minutes the parents agreed, and John had the opportunity to serve a mission with his parents' support.

This same stake president had another experience that illustrates how powerful prayer can be in helping us touch the hearts of others. One of his members was a young lady, twenty-two years old, who wanted to serve a mission but whose nonmember parents objected. They had two concerns: that their daughter would lose her chastity in the mission field and that she would lose her current job in a country where unemployment was very high.

The stake president visited them in their home and offered a constant prayer in his heart for help from the Lord. He didn't know what to do or say, but he had faith the Lord could help him. As they talked, he suddenly thought of a young returned-missionary sister who lived nearby. He excused himself and went to get her, praying all the way that she would be home and available. She was home, and she willingly agreed to bear testimony to these nonmembers. She told them more about what a mission was, how it had changed her life, and how it had strengthened rather than weakened her moral values.

The parents were pleased and convinced—but still were concerned about their daughter's employment. The stake president next visited the girl's boss, the manager of a department store and explained what the young woman was trying to accomplish. The manager was unimpressed. The young woman was one of his best employees, he said, and he wasn't about to let her leave for eighteen months. If she did choose to leave, she'd lose her job.

Continuing to offer a silent prayer, the stake president explained how beneficial the mission would be. The manager's heart was touched, and he offered to sign an agreement to allow her to return to her job after her mission—which was unheard of in that country at that time. He also offered to help support her on the mission, giving a sum of money on the spot.

I bear my testimony that if we will ask, the Lord will help us in our conversations, our visiting, our interviews, and all our contacts with those whom we serve.

We must pray fervently throughout all such contacts that we may "speak the thoughts that [the Lord] shall put into [our] hearts, and [we] shall not be confounded before men; for it shall be given [us] . . . in the very moment, what [we] shall say." He surely will give us "that portion that shall be meted unto every man." (D&C 100:5-6; 84:85.)

Truly prayer will help to change our hearts, and it will help to touch the hearts of those with whom we work. Whether we're dealing with a rebellious child, an unhappy spouse, a less active member, a friend or associate, or even ourselves, prayer can make a real and lasting difference.

Questions to Ponder
