Gene R. Cook, Receiving Answers to Our Prayers ( 1996)

Chapter 7

The Grace of the Lord

How many of us sometimes try to resolve life's challenges ourselves, without seeking the intervention of the Lord in our lives? We try to carry the burden alone.

How many times, likewise, as we have prayed for assistance or help with our problems, have we severed ourselves from the power of God because of doubt or fear and thus could not obtain the blessings he would give us? (See D&C 6:36; 67:3.)

As some are faced with trials and afflictions, they say, "Why won't God help me?" Some have even struggled with doubts about their prayers and their personal worthiness and say, "Perhaps prayer doesn't work."

I bear testimony that prayer does work, and that the Lord stands ready to help us. One of the keys seems to be to learn better from the Lord how to engage the powers of heaven to intervene in our behalf, which we do when we receive his grace.

The Enabling Power of God

The best definition I know of the word grace is found in the dictionary of the LDS edition of the Bible. It says:

The main idea of the word is divine means of help or strength, given through the bounteous mercy and love of Jesus Christ. . . . Grace is an enabling power. (Holy Bible [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1979], Appendix, p. 697.)

Grace, then, is the enabling power of God. In fact, we could replace the word "grace" with "God's divine enabling power" every time we see it in the scriptures, and we'd have a great insight.

Let me give you an example from Jacob:

Wherefore, we search the prophets, and we have many revelations and the spirit of prophecy; and having all these witnesses we obtain a hope, and our faith becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can command in the name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea. (Jacob 4:6.)

What a great statement! The mountains and trees and waves of the sea responded to their command. But how were they able to do that?

Nevertheless, the Lord God sheweth us our weakness that we may know that it is by his grace [or his enabling power], and his great condescensions unto the children of men, that we have power to do these things. (Jacob 4:7.)

How is it you have power to do it, Jacob? It was because of the grace, the enabling power of God, and his condescension unto the children of men.

Let's look at another scripture that underscores how important this enabling power is:

There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated. (D&C 130:20-21.)

This is one of those all-inclusive revelations. The law was irrevocably decreed—it cannot be changed. All blessings are predicated upon that law—none are excluded. When we receive any blessing, it is by obedience to the law—again, none are excluded.

I believe the Lord is saying that there are laws and conditions that govern all blessings. If you fulfill the law and the condition, the blessing will be yours (assuming you're not working contrary to the will of God).

How does this fit into the principle of grace?

Let's assume that a faithful man named John is praying for a blessing with all his heart, and he does all he can to help bring it to pass, but it's just not enough. He puts in most of what's required but not all. He just doesn't have the capacity to do all that's required. But he persists and receives the blessing.

Question: Who put in the rest? The law or requirement must be fulfilled, but John wasn't able to fully do it. Who compensates for his inadequacy?

Answer: The Lord, Jesus Christ. The enabling power of God, or grace, intervened and Jesus Christ contributed what John lacked. And thus the law was fulfilled.

Please understand this. Jesus came not only to save us from our sins but also to assist us with our infirmities, our afflictions, our weaknesses, our problems, and our discouragements. And when he does so, in the process he helps us to qualify for the blessings we seek, and that is called grace.

Now consider another man. This man has less faith than John. This man was baptized just last week. He seeks the same blessing as John, but he cannot muster the faith that John has. As he seeks to obey the required law, all he can do is put in maybe a tenth of what's needed. Yet he still receives the blessing. Why is that? Again, because Jesus compensated and put the rest in for him. After we have done all in our power, the grace of the Lord will intervene. The prophet Nephi said it masterfully:

For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do. (2 Nephi 25:23.)

In my judgment, this principle explains why it is that when a little child prays he can so readily receive the blessing. The child doesn't know how to do very much except give all of his heart, but that's enough. Then the Lord puts in the rest. Children have great access to the heavens.

We also can have such access if we will pray with all our hearts and do all we can to qualify for the blessing we seek. Then, through the grace, or enabling power, of Christ, the heavens will intervene and bring us that which we desire.

But I want to stress once again that all of these principles are always subject to the overriding will of the Lord. Because of his great love for us, he will always do what is best for us in the short term as well as in the long run.

Accessing the Lord's Grace

Since these things are true, how can you obtain access to this grace that we're talking about, so the heavens can help you? How do you fulfill the laws and the conditions for grace? The scriptures teach of some prerequisites.

First, have faith. As Paul wrote:

Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ:

By whom also we have access by faith into this grace. (Romans 5:1-2.)

If we truly have faith, casting out doubts and fears, we can receive grace, which can give us power unto the answering of our prayers.

Second, repent and do good works. As we read in Helaman:

Therefore, blessed are they who will repent. . . .

And may God grant, in his great fulness, that men might be brought unto repentance and good works, that they might be restored unto grace for grace, according to their works. (Helaman 12:23-24.)

A repentant heart and good works are the very conditions required to have grace given to us. When someone pleads fervently in prayer for a blessing, the answer may be conditioned on repentance from our own personal sins more than any other factor. (See D&C 101:7-8; Mosiah 11:23-24.)

Third, be humble. James said:

He giveth more grace. Wherefore he saith, God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble. (James 4:6.)

Humility seems to rest at the core of who we are in our hearts. If you'll humble yourself before God—and if your desire is in harmony with the will of the Lord—the grace will come, the power will come and intervene for you, and your prayer will be answered.

This principle was also given by the Lord through Moroni:

And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. (Ether 12:27.)

If we will come unto Christ, have faith in him, and humble ourselves before him, then he will give us the grace. How much grace? As much as we need—his grace is sufficient for all men.

Fourth, do all in your power. Nephi gave us this great statement of truth:

We know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do. (2 Nephi 25:23.)

In other words, you can't get the grace, or enabling power, to work for you unless you have done all you can do. When you've done all you're able to do of what the Lord requires, you have every right to expect the Lord to intervene, and he will, assuming you're seeking something that's honorable and right.

This truth was reaffirmed in an inspired way by Joseph Smith when he said,

Let us cheerfully do all things that lie in our power; and then may we stand still, with the utmost assurance, to see the salvation of God, and for his arm to be revealed. (D&C 123:17.)

Unless one has done all in his own power, he cannot expect the grace of God to be manifest. What a glorious principle to understand: the Lord's assistance to us—whether we have strong faith or weak faith; whether a man, a woman, or a child—is not based just on what we know, how strong we are, or who we are, but more on our giving all that we can give and doing all that we can do, according to the Lord's requirement and according to our present capacity. Once we have given all we can, then the Lord, through his grace, may assist us.

Fifth, keep the commandments. This requirement is very closely related to the one of repenting and doing good works. The Lord has said,

If you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness . . . ; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace. (D&C 93:20.)

To obtain grace, one does not have to be perfect, but he does have to be trying to keep the commandments the best he can. Then the Lord may allow him to receive that power.

These, then, are some key elements that are needed as we seek to receive grace, which in turn will bring us blessings and strength from above: faith, repentance and good works, humility, doing all that is in our power, and keeping the commandments.

I bear witness that if we will seek the grace of God, he will come to our aid and the aid of our loved ones in times of need. He will hear our pleas and, according to his holy will, he will give us answers to our prayers. He will intervene in our behalf and will give us the blessings we seek. If we do our part, then surely he will do his.

Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. (Hebrews 4:16.)

Questions to Ponder
