Gene R. Cook, Receiving Answers to Our Prayers ( 1996)

Chapter 8

When Answers Do Not Seem to Come

Not long ago I received a poignant letter from a single sister in the Church who had had a disappointing experience with prayer. As she had prayed about a man she was interested in, she thought she had been inspired to know she would marry him, but in her view it never worked out. Here is part of her letter:

Last year I met a man (I'll call him Paul) who quite impressed me with his compassion and his other qualities. I became attracted to him—which was a rare event for me, since I'm forty-eight years old and have never been married. As my feelings for him started to grow, I began a process of prayer to know if I should expect the relationship to develop. I prayed very carefully, because I didn't want to pray for something that was wrong—and I didn't want to pursue something that would only end in my being hurt. From my first carefully worded prayer, I felt as if it was part of an eternal plan for us to be together.

I've prayed about this every day for many months. I've fasted many times; I've gone to the temple and prayed in the celestial room. Every time, I've received the same intense feeling within that I experience when the Spirit bears testimony to me about the truthfulness of the gospel. Sometimes when I've had this intense feeling, I've explained to my Heavenly Father that I interpreted the feeling as a confirmation about Paul and me, and I've asked Him to take the feeling away if I was misinterpreting its meaning. That never happened.

However, it has now become painfully clear to me that there will never be a relationship between Paul and me. This is most confusing, as well as anguishing. Of course there is the emotional pain—I've prayed about marriage for many years. (I was engaged in 1984, but my fiance abruptly decided to marry another after his prayers about our marriage suddenly felt "wrong.") But the greatest pain is spiritual. I honestly feel forsaken by our Heavenly Father. How could something that feels so spiritually right, as a result of sincere and fervent prayer, turn out to be so wrong?

Of course, the standard explanations are: (a) I confused my emotional feelings with spiritual answers; or, (b) Paul chose not to be guided by the Spirit.

My responses to these standard explanations are: (a) Not only are the intense feelings that I experienced during my prayers the same as what I feel about other spiritual matters, but I also can't force them to occur; and (b) if Paul chose not to be guided by the Spirit, God would have known that in advance, and He could have spared me this painful ordeal just by letting me know it would not work out.

It is incomprehensible to me that my earnest actions have not brought blessings but have left me in the depths of despair. Can't we expect to receive divine guidance if we live righteously, pray sincerely and fervently, fast, listen to the Spirit, and ask for confirmation of the answers we receive? Despite some very painful experiences at other times in my life, this is the most depressing experience I've ever had, because I truly feel betrayed by God. I would much rather have a terminal illness than face the rest of my life not knowing what to believe when I pray.

Dealing with Unanswered Prayers

As I meet with members of the Church in many lands, it is abundantly clear that this sister is not alone in her frustrations with answers to prayer. All of us struggle to some degree with how to receive answers to our prayers. We all have times when answers come easily. We have times when answers come clearly and distinctly. And we all have times when we really pray about something and seemingly receive no answer. On some such occasions, we may feel that we've conscientiously followed the instructions in Doctrine and Covenants 9:7-9. We have studied the issue out in our minds, prayed about it (perhaps we even fasted), and asked the Lord if our decision or understanding is right. But after all that, we still do not feel we have received a burning in the bosom—or a stupor of thought—and thus it appears we are left to our own resources to try to solve the problem. Or we may be certain we have received an answer—but then things don't work out the way we thought they would.

When these kinds of situations arise, it presents an even greater spiritual opportunity to exercise our faith and to persist—and thus, in the process, to truly increase our faith, perhaps more than when answers come easily, directly, clearly, or distinctly.

Some Saints, when they have faced situations like this, lose faith in prayer, or determine the Lord doesn't always answer prayer, or decide it is not a surefire means of receiving help. What can we do to persist and not lose faith when answers don't come quickly?

First of all, I earnestly believe in the Lord's great love for his children. As I mention elsewhere in this book, I believe there never was a sincere prayer offered since the days of Adam, by anyone, member or nonmember alike, that was not answered by the Lord. When one truly knows the great love the Lord has for his children, he will know with a certainty that the Lord does answer all sincere prayers.

The key, then, is for us to discern how those answers come. We must not judge the Lord, nor should we harden our hearts when seemingly an answer has not come. Instead, we need to trust the Lord and know he is answering our prayers in his own way and by his own means. As Isaiah taught us:

For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord.

For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. (Isaiah 55:8-9.)

I bear my testimony that this is true. Therefore, we cannot judge the Lord—but we can trust him.

Let's look at some of the circumstances where prayers may seem to be unanswered—and how we might understand them.

Know That Answers May Come in Unexpected Ways

One kind of seemingly unanswered prayer comes when the Lord does not answer our prayers in the way we expect. If we are more open to the different ways that answers come, we will recognize the Lord's hand in our lives more—and that, in turn, will build our faith so we can receive more answers.

I once had a difficult experience in Guayaquil, Ecuador, that illustrates this. I was on my way to a mission tour in Santa Cruz, Bolivia, with an overnight stop in Guayaquil. The next day, when I arrived at the immigration checkpoint in the Guayaquil airport, I had one hour to go before flight time. As I went through, one of the immigration officers looked at the visa in my passport and said, "You have to obtain proof that you do not have debts in this country. You cannot leave without some financial affidavits. Where are the papers?" I told him that I had never heard of that before, but he said it was necessary and that I could not leave the country.

I explained that I had left the country many times before and that no one had ever asked me for such information in the past. He said it didn't matter and pulled out a long statement of rules proving his assertion that with my kind of visa the financial affidavits were necessary.

Finally the immigration officer next to him got involved. He spoke with him a bit and persuaded him that they should allow me to leave. They stamped my passport and let me go. I was very relieved. I went into the Braniff waiting area and began to read.

After about a half hour, the immigration officer who had allowed me to pass through came up to me and said, "May I see your passport?" I showed it to him, and he took it back to his desk. "I'm sorry," he said, "but I don't think you can leave." He said that allowing me to go would be against the rules and said, "If you did have some kind of debt, we would be responsible for it." Besides, he noted, "You have never been registered into the country."

I continued to talk to him about it, praying silently as I did. Finally he said, "All right, we will let you go this time, but don't ever come back to Guayaquil unless you have all your papers in proper order."

I felt very relieved and totally relaxed, convinced there would be no further problem. I sat and continued my reading. When they called for the boarding, the few passengers waiting to board quickly checked through the door. I began to button up my briefcase to walk through myself, but the other immigration official came up to me and said, "Let me see your passport." I asked him what he needed it for, but he wouldn't tell me. "Let me see it," he repeated.

I told him I wouldn't allow him to see it unless he told me what he wanted. I also said that the other immigration officer had already checked me out of the country and that Braniff had called for boarding. I needed to board immediately.

He became angry and said, "Follow me," so I walked back to the immigration desk. He demanded to see my passport again, telling me that he just wanted to check something, so I gave it to him. I was becoming increasingly anxious, since all the other passengers had already boarded. He took my passport and, using his pen, obliterated the stamp his co-worker had put in it. He then handed the passport back to me and said, "Now let's see you leave Ecuador. You will not be going today, and you probably will have to return to Quito to get the paper you need, and then maybe in a day or so you'll be able to leave."

I tried to explain that I was the president of an area in the Mormon Church in those countries and that I had two hundred missionaries waiting for me. It was all to no avail; he wouldn't even listen. I didn't know if he was having a bad day, if he didn't like North Americans, or if he didn't like Mormons—or all of the above—but he certainly seemed to be determined to cause me difficulties.

When nothing else would work, I demanded to see his boss. He told me he didn't have one and wouldn't give me his name. Finally a lady at a nearby desk said she would give me the number of the immigration department downtown. But she and the man I was dealing with both said I would have to use a public telephone. Unfortunately, I had no coins for a phone. I knew they were stalling me so that I would miss my plane. I informed them I would use their phone and picked it up (to their astonishment) and began to dial. It was only then that I really began to fervently pray in my heart for help. Up until then I had relied on my own strength.

Then I realized it wouldn't help even if I could reach their boss downtown. I would still miss the plane as they sorted things out. I felt inspired to hang up the phone, grab my things, and run out to the Braniff desk. At that moment I saw the more helpful immigration officer walk in off the street. "What are you doing here?" he asked. "I thought you had left." I explained my problem and he looked at my passport, seeing where the other immigration officer had totally obliterated the approval stamp to leave the country.

He walked me back in and asked his co-worker to give him the stamp. The obstinate man refused. The man helping me literally grabbed the stamp from him, restamped my passport so it was legible, and said, "Go!" I did not have to be told twice. I raced onto the Braniff plane just as they were closing the door.

It took me a half hour to regain my composure. I was somewhat in an emotional state after all that difficulty.

After I had calmed down, I gave thanks to the Lord for helping me to finally get onto the plane. It was only then that I remembered a prayer I had offered earlier. About twenty minutes before I had gone through the immigration checkpoint, I had silently prayed that the Lord would help to strengthen my faith. I had asked that he would help me to be willing to pass through any tribulation he might desire, that I would be able to demonstrate my faith under any adversity.

As I contemplated the experience, I was pleased that things had worked out well in the end. But I felt bad that I had not recognized earlier that this was an opportunity to exercise my faith in the Lord. I had asked for an opportunity to grow more, but in the midst of the trial I had forgotten all about it. Instead, I went charging through, relying on my own strength. I was doing more of my part than I needed to, and I didn't let the Lord come in to help when he would have. I was disappointed that I didn't realize until it was all over that that difficult experience had the markings of a blessing—a blessing I had actually asked for, and one I had nearly missed.

Be Prepared for Increased Opposition from Satan

If you're praying for something that really matters, you can count on the fact that the devil will get involved. He's eager to do what he can to thwart you. He will do his best to dissuade you from going forward. He'll give you such thoughts as "You can't do it. You're not worthy enough. Your family's got too many problems. You can't do what the Lord requires." He'll engineer whatever he can to try to make you doubt. So you may as well know up front that he is going to tempt you.

When you attract the devil's attention and he starts to give you more opposition than you normally have, that's a great sign that you're on a course that pleases God and displeases Satan.

I've found that when you begin to pray for something that really matters, many times things get worse, not better. Often the cause is Satan and his helpers, who are doing their best to make sure you don't succeed. That ought to be a signal to a man or woman of faith: "I'm on the right track. I'm doing something that's making a difference and I will now double my faith." If you can increase your faith in that moment, you will have won most of the battle.

Be Prepared for the Lord to Test Your Faith

When we're seeking answers to prayers, the Lord will surely test us. He wants us to see if we will serve and love him at any cost. He wants us to see if we will continue in faith even if we don't receive the answer we had hoped for.

The blessing often comes after a trial of our faith (see Ether 12:6), and we have to persevere even through difficult times if we want to come to the answer we seek.

Here is an experience that illustrates that:

I had great desires to be home with my wife at the birth of our sixth child, a son, who was to be delivered in Quito, Ecuador. And she wanted very badly for me to be with her. She didn't speak Spanish very well at that time, and she was uncomfortable with some of the medical procedures there. I arranged my schedule so that I would be home for two or three weeks around the time of the birth of the baby.

Then, to our surprise, the Brethren in Salt Lake City assigned me to go to Brazil for the two weeks immediately prior to the due date. They were unaware of when our baby was due, and we debated whether or not we should tell them. After we carefully considered the options, we determined that we would go forth in faith, hoping that the baby would come at a time when I was present.

The entire family began to pray that the baby would come before I left for Brazil. But it didn't happen, and as I boarded the airplane for Brazil my family all began to pray, "Please do not send the baby now; please wait until Daddy can be home." The Lord blessed us, and the baby did not come while I was in Brazil.

When I got back home to Ecuador, I informed my wife that the Brethren had adjusted the time for the mission president's seminar in Peru; in less than a week I was being asked to go to Peru for four more days.

At that point we were exactly on the expected date of our baby's arrival. That night as my wife and I talked and prayed about the matter, she once again said in great faith, "You go forward and fulfill your assignment. I hope with all my heart that the Lord will allow you to be present for the baby's birth, but if you are not able to be here I will happily do my best to make it on my own. However, I believe that the spirit and authority that calls you to go on these assignments is the same spirit and authority that sends new babies. I can only hope and pray that the Lord will hear us and that you will be present."

I am convinced that at that moment my wife paid the price (the sacrifice) the Lord required for her to receive the blessing—she truly was willing to submit happily to the will of the Lord, whatever it might be.

I went off to Peru for the mission presidents' seminar. On the morning of the fourth day, Elder Howard W. Hunter of the Quorum of the Twelve, who presided at the seminar, told me that I must go home. I said, "Well, the seminar is over tomorrow and then I'll go." He said, "No, you must go home right now, this very morning." He insisted—and it turned out that his direction was pure inspiration.

I found a flight that morning and left Cuzco, where the seminar was being held, and flew to Lima, then made a connection to fly to Quito, Ecuador. I was met there by one "very pregnant" lady. Upon my arrival at home I rested for a half hour; then my wife said, "It's time. Let's go!" Off we went to the hospital where our sixth child was delivered, a baby boy. I had been home only two hours when he was born.

How kind the Lord was to us in that circumstance. What faith was manifested by my good wife and children, despite the trials and seeming setbacks.

We can truly see that a family united in prayer can have real spiritual power because of their faith. I honestly believe that if a family is praying for what is honorable and right, they have every right to assume that the Lord will respond to them. He will either bless them with what they desire, or give them some indication of why they cannot have it, or indicate that they ought to quit praying for something they will not receive. It was truly satisfying to our family to have our prayers answered in that way.

All the Lord wants from us is to know where our hearts are. If our hearts are right we may receive the trials, but it won't diminish our faith. Or we may not be required even to receive the trials if the Lord feels that we have already gained the benefit that would come from them. Sometimes the Lord will "pull the rug out from under you" in order to be sure of your heart. He may let you pass through difficult circumstances, contrary to what you may have prayed for, just to help you prove to yourself that you really will do anything he might ask you to submit to.

Sometimes the Answer Comes Later

Prayers for the Redemption of Zion. The redemption of Zion gives us a good example of this principle. How many prayers do you think were offered for the redemption of Zion in Missouri in the early part of this dispensation? Once the Latter-day Saints learned they were to build a Zion in Independence, Missouri, don't you suppose that thousands of people would have offered thousands of prayers that they would indeed be able to inherit Zion? Yet, if we judge from the vantage point of those people who were driven out of Missouri, we would have to say that their prayers were not answered.

Yet, because the Lord does things in his own way and in his own time, all of those prayers, in my judgment, have been and will be answered upon the heads of the faithful Latter-day Saints. It is true that they did not appear to be answered then, but that is no reason to assume they are not going to be answered at all. They will be answered, and they will be consecrated for the good of the Saints who offered them.

The Lord said,

But behold, I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint; that ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ, that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee, that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul. (2 Nephi 32:9.)

These Saints did pray fervently for the redemption of Zion, and, as a result, the Lord will consecrate their performance for the welfare of their souls.

One of the problems we have is that we want our answers and we want them now. Too often we're like the man who prayed for patience and in his prayer added, "And I want it now." Or, to use another example, we may pray for courage and then be astonished when the Lord sends us a lion. We sometimes want the gift without doing the work to obtain it. Facing up to a "lion" will help us to have courage. But if we are not careful, we will not see the lion as a blessing, as an answer to prayer. Instead, we may misjudge the Lord and think we received the opposite. We wanted courage and now we're filled with fear. But the Lord has answered the prayer: He is providing a means for us to participate in the development of that courage and thus participate in the answer to our own prayer.

The Lord answers our prayers in his own way. Some answers come quickly. Some come many, many years later. Some come as we expected. Some come in disguise. But all honest, sincere prayers are answered.

The Prayers of the Nephites. Let me illustrate further with another example. Think of all the prayers that were offered in the times of the Nephites and Lamanites to preserve the Book of Mormon record, as well as the prayers that were offered for the record to come forth. Hundreds of years later these prayers were answered.

And, behold, all the remainder of this work does contain all those parts of my gospel which my holy prophets, yea, and also my disciples, desired in their prayers should come forth unto this people.

And I said unto them, that it should be granted unto them according to their faith in their prayers;

Yea, and this was their faith—that my gospel, which I gave unto them that they might preach in their days, might come unto their brethren the Lamanites, and also all that had become Lamanites because of their dissensions.

Now, this is not all—their faith in their prayers was that this gospel should be made known also, if it were possible that other nations should possess this land;

And thus they did leave a blessing upon this land in their prayers, that whosoever should believe in this gospel in this land might have eternal life. (D&C 10:46-50.)

Did not the Lord fulfill his promise and answer their prayers? Yes, but once again the answer did not come until hundreds of years had passed.

I say once more, the Lord will answer our prayers in his own time and in his own way, and his thoughts are not our thoughts, and his ways are not our ways. Thus, let us be very careful to never judge the Lord and say, "He did not answer my prayer."

Prayers to Open the Doors of the Nations. Think of how many years President Spencer W. Kimball asked the Latter-day Saints to pray that the doors to the nations might be opened to the message of the gospel. For years faithful Latter-day Saints prayed that prayer daily, and yet the doors did not open. And then all of a sudden, when it was time (and I repeat, when it was time), the Lord answered those united prayers, and the doors of the nations in eastern Europe, the communist world, and other nations opened, as it were, in a day.

Once again, it occurred according to the Lord's own timetable. Let us be patient, then, and recognize the Lord's love for us; and the next time we are faced with what seems to be an unanswered prayer, let us trust more, let us have more faith in the Lord, and in time we will see that the Lord will answer that prayer.

A Mother's Prayer. To put this in a more personal realm, I have a wonderful friend whose daughter began to be wayward when she was about fifteen years old. How this good mother prayed, along with her husband, that this girl would walk the straight and narrow path. However, the girl's agency was in play, and she determined that she wanted to participate in worldly things. And that's exactly what she did.

The mother increased her faith, increased her prayers, increased her fasting, but seemingly to no avail. She felt her prayers were not answered. Her daughter went astray even more and participated in all the worldly things in which a wayward young lady might participate.

Fortunately for this woman, she went on praying. About five years later, this young lady was touched by the Spirit, repented of her sins, fell in love with a young returned missionary, and was ultimately married in the temple.

This entire process took about ten years. Were the mother's prayers answered? Were they consecrated for her good? I bear testimony that they were and that the Lord does answer prayers—but many times not in the way men desire, nor according to the timetable men would choose.

Our own family has seen the truth of this. In at least two instances we have prayed faithfully for something for about ten years. The answers did not come, but we persisted—and finally we are now seeing the fruits of those prayers.

Strengthening Your Children through Family Home Evening. We could find many other examples. For instance, I'm sure you are aware of people who accepted the First Presidency's promise that if they held family home evening faithfully their children would be strengthened. They understood that home evening would more fully facilitate the redemption of their children. Yet in the process, they have lost some of their children. They've prayed and prayed and still the promise has not been realized. Are these Saints looking for answers in the short run only, not recognizing that the Lord's promises apply not only in this life, but in the life to come?

What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same. (D&C 1:38.)

The Lord's word will stand. He will answer the prayers of his people. Prophets have borne testimony that if we as parents faithfully do our part, we can more surely bring our children to salvation. If we believe the promises of the Lord or one of his servants, He will answer our prayers in His own time and in His own way.

Sometimes the Answer Is Unclear

When I was younger and prayed fervently for answers to prayers, sometimes I didn't feel I received an answer—and then I wondered if the Lord really did love me. I had prayed earnestly and put my trust in the Lord, exercised faith, fasted, and seemingly received no response from the heavens.

I have realized in later years that in many instances the Lord does not give a direct answer to our prayers, since that would destroy our opportunity to exercise faith. Sometimes he knows an unclear answer or a delayed answer is exactly what we need, for a time, so we will learn to exercise greater faith.

But my experience has been that, even if an answer doesn't seem to come, the Lord will still communicate with you. I believe that if you will watch carefully, he will somehow express his love to you, telling you that you are okay in some other way, independent perhaps of that for which you are praying. In this way he will give you comfort and yet not defeat his purpose of causing you to have more faith. Because of his love, he may not respond directly on the issue you're praying about, but some way, somehow, perhaps through some other means or some other issue in your life, he will whisper into your heart the assurance that he does love you, that he is working with you, and that you are okay.

That sweet whispering of assurance will give you confidence that he has heard your prayer, that he knows the situation, and that, if you will be patient, he will handle the whole matter. I have particularly seen this to be the case when, because of my ineptness or inability, I have tied myself or my circumstances up in knots. If I then will be patient and express my love to the Lord, letting him know I trust him even when there seemingly is no answer, he will gradually untie all the knots I have so neatly tied up in my life. And, as those knots are untied, he will give me the final peace and assurance that I am okay.

I hope we all see that this is one of the Lord's great approaches for helping us to develop additional faith. The Lord knows us. He can see things clearly, for both the short term and in the long run, and he will do that which will most benefit each of us individually.

Truly the Lord said through his prophets:

He doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world. (2 Nephi 26:24.)

And again, I remember that thou hast said that thou hast loved the world, even unto the laying down of thy life for the world. (Ether 12:33.)

Let me give you another illustration from the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith that shows how the Lord might give an answer that doesn't seem clear. At one time Joseph Smith had a great desire to know when Jesus was going to come again. As we read in Doctrine and Covenants 130:14-17:

I was once praying very earnestly to know the time of the coming of the Son of Man, when I heard a voice repeat the following:

Joseph, my son, if thou livest until thou art eighty-five years old, thou shalt see the face of the Son of Man; therefore let this suffice, and trouble me no more on this matter.

I was left thus, without being able to decide whether this coming referred to the beginning of the millennium or to some previous appearing, or whether I should die and thus see his face.

I believe the coming of the Son of Man will not be any sooner than that time.

It is important to note that Joseph Smith was praying earnestly. He was not just praying; he was praying earnestly. He had prayed many other times and had his prayers answered with direct revelation. It's very likely he assumed this would be another one of those cases.

Instead, the Lord gave him a very brief and somewhat ambiguous answer: "If thou livest until thou art eighty-five years old, thou shalt see the face of the Son of Man; therefore let this suffice, and trouble me no more on this matter."

As Joseph pondered this answer, he was left with three possibilities, as outlined in the following verse: (1) that before Joseph was eighty-five years of age the Lord would come in the Millennium, (2) that the Lord had reference to Joseph Smith seeing his face in a pre-Millennial appearance; or (3) that Joseph might die and thus see his face.

Did Joseph Smith receive an answer to his prayer? One might say with a smile, "Yes, I guess not." He did, but he wasn't absolutely sure what the answer meant. Many times that's the way answers to prayers come to us. Then, as I mentioned before, we have an opportunity to increase our faith even more than if the answer had come clearly.

The key is to not harden your heart, to not be angry with the Lord, and to not, in disbelief, think that he did not answer your prayer. When we have a prayer that doesn't seem to be answered, do we doubt the Lord? Or are we filled with fear, believing we are not adequate or worthy to receive answers to our prayers? We must watch out for such feelings, because they can give Satan an opportunity, through our own doubts and fears, to destroy the faith that we might have otherwise had.

Sometimes the Answer We Desire Is Not Granted

Let me share with you a similar story that didn't work out so well. When we were in Uruguay presiding over a mission, we were having another baby. My wife was overdue, and the doctor said that they would induce labor by Monday morning if the labor pains didn't start on their own. We didn't feel like inducing labor was the thing to do—we had a great desire for the baby to come naturally. We decided to ask the missionaries in the office staff to fast and pray with us that the baby would come before Monday.

My wife and I walked more in the next three or four days than we had in the whole month previous, trying to help things along. But the days came and went, and still no baby. On Sunday night we prayed extra fervently, and we continued to pray until 9:30 a.m. on Monday, when the nurse inserted the needle that started the labor.

This experience in prayer seemed to be one of failure, but it really was a success, and it helps to illustrate an important principle of power in prayer.

When our prayers are not answered the way we'd hoped, how do we respond? Do we turn our backs on the Lord in frustration or anger? Do we doubt the process? Do we doubt ourselves? Or do we learn from the experience and continue with increased faith the next time?

I believe that no exercise of faith and prayer is wasted, even if the desired result is not obtained. Every such exercise helps us to grow and develop in most important spiritual ways, and we thereby become more prepared to seek and receive answers to prayers on future occasions.

Of course, all sincere prayers are answered. But remember that sometimes the answer will be no; or yes, but later; or yes, but with alterations; or some other response.

As I conclude this experience, there is one more key observation I feel I should make. Some months later we joined the missionaries in exercising faith, seeking the Lord's blessings in regard to a challenge the mission was having. Suddenly I realized that our earlier efforts to exercise faith (for the natural birth) were now bearing fruit. Because we had tried to double our faith when we had "failed" to avoid the inducing of labor, the Lord had truly increased our faith. This earlier, "easy" experience had helped to prepare us to have sufficient faith to face the difficult challenge the mission was now facing.

When you face "failure" in prayer, if you will respond by praying more, loving the Lord more, trusting more, asking again, and refusing to give up, your faith will be rewarded.

The Lord Will Do What Is Best for You

It seems many times that the Lord will not reveal his total will to us so that he might give us an opportunity to truly exercise faith. I have a testimony that the Lord will always do that which is good or right for us. I am impressed with these words in Moses 6:32:

And the Lord said unto Enoch: Go forth and do as I have commanded thee, and no man shall pierce thee. Open thy mouth, and it shall be filled, and I will give thee utterance, for all flesh is in my hands, and I will do as seemeth me good.

It is evident to me that the Lord will treat all men in such a way; he will always do that which is for their best good. We find that same concept taught regarding the families of Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, who had been away from their families for a period of time preaching the gospel. The Lord said to them:

Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, my friends Sidney and Joseph, your families are well; they are in mine hands, and I will do with them as seemeth me good; for in me there is all power.

Therefore, follow me, and listen to the counsel which I shall give unto you. (D&C 100:1-2.)

The Lord often says, "I will do that which seemeth me good." But since we know that he does only that which will benefit mankind, we can also be confident that he will do only that which is best for us. At the same time, it's also clear that he does not reveal to us the totality of his will. He does this so that we can go forward in faith, believing. We are not always certain what he will do or what he will not do, but we know we can trust him to do that which will be the greatest blessing to us.

Questions to Ponder
