Gene R. Cook, Receiving Answers to Our Prayers ( 1996)

Chapter 9

Applying the Principles of Prayer

We've talked about some great principles of prayer, but how can we keep track of it all? Over the years I've used a summary of six key points that are easy for me to remember. Then, whenever I'm working on really exercising my faith in prayer, I check my effort against these key principles.

A Process for Exercising Faith

Believe. The first thing to remember is the simple word believe. By that I mean to have faith, to not doubt, to not have fear. Jesus said you must believe first, then you would see the blessing:

I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. (Mark 11:24.)

When you start praying, you've got to believe as if your request has already been granted. That's the kind of belief the Lord is talking about. Of course, our belief and our faith are in Jesus Christ, who has both the power to grant blessings and the desire to do so. We must always center this belief in Christ, knowing that he will do what is best for us and trusting that our prayers will be answered according to his will.

Repent. The next thing to remember is to repent. Part of repentance is to "sacrifice, to pay the price." We need to find out what we need to change in our lives, what we need to do differently, and then we need to do it.

I'm not surprised that these first two requirements are also the first two principles of the gospel: to have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and to repent of our sins. After those, we partake of the power and blessing of the ordinances, not just once, but repeatedly. By reliving the ordinances (by partaking of the sacrament and returning to the temple) we can receive strength over and over again as the weeks go by.

Pray. The third key to remember is to pray as if everything depends on God. By trusting in him, by relying on his strength and power, we receive strength and power unto ourselves to see us through to the end.

Work. The fourth principle is to work as if everything depends on us. A great example of this is the story of Nephi, when he went back to Jerusalem to get the brass plates. He and his brothers tried one thing after another as they sought to obtain the plates; and they "failed" each time. But Nephi wouldn't give up. He knew it was the Lord's will that they succeed, and he wasn't going to quit until he had done all in his power to accomplish his purpose. (See 1 Nephi 3-4.)

This story contains another great principle: The Lord reveals his will many times in half steps. He does this so that we will be pressed into exercising faith in order to receive the next step. We might think of this principle as walking to the edge of the light. We must do all in our power, walking to the edge of the light we have and maybe a little way into the dark, and then the lights of revelation will turn on again. But until we walk to the edge of the light and do all in our power to perform, we will often not be ready to receive more from the Lord.

Prepare for intense trials. Number five is to prepare for intense trials of your faith. Remember that when you begin to truly seek answers to prayer, there will be forces that will do all in their power to stop you. So don't be surprised when opposition comes; in fact, you should expect it from the beginning. Then, when difficulties really descend upon you and you reach your bleakest moment, you have the opportunity to discover how much faith you really do have.

Will you stand tall and strong in the face of all adversity? Will you still believe? Will you continue to press forward? Will you pay the price until you've received the blessing from the Lord (or until he tells you it's no longer his will that you seek it)? Do these things and you will endure the trials well, and you'll be that much closer to receiving the blessings you seek.

Expect to see the arm of the Lord revealed. Number six is to expect to see the arm of the Lord revealed on your behalf. Because you've done the things the Lord required, you now have full reason to believe that the Lord will intervene and assist you.

I like the way these ideas encapsulize what is required in receiving answers to prayer. Remember them, ponder them when you're trying to obtain an answer, and evaluate yourself:

Do I really believe? Do I have faith in the Lord and his promises?

Am I repentant of my sins?

Do I pray as if all depends on the Lord?

Do I work as if everything depends on me?

Am I prepared to endure intense trials of my faith?

After I've done all these things, do I honestly expect to see the arm of the Lord revealed on my behalf?

When you are in the midst of the battle and need extra assistance, remember the Lord's requirements and his promises, and you'll be able to move ahead more surely.

The Lord Stands Ready

I bear testimony that the Lord stands ready to answer our prayers and to grant our righteous requests. There is a great example of this in the book of Alma. I've saved this story as a testimony for this last chapter.

Early one morning as our family was reading the account of the wars in Alma, one of my children said, "Dad, I'm not getting much out of these chapters about the wars. I wish we were back reading some of those other things." I answered, "Well, these things are all in here for a good reason, Son. I'm sure there are some hidden treasures in here we just haven't found."

That very morning we found a wonderful description of how the Lord responds to our prayers. In Alma 58 we read how the Lamanites and Nephites were in the midst of a battle. The Nephites were about to lose. They hadn't been too faithful, but when they found themselves in trouble, they went to the Lord for help.

"Therefore," the Nephites said, "we did pour out our souls in prayer to God, that he would strengthen us and deliver us." (Alma 58:10.) What a beautiful description of what we often ask for—to be strengthened or to be delivered from a problem.

Then we get another clue about prayer. The Nephites didn't just pray, but they prayed fervently: "We did pour out our souls in prayer." That's how we get answers—to pray with great intensity.

Now note in this next verse how quietly the answers came. The Lord did indeed answer them, but they might have missed the answer if they weren't being spiritually attentive.

Yea, and it came to pass that the Lord our God did visit us with assurances that he would deliver us; yea, insomuch that he did speak peace to our souls, and did grant unto us great faith, and did cause us that we should hope for our deliverance in him. (Alma 58:11; italics added.)

It may be that the Nephites hoped for a miracle. Maybe they wanted angels to come to deliver them, as had happened a time or two in the Old Testament. But what did they receive? The Lord gave them assurance, peace, faith, and hope. He didn't directly destroy their enemies, but he did give them the gifts they needed so they could deliver themselves.

The next verse shows the effect of the Lord's answer on the people:

We did take courage with our small force which we had received [and you may feel that your force or power to accomplish your desires is awfully small], and were fixed with a determination to conquer. (Alma 58:12.)

In other words, the Lord put inside these men the will and the power to do what they desired—to begin with a strong resolve and then to see it through. After their prayer was answered, the Nephites went on to secure their liberty.

When the Lord instills hope and faith and peace and assurance in people, they can bring great things to pass. This, then, is often what we should look for when we ask for help—not a miracle to solve our problem for us, but a miracle inside, to help us come to the solution ourselves, with the Lord's help and the Lord's power.

A Witness of the Truth

As I conclude this book, I would like to bear witness to the truthfulness of that which I've said. I bear witness of a God who loves us. He knows where our hearts are. He lives every moment with each of us. He has borne our pains, afflictions, temptations, sicknesses, and all our infirmities. (See Alma 7:11-12.) He even says that in the last day, when he comes, we will see that "in all [our] afflictions he was afflicted. And the angel of his presence saved [us]; and in his love, and in his pity, he redeemed [us], and bore [us], and carried [us] all the days of old." (D&C 133:53.) I am confident that his angels have saved us numerous times and we knew it not. Can anyone deny his great love for us?

I bear testimony that your faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and your resolve to go forward can combine to bring real power to your life. If you'll nurture and strengthen those feelings, you will have a greater desire to align your will with the will of the Lord—and then you'll soon see your righteous desires become reality.

I hope as you conclude this book that you will seek in prayer to be filled with a fixed determination to conquer . . . to humble yourself more . . . to pray more fervently . . . to believe . . . to repent of your sins . . . to abide the laws and conditions that govern that which you desire. As you do, you'll draw closer to the Lord. And you'll recognize that your prayers are being answered more and more consistently.

Let us therefore never harden our hearts in disbelief and doubt and think that the Lord does not answer prayer. He will never forsake us. Let these great words from the apostle Paul, speaking of the Lord's love, ring in all of our ears:

Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.

And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of God.

And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. . . .

What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? . . .

Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? . . .

Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us.

For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,

Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. (Romans 8:26-28, 31, 35, 37-39.)

These are the sure promises of the Lord. And, concerning his promises, he has said:

What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same.

For behold, and lo, the Lord is God, and the Spirit beareth record, and the record is true, and the truth abideth forever and ever. Amen. (D&C 1:38-39.)

Questions to Ponder
