Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Section 11

The Paschal Feast, the Private Prayers and Sermons, and Gethsemane

Salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent. (Mosiah 3:18.)

If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin. (1 Jn. 1:7.)

Jesus who is called Christ—and blessed be his name!—is preparing himself to die, and his disciples to accept that divine destiny which is his.

He takes the Twelve apart by themselves and tells them in plain words what is about to be—his betrayal and crucifixion.

Then Judas leaves their presence to conspire, plot, and bargain; he sells his soul for the price of a slave.

Peter and John make ready the Passover, which with Jesus and the rest they eat in an upper chamber in the house of a disciple. At the Paschal table Jesus washes the feet of the disciples and names Judas as his betrayer; after that unworthy one has gone out into the night, the Master institutes the sacrament of the Lord's Supper in remembrance of his own death.

That blessed night he commands the disciples to love one another; discourses on the Two Comforters—one the Holy Ghost, the other he himself; and proclaims himself as the Way, the Truth, and the Life. "If ye love me, keep my commandments," he says, and gives the grandest of all the allegories: that of the Vine, the Husbandman, and the Branches.

He speaks at length of love, of the persecutions ahead, and of the Holy Ghost who will guide his saints into all truth.

Then comes the greatest of all the recorded prayers—the Intercessory Prayer in which he defines eternal life and pleads for the Twelve and all of the saints, that they may be one as he and the Father are one.

Then it is Gethsemane! Alone, in the greatest ordeal ever borne by man or God, in agony beyond compare, sweating great drops of blood from every pore, in a way beyond mortal comprehension, he takes upon himself the sins of all men on condition of repentance.

The infinite and eternal atonement, in large measure, is accomplished. Jesus has done what none but he could do.

After that, the betrayal and the arrest. Judas earns his thirty pieces of silver and loses his own soul. The Son of God chooses to bow to the will of wicked men—and the cross is just ahead.

1981 Deseret Book Co.
