Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 94

Preparing for the Crucifixion

They shall consider him a man, and say that he hath a devil, and shall scourge him, and shall crucify him. (Mosiah 3:9.)

He came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness. (D&C 76:41.)

I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me. And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross. (3 Ne. 27:13-14.)

Preparing the Disciples for His Death

(Matthew 26:1-2)

Steadily, ominously, borne by a tide that no man can stop—that neither God nor his Son in their infinite wisdom will stop—Jesus is going to his death. He came into the world to die upon the cross for the sins of the world, to die that men might live; and die he will and die he must. And in death he will gain his greatest victory.

Two days of life remain. He is with the Twelve and perhaps others who are beloved by him. We suppose he is in Bethany; if not, he is in that immediate vicinity. The last words we heard him speak came forth on the Mount of Olives as a lowering dusk ended the same day on which he bore the final public witness of his own divine Sonship. He and his friends rested somewhere that night near the Mount of Ascension. We like to think that he, at least, found peace and companionship within those hallowed walls in Bethany where the beloved sisters dwelt.

But now it is Wednesday, April 5, 13th Nisan, A.D. 30, and tomorrow is the day for the slaying of thousands of Paschal lambs. It must be early in the day, a day that Jesus is devoting to his intimate friends. Of all that transpired on this day only one sentence has come down to us, but oh, what a significant declaration it is:

Ye know that after two days is the feast of the passover, and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.

Specifying that it is two days before the Passover preserves for us the chronology and continuity of the events of the week of his passion; the statement about his betrayal and crucifixion reveals the subject that was uppermost in the minds of all of them as the climax of the one perfect ministry approached.

As to the day on which Jesus spoke these words, Edersheim says: "The day before that on which the Paschal Lamb [that is, he himself] was to be slain, with all that was to follow, would be one of rest, a Sabbath to His Soul before its Great Agony. He would refresh Himself, gather Himself up for the terrible conflict before Him. . . . Only two days more, as the Jews reckoned them—that Wednesday and Thursday—and at its Even the Paschal supper! And Jesus knew it well, and He passed that day of rest and preparation in quiet retirement with His disciples—perhaps in some hollow of the Mount of Olives, near the home of Bethany—speaking to them of His Crucifixion on the near Passover." (Edersheim 2:468-69.) [^1]

As to his betrayal and crucifixion, we have somewhat more to say. We are speaking of the death of a God. God himself—the Great Creator, "the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity," who had "come down from heaven among the children of men" (Mosiah 3:5)—God himself, subjecting himself to the will of the Father in all things, was appointed to die. He who was born in a lowly stable is about to die upon a cruel cross.

Yea, he is to do more than die in the manner and way common to all mankind. As he came into mortality in the lowliest circumstances—born in a stable, cradled in a manger, crooned to by braying asses and lowing cattle—so he is to depart this life in the most ignominious way then known in a cruel and merciless world. Roman nails driven by Jewish hands will tear his flesh. As he hangs, like a common criminal, between two thieves, a Roman spear, hurled with pharisaic zeal, will rend his side; then his marred body will be placed in a borrowed grave, and the seal of death and failure will be placed, by unbelieving zealots, upon his life and mission.

Though the Twelve and others have been with him through his whole ministry, even they must be further conditioned to accept that which is about to be. Any remaining slivers of false Jewish tradition must be swept from their minds. Their Deliverer is to die; their God is to be crucified; their Messiah is to fail—as far as the Jewish concept is concerned. Everything that is about to happen in his life will run counter to all that the scribes and Pharisees have supposed and believed and taught. Jesus, as we assume, has set apart this day to counsel and strengthen his chosen ones with reference to his coming demise and the glorious resurrection that will result therefrom.

That the Promised Messiah was appointed unto death, unto an agonizing death on a crucifier's cross, was something of which the prophets of old had spoken freely. They had said in plain words, and in many similitudes, that death and crucifixion awaited the mortal Son of the immortal Father. Of all this, fervent and extended witness is elsewhere borne. (The Promised Messiah, pp. 527-36.) For our present purposes we need only recount some of the numerous occasions of which we know, and there must have been many others, when the Mortal Messiah spoke of his coming crucifixion—all preparatory to this day on which, we cannot doubt, he taught and explained the coming reality in fulness.

Three years before, at the Passover, as he began his early Judean ministry, Jesus made the first such declaration of which we know. After the first cleansing of the temple, and in answer to the Jewish demands as to his authority for so doing, he said: "Destroy this temple"—as John says, "he spake of the temple of his body"—"and in three days I will raise it up." It was not, however, until after "he was risen from the dead" that the full significance of this pronouncement dawned upon his disciples. (John 2:13-22.) Yet it was the beginning; he was commencing the process of indoctrination that one day would leave them with a perfect knowledge of his death and resurrection.

In the great Born-Again Sermon, delivered, as we suppose, in the home of John in Jerusalem, Jesus told Nicodemus, a friendly Sanhedrist: "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up." (John 3:14.) How apt are the figures and how plain the similitudes that bear record of Him!

When these worthies asked Jesus why his disciples did not fast often, as was the case with them and the Pharisees, our Lord replied: "Can the children of the bride-chamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? but the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast." (Matt. 9:14-15.) In keeping with the Jewish custom of pondering and discussing religious questions morning, noon, and night, seven days a week, how often thereafter must the disciples of John have thought and spoken of this reply.

"For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale's belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth," he said as he excoriated them for their evil and adulterous lives. (Matt. 12:38-40.) Again, we are left to suppose that many people thereafter saw in the miraculous experience of Jonah a sign and a type of their Messiah.

At the time of the sending forth of the Twelve, and as a part of a statement about losing one's life for Jesus' sake, our Lord said: "And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me." (Matt. 10:38-39.) The allusion is clear and the portent ominous.

All those whose hearts were open, familiar as they were with the usage of Jewish figures and symbolism, saw in his declarations that he was the Bread of Life who came down from heaven, a reaffirmation of his divine Sonship. When he said, "And the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world," they knew he meant he would be slain, so that, figuratively, all men might eat his flesh and drink his blood. (John 6:48-56.)

After Peter's solemn and Spirit-born confession, Matthew says: "From that time forth began Jesus to shew unto his disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day." (Matt. 16:21.) From this it appears that both then and on many subsequent occasions Jesus spoke in plainness to his chosen and favored ones of his death and resurrection.

Though at the time the knowledge of such was reserved for Peter, James, and John only, Jesus discussed "his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem" with Moses and Elias, when those translated beings ministered to him on the Mount of Transfiguration. (Luke 9:28-31.)

After they came down from the Holy Mount—hallowed forever because of the Transfiguration—and returned to Galilee, the scripture says: "And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said unto them, The Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men: And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again. And they were exceeding sorry." (Matt. 17:22-23.)

Again we but need to quote the scripture: "And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart in the way, and said unto them, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and unto the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him: and the third day he shall rise again." (Matt. 20:17-19.)

How could he have spoken more plainly or with greater clarity than when he said: "I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. . . . As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. . . . Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I deceived of my Father." (John 10:11-18.)

"They will reverence my son," said the householder whose servants had been beaten, stoned, and killed. But instead, when the wicked "husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him." Jesus then announced himself as the Stone which the builders rejected, and the chief priests and Pharisees knew that "he spake of them" as the slayers of the Son. (Matt. 21:33-46.)

We cannot believe that all these sayings—given as allusions, as similitudes, and in plain words—constituted a tithe, or a hundredth, or a thousandth part of what the Blessed One said of his coming death and crucifixion and of his resurrection on the third day. Nor can we think that the people generally were unaware of his teachings; friends and foes alike had fixed in their minds that such was his announced course. That few truly envisioned the import and glory of it all, there is no doubt. Even the Twelve needed yet added teachings about his atoning sacrifice. And we conclude that on this day, alone with them and others of like spiritual stature, he taught them all that they were then able to receive about his coming ordeal and the glory and exaltation—for himself and for the faithful—which would result therefrom.

Judas and the Jews Plot His Death

(Matthew 26:3-5, 14-16; Mark 14:1-2, 10-11; JST Mark 14:1-3, 31-32; Luke 22:1-6)

If a God is to die, what circumstances shall attend his demise? If the Great Deliverer is to be destroyed, how can the deed be done? If the Jewish Messiah is to be murdered—in cold blood, with malice aforethought, by evil men—how shall it be brought to pass?

As with all else that unto this mortal probation doth appertain, the awful act will come about by seemingly normal means. It will grow out of the social, political, and religious milieu of the moment. And those who do the evil deed will justify themselves in their own sinful and knavish minds. Satan always has an explanation for wickedness—even the murder of a God!—which will suffice for those who love darkness rather than light because their deeds are evil.

And so it was on this dark day. "It was inevitable that the burning words of indignation which Jesus had uttered on this last great day of His ministry should exasperate beyond all control the hatred and fury of the priestly party among the Jews. Not only had they been defeated and abashed in open encounter in the very scene of their highest dignity, and in the presence of their most devoted adherents; not only had they been forced to confess their ignorance of that very Scripture exegesis which was their recognized domain, and their incapacity to pronounce an opinion on a subject respecting which it was their professed duty to decide; but, after all this humiliation, He whom they despised as the young and ignorant Rabbi of Nazareth—He who neglected their customs and discountenanced their traditions—He on whose words, to them so pernicious, the people hung in rapt attention—had suddenly turned upon them, within hearing of the very Hall of Meeting, and had pronounced upon them—upon them in the odour of their sanctity—upon them who were accustomed to breathe all their lives the incense of unbounded adulation—a woe so searching, so scathing, so memorably intense, that none who heard it could forget it forevermore.

"It was time that this should end. Pharisees, Sadducees, Herodians, Priests, Scribes, Elders, Annas the astute and tyrannous, Caiaphas the abject and servile, were all now aroused; and, dreading they knew not what outburst of religious anarchy, which would shake the very foundations of their system, they met together"—probably while Jesus was in quiet seclusion with his loved ones at or near Bethany—"in the Palace of Caiaphas, sinking all their differences in a common inspiration of hatred against that long-promised Messiah in whom they only recognized a common enemy. It was an alliance for His destruction, of fanaticism, unbelief, and worldliness; the rage of the bigoted, the contempt of the atheist, and the dislike of the utilitarian; and it seemed but too clear that from the revengeful hate of such a combination no earthly power was adequate to save.

"Of the particulars of the meeting we know nothing; but the Evangelists record the two conclusions at which the high conspirators arrived—the one a yet more decisive and emphatic renewal of the vote that He must, at all hazards, be put to death without delay; the other, that it must be done by subtilty, and not by violence, for fear of the multitude; and that, for the same reason—not because of the sacredness of the Feast—the murder must be postponed, until the conclusion of the Passover had caused the dispersion of the countless pilgrims to their own homes." (Farrar, pp. 588-89.)

Their plan was to slay their Savior after the Passover; after the Galilean patriots had returned to their rugged homeland; after any sympathetic souls from outlying areas had departed for their dwelling places. But Jesus had named the Passover as the time when the Lamb of God should pour out his soul unto death in the supreme atoning sacrifice. And as he had spoken, so must it be.

Accordingly, Judas, one of the Twelve, believed to be the only Judean among them, left the Holy Party and aligned himself with the unholy alliance of wicked men whose hearts were hardened by priestcrafts and iniquities; and he—a traitor—then "promised" to betray Jesus and deliver him up "in the absence of the multitude." If he could be arrested, tried, sentenced, and slain without such a tumult as to arouse their Roman overlords or permit him to be rescued by a mob, then let his death come soon; he could not die too soon to please his implacable foes.

Judas, be it realized, took the initiative in the betrayal; his was a willful act; he went to the evil-hearted Sanhedrists—to the sin-hardened Satanists—to tell them how he would place his Master into their hands. But he would do it for a price. The price of a slave? Nay, the price of his soul! Yet the words spoken by the mouth of Zechariah must not fail; not one jot or tittle must fall short of the prophetic mark. They must weigh for the price of their King "thirty pieces of silver"! (Zech. 11:12.) "What greedy chafferings took place we are not told, nor whether the counter-avarices of these united hatreds had a struggle before they decided on the paltry blood-money. If so, the astute Jewish priests beat down the poor ignorant Jewish Apostle. For all that they offered and all they weighed to him was thirty pieces of silver—about three pounds, sixteen shillings—the ransom-money of the meanest slave. For this price he was to sell his Master, and in selling his Master to sell his own life, and to gain in return the execration of the world for all generations yet to come." (Farrar, p. 529.)

Thirty pieces of silver! (Ex. 21:28-32.) "They 'weighed out' to him from the very Temple-treasury those thirty pieces of silver. . . . It was surely as much in contempt of the seller as of Him Whom he sold, that they paid the legal price of a slave. Or did they mean some kind of legal fiction, such as to buy the Person of Jesus at the legal price of a slave, so as to hand it afterwards over to the secular authorities? Such fictions, to save the conscience by a logical quibble, are not so uncommon—and the case of the Inquisitors handing over the condemned heretic to the secular authorities will recur to the mind. But, in truth, Judas could not now have escaped their toils. They might have offered him ten or five pieces of silver, and he must still have stuck to his bargain. Yet none the less do we mark the deep symbolic significance of it all, in that the Lord was, so to speak, paid for out of the Temple-money which was destined for the purchase of sacrifices, and that He, Who took on Him the form of a servant, was sold and bought at the legal price of a slave." (Edersheim 2:477.)

Why did Judas become a traitor and seek to betray Jesus? Mark says, "He turned away from him, and was offended because of his words." Luke says simply: "Then entered Satan into Judas." And Matthew preserves for us the words spoken by this evil apostle to the chief priests: "What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you?" John said of him: "He was a thief." (John 12:1-6.) In all of this Judas displays disbelief, a rejection of the gospel, personal offense against the word—all because of the gospel truism: "The guilty taketh the truth to be hard, for it cutteth them to the very center." (1 Ne. 16:2.) In all this there is selfishness, avarice, dishonesty, and a grasping after worldly things that resulted in a satanic domination of his soul. Satan can have no power over human souls unless it is given to him by them. People are subject to him only when they hearken to his enticements. In other words, Judas was an evil traitor because of personal wickedness, because he preferred to live after the manner of the world, because he "loved Satan more than God." He truly had become "carnal, sensual, and devilish" by choice. [^2]

It is common, almost classical, to ask: What were the motives of this man? Who can attempt to fathom the unutterable abyss, to find his way amid the weltering chaos, of a heart agitated by unresisted and besetting sins?

From such a launching pad, every self-appointed theologian and every pseudo-doctrinaire who writes about the life of Christ seems to feel an obligation—almost a compulsion—to explain Judas and to tell why he planted the traitor's kiss on the cheek of Him who did no sin. The act in itself is so revolting and is looked upon with such abhorrence that writers and expounders seek for some explanation other than the obvious one. They point to avarice, of course, but then seek to probe what must have been in the mind of one who would turn the Son of God over to his enemies. They speculate as to what all-consuming passion must have burned in the soul of one who would betray the Sinless One into the hands of sinful men.

Having named avarice as the ruling passion in the life of Judas, Farrar speculates in this way: "Doubtless other motives mingled with, strengthened—perhaps to the self-deceiving and blinded soul substituted themselves for—the predominant one. 'Will not this measure,' he may have thought, 'force Him to declare His Messianic kingdom? At the worst, can He not easily save Himself by miracle? If not, has He not told us repeatedly that He will die; and if so, why may I not reap a little advantage from that which is in any case inevitable? Or will it not, perhaps, be meritorious to do that of which all the chief priests approve?' A thousand such devilish suggestions may have formulated themselves in the traitor's heart, and mingled with them was the revulsion of feeling which he suffered from finding that his self-denial in following Jesus would, after all, be apparently in vain; that he would gain from it not rank and wealth, but only poverty and persecution. Perhaps, too, there was something of rancour at being rebuked [this in regard to his views relative to selling Mary's ointment for three hundred pence]; perhaps something of bitter jealousy at being less loved by Jesus than his fellows; perhaps something of frenzied disappointment at the prospect of failure; perhaps something of despairing hatred at the consciousness that he was suspected.

"Alas! sins grow and multiply with fatal fertility, and blend insensibly with hosts of their evil kindred. 'The whole moral nature is clouded by them; the intellect darkened, the spirit stained.' Probably by this time a turbid confused chaos of sins was weltering in the soul of Judas—malice, worldly ambition, theft, hatred of all that was good and pure, base ingratitude, frantic anger, all culminating in this foul and frightful act of treachery—all rushing with blind, bewildering fury through this gloomy soul."

But Farrar, whose gift is to wield the witchery of words, also points to the basic and obvious reason for Judas's act. It was sin—evil, wicked, soul-blackening sin. In this—and let there be no mistake on this point—Judas was no different from the thousands and millions of sinners who preceded him and the billions who have come after. Why does any traitor betray his friends? Why are there crimes and murders and wars? "From whence come wars and fightings among you?" James asks. His declarative answer, though given in the form of a question, is: "Come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members?" (James 4:1.) The world has been cursed with Judases without number, and one is no different from any of the others; yet one does stand out above them all because he happened to betray the Greatest of All. Similarly, the world has suffered from Pilates without end at whose word innocent men have gone to their graves, and one is no different from any of the others; yet one stands out above them all because he chanced to stand at the crossroads of history and authorized the legal murder of the one who was the Innocent above All.

And so, with proper insight, Farrar says, in answer to his question about the motive of Judas: "The commonest observance of daily facts which come before our notice in the moral world, might serve to show that the commission of crime results as frequently from a motive that seems miserably inadequate, as from some vast temptation. . . . The sudden crisis of temptation might seem frightful, but its issue was decided by the entire tenor of the traitor's previous life; the sudden blaze of lurid light was but the outcome of that which had long burnt and smouldered deep within his heart." (Farrar, pp. 592-94.)

Thus Judas—traitorous, evil, wicked, as he was—was in reality no different from his Jewish forebears of whom Jehovah said: "They sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes." (Amos 2:6; 8:6.) Nor was he any different from those anciently who, "for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread," slew "the souls that should not die." (Ezek. 13:19.) Judas betrayed the Son of Man himself, but is it not written: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me"? (Matt. 25:40.) It is sad to contemplate how many Judases there really are among the hosts of men.

And on this note ends the day of conspiracy; the day on which Jesus taught the eleven who were righteous about the glory and wonder of his death and resurrection; the day on which the one of the Twelve who was evil became an incarnate devil to plan the very death out of which life for all men would come—and in that act Judas sold his soul to another master whose disciple and follower he thus became.

This night the Son of Man will lay down his head in sleep "for the last time on earth." On the Thursday morning he will awake "never to sleep again." (Farrar, p. 595.)

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Jewish customs, practices, and traditions relative to Paschal matters are digested and summarized from Edersheim, whose life's work it was to search them out from the abundant and voluminous original sources.
[^2] To Nicodemus. 2. The quoted words are taken from earliest days. After Adam and Eve had "made all things" that God had revealed to them "known unto their sons and their daughters," the scripture says: "And Satan came among them, saying: I am also a son of God; and he commanded them, saying: Believe it not; and they believed it not, and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish." (Moses 5:12-13.)
