Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 95

The Paschal Supper

In the fourteenth day of the first month at even [between the two evenings] is the Lord's passover. (Lev. 23:5.)

Your lamb shall be without blemish, . . . And ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and . . . shall kill it in the evening [between the two evenings]. . . . And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they shall eat it. . . . It is the Lord's passover. (Ex. 12:5-11.)

Peter and John Make Ready the Passover [^1]

(Matthew 26:17-19; Mark 14:12-16; Luke 22:7-13)

It is the time of the Lord's Passover!

Nay, more, it is the Passover of Passovers. In Jehovah's House, in Jerusalem the Holy City, on this very day—April 6, A.D. 30—calculating on the basis of one yearling lamb for each ten persons, some two hundred and sixty thousand lambs will be slain. And then on the Passover morrow the Lamb of God himself will be sacrificed; he in whose name and honor countless lambs have had their blood sprinkled on the holy altar will himself have his blood shed that its saving power may be sprinkled upon believing souls forever.

From that dark Egyptian night a millennium and a half before, when two million of their fathers were prepared to march out of bondage, to this bright Palestinian day, when, though still subject to a Gentile yoke, they were free to worship and rejoice in a long and glorious history—from then until now, there had never been such a Passover as this. This was to be the climax and the end. Never again would any Passover meet with divine approval; and, indeed, a few years hence, with the destruction of the temple, the sacrificial parts of the feast would cease. But now, "Everyone was going to Jerusalem, or had those near and dear to them there, or at least watched the festive processions to the Metropolis of Judaism. It was a gathering of universal Israel, that of the memorial of the birth-night of the nation, and of its Exodus, when friends from afar would meet, and new friends be made; when offerings long due would be brought, and purification long needed be obtained—and all [would] worship in that grand and glorious Temple, with its gorgeous ritual. National and religious feelings were alike stirred in what reached far back to the first, and pointed far forward to the final Deliverance. On that day a Jew might well glory in being a Jew." (Edersheim 2:479-80.)

Jesus' disciples felt the fervor of the festive season. They knew that on Nisan 14, between the two evenings—for so the revealed rubric reads in Hebrew—their Paschal lamb must be slain. And Nisan 14 had begun on the evening before, on Wednesday the 13th, when the first of three stars appeared; and it will end the evening of this Thursday when the same three heavenly luminaries make their reappearance. Then before the midnight that will follow, their Paschal lamb, properly roasted, with the bitter herbs and all else appertaining to the Paschal supper must be eaten. Any of the lamb that remains until morning must be burned in the fire.

And so, on Thursday morning, knowing that the preparations must be made to eat the Passover meal, the disciples ask Jesus: "Where wilt thou that we go and prepare that thou mayest eat the passover?" Will it be in blessed Bethany, which was designated by Rabbinical authority as part of Jerusalem for the purposes of the feast, or back in the city proper? Only a few hours remain in which the needed lamb could be slain in the temple; what arrangements, therefore, shall they make?

Then Jesus, using seeric power—the power to see beforehand the happenings that shall be—calls Peter and John and says: "Go and prepare us the passover, that we may eat." They ask: "Where wilt thou that we prepare?" Jesus answers: "Behold, when ye are entered into the city, there shall a man meet you, bearing a pitcher of water; follow him into the house where he entereth in. And ye shall say unto the goodman of the house, The Master saith unto thee, Where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples? And he shall shew you a large upper room furnished: there make ready."

From this we can draw no conclusion except that a favored disciple had foreknowledge that Jesus and the Twelve desired to eat the Passover in his house. Whether this knowledge came by the spirit of inspiration or in some other way, we are not told. This we know: A man bearing a pitcher of water did in fact go out to meet them; he led them to the house; obviously they conversed en route; upon arrival they told the homeowner that the Master—thus identifying Jesus—asked for a guestchamber in which he and his disciples could eat the Passover; he then took them to an upper room that was already "furnished and prepared." The table was set; the couches were arranged; the dinnerware was in place; the cups and herbs and bowls and wine were there; cakes of unleavened bread were at hand; food was available; the goodman of the house had prepared for thirteen guests. It was his blessed privilege to host Him who should make an end to the Passover and in its place institute the sacrament of the Lord's Supper; and his house—clearly it was a large and commodious one—was the chosen place. What loving care must have attended the preparation that preceded the arrival of Peter and John!

Drawing on our learned friend Edersheim, we now note a most remarkable coincidence; or, rather, we discover a marvelous example of that divine attention to detail which ever delights the souls of those who ponder the words of holy writ. By combining the accounts of the three Synoptists, the message spoken by Peter and John to the goodman of the house comes out thus: 'The Master saith, My time is at hand—with thee [that is, in thy house: the emphasis is on this] I hold the Passover with my disciples. Where is my hostelry [or hall], where I shall eat the Passover with my disciples?'

The Hebrew word used here for hostelry or hall is Katalyma; and it is used only one other place in the whole New Testament. It is the word used to designate the inn or hostelry in Bethlehem where the Lord Jesus was born of Mary; where he drew his first mortal breath; where he began the mortal life that was destined to end at this very Passover time. As we are aware, Jesus was born in an open Khan, among the beasts, because there was no room in any of the inns or guestchambers that surrounded and opened upon the open courtyard. And this day in Jerusalem, the disciples did not ask for the upper chamber, but for a hostelry or hall that opened upon the Khan of the house. This Khan was the place in the house where, as in the open Khan, the beasts of burden were unloaded, and where shoes and staff, and dusty garments and burdens were put down. Apartments or guestchambers opened upon it. "He Who was born in a 'hostelry'—Katalyma—was content to ask for His last meal in a Katalyma." Born in the humblest of circumstances, he was prepared to remain in them all his days.

But now at this Passover, he made one provision with reference to the guest chamber; it was to be "my Katalyma." His purpose was to eat his last meal alone with his apostles. None of his other followers were to be present—not even his Blessed Mother, nor Mary Magdalene, who had so often traveled with the Twelve in their missionary journeys, nor Mary who worshipped at his feet in Bethany. He and the Twelve were more than the minimum of ten needed for the Passover meal, and he and they had sacred ordinances to perform before he went to Gethsemane to take upon himself the combined weight of all the sins of all men.

But as we have seen—and as Jesus foreknew—the goodman of the house took Peter and John to "a large upper room," "perhaps the very room where three days afterwards [as we shall note shortly] the sorrow-stricken Apostles first saw their risen Saviour—perhaps the very room where, amid the sound of a rushing mighty wind, each meek brow was first mitred with Pentecostal flame." (Farrar, p. 598.)

Who was the homeowner whose gracious preparations so well served the needs of Jesus on this memorable occasion? He is not named, and we do not know. No doubt Jesus withheld his name for two reasons: so that Peter and John, following his instructions, would learn anew of his seeric powers, and also to keep the knowledge from Judas. That unworthy one, who by now had returned from conspiring with the chief priests, must not be able to lead them to Jesus until after all things had been accomplished at the Passover meal and in the Garden of Gethsemane. The traitor must first go with the others to eat the Paschal meal, and then he must be told to leave and carry out his evil work.

As to the identity of the disciple who hosted the Lord Jesus in his last meal in mortality, many have speculated that it was the father of John Mark. The reasoning involved is to this effect: From the account in Acts relative to the freeing of Peter from prison we know that the family home of John Mark was a large one where the saints were wont to gather. (Acts 12:1-17.) From the fact that Mark alone tells about the young man who was accompanying Christ as he was led away captive, and who himself escaped arrest by fleeing naked as his captors tore from him his sole article of apparel, a loose linen garment—this has led to the universal assumption that Mark himself was the young man. (Mark 14:51-52.) What, then, is more natural than to conclude that Judas returned to the Passover-home with the arresting soldiers, only to find that Jesus and the other apostles had departed for Gethsemane; that in the commotion at the home young John Mark was aroused from sleep and hastily put on a loose tunic and followed the soldiers to the garden; that there he was a witness and an unwilling observer of the betrayal and arrest; and that he lost his own garment in fleeing from those who held captive his Lord? Someday it will be gratifying to know all things relative to these memorable days and to acclaim those disciples who then laid their all on the altar as they confessed before men Him who has since confessed them before his Heavenly Father.

But back to the Passover preparations. Certain ritualistic performances were an essential part thereof. One of these, the solemn search for leaven—for this also was the Feast of Unleavened Bread—had already occurred under the direction of the homeowner. On the evening of Nisan 13, as Nisan 14 commenced, this search was made in each house. Any leaven that had been hidden or lost must be found, put in a safe place, and later destroyed. From midday on the 14th nothing leavened might be eaten, and it was, in fact, the custom to fast on that day preparatory to eating the Paschal supper.

Further: The ordinary evening service and sacrifice in the temple must precede the supper. On this feast day this service began an hour early, or at about 1:30 P.M., with the evening sacrifice itself being offered at about 2:30 P.M. This was the time for the slaying of the Paschal lambs by their owners and the sprinkling of their blood upon the altar by the priests. Both Mark and Luke say that Peter and John were to "make ready" the Passover meal, and they both record that "they made ready the passover." Of necessity this means that the two apostles, rather than the homeowner or some other person, were required to and did attend the temple services for the formal slaying and preparation of the lamb; and to this assumption there is a certain fitness and propriety: two of the chief apostles, for themselves and on behalf of their Lord and their brethren, were complying to the full to the letter of the law on the last day on which its provisions were in force. When, on the morrow, the true Paschal Lamb was slain, the old order would be over and the new covenant only would have binding efficacy and force.

And so we can envision Peter and John in the temple courts, amid the massive throngs of worshippers, submitting for the last time in this respect to the law of Moses, and there witnessing and participating in the ceremonial performances so familiar to them. We cannot leave this scene without singling out certain of the scriptural words chanted that day by the Levites. The language is recorded in Psalm 81, and as there and then given—"broken three times by the threefold blast from the silver trumpets of the priests"—it included a promise and a call to Israel to serve their God and also a prophecy of their fate if they did not do so. This is the call and the promise:

Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee: O Israel, if thou wilt hearken unto me; There shall no strange god be in thee; neither shalt thou worship any strange god. I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.

Then came the seeric and prophetic pronouncement—and what sad and mournful significance it must have had to apostolic ears on this day:

But my people would not hearken to my voice; and Israel would [have] none of me. So I gave them up unto their own hearts' lust: and they walked in their own counsels. Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways!

And further, as the blood of thousands of lambs was sprinkled on the altar, the Levites chanted the Hallel (Psalms 113 to 118), with the people responding with cries of Hallelujah (praise Jehovah) at the proper places, and with the people, also at the proper place, saying:

Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity. Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord.

This chant—the same one shouted amid cries of Hosanna by the exultant throngs, as Jesus rode triumphantly into the Holy City—was thus here given for the last authorized time by the legal administrators of the Mosaic order. Its recitation here could not have done other than relight in the breasts of Peter and John those fires of testimony and rejoicing which burned so brightly on that triumphal day.

After attending to all that was incumbent upon them, Peter and John—with their lamb flayed and cleansed, and with the required parts left on the altar for burning—returned to the appointed home to meet Jesus and the others, there to partake of the crowning Paschal supper of the ages. The two appointed apostles had done their work well; the Paschal supper was made ready; all things had happened as Jesus foretold—such being in itself a witness that all things he had said of his coming betrayal, crucifixion, and resurrection would also come to pass.

Jesus and the Twelve Recline at the Paschal Table

(Matthew 26:20; Mark 14:17; Luke 22:14)

Peter and John have now done their work; they and the homeowner have made ready the guest chamber. The lamb has been roasted on a pomegranate spit; the unleavened cakes, the bitter herbs, the dish with vinegar—all are in place. Such items of food as needed are on the movable table; the festive lamps are lit; it is eventime, and the meal is ready.

"It was probably as the sun was beginning to decline in the horizon that Jesus and the other ten disciples descended once more over the Mount of Olives into the Holy City. Before them lay Jerusalem in her festive attire. All around pilgrims were hastening towards it. White tents dotted the sward, gay with the bright flowers of early spring, or peered out from the gardens or the darker foliage of the olive plantations. From the gorgeous Temple buildings, dazzling in their snow-white marble and gold, on which the slanting rays of the sun were reflected, rose the smoke of the altar of burnt-offering. These courts were now crowded with eager worshippers, offering for the last time, in the real sense, their Paschal lambs.

"The streets must have been thronged with strangers, and the flat roofs covered with eager gazers, who either feasted their eyes with a first sight of the Sacred City for which they had so often longed, or else once more rejoiced in view of the well-remembered localities. It was the last day-view which the Lord had [free and unhindered] of the Holy City—till His resurrection! Only once more in the approaching night of His betrayal was he to look upon it in the pale light of the full moon. He was going forward to 'accomplish His death' in Jerusalem; to fulfil the type and prophecy, and to offer Himself up as the true Passover Lamb—'the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.'

"They who followed Him were busy with many thoughts. They knew that terrible events awaited them, and they had only a few days before been told that these glorious Temple-buildings, to which, with a national pride not unnatural, they had directed the attention of their Master, were to become desolate, not one stone being left upon the other. Among them, revolving his dark plans, and goaded on by the great Enemy, moved the betrayer. And now they were within the city. Its Temple, its royal bridge, its splendid palaces, its busy marts, its streets filled with festive pilgrims, were well known to them, as they made their way to the house where the guestchamber had been prepared for them. Meanwhile the crowd came down from the Temple-mount, each bearing on his shoulders the sacrificial lamb, to make ready for the Paschal Supper." (Temple, pp. 226-28.)

The Holy Party (one of whom was unholy) entered the chosen house and ascended the stairs to the appointed upper chamber. Assuming it to be the house of Mark, Edersheim asks: "Was this [the] place of Christ's last, also that of the Church's first, entertainment; that, where the Holy Supper was instituted with the Apostles, also that, where it was afterwards first partaken of by the Church; the Chamber where He last tarried with them before His death, that in which He first appeared to them after His resurrection; that, also, in which the Holy Ghost was poured out, even as (if the Last Supper was in the house of Mark) it undoubtedly was that in which the Church was at first wont to gather for common prayer?" His answer (and ours): "We know not, and can only venture to suggest, deeply soul-stirring as such thoughts and associations are." (Edersheim 2:490.)

We do feel, however, that we can with measurable certainty reach some conclusions relative to the Paschal supper and all that it means in the eternal scheme of things. The Lord Jesus, in the more than a dozen years of his mature life, may have presided over other Paschal suppers, thus being the One who offered the slain lamb in similitude of his own coming sacrifice. The likelihood, however, is that such was not the case. At any prior Passover spent in Jerusalem, where alone the sacrificial lambs could be offered, he would have been a guest at someone else's table. At each table a minimum of ten diners was required, and the host was the one who made the offering.

It is pleasant to suppose that this is the one Paschal supper over which Jesus presided, and that, therefore, he offered the last symbolic sacrifice preparatory to his offering of the only real sacrifice which would free men from their sins. If this is the case, the only sacrifices in which he involved himself (and there is a certain reverential fitness about such being the case) would be the symbolical one on Thursday whose emblems betokened the infinite and eternal one on Friday. Thus he would endorse and approve all of the similitudes of the past and announce their fulfillment in him. Thus also would the past, the present, and the future all be tied together in him, with the assurance held out to all the faithful of all ages, that all who look to him and his atoning sacrifice shall be saved.

Two of the ordinances given of God to his people, without which accountable men cannot be saved, are baptism and the sacrament of the Lord's Supper; and with one Jesus commenced, and with the other he concluded his ministry. Both ordinances bear record of his death, burial, and resurrection. The faithful, buried with him in baptism and thereby dying unto sin, then come forth from the watery grave in a newness of life and in the likeness of his resurrection. Similarly when they partake of his Holy Supper—made efficacious because the Lamb of God shed his own blood in an eternal Passover—they remember anew that death out of which comes life.

On this Passover night, in the home of Mark, the Lord of Life is prefiguring his own death, even as he had done at Bethabara when he was baptized of John. And he is now testifying that all the righteous sacrifices and baptisms of the past have his approval, even as all the righteous sacramental ordinances of the future shall find eternal efficacy in him. The old and the new—all things—center in him.

Thus there is, in reality, only one sacrifice—the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ. All of the symbolisms are swallowed up in him. As Paul said, "Christ our passover is sacrificed for us: Therefore let us keep the feast"—and in this sense we shall keep the Feast of the Passover forever—"not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth." (1 Cor. 5:7-8.)

The Passover is not the child of the Mosaic law. As part of the gospel, which the Lord first gave to Israel's ancient lawgiver, it was administered under the Mosaic system until the coming of Christ. It was given before the law, and its truths remain after the law. "It was not of the Law, for it was instituted before the Law had been given or the Covenant ratified by blood; nay, in a sense it was the cause and foundation of all the Levitical Sacrifices and of the Covenant itself. And it could not be classed with either one or the other of the various kinds of sacrifices, but rather combined them all, and yet differed from them all. Just as the Priesthood of Christ was real, yet not after the order of Aaron, so was the Sacrifice of Christ real, yet not after the order of Levitical sacrifices but after that of the Passover. And as in the Paschal supper all Israel were gathered around the Paschal Lamb in commemoration of the past, in celebration of the present, in anticipation of the future, and in fellowship in the Lamb, so has the Church been ever since [when it has been on earth] gathered together around its better fulfilment in the Kingdom of God." (Edersheim 2:492.)

One other matter of considerable interest is the seating arrangement at the Paschal table, or, rather, the reclining positions assumed by the partakers of the meal. With reference to that first Passover night in Egypt, the divine word was: "And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste." (Ex. 12:11.) But in Jesus' day it was different; the Rabbinic decree then was that all who ate should recline at a table, to indicate rest, safety, and liberty. Low, moveable tables were used—sometimes they even hung from the ceiling so as not to touch the floor and be defiled—and it was the custom for each person to occupy a separate divan or pillow, to lie on his left side and lean on his left hand, the feet stretching back towards the ground. The couches upon which the diners reclined were set on two sides and one end of the table so as to leave about a third of the table free for serving trays and dishes. Needless to say, the reality had no resemblance to the paintings of Leonardo da Vinci and others whose genius has memorialized this event through the ages.

It is interesting, based on the scriptural allusions and inferences, to place Jesus and at least three of the Twelve in the positions they may have occupied at the table. This we shall now do, reserving for more extended recitation the specific matters that bear upon our suggestive conclusions.

As the Twelve began to take selected positions at the table, a contention arose, evidently over precedence in seating. By instinct we feel Judas—who was out of harmony with his brethren, and who at this late date was manifesting none of the Christian attributes of tolerance, charity, or concern for the comfort and well-being of his associates—we feel instinctively that Judas was at the root of the trouble. Various inferences and allusions found in the general setting and set forth in the scriptural accounts bear this out.

Among the Pharisees this matter of rank and precedence, of what place each person occupied at the table, was a matter of great concern; and Judas—influenced, nay, dominated by the prince of this world, who is Lucifer—was more of a Pharisee than a Christian. He, by training and inclination, would follow the Pharisaic custom and seek for himself the seat of honor. John speaks, in connection with the supper, of the devil having entered into Judas; and as Jesus said, in another connection, "He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another." (3 Ne. 11:29.)

We reason, thus, that Judas's acts caused the contention in which he gladly participated. With whom would he contend? Obviously with Peter, who was in fact the chief apostle and who knew his place was at the Lord's side in the position of honor and precedence. When Jesus rebuked the contention, a very natural thing would happen: impetuous Peter would go and take the lowest seat, while spiritually hardened Judas, immune to feelings of conscience and decency, would maintain his claim and take the seat of honor at the side of Jesus. This suggests the position of two of the Twelve.

As to the Beloved John, he leaned on the Master's bosom, which could only be done if he were on Jesus' right side. It was the custom for the chief personage at a feast to have someone on either side. Thus, starting on one side of the table, we would have John, then Jesus, and then Judas; the others would place themselves where they chose, but Peter would go across from John at the foot of the semicircle. Thus when Christ told John the sign by which the traitor would be known, none of the others would hear him. Thus Jesus, as part of the Paschal ceremony, could give the sop first to Judas, who sat in the seat of honor at his left hand. Thus when Judas asked if his treachery was known, and received an affirmative answer, none of the others knew what was involved. And thus Peter, having placed himself at the foot, would have to beckon to John to ask who it was who should betray the Lord. At least that is the reasoning involved; and, once again, we say this is something that someday we shall know with certainty. All that will be required is for the Lord to show one of his servants, in a vision or a dream, what happened that Passover night two millennia ago.

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] This a verse from the hymn "The Spirit of God Like a Fire Is Burning," by W. W. Phelps, as that glorious hymn of praise and exultation was sung at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, March 27, 1836.
