Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 96

The Last Supper

We'll wash and be washed, and with oil be anointed, Withal not omitting the washing of feet; For he that receiveth his penny appointed Must surely be clean at the harvest of wheat. [^1]

Strife Erupts at the Passover Table

(Luke 22:24-30; JST Luke 22:26-27, 30)

As the Holy Party prepare to recline on the couches around the Passover table, the flaring fires of strife are ignited, as we suppose, by Judas, whose spirit is evil and whose judgment is warped. It is over the age-old question, raised anew, that has caused strife and contention from the beginning of time. Who among them shall be accounted the greatest? Who shall have the place of honor at the table? For all such things do the Pharisees seek; and does not Judas have the same spirit as those with whom he is conspiring to shed innocent blood?

But a short time before, when James and John and their mother sought to have Zebedee's two sons chosen—to the indignation of the other disciples—to sit on Jesus' right and left hand in his kingdom, our Lord had severely rebuked such strivings. It seems sad that at this solemn hour, when the precedence of the cross, if so it may be called, is coming into view, such a contention should arise again. Well might their feelings have been: Who will take precedence in suffering for His name now, that they may be named by him before his Father hereafter? Yet, where there is an evil spirit, contention is ever found; and so Jesus patiently rehearses the old gospel verities over again:

The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors. But it ought not to be so with you; but he who is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and he who is chief, as he who doth serve.

For whether is he greater, who sitteth at meat, or he who serveth? I am not as he who sitteth at meat, but I am among you as he who serveth.

The servants of the Lord in all ages, even as with Him whom they serve, are to forget the honors of men and the glories of the world. Where now is the grandeur that was Greece and the glory that was Rome? Are those who held sway in any of the ancient empires anything more than handfuls of dead dust? What will it matter a few years hence what earthly honors were conferred by mortals on their fellows? Who will even remember tomorrow who sat where at what table? With the Lord's servants, all strife over precedence must cease; theirs is a ministry of service and not of rulership. To this Jesus' whole life and ministry attested. And yet even those who serve tables in his earthly kingdom shall not go unrewarded. As also he has said aforetime, he now repeats:

Ye are they who have continued with me in my temptations. And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me; That ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom; and sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

What more can they ask than to have eternal association with their Lord, even to eating and drinking at his table forever? And how few will hold greater positions in eternity than those Twelve who return in glory with the Son of Man, and who are then appointed to sit on twelve thrones judging the whole house of Israel?

Jesus Washes the Feet of His Disciples

(John 13:1-17; JST John 13:8, 10)

After reclining at the Passover table, Jesus and his apostolic friends ate the Passover meal with such portion of its rites and ceremonies as then suited their purposes. Then he introduced the gospel ordinance of the washing of feet, identified Judas as the one who would betray him, sent the traitor out into the night, and gave the ordinance of the sacrament. Since the sacramental rites grew out of the Passover procedures, we shall reserve our consideration of the Passover meal itself until we take up the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. To keep things in proper perspective, however, it is important to emphasize that the washing of feet came in the course of the meal, not at the beginning, and it was not simply an illustration of Godly humility, devised by Jesus to demonstrate his teachings about precedence, but was in fact the introduction of a new gospel ordinance.

John alone records such portions of what transpired relative to the foot-washing ordinance as have come down to us from biblical sources; our more extended knowledge relative thereto comes from latter-day revelation. The Beloved Disciple begins his Passover recitations by saying that "before the feast of the passover"—and what he is about to say is something of which we too are aware—"when Jesus knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the Father," there yet remained something of great concern to him. "Having loved his own which were in the world," he must yet, incident to the Passover meal, manifest to them how "he loved them unto the end." And the two ordinances about to be revealed—those of the washing of feet and of the partaking of the emblems of his flesh and blood—these two become an eternal manifestation of the grace and goodness and love of the Lord for the Twelve and for all who believe and obey us gospel, thereby making themselves worthy to receive each of these ordinances.

And so, John says, "supper being ended," or, rather 'during supper,' "the devil having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray him" (these words read like a formal indictment) and "Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God; He riseth from supper, and laid aside his garments; and took a towel, and girded himself. After that he poureth water into a basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded."

This appears to be a general summary of all that transpired. What then follows are some of the particulars. As to these particulars, John says: "Then cometh he to Simon Peter: and Peter saith unto him, Lord, dost thou wash my feet?" Jesus replied: "What I do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter." That is: 'You assume that I am acting only as any slave or host might, which is far from the case. I am about to perform a sacred ordinance, the meaning of which I will explain, and in due course you will know its true meaning.' Still impulsive and reticent, the Chief Apostle said: "Thou"—our Master and Lord!—"Thou," of all people, "needest not to wash my feet." 'Even though it be a sacred ordinance, let someone else do it instead!'

If we judge aright, Peter was the first one to have his feet washed, as he should have been, he being the senior apostle and the future president of the Church. John's phrase, "Then cometh he to Simon Peter," means, not that he came to him after the others, but either that he came to him from across the table or from the place where the basin and water for purification had stood. It would have been quite inappropriate, a self-serving assertion of excessive humility on his part, if Peter had first seen Jesus wash the feet of others and had then objected to the performance of the same act on his behalf. Since it was common for slaves and servants to wash the feet of guests, Peter's objection was to the Lord of heaven, as though he were merely a slave, washing the feet of one so unworthy as he deemed himself to be. It compares with previous like reactions on the part of the man Simon. "Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord" was his cry when, though he had toiled all night and caught nothing, yet, casting once again at Jesus' command, in one sweep the net became so full that it brake. (Luke 5:1-11.) "Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not be unto thee," was his reaction when Jesus told the disciples that he must suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day. (Matt. 16:21-23.) After hearing the conversation with Peter, and learning somewhat the meaning and import of the ordinance, none of the others would have objected.

Jesus then said: "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me." Catching a partial glimpse of the cleansing power of the new ordinance, Peter, ever impetuous, ever desiring to do all and more than need be, exclaimed "Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head." Jesus replied: "He that has washed his hands and his head, needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit; and ye are clean, but not all."

At this point, with reference to the ordinance itself, John explains: "Now this was the custom of the Jews under their law; wherefore, Jesus did this that the law might be fulfilled." The full significance of this is not apparent to the casual reader, nor should it be, for the washing of feet is a sacred ordinance reserved to be done in holy places for those who make themselves worthy. It is evident, however, that the Jews also had sacred ordinances performed in their temple, a knowledge of which has not been preserved, nor could it be, in any literature that has come down to us.

As to Jesus' statement that the Twelve were "clean, but not all," John explains: "For he knew who should betray him; therefore said he, Ye are not all clean. So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you?"

What had he done? He had instituted—nay, reinstituted, for "the order of the house of God has been, and ever will be, the same" [^2]—he had reinstituted one of the holy ordinances of the everlasting gospel. Those who have been washed in the waters of baptism, who have been freed from sin and evil through the waters of regeneration, who have come forth thereby in a newness of life, and who then press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, keeping the commandments and walking in paths of truth and righteousness, qualify to have an eternal seal placed on their godly conduct. They are thus ready to be endowed with power from on high. Then, in holy places, they cleanse their hands and their feet, as the scripture saith, and become "clean from the blood of this wicked generation." (D&C 88:74-75, 137-41.) Then, as the scripture also saith, they receive anointings and washings and conversations and statutes and judgments. (D&C 124:37-40.) Then they receive what Jesus here gave the Twelve, for as the Prophet said: "The house of the Lord must be prepared, . . . and in it we must attend to the ordinance of washing of feet. It was never intended for any but official members. It is calculated to unite our hearts, that we may be one in feeling and sentiment, and that our faith may be strong, so that Satan cannot overthrow us, nor have any power over us here." (Commentary 1:709.)

Did the Twelve then know what Jesus had done in their behalf? Perhaps in part, with the full significance to come to them after receiving that pentecostal endowment from on high which is the Holy Ghost. No doubt, also, Jesus then said more to them than John chose to record, for many things relative to these holy things are too sacred to publish to the world. It should be clear to all, however, that just as the act of immersion in water only hints at the true significance and power of baptism, so the act of the washing of feet is far more than the cleansing and refreshing of dusty and tired pedal extremities. It is an eternal ordinance, with eternal import, understood only by enlightened saints. That it might be continued by those having divine authorization to perform it, Jesus said:

Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you. Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord; neither he that is sent greater than he that sent him. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

Jewish proverbial expressions that give added depth and meaning to Jesus' words are set forth for us by Edersheim. "He, Who really was Lord and Master, had rendered this lowest service to them as an example that, as He had done, so should they do. No principle [was] better known, almost proverbial in Israel, than that a servant was not to claim greater honour than his master, nor yet he that was sent than he who had sent him. . . .

"The Greek word for 'the towel,' with which our Lord girded Himself, occurs also in Rabbinic writings, to denote the towel used in washing and at baths (Luntith and Aluntith). Such girding was the common mark of a slave, by whom the service of footwashing was ordinarily performed. And, in a very interesting passage, the Midrash contrasts what, in this respect, is the way of man with what God had done for Israel. For, He [God] had been described by the prophet as performing for them [Israel] the service of washing, and others usually rendered by slaves." It scarcely needs to be here interjected that such a Jewish concept is purely Messianic in nature.

"The idea, that if a man knows (for example, the Law) and does not do it, it were better for him not to have been created, is not unfrequently expressed. But the most interesting reference is in regard to the relation between the sender and the sent, and a servant and his master. In regard to the former, it is proverbially said, that while he that is sent stands on the same footing as he who sent him, yet he must expect less honour. And as regards Christ's statement that 'the servant is not greater than his Master,' there is a passage in which we read this, in connection with the sufferings of the Messiah: 'It is enough for the servant that he be like his Master.'" (Edersheim 2:501-2.)

And in conclusion, well might we ask: If true disciples are to wash each other's feet, where among the sects of Christendom is this done? And how could it be done except by revelation? Who would know all that is involved unless God revealed it? Is not this holy ordinance one of the many signs of the true Church?

Jesus Names Judas as His Betrayer

(John 13:18-30; JST John 13:19; Matthew 26:21-25; Mark 14:18-21; JST Mark 14:30; Luke 22:21-23)

The blessed Twelve, their feet washed in an holy ordinance, their whole bodies being thereby cleansed from the blood and sins of that evil and adulterous generation in which they lived—the blessed Twelve were clean, "clean every whit"—"but not all." Judas yet sat in their circle; his deed of shame and infamy lay ahead; he must yet raise the standard of betrayal and sin round which all the traitors of all the ages might rally. "The hands of the Lord of Life had just washed the traitor's feet. Oh, strange unfathomable depth of human infatuation and ingratitude! that traitor, with all the black and accursed treachery in his false heart, had seen, had known, had suffered it; had felt the touch of those kind and gentle hands, had been refreshed by the cleansing water, had seen that sacred head bent over his feet, stained as they yet were with that hurried secret walk which had taken him into the throng of sanctimonious murderers over the shoulder of Olivet. But for him there had been no purification in that lustral water; neither was the devil within him exorcised by that gentle voice, nor the leprosy of his heart healed by that miracle-producing touch." (Farrar, p. 602.) Truly all ordinances must be sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise, else they are not binding on earth and sealed everlastingly in the heavens! And none are so sealed and ratified except for those who are just and true.

I speak not of you all: I know whom I have chosen: but that the scripture may be fulfilled, He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up his heel against me. Now I tell you before it come, that, when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am the Christ.

King David—whose son, now reclining at the Passover table, has inherited the ancient throne—using his own experiences as a base, wrote these Messianic words: "All that hate me whisper together against me: against me do they devise my hurt. . . . Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me. But . . . as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest me before thy face for ever." (Ps. 41:7-12.) [^3] In these words, David declaimed both his own betrayal by his counselor, Ahithopel, and the betrayal of his Lord by Judas in the coming day. Both Judas and Ahithopel, their conspiracies not unfolding as they had supposed, went and hanged themselves, that the ancient promise might be a perfect type of the evil deed to be done in the Messianic day. (2 Sam. 15:10-12; 17.) At this point Jesus said:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that receiveth whomsoever I send receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.

"Soon should they know with what full foreknowledge He had gone to all that awaited Him; soon should they be able to judge that, just as the man who receives in Christ's name His humblest servant receiveth Him, so the rejection of Him is the rejection of His Father, and that this rejection of the Living God was the crime which at this moment was being committed in their very midst." (Farrar, p. 603.) Having so spoken, Jesus "was troubled in spirit"—not, as we suppose, because of what lay ahead for him, but for the evil deed spawned in the heart of his "own familiar friend." He said:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.

One of you which eateth with me shall betray me.

But, behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table.

"And they were exceeding sorrowful," Matthew says. Indeed, "a deep unspeakable sadness had fallen over the sacred meal. Like the sombre and threatening crimson that intermingles with the colours of sunset, a dark omen seemed to be overshadowing them—a shapeless presentiment of evil—an unspoken sense of dread. If all their hopes were to be thus blighted—if at this very Passover, He for whom they had given up all, and who had been to them all in all, was indeed to be betrayed by one of themselves to an unpitied and ignominious end—if this were possible, anything seemed possible. Their hearts were troubled." (Farrar, p. 604.)

One by one, eleven of the Twelve, "doubting of whom he spake," each asked in turn, "Is it I?" Their consciences were clear, and yet none dared ask, "Is it he?" "Better the penitent watchfulness of a self-condemning humility than the haughty Pharisaism of censorious pride. The very horror that breathed through their question, the very trustfulness which prompted it, involved their acquittal." (Farrar, p. 604.)

John, at this point, was leaning on Jesus' bosom. Peter beckoned to him to ask Jesus who it was; he asked, and Jesus answered:

He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it.

It is one of the twelve, that dippeth with me in the dish.

The Son of man goeth as it is written of him: but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! it had been good for that man if he had not been born.

Better for Judas if he had never been born! Yea, and better for all those who knowingly and willfully reject the truth and defy the Christ, better for them also if they had never been born! Their position in preexistence—in the presence of God—limited though their progression could be in the spirit state, was better than to be consigned to that state of which it is written: "Where God and Christ dwell they cannot come, worlds without end." (D&C 76:112.) Judas is not alone as an inheritor of the awesome wo here pronounced, as this Book of Mormon language reveals: "And wo be unto him that will not hearken unto the words of Jesus, and also to them whom he hath chosen and sent among them; for whoso receiveth not the words of Jesus and the words of those whom he hath sent receiveth not him; and therefore he will not receive them at the last day; And it would be better for them if they had not been born. For do ye suppose that ye can get rid of the justice of an offended God, who hath been trampled under feet of men, that thereby salvation might come?" (3 Ne. 28:34-35.)

As to the sign by which the traitor might be known—dipping with Jesus in the common bowl and the taking of the sop from his hand—such was neither designed nor intended to identify Judas with clarity and certainty, and it did not have such an effect. All who sat at the table dipped their hands in the bowl, and all received a sop from Jesus' hand as part of the Passover rituals, as we shall see shortly, though it would appear that Judas was the first so served, or, perhaps, that he received an additional sop. In any event Jesus then "dipped the sop" and gave it to Judas, and then, and then only, did Judas ask, "Master, is it I?" Jesus answered: "Thou hast said," apparently whispering the reply only to Judas, without making the others aware in words who the traitor was.

Of Judas John tells us that after the sop, "Satan entered into him." Thus—"As all the winds, on some night of storm, riot and howl through the rent walls of some desecrated shrine, so through the ruined life of Judas envy and avarice, and hatred and ingratitude, were rushing all at once. In that bewildering chaos of a soul spotted with mortal guilt, the Satanic had triumphed over the human; in that dark heart earth and hell were thenceforth at one; in that lost soul sin had conceived and brought forth death." (Farrar, p. 605.)

Jesus then said: "What thou doest, do quickly; but beware of innocent blood." John notes that none of them at the table "knew for what intent he spake this unto him." Some thought the keeper of the bag was being sent to buy provisions for the continuing period of the feast, others that he was being sent to give alms to the poor who even then, this being a day of festivity, were still mingling in the courts of the temple. But Judas, "having received the sop went immediately out." "And so from the lighted room, from the holy banquet, from the blessed company, from the presence of his Lord, he went immediately out, and—as the beloved disciple adds, with a shudder, letting the curtain of darkness fall for ever on that appalling figure—'and it was night.' " (Farrar, pp. 605-6.)

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] The head of the company—in this case Jesus—took the first of four cups of wine, said two benedictions over it, and then all present drank of the cup. It will help us feel the spirit of the solemn occasion to quote the two benedictions customarily spoken, both of which are accepted as having been in use in Jesus' day. One was in these words: "Blessed art Thou, Jehovah our God, who hast created the fruit of the vine!" The other was more extended and self-exulting: "Blessed art Thou, Jehovah our God, King of the Universe, who hast chosen us from among all people, and exalted us from among all languages, and sanctified us with Thy commandments! And Thou hast given us, O Jehovah our God, in love, the solemn days for joy, and the festivals and appointed seasons for gladness; and this the day of the feast of unleavened bread, the season of our freedom, a holy convocation, the memorial of our departure from Egypt. For us hast Thou chosen; and us hast Thou sanctified from among all nations, and Thy holy festivals with joy and with gladness hast Thou caused us to inherit. Blessed art Thou, O Jehovah, who sanctifiest Israel and the appointed seasons! Blessed art Thou, Jehovah, King of the Universe, who hast preserved us alive and sustained us and brought us to this season!" In this connection, Joseph Smith said: "What did Jesus do? Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation, and I will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself. So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all his children." (Teachings, pp. 347-48. Italics added.)
[^2] Next came the washing of his own hands by the head of the company, as he recited these words: "Blessed art Thou, Jehovah our God, who hast sanctified us with thy commandments, and hast enjoined us concerning the washing of our hands." Later, after the meal proper, all present would wash their hands. We cannot believe that Jesus performed this act of washing; we have heretofore heard him excoriate the Jewish formalists for their adherence to the washing traditions of the elders. It is probable that at this point he did wash the feet of the disciples; and we know that he said to Peter, "He that has washed his hands and his head, needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit." John's comment on this was that Jesus so acted because it "was the custom of the Jews under their law," and that he did it "that the law might be fulfilled." Of this we have already taken note. Using a similar tender approach, the Lord addressed his latter-day servants in like manner. "Fear not, little children," he said, "for you are mine, and I have overcome the world, and you are of them that my Father hath given me." (D&C 50:40-41; 78:17-18.)
[^3] A table was then brought in upon which were placed the bitter herbs, the unleavened bread, the charoseth (a dish made of dates, raisins, and vinegar), the Paschal lamb, and the flesh of the chagigah (a festive sacrifice in addition to the Paschal lamb). The head of the company, usually the father, dipped a piece of herb in the charoseth, ate it, offered a benediction, and distributed a similar morsel to all. Then the second cup was filled but not drunk. Of the sacrifices offered by Adam, who had been commanded so to do, the angelic ministrant said: "This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth." (Moses 5:5-8.)
