Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 97

The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper

He that eateth this bread eateth of my body to his soul; and he that drinketh of this wine drinketh of my blood to his soul; and his soul shall never hunger nor thirst, but shall be filled. (3 Ne. 20:8.)

Jesus Saith: "Love One Another"

(John 13:31-35)

Jesus has more to say—much, much more—about his love for his disciples, about their love for him, and about their love for each other. He will say it this night in this upper room in the home of John Mark. And his own beloved John will preserve for us a digest of his sayings in which we shall rejoice forever.

Already we have pondered John's own summary of Jesus' feelings as he reclined with his friends to partake of the Passover. "Now before the feast of the Passover," our apostolic colleague wrote, "when Jesus knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end." (John 13:1.) As death approached, love was uppermost in the divine mind. O if they could but love him as he loved them; O if they would but love each other as his law required; O if they would but love the Lord their God with all their heart, might, mind, and strength—then all would be well with them in time and in eternity!

And, as we have seen, the ordinance of the washing of feet was a manifestation of Jesus' eternal love for his own, a love that impelled the Loving One to do all in his power to seal his friends up unto eternal life in his Father's kingdom. Now we shall see how the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, for the same reason, is also a message of love to all mankind. And so, with Judas out groping in the boundless night that enveloped his sin-blackened soul, Jesus can turn to the law of love as a prelude to instituting the sacrament of love.

"No sooner had Judas left the room, than, as though they had been relieved of some ghastly incubus, the spirits of the little company revived. The presence of that haunted soul lay with a weight of horror on the heart of his Master, and no sooner had he departed than the sadness of the feast seems to have been sensibly relieved. The solemn exultation which dilated the soul of their Lord—that joy like the sense of a boundless sunlight behind the earth-born mists—communicated itself to the spirits of His followers. The dull clouds caught the sunset colouring. . . . Now it was that, conscious of the impending separation and fixed unalterably in His sublime resolve, He opened His heart to the little band of those who loved Him, and spoke among them those farewell discourses." (Farrar, pp. 609-10.)

Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him.

Let the Twelve be reassured—no matter that Judas has left to play his ill and evil part; let that be as it may—what truly matters is that the Son of Man is true and faithful in all things. Shortly he shall be glorified; he shall "receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing." (Rev. 5:12.) And even God is glorified in him, for the glory and honor and dominion and kingdoms gained by the Son are added to those of the Father, thus glorifying him. [^1] Indeed, the Father "glorifieth himself" whenever any of his children gain exaltation, and the added kingdoms thereby brought into being constitute "the continuation" of his works. (D&C 132:29-31.) And—"'If the Father is glorified and exalted to a higher station because of the works and triumphs of the Son, then the Father will further reward the Son with the Father—and the hour for all this is at hand; it shall straightway take place.'" (Commentary 1:726.)

Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me: and as I said unto the Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I say to you.

"The time which remained for Him to be with them was short; as He had said to the Jews, so now he said to them, that whither He was going they could not come. And in telling them this, for the first and last time, he calls them 'little children.' In that company were Peter and John, men whose words and deeds should thenceforth influence the whole world of man until the end—men who should become the patron saints of nations—in whose honour cathedrals should be built, and from whom cities should be named; yet their greatness was but a dim, faint reflection from His risen glory, and a gleam caught from that Spirit which He would send. Apart from Him they were nothing, and less than nothing—ignorant Galilean fishermen, unknown and unheard of beyond their native village—having no intellect and no knowledge save that He had thus regarded them as his 'little children.' And though they could not follow Him whither he went, yet he did not say to them, as He had said to the Jews, that they should seek Him and not find Him. [John 7:34; 8:21.] Nay, more, He gave them a new commandment, by which, walking in His steps, and being known by all men as His disciples, they should find Him soon." (Farrar, p. 610.) [^2]

A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one for another.

A new commandment! Love one another! Yea, and an old commandment, one in force from the beginning, one that dwelt with God in eternity before ever the foundations of the earth were laid! Indeed, it was a new and an everlasting commandment—new each time it fell from divine lips; everlasting because it had lain at the root of all saving fellowship from the beginning, from the day when Adam first gloried in the name of Christ, to that present moment. Thus saith Jehovah to Moses: "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the Lord." (Lev. 19:18.) "For this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another," John said. (1 Jn. 3:11.) But it came then to the Twelve, as it always comes, with a new emphasis, a new prominence, a new influence. They were true disciples and had become such in the waters of baptism. If now they would manifest, one toward another, that love upon which the everlasting gospel is founded, then all men would recognize them for what they were: apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ.

They Eat the Passover Meal

(Luke 22:15-20; JST Luke 22:16)

This night in the Passover meal and in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper all of the sacrificial similitudes of all the ages combined to bear testimony of the infinite and eternal atoning sacrifice—the sacrifice of the Lamb of God who taketh away the sins of the world. The heart and center and core of revealed religion is that the Son of God will shed his blood, in a garden and on a cross; that he will take upon himself the sins of all men on conditions of repentance; that he will ransom men from the temporal and spiritual death brought into the world by the fall of Adam; that he will abolish death and bring life and immortality to light through his gospel; that through him all men will be raised in immortality, while those who believe and obey will ascend unto eternal life—all because of his atoning sacrifice.

From the day of the first Adam (the first man, the first flesh, the first mortal) to the day of the Second Adam (who will be the first to rise in immortality, the first to gain eternal life)—for all these four thousand years, the Lord's people have offered the firstlings of their flocks in sacrifice in similitude of the coming sacrifice of the Son of God. [^3] From the Exodus to this hour the annual Feast of the Passover has been one of the chief occasions on which these sacrifices, with all that they typify, have been performed. A few hours hence and Jesus will be lifted up upon the cross; sacrifices by the shedding of blood will cease among the faithful; [^4] and in their place the saints of the Most High will pay their devotions by partaking of the sacramental emblems in remembrance of the torn flesh and spilt blood of the Atoning One. Jesus and the Twelve are about to end the old similitudes of the past and institute the new symbolisms of the future. This very night they shall perform the ordinance which looks forward to the sacrifice of God's Son, and also the ordinance performed in remembrance of his death. In this setting—portentous, momentous, of eternal importance—it is no wonder, then, that we hear Jesus say to the Twelve:

With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer; For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled which is written in the prophets concerning me. Then I will partake with you, in the kingdom of God.

This night in Gethsemane, and tomorrow before the rulers of this world and on Calvary, he will suffer, suffer as none other has ever done, either before or since. But first—the Passover! They must eat it together, for they will not do so again—note it well!—until the Messianic prophecies concerning his death are fulfilled; until, in resurrected glory, they keep the feast in the kingdom of God. Jesus and the Twelve are going to eat the Passover meal again incident to his glorious return, a return when the kingdom of God, in all its glorious perfection, will be set up on the millennial earth! But first, in the course of this Passover in the upper room this night, "he took the cup, and gave thanks," as the Passover ritual required, and said:

Take this, and divide it among yourselves: For I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall come.

Again it is the Passover of which he speaks. He will not drink again of the wine of the feast until the latter-day kingdom comes, until He rules whose right it is. At this point, as Luke recounts, he breaks and blesses the bread and blesses the wine, identifies them as the sacramental emblems, and gives them to the Twelve. Then, as we shall see, he repeats—this time with reference to the sacramental wine—that he will not drink it again until that same blessed day when he shall also eat and drink the Passover meal again.

In summary, then, the sacrificial performances pointed men's minds forward to the future death of their Savior, and the sacramental emblems are partaken in remembrance of a death that is past. Sacrifices were performed until he came; the sacrament is the new order that serves the same purpose since he came—except that there was at least one sacramental ordinance before he came, and there shall be certain sacrificial performances after his coming.

In an ordinance prefiguring the sacrament, as Abraham returned from the slaughter of the kings, he was met by that great high priest from whom the Father of the Faithful himself had received the priesthood. At this time "Melchizedek, king of Salem"—the same to whom Abraham paid tithes—"brought forth bread and wine; and he break bread and blest it; and he blest the wine, he being the priest of the most high God, And he gave to Abram." (JST Gen. 14:17-18.) Such was the prefiguring of the sacramental ordinance. And in a yet future day, to complete the restitution of all things, the sacrifices that were part of the gospel, and that antedated the law of Moses, will again be performed. [^5] Since Jesus says he will eat of the Passover again with the Twelve, as well as partake of the sacrament with them, we can well suppose he may do both things again, at the same time, even as he did them this night in the upper room. As to his partaking of the sacrament at his coming, we will have more to say as we consider the institution of the sacramental ordinance itself. First, however, it will profit us to recount the Passover performances so as to see how easily and naturally the sacrament grew out of them.

The Passover procedures have varied through the ages. It is common to speak of the Egyptian Passover that Israel kept in her early years as a nation, and of the permanent Passover kept in later generations. In each the symbolisms and performances were geared to the assumed needs of the respective days. In spite of extensive source material, we cannot with absolute certainty define each rite and step as it prevailed in Jesus' day, and it may be that some of these varied and changed even in the short span of his life. From reliable sources we suggest something to the following effect took place in thousands of Jewish homes in Jerusalem on this April 6, A.D. 30. We will concern ourselves particularly with what took place in the upper room.

As we have seen, Luke tells us Jesus took the first cup, "gave thanks," and passed it to the Twelve. In so stating Luke is speaking of the Passover cup, not the sacramental cup, which he mentions later. We cannot, however, believe that Jesus used the words of these prayers. It probably was common for individuals to exercise freedom in what they said, and certainly the Giver of the feast would not have been bound by the Rabbinic rituals. All we know is that he did offer a blessing of some sort over the cup, and that he and the Twelve drank therefrom.

Thus was the Paschal supper conducted in the day of the Lord Jesus. Since he was, in fact, celebrating the supper and fulfilling the law, we must conclude that he followed, insofar as they did not violate true principles, the successive steps in the general format set forth. And building on this foundation he then brought into being the sacramental ordinance itself.

Whether the cups drunk at the Paschal supper were also in similitude of the coming decree that men must drink his blood, we cannot say. Certain it is, however, that the sacrificial lamb, and all that appertained to its offering, was in similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father.

An interesting Messianic sidelight to this whole procedure is the fact that "to this day, in every Jewish home, at a certain part of the Paschal service—just after the third cup, or the cup of blessing, has been drunk—the door is opened to admit Elijah the prophet as forerunner of the Messiah, while appropriate passages are at the same time read which foretell the destruction of all heathen nations." [^6]

But now let us turn to the Lord's Supper itself.

Jesus Giveth Them the Sacrament

(3 Nephi 18:1-14, 27-33; 20:1-9; Moroni 4:1-3; 5:1-2; Matthew 26:26-29; JST Matthew 26:22-25; Mark 14:22-25; JST Mark 14:20-25; Luke 22:15-20; JST Luke 22:16; 1 Corinthians 11:20-34; D&C 20:75-79; 27:1-14)

No single account of the institution of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, standing alone, contains enough to let us know the reality and the glory and the wonder of what happened in that upper room as the Paschal supper died and the sacramental supper was born. Nor for that matter do all the biblical accounts taken together reveal the glorious mystery of it all.

John does not preserve a single word on the subject, though he is the one who recorded the great sermon on the bread of life, which includes the statements about eating the flesh and drinking the blood of the One who came down from heaven. Luke confines his account to two sentences, which scarcely do more than announce that the new ordinance came into being; Matthew and Mark each give a partial account, from which, however, the full significance of what then transpired cannot be discerned; and Paul, who learned either by revelation or from the testimonies of the participants of what then occurred, does not shed any great additional flood of light upon the blessed events. Providentially the Nephite accounts do contain portions of what Jesus said to the American Hebrews as he instituted the same sacramental services among them. Even they, however, do not record the words of blessing spoken by the Lord over the bread and over the wine, though we know such words were preserved at the time, for, nearly four hundred years later, Moroni copied them into his inspired writings. We also have received them by revelation, as well as an account of the drinking of the sacramental wine in the millennial day. It is our privilege now to weave all these accounts into one unified whole and catch for ourselves a vision of what Jesus did that April night and what it has meant ever since to the saints of the Most High.

"And as they were eating"—no doubt as they neared the end of the Paschal supper—"Jesus took bread and brake it, and blessed it, and gave to his disciples, and said":

Take, eat; this is in remembrance of my body which I give a ransom for you. (Matthew.)

Take it, and eat. Behold, this is for you to do in remembrance of my body; for as oft as ye do this ye will remember this hour that I was with you. (Mark.)

This is my body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me. (Luke.)

Take, eat: this is my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. (Paul.)

In the Nephite setting, "Jesus commanded his disciples," the Nephite Twelve, whom he had called and chosen for a like apostolic ministry to that of the Jerusalem Twelve, "that they should bring forth some bread and wine unto him. And while they were gone for bread and wine, he commanded the multitude that they should sit themselves down upon the earth. And when the disciples had come with bread and wine, he took of the bread and broke and blessed it; and he gave unto the disciples and commanded that they should eat. And when they had eaten and were filled, he commanded that they should give unto the multitude. And when the multitude had eaten and were filled, he said unto the disciples":

Behold there shall be one ordained among you, and to him will I give power that he shall break bread and bless it and give it unto the people of my church, unto all those who shall believe and be baptized in my name.

And this shall ye always observe to do, even as I have done, even as I have broken bread and blessed it and given it unto you. And this shall ye do in remembrance of my body, which I have shown unto you. And it shall be a testimony unto the Father that ye do always remember me. And if ye do always remember me ye shall have my Spirit to be with you. (Nephi the Disciple.)

To this account we need only append the words of thanks and blessing spoken by Jesus and the picture will be complete. And we cannot doubt that the words spoken—thereby becoming the pattern for use among the Lord's people in all places and in all ages—conformed, at least in substance and thought content, to the following:

O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it; that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto to thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him, and keep his commandments which he hath given them, that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. (Moroni.)

All these accounts, woven into one majestic tapestry to hang in the halls of the heart of every true saint, enable us to understand what the Master does for his saints in the sacrament. From them we learn: (1) He gave himself, his body, the very flesh of which he was composed, to ransom men. His was a supreme sacrifice—that of his own life, his own body. The ransom paid delivers his brethren from the temporal and spiritual death brought into the world by the fall of Adam. (2) "In memory of the broken flesh, We eat the broken bread; And witness with the cup, afresh, Our faith in Christ, our Head." [^7] We eat in remembrance—in remembrance of that Paschal hour, in remembrance of Gethsemane, of Calvary, of an open tomb. (3) The sacrament must be administered by legal administrators; it is a holy ordinance; those who break and bless the bread must be ordained unto that very power; it is not a prerogative men can assume without divine approval. (4) It is administered only to those who believe and have been baptized (except in the case of little children, who need no baptism); indeed, it is the very ordinance whereby the saints renew the covenants made in the waters of baptism. (5) It is a perpetual, continuing, everlasting ordinance; the faithful always observe its rites and provisions. (6) Those who partake testify to the Father that they will always remember his Son. (7) They also repeatedly renew their covenant to take upon them the name of the Son, to be the Lord's own peculiar people, to set themselves apart from the world, to live as becometh saints, to hold his name in everlasting reverence. (8) In this ordinance the solemn promise is made to keep the commandments of God. (9) In consequence of all this the worthy partakers of this blessed and sanctified emblem receive the promise that they will always have the Lord's Spirit to be with them. (10) And as we shall hereafter note, if any partake unworthily, they thereby eat and drink damnation to their souls.

"And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them; and they all drank of it. And he said unto them":

This is in remembrance of my blood which is shed for many, and the new testament which I give unto you; for of me ye shall bear record unto all the world. (Mark.)

Drink ye all of it. For this is in remembrance of my blood of the new testament, which is shed for as many as shall believe on my name, for the remission of their sins. (Matthew.)

This cup is the new testament in my blood which is shed for you. (Luke.)

This cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord's death till he come. (Paul.)

Among the Nephites, "he commanded his disciples that they should take of the wine of the cup and drink of it, and that they should also give unto the multitude that they might drink of it. And it came to pass that they did so, and did drink of it and were filled; and they gave unto the multitude, and they did drink, and they were filled. And when the disciples had done this, Jesus said unto them":

Blessed are ye for this thing which ye have done, for this is fulfilling my commandments, and this doth witness unto the Father that ye are willing to do that which I have commanded.

And this shall ye always do to those who repent and are baptized in my name; and ye shall do it in remembrance of my blood, which I have shed for you, that ye may witness unto the Father that ye do always remember me. And if ye do always remember me ye shall have my Spirit to be with you. (Nephi the Disciple.)

Again to complete the beauteous tapestry, we append the words of blessing and thanks similar to those that must have fallen from Jesus' lips on these sacred occasions:

O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee, in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this wine to the souls of all those who drink of it, that they may do it in remembrance of the blood of thy Son, which was shed for them; that they may witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they do always remember him, that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. (Moroni.)

Again, all these accounts, becoming part of our tapestry of love and faith and triumph, enable us to understand what Jesus has done for us. Again we learn of a ransom that was paid—paid in blood, paid in the spilt blood of the Lamb. This blood is a new testament—a new covenant!—a testament that replaces the old covenant of Moses. Of it—the new covenant, the gospel covenant—the saints bear record to the world. They drink in remembrance of the blood of the new covenant, the blood shed by Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, which is shed for those who believe. They gain "the remission of their sins"—through baptism and through the renewal of the baptismal covenant as they partake worthily of the sacrament. And again, as often as the saints do these things, they show the Lord's death till he come. Their acts are the fulfilling of the commandment and a witness before the Father that they will keep the commandments of his Son. The same covenant of obedience that appertains to the broken bread is made anew with the wine, and the glorious promise comes again to the saints—for only those who have repented and been baptized are involved—that they shall always have his Spirit to be with them.

And as oft as ye do this ordinance, ye will remember me in this hour that I was with you, and drank with you of this cup, even the last time in my ministry. (Mark.)

And I give unto you a commandment, that ye shall observe to do the things which ye have seen me do, and bear record of me even unto the end. (Matthew.)

And I give unto you a commandment that ye shall do these things. And if ye shall always do these things blessed are ye, for ye are built upon my rock. But whoso among you shall do more or less than these are not built upon my rock, but are built upon a sandy foundation; and when the rain descends, and the floods come, and the winds blow, and beat upon them, they shall fall, and the gates of hell are ready open to receive them.

Therefore blessed are ye if ye shall keep my commandments, which the Father hath commanded me that I should give unto you. (Nephi the Disciple.)

The true saints, remembering the Lord Jesus—and to most of us the remembrance is rooted in what we have read in holy writ—are commanded to do all the things he has done and to bear record of him all their days. Those who so act, being thus built upon the gospel rock, are blessed. Those who do either more or less than he has commanded, either with reference to the sacramental ordinance itself or to any other gospel verity, are built on a sandy foundation; their house shall fall, and they shall be welcomed in the gates of hell. And oh, how many there are in so-called Christendom, where the sacramental ordinance itself is concerned, who even now do either more or less than the Lord Jesus ordained. [^8] And oh, how many there are even among the saints who have partaken unworthily of the sacred emblems when the ordinance was administered according to the divine standard. [^9] And so, continuing his instruction to the Nephites, Jesus said:

Behold verily, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you another commandment. . . . And now behold, this is the commandment which I give unto you, that ye shall not suffer any one knowingly to partake of my flesh and blood unworthily, when ye shall minister it;

For whoso eateth and drinketh my flesh and blood unworthily eateth and drinketh damnation to his soul; therefore if ye know that a man is unworthy to eat and drink of my flesh and blood ye shall forbid him.

Nevertheless, ye shall not cast him out from among you, but ye shall minister unto him and shall pray for him unto the Father, in my name; and if it so be that he repenteth and is baptized in my name, then shall ye receive him, and shall minister unto him of my flesh and blood.

But if he repent not he shall not be numbered among my people, that he may not destroy my people, for behold I know my sheep, and they are numbered.

Nevertheless, ye shall not cast him out of your synagogues, or your places of worship, for unto such shall ye continue to minister; for ye know not but what they will return and repent, and come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I shall heal them; and ye shall be the means of bringing salvation unto them.

Therefore, keep these sayings which I have commanded you that ye come not under condemnation; for wo unto him whom the Father condemneth. (Nephi the Disciple.)

Gross perversions of the true meaning and intent of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper crept into the Church itself even in Paul's day. Apparently, patterning their actions too literally after what Jesus and the Twelve did at the Paschal supper, the Corinthian saints were assembling together and banqueting themselves before partaking of the blessed emblems. The apostle directed them to cease this practice, to eat at home, and when they came together, to partake only of the emblems of the body and blood of their Lord. This they must do in worthiness.

Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

But let him examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body. (Paul.)

But to return to the upper room, the concluding sacramental expressions of which we have record were these:

But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom. (Matthew.)

Verily I say unto you, of this ye shall bear record; for I will no more drink of the fruit of the vine with you, until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God. (Mark.)

Were it not for latter-day revelation, no one would know the significance of this promise. In the revelation authorizing the use of water or other liquids besides wine, the word of the Lord Jesus Christ to his prophet, Joseph Smith, was: "It mattereth not what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that ye do it with an eye single to my glory—remembering unto the Father my body which was laid down for you, and my blood which was shed for the remission of your sins." Then, with reference to the use of wine, the direction was: "You shall partake of none except it is made new among you; yea, in this my Father's kingdom which shall be built up on the earth."

With reference to the very words spoken in the upper room, the same voice, heard again in latter days, promised: "Marvel not, for the hour cometh that I will drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the earth." Having so announced, the Lord named others who would be present to partake of the blessed emblems in the great assemblage that is to come together at Adam-ondi-Ahman incident to the return of the Son of Man to rule and reign in righteousness among men on earth. Those named were: Moroni, Elias of the restoration, who is also identified as being Gabriel or Noah; John the Baptist, Elijah, Joseph who was sold into Egypt, Jacob, Isaac, Abraham, Michael who is Adam, and Peter, James, and John. The New Testament promise was that Jesus would partake of the sacrament with the eleven who first ate the bread and drank the wine in the upper room. To all of this the latter-day word adds: "And also with all those whom my Father hath given me out of the world," which is to say that the righteous saints of all ages, from Adam down to that hour, will all assemble with the Lord Jesus in that great congregation just before the great and dreadful day of the Lord arrives.

Such, then, is the law of the sacrament—the system ordained in the infinite wisdom of God to aid in the cleansing and perfecting of human souls, the system that manifests the infinite love of an infinite being to all us finite creatures here below. And so we conclude our consideration of this part of our Lord's ministry with these words, spoken by him when, for a second time, he administered the sacrament to the Nephites:

He that eateth this bread eateth of my body to his soul; and he that drinketh of this wine drinketh of my blood to his soul; and his soul shall never hunger nor thirst, but shall be filled.

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] The words are those of Joseph Smith as recorded in the Lectures on Faith, pp. 64-66. Additional explanations on the point involved are found in Commentary 1:732-33.
[^2] "If thou lovest me thou shalt serve me and keep all my commandments." (D&C 42:29.) For more extended commentary on this point and the other matters forming part of this discourse on the two Comforters, see Commentary 1:734-41.
[^3] "The Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us. A man may receive the Holy Ghost, and it may descend upon him and not tarry with him." (D&C 130:22-23.) "Therefore it is given to abide in you; the record of heaven; the Comforter; the peaceable things of immortal glory; the truth of all things; that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things; that which knoweth all things, and hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment." (Moses 6:61.)
[^4] "Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am." (D&C 93:1.) "Because of the knowledge of this man," the Book of Mormon says with reference to the brother of Jared, "he could not be kept from beholding within the veil; and he saw the finger of Jesus, which, when he saw, he fell with fear; for he knew that it was the finger of the Lord; and he had faith no longer, for he knew, nothing doubting. Wherefore, having this perfect knowledge of God, he could not be kept from within the veil; therefore he saw Jesus; and he did minister unto him." (Ether 3:19-20.)
[^5] "And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may now the truth of all things." (Moro. 10:5.)
[^6] Commentary 1:743; Mormon Doctrine, pp. 492-93; John 20:17; Teachings, pp. 347-48.
[^7] "Pieces of the broken cake with bitter herbs between them, and dipped in the Charoseth, were next handed to each in the company. This, in all probability, was 'the sop' which, in answer to John's inquiry about the betrayer, the Lord 'gave' to Judas. The unleavened bread with bitter herbs constituted, in reality, the beginning of the Paschal Supper, to which the first part of the service had only served as a kind of introduction. But as Judas, after 'having received the sop, went immediately out,' he could not even have partaken of the Paschal lamb, far less of the Lord's Supper." It was the practice in the day of Jesus for this sop to consist of flesh from the Paschal lamb, a piece of unleavened bread, and bitter herbs. 7. Eliza R. Snow, "How Great the Wisdom and the Love," Hymns, no. 68.
[^8] At this point the Paschal supper itself was eaten. 8. Speaking of those who have done "more" than Jesus commanded, Farrar comments: "The 'transubstantiation' and 'sacramental' controversies which have raged for centuries round the Feast of Communion and Christian love are as heart-saddening as they are strange and needless. They would never have arisen if it had been sufficiently observed that it was a characteristic of Christ's teaching to adopt the language of picture and of emotion. But to turn metaphor into fact, poetry into prose, rhetoric into logic, parable into systematic theology, is at once fatal and absurd. It was to warn us against such error that Jesus said so emphatically, 'It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit and they are life.' (John 6:63.)" (Farrar, p. 608, footnote 2.)
[^9] "Immediately afterwards the third cup was drunk, a special blessing having been spoken over it. There cannot be any reasonable doubt that this was the cup which our Lord connected with His own Supper. It is called in Jewish writings, just as by St. Paul, 'the cup of blessing,' partly because it and the first cup required a special 'blessing,' and partly because it followed on the 'grace after meat.'" 9. "See that ye are not baptized unworthily; see that ye partake not of the sacrament of Christ unworthily; but see that ye do all things in worthiness, and do it in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God; and if ye do this, and endure to the end, ye will in nowise be cast out." (Morm. 9:29.)
