Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 98

The Discourse on the Two Comforters

I now send upon you another Comforter, even upon you my friends, that it may abide in your hearts, even the Holy Spirit of promise; which other Comforter is the same that I promised unto my disciples, as is recorded in the testimony of John. This Comforter is the promise which I give unto you of eternal life, even the glory of the celestial kingdom; Which glory is that of the church of the Firstborn, even of God, the holiest of all, through Jesus Christ his Son. (D&C 88:3-5.)

"In My Father's House Are Many Mansions"

(John 13:36-38; 14:1-6; JST John 14:3)

Jesus and the Twelve (minus Judas) have now finished the Paschal feast with its Jewish rituals and performances, except that they must yet drink the fourth cup and sing the remaining part of the Hallel. Both of these they shall do shortly. The holy party has also partaken, for the first time, of the sacramental emblems, in remembrance of spilt blood and broken flesh of the One who then instituted this new ordinance in his earthly kingdom. The appointed hour for the Atoning One to walk the short distance to Gethsemane, there to take upon himself the sins of the world, is almost at hand. There remain only the private sermons, the Intercessory Prayer, and some conversations with Peter (and the others) about the testing to which they also are being subjected. Then the dread hour of infinite agony will begin.

It is out of Peter's solemn assertion—"I will lay down my life for thy sake"—that the private sermons come. We have already heard Jesus tell the apostles that he will soon be glorified and that where he is going they cannot come. It is this that causes Peter to ask, "Lord, whither goest thou?" Jesus replies: "Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou shalt follow me afterwards." To this Peter asks, "Lord, why cannot I follow thee now?" and makes the rash promise that he is prepared to lay down his life for Jesus' sake. "Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake?" Jesus asks, and then says: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, The cock shall not crow, till thou hast denied me thrice." We shall consider the import of this conversation—here placed by John (and Luke) in the upper room—when we come to similar and more extended statements made, as recorded by Matthew and Mark, when Jesus and the apostles were en route to Gethsemane. For the present we refer to them simply as the basis for the discourse and discussion that followed. Jesus then said:

Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me.

Truly, the Son of Man will soon depart; he will be separated from them for a season; they shall follow him at a later time. But why should this worry them? They believe in God and know of his overruling providences in the lives of men; they must continue to believe in Jesus. He is the Son, and it is as easy to believe that the Father has a son as to believe in the Father alone. Indeed, how can God be a father unless he has a son? How can there be a son of God unless God is the father? It is as easy to believe in one as in the other.

In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you.

Jesus endorses the Jewish concept that there are degrees of reward in eternity; that those who enter the kingdoms of glory shall have different abodes; that they will be rewarded as they merit. It is true that in his Father's house there are many kingdoms. Such is implicit in the eternal scheme of things. If mortality is a testing and probationary estate, if men are to be judged according to the deeds done in the flesh, and if there are as many degrees of righteousness here on earth as there are men, then a just God could not do other than have an infinite number of kingdoms and rewards in the realms ahead. "If it were not so, I would have told you." That is: All men should by instinct know there are different degrees of glory and many levels of reward in the hereafter. If such were not the case, Jesus would have so stated. And he was going to prepare a place in the highest heaven for the faithful saints.

And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also.

Theirs is to be a place in the presence of their Lord; the disciple shall be as his Master, and the servant as his Lord; they shall be even as he is, and he is even as the Father. Though it would not be their privilege to follow him immediately, yet he gave them this assurance: "And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know." Thomas responded: "Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way?" This brought forth from Jesus one of the greatest divine proclamations of his entire ministry:

I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.

Salvation is in Christ! The plan of salvation is the gospel of God; it is the system ordained by the Father to enable his spirit children, Christ included, to advance and progress and become like him. But Christ is the Redeemer of men, the Savior of the world, the one by whom all men are raised in immortality, and by whom those who believe and obey may gain eternal life. He has abolished death, as the scriptures say, and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel. He is the Resurrection and the Life. He is the way: he charts the course; he invites all men to follow him. He is the truth, the embodiment and personification of this holy attribute: his word is truth, and truth alone saves. He is the life: life exists because of him; he is the Creator. No man cometh unto the Father but by him. He redeemeth from the fall; he raiseth men from death; he maketh eternal life possible. He is our Advocate with the Father: without him we are nothing; because of him we can attain all things. Truly, salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through his holy name, and in no other way.

"He That Hath Seen Me Hath Seen the Father"

(John 14:7-14)

God was in Christ manifesting himself to the world. The Great God, the Almighty Father, the Creator, Upholder, and Preserver of all things, revealed himself to all men by sending his Son who is in the express image of his Father's person. Both holy beings now have tangible bodies of flesh and bones; both eat and digest food; both occupy space, travel from place to place, and possess the fulness of all good things. Both are exalted and perfected Men, Holy Men, Men in whose image mortals are made. While he was on earth, Jesus was in the image and likeness of the Father. He came to reveal the Father. By knowing the Son men thereby knew the Father.

If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also: and from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him.

But Philip, not satisfied to see Christ only, and in that way to envision who and what the Father is, asked: "Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us." 'Let us see him as well as his Prototype and it will suffice us.' But Jesus said:

Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father?

"'Philip, after all your association with me, have you not come to know that I am the Son of God, and that the Father is manifesting himself to the world through me? Surely by this time you should know that he who hath seen me hath seen the Father, as it were, for I am so fully and completely like him. Why, then, do you ask for that which you are not now ready to receive, by saying, Show us the Father also?'" (Commentary 1:731.)

Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me for the very works' sake.

The Father and the Son dwell in each other in that they both think the same thoughts, say the same words, and do the same acts. The words that fall from the lips of the Son, and the works that his arm performs, are the very words the Father would speak and the identical works the Father would perform, if he personally were present. They are thus one and dwell in each other. If men cannot believe and know that Christ is in the Father, and the Father in him, then they should believe in Christ because of his works, works that none but God could do.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto my Father.

This night Jesus designs to reveal to his disciples some of the mysteries of his kingdom, some of the deep and hidden doctrines, some things that can be understood only by the power of the Spirit. His answer to Peter about the many mansions, his explanation to Philip about the indwelling of the Father and the Son in each other, and now this pronouncement that believing disciples will do not only the same works he has done, but even greater works "because" he went unto the Father—all of these are numbered with the mysteries of the kingdom.

That the disciples by faith—for by faith all things are possible and nothing is too hard for the Lord—can do among men what their Master had done is self-evident. The same measure of faith always has borne and always will bear the same fruit. But what of the greater works? Are the disciples to surpass the mighty miracles of their Lord? Yes—in eternity! No ministry shall ever equal his on earth, but that ministry was only a small foretaste of the miraculous powers to be wielded by all the faithful in the oncoming ages yet to be. "The greater works which those that believed on his name were to do were to be done in eternity, where he was going and where they should behold his glory." [^1]

And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.

Ask in my name! Ask and ye shall receive; ask in faith and receive an answer; but ask in the name of Christ. Pray unto the Father; pray in faith and God will grant the petition; but pray in the name of Christ. His is the name that the saints take upon them in the waters of baptism; his is the name by which the faithful are called; in his name are miracles wrought, prophecies made, and salvation gained. "Thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son." (Moses 5:8.) "And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you." (3 Ne. 18:20.)

I will do it! Prayers are made to the Father; answers come from the Son, who is the Mediator between God and man. All things are committed into his hands, and God the Father "hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name." (Philip. 2:9-11.)

Jesus Speaks of the Two Comforters

(John 14:15-16)

"If ye love me, keep my commandments."

Through this whole night—a night of blessing and of agony—the Blessed Lord, whose coming agony will redeem his brethren, repeatedly centers the hearts of his disciples on the rock foundation of love. Nowhere is this more evident than in the forthcoming words about the two Comforters. The disciples must love one another or they are not his; his Father so loved the world that he sent his Only Begotten Son to work out, this night, the infinite and eternal atoning sacrifice; he himself came to do the will of the Father because of his infinite love for mankind; and the disciples must love him and signify the same by obedience and service. Nay, more: unless they kept his commandments and do his will and serve their fellowmen, they do not in fact love him to the degree and in the way they must to gain an everlasting inheritance with him in that kingdom which he is about to prepare. [^2]

And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.

As long as Jesus has been with them, he has been their Comforter; he has spoken peace to their souls; those who were heavy laden with the sorrows and sufferings and struggles of the world came to him and found rest for their souls. He comforted the widow and was a father to the fatherless. His words lifted believing souls to new heights of serenity and peace. Now he is leaving, but he will send another Comforter—the Holy Ghost—to abide with the faithful forever.

For all men except those few who heard his voice in mortality, the Holy Ghost is the first Comforter. This member of the Godhead speaks peace to the souls of the righteous in all ages. The Holy Ghost "is the gift of God unto those who diligently seek him, as well in times of old as the time that he should manifest himself unto the children of men" (1 Ne. 10:17), and, as well also, in times to come. He is the Spirit of truth—as also is Christ—but the world cannot receive the Holy Ghost because the Spirit will not dwell in unclean tabernacles.

Further, the Spirit cannot be seen by mortal eyes. "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth," as Jesus said to Nicodemus, "so is every one that is born of the Spirit." (John 3:8.) But the disciples know the Spirit; they hear the whisperings of the still small voice; they feel the sanctifying influence he sends forth; they receive the revelations of truth that he broadcasts out into all immensity—all because he dwells in them. They have gift of the Holy Ghost, which is the right to the constant companionship of that member of the Godhead based on faithfulness. [^3]

I will not leave you comfortless: I will come unto you.

For the faithful saints who receive the Holy Ghost, which is the first Comforter, there is more—much, much more—ahead. The Lord Jesus himself will come to them. Though he has ascended to his Father, yet will he return to show himself to each individual who abides the law which enables men to rend the heavens and see the visions of eternity.

Yet a little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me: because I live, ye shall live also.

The disciples shall see their resurrected Lord, and because he lives—has both immortality and eternal life—so shall they also inherit that fulness of life which is both immortality and eternal life.

At that day ye shall know I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you. He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him.

Even as the Father and the Son dwell in each other, so do the faithful saints, by the power of the Holy Ghost, dwell in both the Father and the Son, and so also do the Gods of heaven dwell in men. It is figurative, symbolic language. All those who think the same thoughts, speak the same words, and do the same deeds dwell in each other; and all who are as Christ is shall surely, while dwelling as mortals, see his face and converse with him as one friend speaketh with another. [^4]

Such wondrous doctrine, comprehensible only to those whose souls are afire with the enlightening power of the Spirit, was too much for the disciples at that point in time. Judas Thaddeus, otherwise known as Lebbeus, asked: "Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?" Jesus replied:

If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

With reference to these words our revelations recite: "The appearing of the Father and the Son, in that verse, is a personal appearance; and the idea that the father and the Son dwell in a man's heart is an old sectarian notion, and is false." (D&C 130:3.)

And with reference to the whole concept of the Second Comforter, we have these words of divine and eternal truth given to us by the Prophet Joseph Smith: "There are two Comforters spoken of. One is the Holy Ghost, the same as given on the day of Pentecost, and that all saints receive after faith, repentance, and baptism. This first Comforter or Holy Ghost has no other effect than pure intelligence. . . .

"After a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins, and is baptized for the remission of his sins and receives the Holy Ghost (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him, Son, thou shalt be exalted. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and his election made sure, then it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter, which the Lord hath promised the Saints, as is recorded in the testimony of St. John. . . .

"Now what is this other Comforter. It is no more nor less than the Lord Jesus Christ Himself; and this is the sum and substance of the whole matter; that when any man obtains this last Comforter, he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him, and the visions of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face, and he may have a perfect knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; and this is the state and place the ancient Saints arrived at when they had such glorious visions—Isaiah, Ezekiel, John upon the Isle of Patmos, St. Paul in the three heavens, and all the saints who held communion with the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn." (Teachings, pp. 149-51.)

He that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings: and the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's which sent me. These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you.

But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.

Though Thaddeus and the others could not then envision in full the import of the divine words, yet there would be a day, after Pentecost, when, as the fire of the Spirit burned in their souls, they would know for themselves of the marvels here taught. The Holy Spirit of God would bring the words back into their minds and would impress upon their hearts and souls the true meanings and significance of the language used. The Holy Ghost would teach them all things. [^5]

"My Father Is Greater than I"

(John 14:27-31; JST John 14:29-31; Matthew 26:30; Mark 14:26; JS, Mark 14:26-27; Luke 22:39)

Their time together in the upper room—a sacred, blessed period, of infinite worth to them and to us—is drawing to its close. The deep doctrine of the Second Comforter has saluted their ears, and some fifty days hence, after Pentecost, it will begin to burn in their hearts. Now Jesus says:

Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.

Gospel peace! The peace possessed by the saints! What a marvelous blessing this is! "He who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come." (D&C 59:23.) Christ is the Prince of Peace, the revealer and dispenser of that inner serenity known only to those who have received the gift of the Holy Ghost. Peace is one of the gifts of the Spirit. Thus, Jesus speaks not of the worldly salutation, "Peace be with you," which was commonly spoken among the Jews, but of that inner serenity reserved for those who have entered into the rest of the Lord and who know of the truth and divinity of the Lord's earthly kingdom.

Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father is greater than I.

If all faithful saints envisioned the glories that lie ahead for them, they would rejoice at the prospects of going where God and Christ and holy beings are. And as to Jesus himself, he is going to eternal glory with his Father who—and again we catch a glimpse of one of the mysteries of the kingdom—is greater than he is.

Jesus' Father is greater than he! "Are they not one? Do they not both possess all power, all wisdom, all knowledge, all truth? Have they not both gained all godly attributes in their fulness and perfection? Verily, yes, for the revelations so announce and the Prophet so taught. And yet our Lord's Father is greater than he, greater in kingdoms and dominions, greater in principalities and exaltations. One does and shall rule over the other everlastingly. Though Jesus is himself God, he is also the Son of God, and as such the Father is his God as he is ours. 'I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God,' he is soon to say.

"Joseph Smith, with inspired insight, tells how Jesus is God's heir; how he receives and possesses all that the Father hath, and is therefore (as Paul said) 'equal with God' and yet at the same time is subject to and less than the Father. These are his words: 'What did Jesus do? Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation, and I will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself. So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all his children.'" [^6]

And now I have told you before it come to pass, that, when it is come to pass, ye might believe. Hereafter I will not talk much with you; for the prince of darkness, who is of this world, cometh, but hath no power over me, but he hath power over you. And I tell you these things, that ye may know that I love the Father; and as the Father gave me commandment, even so do I. Arise, let us go hence.

Jesus has overcome the world. The prince of darkness, who opposes the Prince of peace and of light, has no power over him. The disciples, however, are still subject to the world and all its evils and darkness. But Jesus—blessed be his name—is fulfilling the Father's will. He is prepared to go to Gethsemane. And so, having first "sung a hymn," undoubtedly the latter part of the Hallel, as Mark says, the disciples "were grieved, and wept over him." Then they arose from the Paschal table to go forth to "the mount of Olives."

It will help us better to gain for ourselves a feeling of what then was in the hearts of the Twelve if we ponder some of the words of the hymn then sung. Included, as we suppose, for they were following the Passover format, were these Davidic expressions, which must have enveloped the disciples like a gloomy mist:

I love the Lord, because he hath heard my voice and my supplications. . . .

The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me: I found trouble and sorrow. Then called I upon the name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul. . . .

What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take of the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. . . .

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints. . . .

The Lord is on my side; I will not fear: what can man do unto me? . . .

Thou hast thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the Lord helped me. The Lord is my strength and song, and is become my salvation. . . .

The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner. This is the Lord's doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.

Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord. . . .

God is the Lord. . . .

Thou art my God, and I will praise thee: thou art my God, I will exalt thee. O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever. (Psalms 116-118.)

With these thoughts and upon this tone the Paschal feast ends. Jesus will now speak a few more words to the chosen Twelve and then go to Gethsemane and the cross.

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] The disciple whom Jesus loved, called by us John the Beloved, and who alone has preserved for us Jesus' words about love as spoken on this Passover day, is also the author of these transcendentally beautiful words.
[^2] "The Discourse of Christ recorded in St. John 16, and His prayer [recorded in John 17], were certainly uttered after they had risen from the Supper, and before they crossed the brook Kidron [en route to Gethsemane]. In all probability they were, however, spoken before the Saviour left the house. We can scarcely imagine such a Discourse, and still less such a Prayer, to have been uttered while traversing the narrow streets of Jerusalem on the way to Kidron." (Edersheim 2:513. Italics added.)
[^3] James 2:8.
[^4] Similar divine affirmations have been made by the same Lord to his latter-day disciples. "As I said unto mine apostles, even so I say unto you, for you are mine apostles, even God's high priests; ye are they whom my Father hath given me; ye are my friend; . . . for from henceforth I shall call you friends." (D&C 84:63, 77.) Also: "Verily, I say unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., or in other words, I will call you friends, for you are my friends, and ye shall have an inheritance with me-I called you servants for the world's sake, and ye are their servants for my sake." (D&C 93:45-46.)
[^5] "And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may now the truth of all things." (Moro. 10:5.)
[^6] Commentary 1:743; Mormon Doctrine, pp. 492-93; John 20:17; Teachings, pp. 347-48.
