Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 99

The Discourse on the Law of Love

Beloved, let us love one another; for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is love. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. No man hath seen God at any time, except them who believe. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us. . . . And we have known and believed the love that God hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment; because as he is, so are we in this world. There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear; because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in love. We love him, because he first loved us. If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar; for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? And this commandment have we from him, That he who loveth God love his brother also. (JST 1 Jn. 4:7-21.) [^1]

"I Am the Vine, Ye Are the Branches"

(John 15:1-8)

Jesus and eleven of the Twelve—the holy Party—have now finished the Paschal meal; the last legal performances of the law, given by Jehovah to Moses, have been performed by Him who gave the law; new emblems, symbolical of the sacrifice of God's Son, have been introduced into the New Order; the washing of feet has been attended to; the disciples have risen from their couches; and the musical chanting of the Hallel is over. But "before they started for their moonlight walk to the Garden of Gethsemane, perhaps while yet they stood around their Lord when the Hallel was over, He once more spoke to them." (Farrar, p. 116.) [^2]

I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman.

Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you.

The allegory of the vine, the husbandman, and the branches! "A grander analogy is not to be found in the world's literature. Those ordained servants of the Lord were as helpless and useless without Him as is a bough severed from the tree. As the branch is made fruitful only by virtue of the nourishing sap it receives from the rooted trunk, and if cut away or broken off withers, dries, and becomes utterly worthless except as fuel for the burning, so those men, though ordained to the Holy Apostleship, would find themselves strong and fruitful in good works, only as they remained in steadfast communion with the Lord. Without Christ what were they, but unschooled Galileans, some of them fishermen, one a publican, the rest of undistinguished attainments, and all of them weak mortals? As branches of the Vine they were at that hour clean and healthful, through the instructions and authoritative ordinances with which they had been blessed, and by the reverent obedience they had manifested." (Talmage, pp. 604-5.)

Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me.

I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing.

If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned.

"By their fruits ye shall know them." (Matt. 7:20.) And whatever else—as a foul fungus, or some spongy excrescence, or other parasitic or morbid growth—whatever else may grow on a dead vine, it is not the fruit of eternal life. Only those living branches, into whose vascular tissues flow revelation from the Vine and heavenly power from on high—only such living branches can bear fruit unto eternal life. And any man, be he the highest apostolic minister or the lowest branch in the living Church—any man who does not abide in Christ shall wither away and be cast into eternal fire in the dread day of burning that is to be.

If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.

There are no limits to the power of faith. By it the worlds were made; by it all things are; by it the heavens and the earth shall pass away. Faith is the supreme, ruling power in the universe; it is the power of God; it is infinite and eternal. If the earth itself, the universe, the sidereal heavens—all things—were created and are preserved and upheld by faith, who is to say that the little things of this life shall not be governed by that same infinite power? There is nothing the Twelve shall seek—in faith—that shall not be granted! "But no man is possessor of all things except he be purified and cleansed from all sin. And if ye are purified and cleansed from all sin, ye shall ask whatsoever you will in the name of Jesus and it shall be done. But know this, it shall be given you what you shall ask." (D&C 50:28-30.)

Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples.

God is glorified, as we have seen, when his children gain exaltation, with resultant kingdoms of their own, for all such are added to his dominions.

Such, then, is the grandest allegory of them all. How better could Jesus have taught that he and his prophets are one; that the life-giving power comes from the Vine; but that the branches must bear the fruit? How better could he have shown that true ministers must receive their power from him? Or that "'every apostle, prophet, and legal administrator whom I have commissioned to offer the fruit of eternal life to men shall be cut off by my Father unless he carries forward my work; and every minister who is faithful in my service shall be pruned of dead foliage (divested of worldly distractions) and given power to bring forth more fruit.'" (Commentary 1:745.)

Truly—and how often have we said it—never man spake as this Man!

"The Royal Law: Love Thy Neighbor" [^3]

(John 15:9-17)

"Which is greater and more to be desired, to love God or be loved by him? In his providences the one grows out of the other, for Deity reciprocates in full and abundant measure the love his children confer upon him. And Jesus here speaks, not of the divine decree that men should love God, but of the special and preferential love bestowed by the Lord upon those who love and serve him. Such are singled out by Deity to receive special grace and goodness because they are in process of becoming one with him." (Commentary 1:747.)

As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my love. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love.

Love is the child of obedience, and the greater the obedience the greater the love. As Jesus follows the Father, so must we follow the Son; as the Father loves the Son, so the Son loves us. As the Father's love for the Son comes because of the obedience of the Son, so Jesus' love for us comes because we keep his commandments.

These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full.

As a father has joy and rejoicing in his righteous children, so Jesus finds—and here expresses—his joy in the obedient Twelve. To them he holds out the hope that they may have a fulness of joy, for "Men are, that they might have joy" (2 Ne. 2:25), and both he and his Father, being no respecters of persons, desire to reward all men with the choicest blessings of time and eternity. To others of his apostolic witnesses, three of the Twelve on the American continent, he will soon give an even greater promise. "Ye have desired that ye might bring the souls of men unto me, while the earth shall stand," he will say. "And for this cause ye shall have fulness of joy; and ye shall sit down in the kingdom of my Father; yea, your joy shall be full, even as the Father hath given me fulness of joy; and ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one." (3 Ne. 28:9-10.) This is a promise of exaltation, and to gain exaltation is to have a fulness of joy.

This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you. Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.

Love is a commandment! Thou shalt love the Lord thy God; thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself; thou shalt love thy wife and family; thou shalt love one another. Christ is the Prototype; as he loved us, so we must love one another. And he will soon lay down his life in the atonement of love, the supreme manifestation of his love for his brethren.

Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth I call you not servants, for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you.

As Abraham was the Friend of God, so the Twelve are friends of Jesus; and as it was with those worthies, so shall it be with all who are on intimate terms with their Maker. Friends hold each other in high regard and associate on terms of intimacy and love. Their aims and goals are similar; they walk arm in arm; and, if need be, they are prepared to die for each other. [^4]

Friends confide in each other, and Jesus has told his intimates among the Twelve all things they are able to understand. Peter, James, and John are the only ones, for instance, who know what transpired on the Mount of Transfiguration, though the eternal verities there revealed will in due course be given to all of them. And shortly, this very night, Jesus will say to them that there are many things they cannot yet bear that will be manifest to them when they receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you.

These things I command you, that ye love one another.

Jesus, the Lord, chooses his own friends; he calls his own servants; he names whom he will to stand as his agents. True ministers do not call themselves to apostolic positions, nor to serve as elders or in any ministerial capacity. Jesus came in his Father's name, bearing his Father's power and authority, doing and saying what his Father commanded. The servants of the Son act similarly. They are called by Christ; he endows them with power from on high; they go forth, duly commissioned, in his name; and they do and say what he commands. They are ordained; they hold Aaronic or Melchizedek authority; they have the gift of the Holy Ghost so they can receive direction from their Lord and Master and Friend.

All other would-be servants are false ministers, false apostles, false prophets. Such do not preach the fulness of the everlasting gospel in all its glory, beauty, and perfection; such cannot perform the ordinances of salvation so they are binding on earth and in heaven. Whatever they may do, so be it; whatever ethical principles they may teach, let them stand; whatever improvements their exhortations may make in the lives of ungodly men, it is all to the good—but theirs can never be more than a preparatory work. Only those called of God, by his own voice, or by angelic ministrations, or by the gift of the Holy Ghost—such only are true apostles and true ministers. Theirs only is the prerogative to seal men up unto eternal life. They are the ones whose fruit will endure. They are the ones who shall ask the Father in the name of Christ for whatsoever they will, and it shall be given them. They are the ones who love one another, thereby testifying before the world that they are true disciples.

God's Enemies Hate Christ and His Work

(John 15:18-27; 16:1-4)

According to the eternal law of opposites—the law recites: "It must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things" (2 Ne. 2:11)—according to this law, if there is love, there must be hate. Neither of these attributes can exist without the other. Unless there is darkness, there can be no light; unless there is vice, there can be no virtue; unless there is hate, there can be no love. Love is of God and is manifest in the lives of the friends of God; hate is of the world and is manifest in the lives of the enemies of God. And so, having spoken of love and the blessings that flow therefrom, the Lord of love now speaks of hate and the cursings that attend this evil-given attribute.

If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.

The world—what is it? It is the state of carnality and evil that dwells in the hearts of those who live on the earth who have become, since the fall of Adam, "carnal, sensual, and devilish, by nature." (Alma 42:10.) It is the sum total of the social conditions created by carnal men, on a fallen earth, which conditions will continue to prevail until "the end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked, which is the end of the world." (JS-H 1:4.) Of course the world loves its own and hates the saints. How could it be otherwise? The worldly forces, the forces of worldliness, are but the armies of Lucifer, who first fought against God in preexistence and who now continue, here on earth, that primeval war. "Know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God?" James asks. His answer! "Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God." (James 4:4.)

Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also.

As with the Master, so with his servants. If persecution is the heritage of the Son of God, will not those who have taken upon them the name of Christ, those who are thus members of his family, will not they also be persecuted? If Christ be scourged, will not his servants feel the biting lash? If Christ be crucified, what if his disciples lay down their lives for the testimony of Jesus and the joy reserved for the saints? And the few among the many who would give heed to the words of Jesus, should he personally minister among them—such are the ones who will receive his servants and give heed to their words.

But all these things will they do unto you for my name's sake, because they know not him that sent me.

Everywhere—on every hand, among all sects, parties, and denominations; everywhere—among every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people; everywhere—from one end of the earth to the other—everywhere those who hate and persecute the saints do it because they reject Christ. No matter that they may give lip service to his holy name; no matter that they think he is their God; no matter that they follow what they falsely suppose is his plan of salvation—they in fact are rejecting the living Christ when they reject and persecute those whom he hath called and sent forth to preach his word. And all of this is because, regardless of what false assumptions they may make as to their own forms of worship, they know not the One who sent Christ into the world.

If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloke for their sin.

He that hateth me hateth my Father also. If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both me and my Father.

But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law, They hated me without a cause.

How awful and fearful it is to reject light and truth! "For of him unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation." Men "become transgressors," when otherwise they would have been blameless, because they receive added light and knowledge from on high and do not walk in its blazing glory. (D&C 82:3-4.) The Son of God walks among men, speaks as never man spake, and performs miracles that none else have ever done. Those who reject him thereby become sinners; they can no longer cloak their sins, and they are damned for choosing to walk in darkness at noonday. In Christ they have seen and heard both him and his Father. They have hated both of them without a cause.

But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me: And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the beginning.

However much the world may hate and deny and reject both the Father and the Son; however much carnality may reign in the hearts of the enemies of God; however much the saints may be persecuted and slain—yet Jesus will send the Comforter, from the Father, to the faithful. Then this testator will testify to those whose hearts are contrite; he will proclaim to them the divinity of God's Son and bear record of the saving truths that are in Christ. The faithful then shall raise their voices in the congregations of the wicked, for all who receive the Holy Ghost become living witnesses of the truth and divinity of the Lord's person and work.

These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.

And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor me. But these things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not unto you at the beginning, because I was with you.

Saul of Tarsus thought he did God's service when, assenting to the death of Stephen, he held the cloaks of those who hurled the stones. "Indeed, according to Jewish Law, 'a zealot' might have slain without formal trial those caught in flagrant rebellion against God—or in what might be regarded as such, and the Synagogue would have deemed the deed as meritorious as that of Phinehas." (Edersheim 2:524.)

And in this connection, well might it be said: "Sincerity has almost nothing to do with gaining salvation. Men who slay the saints can be just as sincere as those who thus become martyrs. Men can believe so devoutly in falsehood that they will even lay down their own lives for it. What does it matter that those who killed the prophets, either ancient or modern, thought they did God service? The thing that counts is truth, pure God-given truth." (Commentary 1:752.)

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 42:17.
[^2] "A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; that is, those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning [to recognize] the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus." (Teachings, p. 151.)
[^3] This passage names with particularity some of the marvels to be revealed in the dispensation of the fulness of times.
[^4] In this connection, the Lord Jesus has promised "all that my Father hath" to all of his brethren who keep the terms and conditions of the covenant of the Holy Priesthood. (D&C 84:33-44.)
