Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 100

The Discourse on the Holy Ghost

And the twelve did teach the multitude; and behold, they did cause that the multitude should kneel down upon the face of the earth, and should pray unto the Father in the name of Jesus. And the disciples did pray unto the Father also in the name of Jesus. . . . And they did pray for that which they most desired; and they desired that the Holy Ghost should be given unto them. And when they had thus prayed they went down unto the water's edge, and the multitude followed them. And it came to pass that Nephi went down into the water and was baptized. And he came up out of the water and began to baptize. And he baptized all those whom Jesus had chosen. And it came to pass when they were all baptized and had come up out of the water, the Holy Ghost did fall upon them, and they were filled with the Holy Ghost and with fire. (3 Ne. 19:6-13.)

"The Comforter Knoweth All Things" [^1]

(John 16:5-15)

There is a certain fitness of things—or, better, a divine, controlling providence—about what lies ahead for Jesus. Our Blessed Lord has climbed one majestic peak after another; his mortal life is coming not simply to an end, but to an awesome climax of triumph and glory. His miracles, save only the crowning miracle of the atonement and the resurrection, are part of the tapestry of the past. His teachings have been shown forth upon one mountain crest after another. After such sermons as the one on the Second Comforter and on love, what is there left to say? There remains only—and this is the divine fitness of which we speak—the discourse on the Holy Ghost, a few remaining words about his coming death and resurrection, the great Intercessory Prayer with its assurance of eternal life for the faithful, and then Gethsemane, Calvary, an open tomb, a resurrected ministry, and the ascension on Olivet.

After all that he has said, through three and a half years of ministerial service, what can he now do better than to speak of the gift of the Holy Ghost and of the atonement which assures the saints that they may receive that divine and heavenly gift? Eternal life itself is the greatest of all the gifts of God, for it consists of receiving, inheriting, and possessing the same glorious exaltation enjoyed by the Father himself. It is to be like God, to be one with the Father and the Son. But eternal life is gained only in eternity.

The greatest gift known to and enjoyed by mortals is the gift of the Holy Ghost, which is the right to the constant companionship of that member of the Godhead based on righteousness. This gift, given by the laying on of hands, is enjoyed by those who love God with all their hearts. Into their lives flow revelations of eternal truth; they see the visions of eternity and entertain the angels of heaven; they are in tune with the Infinite, as were their kindred spirits of old who held apostolic offices and served in the majesty of their prophetic callings. The Holy Ghost is a revelator. And into their lives comes the sanctifying and cleansing power that perfects the lives of men, so they become fit friends and companions of Gods and angels. The Holy Ghost is a sanctifier. And so, what is more natural at this point—with all that has been said and all that has been done during the greatest ministry ever performed—what is more natural than to hear Jesus say:

But now I go my way to him that sent me; and none of you asketh me, Whither goest thou? But because I have said these things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart.

Their Lord and Friend is about to return to his Father. Sorrow fills their hearts; the prospects of his death and their separation from him are not pleasant. He chides them gently: "'Instead of being sorrowful and silent because I said I am going to the Father, why don't you ask me more about it and learn the great gospel truths which are involved.'" (Commentary 1:753.)

Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you.

'Though I am the Son of God and have been with you this long time—teaching, admonishing, guiding, giving to you all that you have been able to receive—yet there is something even more wondrous which awaits you. I will send the Comforter. As long as I have been with you, this right to the constant companionship of the Holy Spirit of God has not been yours. My word has sufficed on all matters. Now I shall work out the atoning sacrifice—for which purpose I came into the world—and you shall receive, from the Holy Ghost, the cleansing power that will prepare your souls for celestial rest.'

And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment:

Of sin, because they believe not on me;

Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more;

Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.

"'When you receive the companionship of the Spirit, so that you speak forth what he reveals to you, then your teachings will convict the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. The world will be convicted of sin for rejecting me, for not believing your Spirit-inspired testimony that I am the Son of God through whom salvation comes. They will be convicted for rejecting your testimony of my righteousness—for supposing I am a blasphemer, a deceiver, and an imposter—when in fact I have gone to my Father, a thing I could not do unless my works were true and righteous altogether. They will be convicted of false judgment for rejecting your testimony against the religions of the day, and for choosing instead to follow Satan, the prince of this world, who himself, with all his religious philosophies, will be judged and found wanting.'" (Commentary 1:754.)

I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.

Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that he shall speak; and he will shew you things to come.

Though they had been with him during his whole ministry; though they had heard unnumbered sermons and seen more healing miracles than any mortals from the beginning; though they knew more than all the scribes and Pharisees combined, ten thousand times over—yet it was but the beginning. After the receipt of the gift of the Holy Ghost, then their days of learning would really begin.

"He will guide you into all truth." First comes a testimony of the truth and divinity of the Lord's earthly work, of the fact that he gives to men the power to keep his commandments and gain eternal life; then the doctrines of salvation are revealed in plainness; then all things pertaining to God and man and the universe will be shown forth. Whence came God? How was creation possible? What of man, and all forms of life upon the earth, to say nothing of the sidereal heavens and the endless creations of the Endless One? How can we learn redemption's mystery? Or how the resurrection is brought to pass? Or how the great God in heaven speaks to his lowly creatures on earth by the power of his Spirit? The questions are endless; the answers are eternal; and the power of the Holy Ghost, which makes them manifest, is infinite.

As Jesus said a few moments before, the world cannot receive the Comforter; this blessed gift is reserved for the saints, and he will abide in the faithful forever. True it is that honest truth seekers come to know of the truth and divinity of the Lord's work by the power of the Holy Ghost: they receive a flash of revelation telling them that Jesus is the Lord, that Joseph Smith is his prophet, that the Book of Mormon is the mind and will and voice of the Lord, that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only true and living Church upon the face of the whole earth. They gain a testimony before baptism. But it is only after they pledge their all in the cause of Christ that they receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, which is the heavenly endowment of which Jesus spoke. Then they receive a fulfillment of the promise: "By the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things." (Moro. 10:5.) Then they receive "the spirit of revelation," and the Lord tells them in their heart and in their mind whatsoever he will. (D&C 8:1-3.) [^2]

"He shall not speak of himself." Rather, he is Christ's minister; his commission is to bear record of the Father and the Son; he is appointed to reveal the truths of eternity to receptive souls. Jesus is going away, and the Holy Ghost is coming to act in the place and stead of the Lord, to say what Jesus wants said, to say what Jesus would say if he were personally present. The Holy Ghost speaks what he has heard from the Father and the Son for he is one with them and knows all things. And thus it is that the Lord's mortal agents have this promise: "And as ye shall lift up your voices by the Comforter, ye shall speak and prophesy as seemeth me good; For, behold, the Comforter knoweth all things, and beareth record of the Father and the Son." (D&C 42:16-17.)

"He will shew you things to come." He is a revelator. That which is past, that which is present, that which is future—all are known to him. "God shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit, yea, by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost"—is the voice of the Lord to his saints—knowledge "that has not been revealed since the world was until now." (D&C 121:26-32.) [^3] To all those who serve him in righteousness and in truth, the Lord Jesus says:

To them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of old, and for ages to come, will I make known unto them the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom.

Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations.

And their wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven; and before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall come to naught.

For by my Spirit will I enlighten them, and by my power will I make known unto them the secrets of my will—yea, even those things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor yet entered into the heart of man. (D&C 76:1-10.)

Knowing, as we do, that the New Testament accounts are wont to digest the words of Jesus and to set forth only selected gems from the rich treasure house of his sayings, we may not be far off in suggesting that these very words—those afore quoted—or their equivalent may have been spoken to the ancient Twelve. But back to John's account of what Jesus then said:

He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you.

In the same sense in which the Father is glorified when his children gain eternal life, thus adding to his kingdoms and dominions, so it is with the Son. He is glorified because souls are saved, because his brethren enlist in his cause, because great numbers sit down with him and with his Father in the kingdom of God to go no more out. And the Holy Ghost receives from Christ that which will lead souls to salvation and gives it to men.

All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you.

It is the Father's kingdom, but he has given it to the Son, and therefore the Son, who is exalted with the Father, can give these things, by the power of the Spirit, to the disciples. [^4]

Jesus Shall Die and Rise Again

(John 16:16-33; JST John 16:23)

His discourse on the Holy Ghost being ended—and how grateful we are for that portion which has been preserved for us—Jesus then, somewhat enigmatically, said:

"A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me, because I go to the Father." To us, in retrospect, the message is clear. He was about to leave them in death; they would not then see him in mortality. But he would rise from the grave, that he might return in glorious immortality to his Father; then, after the resurrection, they would see him again. To the disciples, however, the statement was not immediately clear. They said among themselves: "What is this that he saith unto us, A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me: and, Because I go to the Father?" They also said: "What is this that he saith, A little while? we cannot tell what he saith." It is evident that Jesus gave them time to ponder and wonder so that when he revealed the full import of his saying, it would sink with greater force into their hearts.

Knowing they desired to ask him the meaning of his statement, Jesus said: "Do ye inquire among yourselves of that I said, A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me?" The teaching moment had arrived; their minds were ready to receive the message. Jesus said:

Verily, Verily, I say unto you, That ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.

A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.

And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man taketh from you.

How better could he have stated it? For a brief moment he will go away to visit the spirits in prison. Because they live together in love, they shall weep at his death. But when he appears again—resurrected, glorified, perfected—their joy will be unbounded. Death is but the birth pang of life; as a man child is born through travail, so immortality is the child of death. Sorrow is for a moment; joy is eternal.

And in that day ye shall ask me nothing but it shall be done unto you. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.

Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name; ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.

"In my name." 'Let your prayers now be perfected. As long as I have been with you—teaching, guiding, leading—you have not received the gift of the Holy Ghost; my presence and words sufficed. As long as I have been with you, your petitions have come to me or you have prayed to the Father according to the traditions of your fathers. Now as I leave you, having worked out my own salvation by doing all that my Father sent me to do, now your prayers are always to be in my name. I am the Savior, the Redeemer; salvation comes by me. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no man cometh unto the Father but by me. Ye shall always use my name in your prayers. Pray always to the Father, and to none other; pray always in my name, and in none other. My name is the only name given under heaven whereby salvation cometh. "Ye must pray always, and not faint; . . . ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ, that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee, that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul."' (2 Ne. 32:9.)

These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs: but the time cometh, when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall shew you plainly of the Father.

Proverbs were used to hide the truth, or, at least, they limited the extent of the understanding of the disciples. However, after they received the companionship and enlightenment of the Holy Spirit of God, then—and then only—could they receive the mysteries of the kingdom in plainness. Then—and then only—could Jesus manifest to them the Father.

At that day ye shall ask in my name; and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you: For the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God.

Their prayers in Jesus' name are to begin after his resurrection. Then they will no longer need to rely upon him to pray to the Father for them. The Father loves them and they have direct access to him. Having the Holy Ghost, they then will be able to formulate their own Spirit-guided petitions; then they will feel secure in coming boldly "unto the throne of grace," that they "may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need." (Heb. 4:16.)

I came forth from the Father and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father.

To all this the disciples responded: "Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no proverb. Now are we sure that thou knowest all things, and needest not that any man should ask thee: by this we believe that thou camest forth from God." That is, their faith had been strengthened; they believed Jesus came from God, and they were willing to direct their petitions to the Father, as he directed. To their response, Jesus asked, "Do ye now believe?" It is as though he were saying: 'I am glad you believe, for there are hard times ahead for you.'

Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.

Until, at Pentecost, they receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, they will remain weak and wayward and will be scattered before the persecutor's sword. After Pentecost, when the Holy Spirit will burn in their hearts like fire, they will be gathered again, never to depart from the truth, never to do aught save that which He commands them.

These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world.

Jesus' words bring peace; the preaching of the word to believing souls brings peace; the gospel is a message of peace, of peace on earth and good will to men. Peace is one of the gifts of the Spirit. No matter that there is tribulation in the world; no matter that there is persecution and sorrow and evil; the war cry of the saints is, "Be of good cheer," for Jesus has overcome the world. And because he overcame the world—overcame carnality and evil to the full—he is now ready to be offered. There remains, then, only the Intercessory Prayer, and then he and the disciples will depart for Gethsemane and the atoning ordeal.

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Intercessory Prayer is also called the High-Priestly Prayer because, as commentators have chosen to conclude, it was offered by Jesus in his capacity as the Great High Priest, whatever that may be deemed to mean. Of this prayer, Farrar summarized: "He lifted up His eyes to heaven, and uttered His great High-Priestly prayer; first, that his Father would invest His voluntary humanity with the eternal glory of which He had emptied Himself when He took the form of a servant; next, that He would keep through his own name these His loved ones who had walked with Him in the world; and then that He would sanctify and make perfect not these alone, but all the myriads, all the long generations, which should hereafter believe through their word." (Farrar, p. 617.)
[^2] Two other passages have a significant bearing on the matters here considered. "If you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God." (D&C 14:7.) And: "This is eternal lives-to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent." (D&C 132:24.)
[^3] Any concept that others than Jesus can mediate between man and his Maker is not of God. Paul says: "There is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus." (1 Tim. 2:5.) And the Nephite Jacob testifies: "He shall make intercession for all the children of men; and they that believe in him shall be saved. And because of the intercession for all, all men come unto God; wherefore, they stand in the presence of him to be judged of him according to the truth and holiness which is in him." (2 Ne. 2:9-10.)
[^4] In this connection, the Lord Jesus has promised "all that my Father hath" to all of his brethren who keep the terms and conditions of the covenant of the Holy Priesthood. (D&C 84:33-44.)
