Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 101

The Intercessory Prayer

Listen to him who is the advocate with the Father, who is pleading your cause before him— Saying: Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified; Wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life. (D&C 45:3-5.)

The Prayer for Eternal Life

(John 17:1-5)

If holy writ contains—and Jehovah be praised, it does!—a prayer that truly merits the designation "The Lord's Prayer," that divine litany of praise and communion is in the 17th chapter of the Gospel of the Beloved John. At least therein we have a digest of what Jesus then said to his Father, what he said as he was about to go to Gethsemane to pray again as the burdens of all the sins of all the ages fell upon him. We know that on other occasions—two, at least, of which we have knowledge—he offered greater prayers than the one preserved for us by John; and even on this occasion he may have uttered words too sacred and holy to be recorded for the spiritually untutored to read. What pleases us beyond any measure of expression is that we have what we have. If his sermons—filled with eternal truths—reached their peak in his pronouncements about the Comforter, who would lead the faithful into all truth, surely his recorded prayers attained the summit of summits when he interceded with the Father for the Twelve and for the faithful of all ages in the Intercessory Prayer. [^1]

The only two prayers of which we are aware that were intended to be heard by mortal ears, and that were greater than the Intercessory Prayer, were given among the Nephites. When he prayed alone the night before the calling of the Twelve or in Gethsemane on the night of his agony, the prayers were his own, as they were, no doubt, on many occasions during his prayer-filled life. Of such prayers we cannot speak; no doubt they were like or greater than his expressions made in the presence of the Nephite multitude.

As to the Nephite prayers, the scripture saith: "He himself also knelt upon the earth; and behold he prayed unto the Father, and the things which he prayed cannot be written, and the multitude did bear record who heard him. And after this manner do they bear record: The eye hath never seen, neither hath the ear heard, before, so great and marvelous things as we saw and heard Jesus speak unto the Father; And no tongue can speak, neither can there be written by any man, neither can the hearts of men conceive so great and marvelous things as we both saw and heard Jesus speak; and no one can conceive of the joy which filled our souls at the time we heard him pray for us unto the Father. And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of praying unto the Father, he arose; but so great was the joy of the multitude that they were overcome." (3 Ne. 17:15-18.)

Also: "And it came to pass that he went again a little way off and prayed unto the Father; And tongue cannot speak the words which he prayed, neither can be written by man the words which he prayed. And the multitude did hear and do bear record; and their hearts were open and they did understand in their hearts the words which he prayed. Nevertheless, so great and marvelous were the words which he prayed that they cannot be written, neither can they be uttered by man. And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of praying he came again to the disciples, and said unto them: So great faith have I never seen among all the Jews; wherefore I could not show unto them so great miracles, because of their unbelief. Verily I say unto you, there are none of them that have seen so great things as ye have seen; neither have they heard so great things as ye have heard." (3 Ne. 19:31-36.)

But now, still in the home of John Mark, as we have supposed, Jesus "lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said":

Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee: As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him.

This was Jesus' appointed hour—the hour for which he came into the world; the hour when he would take upon himself the sins of the world. For this purpose was he born; for this purpose had he lived. And because he would accomplish the appointed purpose, he would soon rise in immortal glory—for which glory he now prayed. 'Glorify me, Father, and I will glorify thy name.' Jesus is asking for eternal life. Prayers should fit the needs of the hour; the petitions they contain should be expressive of present needs; but there are two things that may, with propriety, be included in all prayers and on all occasions. They are (1) that God will give us his Spirit here and now in this mortal sphere, and (2) that he will save us in his kingdom in the world to come. Salvation is eternal life, and—we repeat—Jesus now prays that he may have eternal life. He is God's Son, God's Almighty Son. His mortal probation is drawing to its close; he has done all things well, and with him the Father is well pleased. All this he knows, and yet his prayer, for himself, is: 'O Father, grant me eternal life with thee in thy kingdom.' Can there be a more perfect pattern in prayer than this?

Jesus has power over all flesh; all things are subject to him. He is the Creator and Redeemer; he judges all men. He is "the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity." (Mosiah 3:5.) He can give, in his Father's name, eternal life to all who believe and obey; he rewards all men. The Father has placed all things in his hands; salvation and eternal life come because of him. "There is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah." (2 Ne. 2:8.) And since there is no greater gift than eternal life, no greater gift that can be gained by men or Gods, it is the very reward that he himself seeks. Of what does such a high reward consist that it is even the desire of the heart of a God? Jesus continues:

And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.

Eternal life is God's life; it is the name of the kind of life he lives. The Father has eternal life for two reasons: (1) He has all power in heaven and on earth; he is omnipotent, omniscient, and, by the power of his Spirit, omnipresent; all things are subject to him; he possesses what, in summary, is called the fulness of the Father, or the fulness of the glory of the Father. (2) He lives in the family unit; he has eternal increase; he has a continuation of the seeds and of the lives forever and ever.

Eternal life thus comes only to those who know the Father and the Son, and who know them in the sense of doing and experiencing what it is their eternal lot to do and experience. In this sense, no one can know God without possessing the knowledge and exercising the power vested in Deity, without creating as he creates, without fathering spirit children as he fathers his eternal progeny, without doing all that he does. Since eternal life is the name of the kind of life God lives, no man can possess it unless and until he becomes like his Eternal Father and has the same eternal powers that are resident in the Eternal One. Of those so obtaining it is written: "Then shall they be gods, cause they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them." (D&C 132:20.) [^2]

I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.

Speaking of things to come as though they already were, Jesus announces the completion of his work on earth and asks for a return of that glory which was his in preexistence. In his spirit state, he was the Firstborn of the Father, the Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, the Creator of all things, the Lord Jehovah, the God of Israel, the Lord God Almighty. Now that his mortal work is over he seeks—and is assured of—all that once was his. And is not this a pattern of what shall be with all of the noble and great? Will not Adam and Enoch and Abraham and all the rest return to receive that glory which was theirs before the world was? And will not they, as with Jesus after the resurrection, receive all power in heaven and on earth, which is eternal life?

The Prayer for the Apostles

(John 17:6-19; 3 Nephi 19:19-36)

Having laid the foundation by holding out the hope of eternal life to all who come unto him and his Father, Jesus now begins to plead the cause of the faithful ones who have been with him in the days of his ministry.

I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy word.

What a tribute this is! The Twelve are Jesus' special friends! They marched under his banner before the world was; they were foreordained as he himself was; they were noble and great sons of the Father whom he gave to Christ to be his mortal companions. To them Jesus has manifest the Father's doctrine, and they have kept his word.

Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee. For I have given them the words which thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me.

These apostles—all of them—believed in Christ; they knew he came from the Father; they accepted the Father as the source of that pure religion which was theirs. It is neither fitting nor proper to belittle or demean them in any way; their mortal shortcomings, which they freely announced, existed because they had not yet received the Comforter. If ever there were spiritual giants among men, such were these friends of Jesus.

In the comparable prayer, given among the Nephites after the Nephite Twelve had received the Holy Ghost, Jesus said:

Father, I thank thee that thou hast given the Holy Ghost unto these whom I have chosen; and it is because of their belief in me that I have chosen them out of the world.

Father, I pray thee that thou wilt give the Holy Ghost unto all them that shall believe in their words.

Father, thou hast given them the Holy Ghost because they believe in me; and thou seest that they believe in me because thou hearest them, and they pray unto me; and they pray unto me because I am with them.

The Nephite Twelve, the Jewish Twelve—all men—are blessed and favored on the same basis. The Gods of heaven are no respecters of persons, and the gifts of the Spirit are available for the faithful on all continents and in all worlds. Let us return to the Twelve in Jerusalem. Jesus continues his prayer:

I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine. And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them.

Jesus pleads the cause of the Twelve—and all the saints—in the courts above. He is their Mediator, Advocate, and Intercessor. He makes intercession for them, because they have forsaken the world and come unto him; he advocates their cause, for their cause is his cause and they have received his gospel; he performs a divine service of mediation, reconciling fallen man to his Maker, because the fallen ones choose now to associate with those who are not of this world. Jesus prays, thus, not for the world, but for those who have kept his commandments; who have reconciled themselves to God through faith and repentance; who are preparing themselves for an abode with him and his Father. And his interceding petitions are always available for all men, if they will but believe his word and obey his law. [^3]

And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are.

Among the Nephite Hebrews—they having received the gift of the Holy Ghost, which did not come to the Twelve in Jerusalem until Pentecost—among the Nephite Hebrews, Jesus' words of intercession and his prayer for unity were even more express.

Father, I thank thee that thou hast purified those whom I have chosen, because of their faith, and I pray for them, and also for them who shall believe on their words, that they may be purified in me, through faith on their words, even as they are purified in me.

Father, I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou hast given me out of the world, because of their faith, that they may be purified in me, that I may be in them as thou, Father, art in me, that we may be one, that I may be glorified in them.

Jesus here introduces into his Jewish prayer—and in this instance the prayer is also a sermon—the theme of unity; he speaks of the perfect oneness that should prevail among the saints and between them and those divine beings whose they are. We shall hear more on this shortly. For the moment we note only the great need for the Twelve to be one while they are yet in the world, where they are subject to all the tuggings and temptations that might drive a wedge among them, and between them and their Lord, who is departing to his Father. In the Nephite account the Twelve, having received the Holy Ghost, are already purified, and Jesus' petitions are that all who believe may attain a like purity of person and become, like the Twelve, one with him and his Father. With reference to the Jewish Twelve he continues:

While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition; that the scripture might be fulfilled.

Jesus' ministry where the Twelve are concerned has succeeded. He has cared for the spiritual well-being of the souls entrusted to him. Only Judas has been lost; and even he, though a son or follower of Satan, who is perdition, as we have heretofore seen, is probably not a son of perdition in the sense of eternal damnation. Judas, of course, is not with them as these words are spoken. He departed from the upper room some time ago that he might conspire with the chief priests and bargain for the life of his Lord.

And now come I to thee; and these things I speak in the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.

Jesus' words—spoken to the Father, heard by the Twelve—are designed to give them the joy he himself possesses. Those who are "sanctified from all sin," as the scripture saith, "enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory." (Moses 6:59.)

I have given them thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.

Why does the world hate and persecute the saints? With what insight Jesus goes to the heart of the matter! Sinners hate righteous people because they are righteous. Sinners love sinners and hate the obedient. Misery loves company. Lucifer was cast out of heaven and became "miserable forever"; accordingly, he now seeks to make "all mankind" miserable like unto himself. (2 Ne. 2:18.) So also do all those who are of the world; they follow their exemplar, who is the prince of this world, and seek to pull all men down to their low and carnal state.

I pray not that thou shouldst take them out of the world, but that thou shouldst keep them from the evil. They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.

Jesus and his disciples are in the world, but are not of the world. They live in the midst of carnality and evil, but do not partake of the ever-present wickedness. Such is the divine purpose and intent: this life is a probationary estate, and all men must be subject to the lusts and enticements of the flesh; if they shun that which is evil and cleave unto that which is good, they thereby overcome the world and gain salvation.

Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth.

As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have also sent them into the world. And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth.

To be sanctified is to be cleansed from all sin; it is to stand pure and spotless before the Lord; it is to overcome the world and be a fit candidate for a celestial inheritance. The "sanctified" are "them of the celestial world." (D&C 88:2.) The Holy Ghost is a sanctifier. His baptism of fire burns dross and evil out of repentant souls as though by fire. Sanctification comes only to the obedient; it is the truth of heaven—the very word of God, his everlasting gospel—which sanctifies the souls of men. As the Father sent Jesus to proclaim his gospel, so Jesus sent the Twelve to proclaim the same word of truth; and as Jesus sanctified himself by obedience to the words of the Father, so the Twelve may sanctify themselves through the truth Jesus has given them.

The Prayer for the Saints

(John 17:20-26)

Deity, in his infinite wisdom, presents the truths of salvation to his children on earth in the most graphic and plain manner they are able to bear. One of his standard approaches is to hold up his prophets and apostles as examples before their fellows, and then to say to other men: 'Go and be thou as these are.' He has the practice of rewarding the noble and great for their spiritual achievements, and then of saying: 'All men can achieve as these favored ones have done.' "Take, my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord," James says, "for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience." They are your patterns. "Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy." (James 5:10-11.) And nowhere is this divine practice of selecting certain patterns, and inviting all men to be as they are, set forth in a better way than in the Intercessory Prayer. Jesus has extolled and honored the Twelve. He has spoken of their mission and sanctification; now he is going to extend out to every faithful person all that he has given or promised the Twelve.

Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me.

Such were Jesus' words in Jerusalem. In the land Bountiful, among a kindred people, for whom another Twelve had been ordained, he said:

And now Father, I pray unto thee for them, and also for all those who shall believe on their words, that they may believe in me, that I may be in them as thou, Father, art in me, that we may be one. (3 Ne. 19:23.)

Jesus prays for all the saints; he is their Intercessor, Mediator, and Advocate, as well as he is for the Twelve. And all who believe are to be one—one in belief, one in godly attributes, one in good works, one in righteousness. He is as his Father, and he and the Father are one; the Twelve are as he is, and he and the Twelve are one; all the saints are as the Twelve, and they are all one. And Jesus dwells in the Father, because they are one; the Twelve dwell in Jesus, because they are one; and all the saints dwell in the Twelve, because the same perfect unity prevails in their hearts. "The Lord our God is one Lord" (Deut. 6:4), and his command to all his disciples is: "Be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine" (D&C 38:27).

And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one: I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me.

God gave his glory to the Son; Jesus gave that same glory to the Twelve; and the Twelve, in turn, make the same eternal fulness, the same glory, the same eternal life, available to all the saints. All of the Lord's people may thus become one with the Gods of heaven. To Adam the Lord said: "Behold, thou art one in me, a son of God; and thus may all become my sons." (Moses 6:68.) And as with Adam—for he is but the pattern and the type—all who live the perfect law of unity "become the sons of God, even one in me as I am one in the Father, as the Father is one in me, that we may be one." (D&C 35:2.) The unity and oneness of the saints is one of the great evidences of the truth and divinity of the Lord's work on earth.

Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.

The intercessory pleadings continue: 'Father, wilt thou give these my brethren eternal life; may they reign in everlasting glory with me in my kingdom, for they are as I am, and I am as thou art. Thou lovedest me and them before the foundation of the world, and as it was in the beginning so shall it be everlastingly.'

O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee: but I have known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me. And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them.

Again Jesus bears witness that the Twelve know he was sent by his Father; they know he is the Son of God. Jesus has taught them of the Father, and the Father loveth them as he loves his own Son, for they are in the Son and he is in them. And as with the Twelve, so with all the saints, of whom the scripture saith: "Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?" (2 Cor. 13:5.)

And so ends the Intercessory Prayer, or in other words these are the last words of the prayer preserved for us by the Beloved John. And so Jesus and the Twelve leave the Holy City to find a hallowed spot in the Garden of Sorrow and Anguish where the miracle of the atonement will take place.

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Intercessory Prayer is also called the High-Priestly Prayer because, as commentators have chosen to conclude, it was offered by Jesus in his capacity as the Great High Priest, whatever that may be deemed to mean. Of this prayer, Farrar summarized: "He lifted up His eyes to heaven, and uttered His great High-Priestly prayer; first, that his Father would invest His voluntary humanity with the eternal glory of which He had emptied Himself when He took the form of a servant; next, that He would keep through his own name these His loved ones who had walked with Him in the world; and then that He would sanctify and make perfect not these alone, but all the myriads, all the long generations, which should hereafter believe through their word." (Farrar, p. 617.)
[^2] Two other passages have a significant bearing on the matters here considered. "If you keep my commandments and endure to the end you shall have eternal life, which gift is the greatest of all the gifts of God." (D&C 14:7.) And: "This is eternal lives-to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent." (D&C 132:24.)
[^3] Any concept that others than Jesus can mediate between man and his Maker is not of God. Paul says: "There is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus." (1 Tim. 2:5.) And the Nephite Jacob testifies: "He shall make intercession for all the children of men; and they that believe in him shall be saved. And because of the intercession for all, all men come unto God; wherefore, they stand in the presence of him to be judged of him according to the truth and holiness which is in him." (2 Ne. 2:9-10.)
