Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 102

In Gethsemane

I command you to repent— repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore— how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not. For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit— and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink— Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men. (D&C 19:15-19.)

The Trial of Peter's Faith

(Luke 22:31-38; JST Luke 22:21-36; John 13:36-38; Matthew 26:31-35; Mark 14:27-31; JST Mark 14:33)

As nearly as we can determine from the sacred accounts, while Jesus and his friends were yet in the upper room, finishing their Paschal ceremonies and partaking of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, some conversations began about the tests that lay ahead for all of them, and of the allegiance they would manifest to their Lord. The colloquy then commenced was interrupted by the discourse on the two comforters, by that on the law of love, and then by that on the Holy Ghost, and also by the offering of the Intercessory Prayer. Then as the holy party left the city, crossed the wadi called Kidron, and came near the Mount of Olives, the same theme was picked up again.

Through it all it is evident that the tests now facing his apostolic associates were of deep concern to Jesus, and that he desired to encourage and strengthen them so they would come off triumphant. It was not his purpose to stay the tempter's power nor to shelter his chosen ones from the onslaught of evil. They must overcome the world even as he had done, if they were to be with him and partake of his glory. He would, however, do all in his power to strengthen their faith that they might be victorious in the warfare with Satan. How true it is that the Lord "scourgeth every son whom he receiveth." (Heb. 12:6.) Let the lash fall; let their flesh be cut; let their faith be tested—but let them bear up under it all.

If Abraham must be willing to offer Isaac, if Isaac and Jacob and all the holy prophets must lay their all on the altar, not even withholding their lives in many cases—then those who would dwell everlastingly with faithful Abraham, those who would sit down in the kingdom of God with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the holy prophets, must also pass the same tests of faith and devotion as did their faithful forebears. And next to the agonies about to engulf Jesus himself, the greatest tests ahead were for Peter. What they were we are not told, nor does it matter, for every man's tests—in the wisdom of Him who ordained all things well—are those which are suited to him and him alone. But we do know that in principle the higher one of the Lord's servants stands in the hierarchy of righteousness, the more severe are the tests to which his faith will be subjected. Jesus is about to carry the greatest burdens ever placed upon a mortal soul. Shall the Twelve, who stand next to him—with Peter at their head—escape their share of the tests and burdens ahead?

And so, Jesus, while they were yet in the upper room, said to Peter: "Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired you, that he may sift the children of the kingdom as wheat." Satan sought the soul of Simon. Every lost soul adds to the revelry and rebellion in the lower realms. Satan seeks to harvest all the souls of men, to sift the saints as wheat is harvested on the threshing floor, so that both the wheat and the tares may be garnered into his granary. And oh, if he can only topple Peter from his high place; if only the chief apostle can be destroyed spiritually; if only the defenders of Zion can be destroyed—how much easier it will be to harvest the then unprotected fields.

"But I have prayed for you," Jesus says to Peter, "that your faith fail not; and when you are converted strengthen your brethren." Peter has a testimony; he knows that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God; he has preached and baptized other believing souls; he has wrought many mighty miracles in the name of Christ; he has been valiant, true, and obedient. But he is not as yet converted. He has not yet become a new creature by the power of the Holy Ghost; he has not as yet put off the natural man, and put on Christ, and become "as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19.) All this can be his only after Pentecost; only after the descent of the Holy Spirit; only after he receives the gift of the Holy Ghost.

But Peter, "being aggrieved" at Jesus' words to him, said: "Lord, I am ready to go with you, both into prison, and unto death." 'Surely I am converted and will stand by thee in all things, though it cost me my life.' Jesus replied: "I tell you, Peter, that the cock shall not crow this day, before that you will thrice deny that you know me."

Then, by way of reassurance, to remind them all that a Divine Providence would preserve them in the tests ahead, Jesus asked: "When I sent you without purse and scrip, or shoes, lacked ye any thing?" Their answer: "Nothing." Jesus continued: "I say unto you again, He who hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip; and he who hath no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one." In the troublesome times ahead, when the hands of all men would be against them, they would need to provide their own food, clothing, and shelter, and for their own protection. [^1]

Whatever lay ahead for the disciples, however—whether they were to be preserved by Divine Providence or by means of their own wise planning and defense, as the varying situations might require—they must not overlook the great reality that their Lord was about to leave them in death. They must not take his passing upon the cross as a sign of defeat. Lest they do so, he reminds them of the Messianic prophecies which speak of his death, and, indeed, he quotes one of them. "For I say unto you," Jesus continues, "This that is written must yet be accomplished in me, And he was reckoned among the transgressors; for the things concerning me have an end." The reference, of course, is to Isaiah's Messianic pronouncement that he should "pour out his soul unto death" and in that hour be "numbered with the transgressors." (Isa. 53:12.) To this the disciples respond, "Lord, behold, here are two swords," falsely assuming that he is asking for a means of defense for himself, rather than telling them they may defend themselves in the treacherous days ahead. Their offer is waved aside by the Lord: "It is enough," he says, meaning, 'Enough of this kind of talk; it is not my purpose to be defended by the arm of flesh.'

For the continuation of this theme—and how heavily it must have weighed on the mind of Jesus—we go now with him and the Twelve toward the Mount of Olives. In "that night" when "the fierce wind of hell was allowed to sweep unbroken over the Saviour, and even to expend its fury upon those that stood behind in His Shelter" (Edersheim 2:535), we hear him say to his friends, "All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered." "What a dreadful thing it is to call for a sword against God; and yet it is part of the plan. Jesus is to die; the Shepherd is to be slain; the sheep are to be scattered." (Commentary 1:769.) Did not Jehovah by the mouth of Zechariah foretell what was to be in this dark hour? "Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow, saith the Lord of hosts," is the prophetic word; and "smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered: and I will turn mine hand upon the little ones." (Zech. 13:7.) But through it all—and this they must never forget—the Lord Jesus, risen in glorious immortality, shall go before them into Galilee; there they will meet again and their joy will be full.

Once again Peter, still brooding over what he esteems to be his total devotion to his Lord, says: "Though all men shalt be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended." Again the prophetic word falls from the lips of the Chief Prophet: "Verily I say unto thee, That this day, even in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice." And still Peter persists: "Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee." And Matthew adds: "Likewise also said all the disciples," for all, in one degree or another, were also being tested.

Jesus Prays and Suffers in Gethsemane

(Matthew 26:36-46; JST Matthew 26:43; Mark 14:32-42; JST Mark 14:36-38, 40, 42-43, 47; Luke 22:40-46; JST Luke 22:45; John 18:1-2)

Outside Jerusalem's walls, across the wadi Kidron, part-way up the slopes of Olivet, in (as we suppose) a secluded vale, was the Garden of the Oil Press—the Garden of Gethsemane. Thither "Jesus ofttimes resorted . . . with his disciples." Surely the site, known to Judas, was the possession of some worthy believer who rejoiced that the Lord often chose his spot of earth as a place to pray and ponder and teach and rest. Though often dry, the wadi, with its precipitous sides, was in April the host of a surging stream. The gentle slopes of Olivet were familiar land to the little party of spiritual giants who were now pondering the truths they had been taught and sorrowing over the separation of which they had been told.

Mark says: "They came to a place which was named Gethsemane, which was a garden; and the disciples began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy, and to complain in their hearts, wondering if this be the Messiah." Though they all knew, as Jesus himself attested in the private sermons and prayer just delivered, that he was the Son of God, yet he did not fit the popular pattern for the Jewish Messiah, and the disciples, of course, had not yet received the gift of the Holy Ghost, which means they did not have the constant companionship of that member of the Godhead. "And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said to his disciples"—that is, to eight of them—"Sit you here, while I shall pray." Also: "Pray that ye enter not into temptation."

Then he took Peter, James, and John with him on into the Garden. As they went he "rebuked them"—apparently for the doubt that arose in their hearts that he was the Messiah—and said: "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; tarry ye here and watch." Then he withdrew from them "about a stone's cast, and kneeled down, and prayed." The statement that he "kneeled" is Luke's; Mark says he "fell on the ground [that is, prostrated himself], and prayed." Matthew says he "fell on his face." No doubt he did all of these things, over a long period and in the course of repeated prayers.

We cannot recount with surety the order in which each thing happened, nor reconstruct with certainty the sequence of Jesus' spoken words, this night in this garden—in this "other Eden, in which the Second Adam, the Lord from heaven, bore the penalty of the first, and in obeying gained life." (Edersheim 2:534.) What has been preserved for us is only a sliver from a great tree, only a few sentences of what was said, only a brief glimpse of what transpired. It would appear that Jesus and the disciples spent some hours there in Gethsemane; that one (or many!) angels were present; and that Jesus poured out his soul in agony as he interceded for the faithful and felt the weight of the world's sins upon his own sinless soul. There is no mystery to compare with the mystery of redemption, not even the mystery of creation. Finite minds can no more comprehend how and in what manner Jesus performed his redeeming labors than they can comprehend how matter came into being, or how Gods began to be. Perhaps the very reason Peter, James, and John slept was to enable a divine providence to withhold from their ears, and seal up from their eyes, those things which only Gods can comprehend. We do know, however, that these words were included in Jesus' prayer:

O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt. (Matthew.)

Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee; take away this cup from me; nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done. (Mark.)

Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done. (Luke.)

Then, as nearly as we can determine, and as Luke records: "There appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him." The angelic ministrant is not named. We know that on the Mount of Transfiguration "Moses and Elias. . . appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem" (Luke 9:30-31); and if we might indulge in speculation, we would suggest that the angel who came into this second Eden was the same person who dwelt in the first Eden. At least Adam, who is Michael, the archangel—the head of the whole heavenly hierarchy of angelic ministrants—seems the logical one to give aid and comfort to his Lord on such a solemn occasion. Adam fell, and Christ redeemed men from the fall; theirs was a joint enterprise, both parts of which were essential for the salvation of the Father's children.

But back to Luke. "And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground." The Son of God who did all things well—whose every thought and act and deed was perfect; whose every prayer pierced the firmament and ascended to his Father—the Son of God himself (note it well) "prayed more earnestly." Even he reached a pinnacle of Perfection in prayer that had not always been his. And as to the blood that oozed from his pores, we cannot do better than recall the words of the angelic ministrant, spoken to the Nephite Hebrew, Benjamin: "And lo, he shall suffer temptations, and pain of body, . . . even more than man can suffer, except it be unto death; for behold, blood cometh from every pore, so great shall be his anguish for the wickedness and the abominations of his people." (Mosiah 3:7.)

"And when he rose up from prayer," Luke continues, "and was come to his disciples"—meaning Peter, James, and John—"he found them sleeping; for they were filled with sorrow; And he said unto them, Why sleep ye? rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation." This same occurrence as recorded by Mark happened this way: "Simon, sleepest thou? Couldest not thou watch one hour? Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation." At this point, they—the three of them—answered: "The spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak."

Jesus then left the chosen three and prayed again: "O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done." Returning, Jesus found them sleeping again, which presupposes he had been away some time and had offered many petitions to his Father. This time they knew not how to answer him. Jesus went away and prayed the third time, "saying the same words." Returning this last time, he said, "Sleep on now, and take your rest." Then, as Mark has it, "After they had finished their sleep, he said, Rise up, let us go; lo, he who betrayeth me is at hand."

Thus ends such accounts as we have of Jesus' suffering in Gethsemane. It is now over and he has won the victory; the atonement, in large measure, has been worked out, and he is now ready for the shame and humiliation and pain of the cross. Then will come the resurrection and the crown.

As he went into Gethsemane, it was with a total awareness of what lay ahead. "Jesus knew that the awful hour of His deepest humiliation had arrived—that from this moment till the utterance of that great cry with which He expired, nothing remained for Him on earth but the torture of physical pain and the poignancy of mental anguish. All that the human frame can tolerate of suffering was to be heaped upon His shrinking body; every misery that cruel and crushing insult can inflict was to weigh heavy on His soul; and in this torment of body and agony of soul even the high and radiant serenity of His divine spirit was to suffer a short but terrible eclipse. Pain in its acutest sting, shame in its most overwhelming brutality, all the burden of the sin and mystery of man's existence in its apostasy and fall—this was what He must now face in all its most inexplicable accumulation." (Farrar, pp. 622-23.)

There is no language known to mortals that can tell what agony and suffering was his while in the Garden. Of it Farrar says: "A grief beyond utterance, a struggle beyond endurance, a horror of great darkness, a giddiness and stupefaction of soul overmastered Him, as with the sinking swoon of an anticipated death. . . . How dreadful was that paroxysm of prayer and suffering through which He passed." (Farrar, p. 624.)

And as to the prayer in the Garden—repeating, as it did, his divine promise made in the councils of eternity when he was chosen for the labors and sufferings of this very hour; the divine prayer in which he said, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" (Moses 4:2)—as to the prayer in the Garden, "That prayer in all its infinite reverence and awe was heard; that strong crying and those tears were not rejected. We may not intrude too closely into this scene. It is shrouded in a halo and a mystery into which no footstep may penetrate. We, as we contemplate it, are like those disciples—our senses are confused, our perceptions are not clear. We can but enter into their amazement and sore distress. Half waking, half oppressed with an irresistible weight of troubled slumber, they only felt that they were dim witnesses of an unutterable agony, far deeper than anything which they could fathom, as it far transcended all that, even in our purest moments, we can pretend to understand. The place seems haunted by presences of good and evil, struggling in mighty but silent contest for the eternal victory. They see Him, before whom the demons had fled in howling terror, lying on His face upon the ground. They hear that voice wailing in murmurs of broken agony, which had commanded the wind and the sea, and they obeyed Him. The great drops of anguish which fall from Him in the deathful struggle, look to them like heavy gouts of blood." (Farrar, p. 624.) And so they were.

And as he came out of the Garden, delivering himself voluntarily into the hands of wicked men, the victory had been won. There remained yet the shame and the pain of his arrest, his trials, and his cross. But all these were overshadowed by the agonies and sufferings in Gethsemane. It was on the cross that he "suffered death in the flesh," even as many have suffered agonizing deaths, but it was in Gethsemane that "he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him." (D&C 18:11.)

The first Adam brought death, both temporal and spiritual, into the world and was cast out of the first Eden. The second Adam (Paul says he is the Lord from heaven) brought life—spiritual life, eternal life—into the world when he bore the sins of all men on that awesome night in a second Eden. Let God be praised that Adam fell; let Gods and angels rejoice that the Messiah came in the meridian of time to ransom men from the effects of the fall! In part the ransom was paid on a cross—having particular reference to the immortality that passes upon all men because Jesus rose from the dead. But primarily the ransom was paid in a garden—for there eternal life was won for the obedient—in the Garden of the Oil Press, where Judas now stands, strengthened by the arm of flesh, ready to betray the Atoning One.

The Betrayal and the Arrest

(Matthew 26:47-56; JST Matthew 26:47-48; Mark 14:43-52; JST Mark 14:52-53, 56-57; Luke 22:47-53; John 18:3-12)

That which Jesus himself had foretold—"how . . . he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day" (Matt. 16:21)—is now coming to pass. Every detail is taking place; every jot and tittle is being fulfilled; the cruel deeds of a cruel week are unfolding—all with a power and vengeance that no human hand can stay; all with a hatred and malignity that should have made even the demons of the deep shudder in their hellish home. The agonies of Gethsemane have seen the blood of a God fall in oozing drops from every pore to hallow forever that sacred spot, where, among the olive trees, apart even from his intimate friends, he took upon himself that weight which none other could bear. His blood, the choicest blood on earth, the atoning blood of God's Son, is now dried on the rocks and mingled with the soil of the Garden where the greatest miracle of the ages has been wrought.

Even now Judas—"mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me" (Ps. 41:9), as the Psalmist described him—has arrived to plant the traitor's kiss and supervise the arrest. Judas, into whom Satan has entered, is the one to whom the world—the Gentile world, of which Rome is the symbol, and the ecclesiastical world, of which the Jewish hierarchy are the leaders—Judas is the one upon whom the god of this world now depends to bring to pass his nefarious purposes.

Judas, standing in Satan's stead, is at the head of a motley band composed of the servants of the chief priests and many elders and Pharisees, of the temple guards with their officers, and of a contingent of Roman soldiers from the tower of Antonia, under the command of a tribune. They are armed with swords and staves—with swords to slay their opponents, if need be; with staves to quiet any tumult or disperse any bellicose rabble. They are carrying lanterns and torches, lest he whom they seek slip away born their iron grasp into the darkness of the night. Probably there are six hundred armed men in the arresting force, for this is no small thing they are undertaking; at last their Galilean enemy, who subverts their religion and rebels against their traditions, is to be done away with. A great multitude of the curious and of those whose sympathies are with the arresting cohort also dog the steps of the fierce Romans and the vengeful Jews sent to arrest the Son of Man. That such an army—at Passover time, when the watchful eye of Rome kept her soldiers on alert to quell disturbances—could not have moved without the prior approval of the Roman procurator, one Pontius Pilate, is perfectly clear. Indeed, a prior authorization of the arrest by Pilate accounts for his subsequent readiness to participate in the events of this dread night.

Having conspired beforehand with the chief priests and Pharisees—"Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he: hold him fast," was his promise—Judas must first have led the evil band to the house in Jerusalem where the holy party celebrated the Feast of the Passover. Finding them gone, and, as we suppose, rousing John Mark in the process, Judas then led those under his command to Gethsemane which he knew was the place to which they commonly resorted. Finding Jesus and the Eleven, Judas called out "Hail master"—'Hail Rabbi'—and kissed him; or, better, as the Greek text conveys, "not only kissed but covered Him with kisses, kissed Him repeatedly, loudly, effusively." (Edersheim 2:543.) There must be no mistake made as to the identity of Jesus; the promised sign must be clear and certain. It was the custom to greet friends and guests with a kiss; Jesus himself had condemned his host, Simon the Pharisee, by saying, "Thou gavest me no kiss." (Luke 7:45.) There must be absolute certainty in the kiss of betrayal, and so Judas showered Jesus with kisses, which but makes the traitorous act all the more repulsive. Jesus then said: "Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?" And then: 'Friend'—for so Judas is identified in the Messianic prophecy—'do that for which thou art come.'

Judas had made the identification. But the armed cohort—whose daily business it was to quell riots, subdue disturbers of the peace, and arrest malefactors—stood in awe. The Presence was more than they were ready to face. Jesus stepped forward, voluntarily and without hesitation, and asked: "Whom seek ye?" They answered, "Jesus of Nazareth," to which Jesus rejoined, "I am he." At this the arresting soldiers, who many times before had arrested criminals and faced armed foes without fear, "went backward, and fell to the ground." No more could Jesus be arrested without his consent than could his life be taken unless he willed it. Even though all the armies of all the nations of men had come to take him—no matter—he was master of all things. But as he would soon choose to die, so now he chose to be arrested. Again he asked the powers of this world: "Whom seek ye?" and again they answered, "Jesus of Nazareth." Then Jesus said: "I have told you that I am he: if therefore ye seek me, let these go their way."

This "last remark had reference to the apostles, who were in danger of arrest; and in this evidence of Christ's solicitude for their personal safety, John saw a fulfilment of the Lord's then recent utterance in prayer, 'Of them which thou gavest me have I lost none.' It is possible that had any of the Eleven been apprehended with Jesus and made to share the cruel abuse and torturing humiliation of the next few hours, their faith might have failed them, relatively immature and untried as it then was; even as in succeeding years many who took upon themselves the name of Christ yielded to persecution and went into apostasy." (Talmage, pp. 615-16.)

"Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus, and took him." He consented to the arrest; he permitted himself to be taken; the Son of God was then bound as a common criminal by men. "The Great Prophet had voluntarily resigned Himself; He was their helpless captive. No thunder had rolled; no angel flashed down from heaven for His deliverance; no miraculous fire devoured amongst them. They saw before them nothing but a weary unarmed man, whom one of His own most intimate followers had betrayed, and whose arrest was simply watched in helpless agony by a few terrified Galileans." (Farrar, p. 634.)

Seeing this turn of events, the disciples asked: "Lord, shall we smite with the sword?" Not waiting for an answer, Peter drew his sword and slashed off the right ear of Malchus, the servant of the high priest.

Then, turning to Peter, Jesus said: "Put up thy sword into the sheath: the cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?" And also: "He who taketh the sword shall perish with the sword." And yet further: "Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels? But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?" Eleven weak mortals—as mortals—were as nothing before this assembled army; and he who could command twelve legions of angels, and more, would make no move to stay the course he must pursue to fulfill all of the Messianic prophecies about his death and resurrection. Having so spoken—and shall we not say he was planning another evidence of his own divinity, of which the high priest shall soon hear?—Jesus asked for the sufferance of the arresting soldiers, while "he put forth his finger and healed the servant of the high priest."

Then Jesus, bound securely and subject to them, spoke to "the chief priests, and captains of the temple, and the elders"—that is, to the leaders of the Jews, through whose evil machinations he had been taken—and asked: "Are ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and with staves to take me? I was daily with you in the temple teaching, and ye took me not: but the scriptures must be fulfilled." And as Luke adds, he also said: "But this is your hour"—your hour of trial and evil—when for the moment "the power of darkness" shall seem to prevail.

"And the disciples, when they heard this saying, all forsook him and fled," thus fulfilling his word that the sheep should be scattered. That their danger was real is seen from the fact that there was then present "a certain young man, a disciple, having a linen cloth cast about his naked body," whom the soldiers attempted to arrest. But he—and we assume he was John Mark—"left the linen cloth and fled from them naked, and saved himself out of their hands."

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Intercessory Prayer is also called the High-Priestly Prayer because, as commentators have chosen to conclude, it was offered by Jesus in his capacity as the Great High Priest, whatever that may be deemed to mean. Of this prayer, Farrar summarized: "He lifted up His eyes to heaven, and uttered His great High-Priestly prayer; first, that his Father would invest His voluntary humanity with the eternal glory of which He had emptied Himself when He took the form of a servant; next, that He would keep through his own name these His loved ones who had walked with Him in the world; and then that He would sanctify and make perfect not these alone, but all the myriads, all the long generations, which should hereafter believe through their word." (Farrar, p. 617.)
