Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Section 12

Footnotes

The Trials, the Cross, and the Tomb

Let him be crucified. . . . Let him be crucified. (Matt. 27:22-23.)

Crucify him. . . . Crucify him. (Mark 15:13-14.)

Crucify him, crucify him. (Luke 23:21.)

Away with him, away with him, crucify him. (John 19:15.)

Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, . . . Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. (Acts 2:22-23.)

From Gethsemane they take Him to evil Annas—an adulterous Jew; a one-time high priest; the father-in-law of Caiaphas—and there He is examined and smitten. This is their hour—the hour of darkness.

In all Israel there is not a more wicked or influential man than Annas, who commits himself to see that Jesus is put to death.

They take him before Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin. They plot a judicial murder, seek false witnesses, find him guilty of blasphemy, and say: "He is worthy of death."

He is maltreated by the guards as they await the morning trial. Peter, before the cock crows twice, thrice denies that he knows him.

Then he is hailed before the Sanhedrin in formal session, where he testifies that he is the Son of God, and "the whole council condemned him" and sent him bound to Pilate.

Pilate, whose hands reek with blood, yet seeks to free him. Jesus testifies that he is a king, but that his kingdom is not of this world.

As a Galilean he is sent to Herod to be examined and derided. There he remains silent.

Before Pilate again he is charged with sedition and treason. Pilate seeks to release him, but the people demand Bar-Abbas instead and shriek, "Crucify him, crucify him."

He is scourged, mocked, derided, and sentenced to be crucified.

Iscariot commits suicide.

Jesus carries his cross for a ways, and then Simon of Cyrene is impressed into service.

They crucify their King.

Pilate places a superscription over his head in Latin, and in Greek, and in Aramaic, reading: "JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS."

The soldiers cast lots for his garments. The Sanhedrists incite mockery and derision against him.

He ministers from the cross, promising the penitent thief, "This day shalt thou be with me in paradise," and committing the care of the Blessed Virgin to the Beloved Disciple.

He hangs on the cross for six hours, during the last three of which darkness covers the land, and he suffers again the pains of Gethsemane. The atonement is complete. His work is finished. He voluntarily lays down his life.

A Roman spear pierces his side, but no bone of his body is broken.

Pilate permits Joseph of Arimathea to have the body, and he and Nicodemus prepare it for burial. They place it in the Arimathean's tomb.

Jesus meanwhile enters paradise, preaches to the righteous dead there assembled, organizes the work, and declares liberty to the captives and the opening of the prison doors to them that are bound.

1981 Deseret Book Co.
