Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 103

The Jewish Pre-Trials

There is save one Messiah spoken of by the prophets, and that Messiah is he who should be rejected of the Jews. (2 Ne. 25:18.)

The Jews at Jerusalem sought to kill Jesus, according to his word. (4 Ne. 1:31.)

Believe in Jesus Christ, that he is the Son of God, and that he was slain by the Jews. (Morm. 7:5.)

Jesus Is Examined and Smitten before Annas

(John 18:12-14, 19-23)

"This is your hour," saith the Lord Jesus, the hour of "the power of darkness"! And if it was true in Gethsemane, how much more does the message tingle in every ear with reference to the unjudicial court procedures of the night and the day that followed.

From Gethsemane—a sacred place, hallowed by the blood of Jesus, sweat in agonizing drops from every pore—to the palace of Annas—an evil, wicked, adulterous Jew—Jesus was taken, bound and subservient, by the Roman soldiers and the temple guards. The alien power and the Jewish rulers were placing the Judge of all the earth into the custody of wicked men to be judged by an evil and apostate court system.

The account of the false and blasphemous travesty that swept him from Annas to Caiaphas to Pilate to Herod and back to Pilate is preserved for us by all four of the Evangelists. Each Gospel recitation is fragmentary; each supplements the others; and from them all we gain such a vision of the sad happenings of that doleful night and day as a divine providence has seen fit to preserve for us. That there are gaps and discrepancies in the account, which cause reputable scholars to disagree on the details of the trials, is of no moment. There is no divine ipse dixit, no voice from an archangel, and as yet no revealed latter-day account of all that transpired when God's own Son suffered himself to be judged by men so that he could voluntarily give up his life upon the cross. Needless to say, however, the overall picture that we shall paint—allowing for divergence of views as to details—is true, eternally true. Jesus was judged of men that the scriptures might be fulfilled, that the atonement might be completed, that immortality might pass upon all men, and that the saints of the Most High might be inheritors of eternal life in the Everlasting Presence. [^1] We shall draw freely upon the words and phrases of some of Christianity's ablest apologists as we recite what happened, and—what is equally important—seek to feel the ignominy and the victory interlaced with the balance of the life of Him of whom we testify.

Jesus was subjected to three Jewish trials. The first, before Annas, though unofficial in the strict sense, was the one that assured the ultimate Roman-imposed penalty of death. It was the crowning act of conspiratorial evil; the authoritative prejudging of him who, according to their law, should have been presumed to be innocent. It was the practical trial; the one before the de facto high priest; before the recognized source of Jewish power; before the one who wielded the real power of the Jewish people.

The second trial, before Caiaphas, though involved primarily with preliminary questioning, was the occasion when the real or formal determination was made that the Guiltless One, the Sinless One, was worthy of death. And the third trial, before the Sanhedrin, constituted a ratification of the illegal procedures before Annas and Caiaphas; in it the formal decision was pronounced; strictly speaking it was the only real and legal trial, though, as we shall see, it too violated almost every basic and established rule, order, and law set down for Sanhedrinic operation.

As to the trial before Annas, a brief comment about him and his influence in the Jewish social structure will show why the cunning conspirators would choose first to take Jesus before his bar. Under his guidance Caiaphas and the whole Sanhedrin would nod, almost as a reflex action, a firm approval of the plot that would only succeed when Jesus' body lay in the grave.

Who was Annas, as he is called by the Evangelists? He was the best known, one of the wealthiest, and certainly the most influential Jew of his day; and if wickedness be measured by evil opposition to the truth and by a desire to shed innocent blood, he ranks with Judas among the abominable of the earth. He was Hanan, the son of Seth, the Ananus of Josephus. He had been the actual high priest for some seven years, and since being deposed by the Procurator Valerius Gratus, he had been the power behind the priestly throne. In his degenerate day, when the high priests were appointed and deposed by Gentile overlords; when the office was more of a political than a religious one; when, in spite of the general moral decay, the office did require "a certain amount of external dignity and self-denial which some men would only tolerate for a time" (Farrar, p. 639)—under these circumstances, to appoint and control a high priest was greater and more to be desired than to be one.

"The Jewish historian calls this Hanan the happiest man of his time, because he died at an advanced old age, and because both he and five of his sons in succession—not to mention his son-in-law [and a grandson]—had enjoyed the shadow of the High Priesthood; so that, in fact, for nearly half a century he had practically wielded the sacerdotal power. But to be admired by such a renegade as Josephus is a questionable advantage. In spite of his prosperity Hanan seems to have left behind him but an evil name, and we know enough of his character, even from the most unsuspected sources, to recognize in him nothing better than an astute, tyrannous, worldly Sadducee, venerable for all his seventy years, full of a serpentine malice and meanness which utterly belied the meaning of his name [Clement or merciful], and engaged at this very moment in a dark, disorderly conspiracy, for which even a worse man would have had cause to blush. It was before this alien and intriguing hierarch that there began, at midnight, the first stage of that long and terrible inquisition . . . .

"If there were one man who was more guilty than any other of the death of Jesus, that man was Hanan. His advanced age, his preponderant dignity, his worldly position and influence, as one who stood on the best terms with the Herods and the Procurators, gave an exceptional weight to his prerogative decision. . . . If we may believe not a few of the indications of the Talmud, that Sanhedrin was little better than a close, irreligious, unpatriotic confederacy of monopolizing and time-serving priests—the Boethusim, the Kamhits, the Phabis, the family of Hanan, mostly of non-Palestinian origin—who were supported by the government, but detested by the people, and of whom this bad conspirator was the very life and soul." (Farrar, pp. 639-41. Italics added.) [^2]

We can see on every hand reasons why the scribes and Pharisees would seek the death of Jesus. From the beginning of his ministry, day in and day out, in one setting after another, it had been his unvarying practice to deride and defame their cherished Mosaic traditions and to hurl bolts of divine wrath upon them for their ignorance and selfish self-exultation. We can scarcely count the times he has called them hypocrites, liars, adulterers, a generation of vipers, a people fit only for the burning fires of Gehenna. In much of this anathema the Sadducees took secret delight, for they too ignored the strict formalities of the law, and could not have been other than gratified to see both their scribal and their Pharisaic foes repeatedly routed by this rustic Galilean and his Rabbinically unschooled friends.

But why the Sadducean rage against him? Why did Judas and the temple guards make sure Jesus was delivered into Sadducean hands to be tried by a Sadducean Sanhedrin? Why would anyone who felt the pulse of the people know that Annas would lead out in opposition to Jesus?

We cannot doubt that the underlying reason for the rebellion of all sects, parties, and groups—the Sadducees included—was religious. Though as sects they fought among themselves, their one common point of agreement opposition to Jesus. But there was something more. To the Sadducees, Jesus was an economic threat. Their crafts were in danger. He was destroying the thriving business enterprises that poured the wealth of the world into their rapacious pockets. We cannot escape the conclusion that "the rage of these priests was mainly [or, at least, in large measure] due to our Lord's words and acts concerning that House of God which they regarded as their exclusive domain, and, above all, to His second public cleansing of the Temple. . . . The first cleansing might have been passed over as an isolated act of zeal, to which little importance need be attached, while the teaching of Jesus was mainly confined to despised and far-off Galilee; but the second had been more public, and more vehement, and had apparently kindled a more general indignation against the gross abuse which called it forth. Accordingly, in all three Evangelists we find that those who complained of the act are not distinctively Pharisees, but 'Chief Priests and Scribes,' who seem at once to have derived from it a fresh stimulus to seek His destruction.

"But, again, it may be asked, Is there any reason beyond this bold infraction of their authority, this indignant repudiation of an arrangement which they had sanctioned, which would have stirred up the rage of these priestly families? Yes—for we may assume from the Talmud that it tended to wound their avarice, to interfere with their illicit and greedy gains. Avarice—the besetting sin of Judas—the besetting sin of the Jewish race—seems also to have been the besetting sin of the family of Hanan. It was they who had founded the chanujoth—the famous four shops under the twin cedars of Olivet—in which were sold things legally pure, and which they had manipulated with such commercial cunning as artificially to raise the price of doves to gold coin apiece, until the people were delivered from this gross imposition by the indignant interference of a grandson of Hillel. There is every reason to believe that the shops which had intruded even under the Temple porticoes were not only sanctioned by their authority, but even managed for their profit. To interfere with these was to rob them of one important source of that wealth and worldly comfort to which they attached such extravagant importance. There was good reason why Hanan, the head representative of 'the viper brood,' as a Talmudic writer calls them, should strain to the utmost his cruel prerogative of power to crush a Prophet whose actions tended to make him and his powerful family at once wholly contemptible and comparatively poor." (Farrar, pp. 641-42.)

Thus Jesus is hailed before a gold-bloated usurper, who exercises the power of an office he does not hold, and who has already determined what judgment should be rendered. Jesus had been arrested at night and on the testimony of an accomplice, both of which acts were illegal under Jewish law. Now he is before Annas—who is sitting as a sole judge, and it is still night, both of which conditions make the hearing itself illegal. Though he has been arrested, there is as yet no charge lodged against him. Annas, therefore, questions him about two things: his disciples and his doctrine. Perhaps some charge of sedition can be lodged against his followers; perhaps there is some doctrinal statement that can be construed as false or blasphemous. As far as the record goes, Jesus ignored the attempt to involve his followers; he, not they, was to suffer and die at this time; their day of martyrdom lay ahead. As to the doctrinal inquisition, he said: "I spake openly to the world; I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort; and in secret have I said nothing. Why askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them: behold, they know what I said." Such a reply by the Prisoner was proper; he was entitled to be confronted by his accusers; there was nothing for him to confess; if they wanted to try him, let them present their case. "Even the minions of Annas felt the false position of their master under this calm rebuke; they felt that before the transparent innocence of this youthful Rabbi of Nazareth the hypocrisy of the hoary Sadducee was abashed. 'Answerest thou the High Priest so?' said one of them with a burst of illegal insolence; and then, unreproved by this priestly violator of justice, he profaned with the first infamous blow the sacred face of Christ. Then first that face which, as the poet-preacher says, 'the angels stare upon with wonder as infants at a bright sunbeam,' was smitten by a contemptible slave." (Farrar, p. 643.) Jesus answered simply: "If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou me?" [^3]

Jesus before Caiaphas and the Council

(Matthew 26:57-66; JST Matthew 26:59-61, 67; Mark 14:53-64; JST Mark 14:65; Luke 22:54; John 18:24)

Joseph Caiaphas, the legal high priest—the son-in-law of that evil and avaricious Annas, and himself also of like nature and disposition—was the next Jewish ruler to hurl his anathematizing curse upon the Son of God. He was, John says, "the high priest that same year," which we cannot do other than accept as an ironical slur against the apostate system under which the life-long office of high priest was passed around among the family of Annas, as though they were designating which steward should care for their interests for the year.

"Now Caiaphas was he"—as John is also careful to mention at this point—"which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for the people." (John 18:14.) As we are aware, this counsel of Caiaphas was a prophetic utterance. God had used him as he used Baalam's ass to proclaim a message to his people, and that message did not carry the meaning and intent that was in the evil heart of the wicked man whose tongue was then guided in what he said. With reference to Jesus' work and miracles, other members of the Supreme Council had then said: "If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him: and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation." Intending to concur with this view and seeking to incite bitterness against Jesus, Caiaphas had then said: "Ye know nothing at all, Nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not." Thus he "had been the first to enunciate in plain words what seemed to him the political necessity for the judicial murder of Christ. There had been no pretense on his part of religious motives or zeal for God; he had cynically put it in a way to override the scruples of those old Sanhedrists by raising their fears. What was the use of discussing about forms of Law or about that Man? it must in any case be done; even the friends of Jesus in the Council, as well as the punctilious observers of [the] Law, must regard His Death as the less of two evils. He spoke as the bold, unscrupulous, determined man that he was; Sadducee in heart rather than by conviction: a worthy son-in-law of Annas." (Edersheim 2:546. Italics added.) But a divine power decreed otherwise, and his words—John says "he prophesied"—became an announcement that Jesus would die as the Deliverer of the Jews, "And not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad." (John 11:49-52.) That, like Baalam's ass, Caiaphas knew no more after the divine word fell from his lips than he did before is evident from the course he is now pursuing. He is still bent on finding a way to bring death to Him by whom life comes.

Having failed to elicit any incriminating evidence against Jesus, Annas "sent him"—not "had sent," as a poor biblical translation has it, but "sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest." [^4] And it stretches the bounds of credulity to suppose that Annas himself remained aloof from the continuing inquisition; certain it is that he went with the guards and their prisoner, that he might add his influence and prestige and be a personal witness of the hoped-for triumph over his enemy. The leading elders, scribes, and chief priests—alerted as they were that Jesus would be arrested that night—were already assembled; and Peter and John, having overcome the first flush of panic that swept over them in Gethsemane, were also present as sorrowing observers.

There, in the palace of Caiaphas, then "took place the second private and irregular stage of the trial. There—for though the poor Apostles could not watch for one hour in sympathetic prayer, these nefarious plotters could watch all night in their deadly malice—a few of the most desperate enemies of Jesus among the Priests and Sadducees were met." (Farrar, pp. 643-44.) At least twenty-three members of the Great Sanhedrin were present, the number required for a quorum, for both Matthew and Mark call the meeting one of the council which is the Sanhedrin.

They had before them a prisoner charged with no crime. Innocent of all crimes, as he was, even these conspiring Satanists had not been able to come up with an offense for which he could be arraigned. Annas had failed in his attempt to charge the disciples with sedition and Jesus with teaching false and apostate doctrines. Their dilemma was real, for they themselves were sharply divided on all major issues save one—that the man Jesus must die. "If they dwelt on any supposed opposition to civil authority, that would rather enlist the sympathies of the Pharisees in His favour; if they dwelt on supposed Sabbath violations or the neglect of traditional observances, that would accord with the views of the Sadducees. The Sadducees dared not complain of His cleansing of the Temple: the Pharisees, or those who represented them, found it useless to advert to His denunciations of tradition. But Jesus, infinitely nobler than His own noblest Apostle, would not foment these latent animosities, or evoke for His own deliverance a contest of these slumbering prejudices. He did not disturb the temporary compromise which united them in a common hatred against Himself." (Farrar, pp. 645-46.)

Since a charge must be lodged to justify Jesus' arrest, since they themselves were not sufficiently united to bring up any of their old doctrinal objections, and since the charge must be one that the Romans would consider to be a capital offense, "the chief priests, and elders, and all the council" (after counseling with Satan whose servants they were) chose the most evil of all possible courses. They "sought false witness"!

Read it again, for it is forever inscribed in the records of eternity—they sought not witnesses, but false witnesses. Let none come forward but those who will perjure their souls; who will condemn the Holy One and the Just; who will cry, 'Away with him. Crucify him, crucify him.' No voice must be raised in his defense; no lie must be refuted; no falsehood shall be denied. This is God's Son (oh, the shame of it all!) and the leaders of his own people—acting for their constituents; reflecting the feelings that smoldered like the fires of hell in the breasts of all recalcitrant Jewry of the time—these leaders "sought false witness against Jesus, to put him to death." He must not live; let him die the death, and whatever perjured word is needed to nail him to a Roman cross, so be it!

Nor was it difficult to find those to whom Jehovah's word spoken to Moses the man of God, amid the fires and thunders of Sinai—"Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour" (Ex. 20:16)—was as alien gibberish. Search was made only among the rabble who followed the arresting party, who followed in the hopes of seeing one whom they hated suffer an ignominious death. And "though many false witnesses came," Matthew says, "they found none that could accuse him." None could devise a charge that would stand up before the Roman law. "For many bare false witness against him," as Mark records it, "but their witness agreed not together." "Though the agents of these priests were eager to lie, yet their testimony was so false, so shadowy, so self-contradictory, it all melted to nothing, and even those unjust and bitter judges could not with any decency accept it." (Farrar, p. 646.)

Finally, "there arose certain"—meaning, apparently, that there arose some from among their own number; from among the priests themselves; from among those who were present when Jesus first cleansed the temple—"there arose certain" to "bear false witness against him" that would cause Roman ears to listen. It will be remembered that on the occasion of the first Passover, Jesus drove from the temple the moneychangers and those who sold oxen and sheep and doves; that he thus made a shamble of the bazaars of the sons of Annas; and that when asked for a sign as to his authority for so doing, he told them that if they would destroy the temple of his body, he would raise it up again in three days. There was to be no sign given to that wicked and adulterous generation except the sign of the prophet Jonas, the sign of his resurrection. Now, three years later, his words are to be twisted and perverted by false witnesses. We suppose Annas and Caiaphas, who suffered financially on the first purgation of Jehovah's house, were the ones who now saw the possibility of using what Jesus then said as a basis for a criminal charge against him.

The perjured words of the false priests included such statements as, "We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within three days I will build another made without hands." That there were other perversions of his word is clear from Mark's conclusion, "But neither so did their witness agree together." This charge that Jesus would first destroy and then rebuild, in three days, the most magnificent building of their age; that stone for stone he would put back together, in three days, what had been under construction for forty-six years, and was far from finished; that in a moment of time, as it were, he would bring into being what thousands of workers had spent scores of years to build—this fantastic claim (which he had never made) would indicate to the Romans that he was a dangerous seducer of the people with magical pretensions. He thus would be one who would rally the people around him in a revolt that would destroy the peace of the land. And, be it remembered, "The purpose of the High-Priest was not to formulate a capital charge in Jewish Law, since the assembled Sanhedrists had no intention so to try Jesus, but to formulate a charge which would tell before the Roman Procurator. And here none other could be so effective as that of being a fanatical seducer of the ignorant populace, who might lead them on to wild tumultuous acts." (Edersheim 2:559.)

Through all this "Jesus listened in silence while His disunited enemies hopelessly confuted each other's testimony. . . . But that majestic silence troubled, thwarted, confounded, maddened them. It weighed them down for the moment with an incubus of intolerable self-condemnation. They felt, before that silence, as if they were the culprits, He the judge. And as every poisoned arrow of their carefully-provided perjuries fell harmless at His feet, as though blunted on the diamond shield of His white innocence, they began to fear lest, after all, their thirst for His blood would go unslaked, and their whole plot fail. Were they thus to be conquered by the feebleness of their own weapons, without His stirring a finger, or uttering a word? Was this Prophet of Nazareth to prevail against them, merely for lack of a few consistent lies? Was His life charmed even against calumny confirmed by oaths? It was intolerable.

"Then Caiaphas was overcome with a paroxysm of fear and anger. Starting up from his judgment-seat, and striding into the midst—with what a voice, with what an attitude we may well imagine!"—he would set this court proceeding on its proper course. Their own false witnesses—carefully selected, screened, and coached, that their every word would be dipped in the poison of death—their own appointed perjurers, though they skirted the truth and gave a devilish twist to what Jesus had said—they, nonetheless, could arouse no response from Him who had spoken only the truth; the lips of innocence were closed against their calumnies. But Caiaphas himself would hurl the question: "Answerest thou nothing?" How can a man be silent when, knowing his life is at stake, he hears others lie about him? "Knowest thou what these witness against thee?" 'Their false words will cost thee thy life, and yet thou sayest nothing.' "Had not Jesus been aware that these His judges were wilfully feeding on ashes and seeking lies, He might have answered; but now His awful silence remained unbroken.

"Then, reduced to utter despair and fury, this false High Priest—with marvelous inconsistency, with disgraceful illegality—still standing as it were with a threatening attitude over his Prisoner, exclaimed, 'I adjure Thee by the living God to tell us'—what? whether Thou art a malefactor? whether Thou hast secretly taught sedition? whether Thou hast openly uttered blasphemy?—no, but (and surely the question showed the dread misgiving which lay under all their deadly conspiracy against Him)—'WHETHER THOU ART THE CHRIST, THE SON OF GOD?' " (Farrar, pp. 646-47.)

How intense was the hatred of that hour! How many unseen demons must have laughed in the background as the legal high priest in Israel, speaking in Jehovah's name, adjured Jehovah himself to proclaim his own divine Sonship! No doubt the prince of devils himself was there; what is more natural than to expect the master of all evil to come face to face with Him that is the embodiment of all that is good? "Tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God!" Suppose, just suppose he was, what then of Caiaphas, and the Sanhedrin, and the Jewish nation? Would they be buffeted and scattered and scourged and hated of all men until the times of restitution?

"Strange question to a bound, defenseless, condemned criminal; and strange question from such a questioner—a High Priest of His people! Strange question from the judge who was hounding on his false witnesses against the prisoner! Yet so adjured, and to such a question, Jesus could not be silent; on such a point He could not leave Himself open to misinterpretation. In the days of His happier ministry, when they would have taken Him by force to make Him a King—in the days when to claim the Messiahship in their sense would have been to meet all their passionate prejudices half way, and to place himself upon the topmost pinnacle of their adoring homage—in those days He had kept His title of Messiah utterly in the background: but now, at this awful decisive moment, when death was near—when, humanly speaking, nothing could be gained, everything must be lost, by the avowal—there thrilled through all the ages—thrilled through that Eternity, which is the synchronism of all the future, and all the present, and all the past—the solemn answer, 'I AM: and ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.' " (Farrar, pp. 647-48.)

'Art thou the Messiah? Art thou the Son of God?' 'I AM; I AM THAT I AM: I am the Eternal One; I am the Lord Jehovah; I am Jesus Christ the Son of the living God; I am the Son of that Holy Man who is your Father in heaven. Ye shall reject me now and do with me as ye will; but I shall come again, in all the glory of my Father's kingdom. Then shall ye see me sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven; then shall ye know that I am he of whom Moses and all the prophets spake. I am the Christ. I am the Son of God.'

"In that answer the thunder rolled—a thunder louder than at Sinai, though the ears of the cynic and the Sadducee heard it not then, nor hear it now. In overacted and ill-omened horror, the unjust judge who had thus supplemented the failure of the perjuries which he had vainly sought—the false High Priest rending his linen robes before the True [High Priest]—demanded of the assembly His instant condemnation.

"'BLASPHEMY!' he exclaimed; 'what further need have we of witnesses? See, now ye heard his blasphemy! What is your decision?' And with the confused tumultuous cry, 'He is ish maveth,' 'A man of death,' 'Guilty of death,' the dark conclave was broken up, and the second stage of the trial of Jesus was over." (Farrar, p. 648.)

"He is guilty of death." Thus saith the Sanhedrin.

"And they all condemned him to be guilty of death." Thus saith the Sanhedrin.

We do not say this was a sentence of death, for the Sanhedrin had no such power in that day. Rather, it was their heartfelt, devil-inspired pronouncement: 'He is worthy of death; he ought to die, according to our law, for he is a blasphemer.' "And yet is it not after all true—that He was either the Christ, the Son of God, or a blasphemer? This Man, alone so calm and majestic among those impassioned false judges and false witnesses; majestic in His silence, majestic in His speech; unmoved by threats to speak, undaunted by threats when He spoke; Who saw it all—the end from the beginning; the Judge among His judges, the Witness before His witnesses: which was He—the Christ or a blaspheming imposter? Let history decide; let the heart and conscience of mankind give answer. If He had been what Israel said, He deserved the death of the Cross; if He is what the Christmas-bells of the Church, and the chimes of the Resurrection-morning ring out, then do we rightly worship Him as the Son of the Living God, the Christ, the Saviour of men." (Edersheim 2:561-62.)

Yea, and let more than history record; let more than the heart and conscience of mankind speak out—for though history turn into myth and legend, and though the conscience of mankind be seared with a hot iron, yet He remains true and faithful. Let the answer then come from the lips of those to whom he has revealed himself anew in the latter days. We are they, and we say: He is God's Son, the true Messiah; he spake no blasphemy; and all who would live and reign with him and his Father must believe the witness he bore of himself. He is the Son of God.

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] Farrar, pp. 649-50. It is, of course, the speculative license of an author to say Jesus was taken from the place where he had been judged to a guardroom. There is nothing in the inspired account to indicate where or in what place the maltreatment took place. All we know for certain is that, from whatever place he was kept, Jesus was able to look upon Peter when that apostle made his third denial. Further, as shall be seen hereafter, the so-called formal trial of Jesus in all probability took place in the palace of Caiaphas and not in the Hall of Judgment, though, as Farrar indicates, that is the only place it could have been held legally.
[^2] "Peter failed on this occasion to testify as becometh one who is a special witness of the Lord, but so in effect had all the disciples, for they all forsook him and fled. But Peter was not yet the man he was to be, for about fifty days hence, at Pentecost, he and all the saints were to receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Perhaps, then, the great lesson to be learned from this experience of the chief apostle is this: if men are to resist and overcome the world; if they are to stand valiantly in the Cause of Christ; if they are to be faithful and true in all things-they must have the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Commentary 1:794.)
[^3] Our King James Version says the officer struck Jesus "with the palm of his hand." The Revised Version says "with a rod." Edersheim comments and speculates: "We are almost thankful that the text leaves it in doubt, whether it was with the palm of the hand, or the lesser indignity-with a rod. Humanity itself seems to reel and stagger under this blow. In pursuance of His Human submission, the Divine Sufferer, without murmuring or complaining, or without asserting His Divine Power, only answered in such tone of patient expostulation as must have convicted the man of his wrong, or at least have left him speechless. May it have been that these words and the look of Christ had gone to his heart, and that the now strangely-silenced malefactor became the confessing narrator of this scene to the Apostle John?" (Edersheim 2:550.)
[^4] This change in a verb tense in John 18:24 is one of the reasons we know there was a separate examination before Annas, the high priest in fact, before Jesus was taken to Caiaphas, the titular high priest.
