Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 104

The Formal Jewish Trial

I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting. (Isa. 50:6)

It pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief. (Isa. 53:10.)

They Maltreat Jesus

(Matthew 26:67-68; Mark 14:65; Luke 22:63-65)

Annas and Caiaphas had done their work well. As the high priests in Israel—one the real, the other the titular high priest—they had guided the Sadducean-dominated Sanhedrin, representative of the hosts of the people, to find the Jesus guilty of blasphemy because he said he was the Son of God. And the garments of Caiaphas had been rent in everlasting witness that the blasphemer before them was worthy of death. They had spoken; the council had spoken; and through them, as the representative leaders of all Jewry, the whole nation had spoken; the collective judgment of the Jews (though yet to be formally ratified) had nonetheless been given. "And this was how the Jews at last received their promised Messiah—longed for with passionate hopes during two thousand years; since then regretted in bitter agony for well-nigh two thousand more! From this moment He was regarded by all the apparitors of the Jewish Court as a heretic, liable to death by stoning; and was only remanded into custody to be kept till break of day, because by daylight only, and in the Lishcat Haggazzith, or Hall of Judgment, and only by a full session of the entire Sanhedrin, could He be legally condemned. And since now they looked upon Him as a fit person to be insulted with impunity, He was haled through the court-yard to the guard-room with blows and curses, in which it may be that not only the attendant menials, but even the cold but now infuriated Sadducees took their share." [^1]

Then, "in the guard-room to which He was remanded to await the break of day"—or in whatever place his captors kept their prisoner—"all the ignorant malice of religious hatred, all the narrow vulgarity of brutal spite, all the cold innate cruelty which lurks under the abjectness of Oriental servility, was let loose against Him. His very meekness, His very silence, His very majesty—the very stainlessness of His innocence, the very grandeur of His fame—every divine circumstance and quality which raised Him to a height so infinitely immeasurable above His persecutors—all these made Him an all the more welcome victim for their low and devilish ferocity. They spat in His face; they smote Him with rods; they struck Him with their closed fists and with their open palms. In the fertility of their furious and hateful insolence, they invented against Him a sort of game. Covering His eyes, they hit Him again and again, with the repeated question, 'Prophesy to us, O Messiah, who it is that smote thee.' So they wiled away the dark cold hours till the morning, revenging themselves upon His impassive innocence for their own present vileness and previous terror; and there, in the midst of that savage and wanton varletry, the Son of God, bound and blindfold, stood in His long and silent agony, defenseless and alone. It was His first derision—His derision as the Christ, the Judge attainted, the Holy One a criminal, the Deliverer in bonds." (Farrar, p. 654.)

This night, as time seemed to stand still, the prince of devils worked his will through those mortal devils who submitted their wills to his. It seems clear enough that among those degenerate humans who so reveled in their base and evil sport were members of the Sanhedrin itself. Matthew records that the members of that council said, "He is guilty of death," and his very next words are: "Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him; and others smote him with the palms of their hands." That is, the members of the Great Council, the legal lights and leaders of the people, spurted their foul spittle into the face of their Messiah, while others, their servants and menials, struck him with physical force. Mark also seems to differentiate between those who did the spitting and the buffeting and "the servants" who did the striking. Luke speaks as though the soldiers—"the men that held Jesus"—were the ones who mocked and smote him. This truly was their hour, and they were enveloped in darkness!

Peter Denies Knowing Who Jesus Is

(Matthew 26:69-75; Mark 14:66-72; JST Mark 14:81-82: Luke 22:55-62; John 18:15-18, 25-27)

Peter and John—blessed brethren of infinite valor and faith—recovering quickly (sooner than any of the other apostles) from that panic which swept over them in Gethsemane, set out to follow Jesus and the soldiers who held him bound. One or both of them may have been present when Annas began the Jewish inquisition that was designed to find a legal reason to slay the man whose death was already a foregone conclusion in their minds. We know that both were present at the palace of Caiaphas. John was known to the high priest, and apparently to his servants; he gained ready admittance. "Peter stood at the door without," unable to gain entrance; strict security measures were in force on this evil night, for one of the followers of Jesus, with a flashing sword, had, in Gethsemane, already slashed off the ear of Malchus; there must be no further dissension or uproar. But John, apparently not without some influence in high places, went out and persuaded the portress who kept the gate, and who also must have known him, to admit his fellow apostle.

John hastened into the palace where Jesus stood arraigned before the Sanhedrin, or such portion of it as was assembled at this dread hour; Peter, discreetly or of necessity, remained in the hall or courtyard where he mingled with the servants and court followers and warmed himself over a coal fire. As Peter sat among these rowdies and malcontents, listening to the accounts of the arrest and hearing the predictions of what lay ahead for his Master, the damsel who had admitted him realized who he was. "Art not thou also one of this man's disciples?" she first asked. He replied, "I am not." She persisted: "Thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth." To the others present she said, "This man was also with him." But Peter continued to disassociate himself from his Lord. "I know not, neither understand I what thou sayest," he affirmed. And also: "Woman, I know him not." Disconcerted by this challenge to his presence, Peter left the fire, "And he went out into the porch; and the cock crew."

While Peter was out on the porch, another maid—perhaps a replacement for the portress who had admitted him—said to those there assembled: "This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth." Again Peter denied, this time with an oath, saying, "I do not know the man." A man standing by agreed with the maid and said, "Thou art also of them." Peter said, "Man, I am not." All of this, as nearly as we can tell, may be counted the second denial.

About an hour then elapsed—such quite likely being the time during which Caiaphas held his hearing and issued his blasphemous adjuration—and it appears that Peter was back, standing beside the fire, warming himself with the others, for it was cold. One of those who stood by them said, "Surely thou also art one of them; for thy speech bewrayeth thee," as Matthew has it; or: "Surely thou art one of them: for thou art a Galilean, and thy speech agreeth thereto," as Mark has it; or: "Of a truth this fellow also was with him: for he is a Galilean," as Luke has it. Or, as John's account says, "Art not thou also one of his disciples?" to which he said, "I am not." At this point a kinsman of Malchus recognized Peter and said, "Did not I see thee in the garden with him?" To all of this came firm denials. Peter cursed and swore with an oath, "I know not the man." Also: "I know not this man of whom ye speak." And: "Man, I know not what thou sayest." All this may be accounted the third denial. And immediately, for the second time, the cock crew.

At this point, "the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter." Peter then remembered the prophecy, "Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice." Then he went out and wept bitterly.

Such is the sparsely worded account of Peter's so-called denial of his Lord, a denial that was rather a failure to stand up and testify of the divine Sonship when an occasion afforded than a denial of any divinity resident in the Son of Man. [^2]

Two eloquent passages deserve preservation in our present record, for both help us to feel as well as to know what happened in Peter's life this night.

"The Lord in the agony of His humiliation, in the majesty of His silence—'the Lord turned and looked upon Peter.' Blessed are those on whom, when He looks in sorrow, the Lord also looks with love! It was enough. Like an arrow through his inmost soul, shot the mute eloquent anguish of that reproachful glance. As the sunbeam smites the last hold of snow upon the rock, ere it rushes in avalanche down the tormented hill, so the false self of the fallen Apostle slipped away. It was enough: 'he saw no more enemies, he knew no more danger, he feared no more death.' Flinging the fold of his mantle over his head, he too, like Judas, rushed forth into the night. Into the night, but not as Judas; into the unsunned outer darkness of miserable self-condemnation, but not into the midnight of remorse and of despair; into the night, but, as has been beautifully said, it was 'to meet the morning dawn.' If the angel of Innocence had left him, the angel of Repentance took him gently by the hand. Sternly, yet tenderly, the spirit of grace led up this broken-hearted penitent before the tribunal of his own conscience, and there his old life, his old shame, his old weakness, his old self was doomed to that death of godly sorrow which was to issue in a new and spiritual birth." (Farrar, pp. 653-54.)

"The Lord turned round and looked upon him—yes, in all that assembly, upon Peter! His eyes spake His Words; nay, much more; they searched down to the innermost depths of Peter's heart, and broke them open. They had pierced through all self-delusion, false shame, and fear: they had reached the man, the disciple, the lover of Jesus. Forth they burst, the waters of conviction, of true shame, of heart-sorrow, of the agonies of self-condemnation; and, bitterly weeping, he rushed from under those suns that had melted the ice of death and burnt into his heart—out from that cursed place of betrayal by Israel, by its High Priest—and even by the representative Disciple.

"Out he rushed into the night. Yet a night lit up by the stars of promise—chiefest among them this, that the Christ up there—the conquering Sufferer—had prayed for him. God grant us in the night of our conscious self-condemnation the same star-light of His Promises, the same assurance of the intercession of the Christ, that so, as Luther puts it, the particularness of the account of Peter's denial, as compared with the briefness of that of Christ's Passion, may carry to our hearts this lesson: 'The fruit and use of the sufferings of Christ is this, that in them we have the forgiveness of our sins.'" (Edersheim 2:564.)

Jesus before the Sanhedrin

(Luke 22:66-71; 23:1; Matthew 27:1-2; Mark 15:1; JST Mark 15:1-2)

"Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people, and officers over them," the Lord commanded Moses, and "they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not thyself alone." (Num. 11:16-17.) Thus was the Lord's system of government perfected in ancient Israel. Moses served as the prophet, seer, and revelator; at his side were "the princes of Israel," twelve in number, comparable to the Twelve Apostles, one of whom presided over each of the tribes (Num. 7); then came the Seventy—holy and noble men who also sat in judgment and regulated the affairs of the people. And a millennium and a half later, the Jews still maintained the form of their ancient order; the Great Sanhedrin—either patterned after or descended from the Quorum of Seventy called by Moses—still attempted to rule over the people. Albeit, to their sorrow, those of whom it was composed in time's meridian were no longer the spiritual giants who were qualified to go up into the Holy Mount and see "the God of Israel," as had been their predecessors in office. (Ex. 24:9-11.)

At the time the Great Sanhedrin, in its apostate and fallen state, chose to seek out and sit in judgment on that God who himself had called their predecessors, the tribunal was composed of seventy-one persons. Their traditional meeting place had been in one of the temple chambers—the Lishkath haGazith (Lishcat Haggazzith) or Chamber of Hewn Stones—but now it was common for them to meet in the merchandising booths of the sons of Annas. Their members were ordained and set apart by the laying on of hands, and twenty-three of their number constituted a quorum for the transaction of business. There is some confusion and uncertainty as to the powers and place of the Sanhedrin in that day; probably these varied from year to year depending upon the political climate. The council, as a stabilizing influence, operated with Roman approval and the Procurator appointed the high priests. Its authority was limited to religious matters, and it did not have the power to inflict the death penalty, though in fact the Roman authorities seemed to overlook some judicial murders made on religious grounds. Stephen was convicted before the Sanhedrin on suborned testimony and suffered death by stoning. (Acts 6-7.) Paul would have been killed by act of the Council had he not been rescued by Roman soldiers. (Acts 23.) And the Jews, without reference to Rome, had sought on previous occasions to kill Jesus. (John 5:18; 7:25.)

But let us return to the Jewish trials of Jesus. Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin had "condemned him to be guilty of death." (Mark 14:64.) But—"The law and the practice of the time required that any person found guilty of a capital offense, after due trial before a Jewish tribunal, should be given a second trial on the following day; and at this later hearing any or all of the judges who had before voted for conviction could reverse themselves; but no one who had once voted for acquittal could change his ballot. A bare majority was sufficient for acquittal, but more than a majority [two more, in fact] was required for conviction. By a provision that must appear to us most unusual, if all the judges voted for conviction on a capital charge the verdict was not to stand and the accused had to be set at liberty; for, it was argued, a unanimous vote against a prisoner indicated that he had had no friend or defender in court, and that the judges might have been in conspiracy against Him. Under this rule in Hebrew jurisprudence the verdict against Jesus, rendered at the illegal night session of the Sanhedrists, was void, for we are specifically told that 'they all condemned him to be guilty of death.'

"Apparently for the purpose of establishing a shadowy pretext of legality in their procedure, the Sanhedrists adjourned to meet again in early daylight. Thus they technically complied with the requirement—that on every case in which the death sentence had been decreed the court should hear and judge a second time in a later session—but they completely ignored the equally mandatory provision that the second trial must be conducted on the day following that of the first hearing. Between the two sittings on consecutive days the judges were required to fast and pray, and to give the case on trial calm and earnest consideration." (Talmage, pp. 627-28.) [^3]

And so the continued happenings of that doleful night were these: "At last the miserable lingering hours were over"—the hours before Annas and Caiaphas, during which he was derided, mocked, slapped, cursed, and showered with spittle—"and the grey dawn shuddered, and the morning blushed upon that memorable day. And with the earliest dawn, . . . the Sanhedrin had been summoned, for His third actual, but His first formal and legal trial. It was now probably about six o'clock in the morning, and a full session met. Well-nigh all—for there were the noble exceptions at least of Nicodemus and of Joseph of Arimathea, and we may hope also of Gamaliel, the grandson of Hillel—were inexorably bent upon His death. The Priests were there, whose greed and selfishness He had been reproved; the Elders, whose hypocrisy He had branded; the Scribes, whose ignorance He had exposed; the worse than all, the worldly, skeptical, would-be philosophic Sadducees, always the most cruel and dangerous of opponents, whose empty sapience He had so grievously confuted. All these were bent upon His death; all filled with repulsion at that infinite goodness; all burning with hatred against a purer nature than any which they could even conceive in their loftiest dreams. And yet their task in trying to achieve his destruction was not easy. . . . The fact was that the Sanhedrists had not the power of inflicting death, and even if the Pharisees might have ventured to usurp it in a tumultuary sedition, as they afterwards did in the case of Stephen, the less fanatic and more cosmopolitan Sadducees would be less likely to do so.

"Not content, therefore, with the cherem, or ban of greater excommunication, their only way to compass His death was to hand Him over to the secular arm. At present they had only against Him a charge of constructive blasphemy, founded on an admission forced from Him by the High Priest, when even their own suborned witnesses had failed to perjure themselves to their satisfaction. There were many old accusations against Him, on which they could not rely. His violations of the Sabbath, as they called them, were all connected with miracles, and brought them, therefore, upon dangerous ground. His rejection of oral tradition involved a question on which Sadducees and Pharisees were at deadly feud. His authoritative cleansing of the Temple might be regarded with favour both by the Rabbis and the people. The charge of esoteric evil doctrines had been refuted by the utter publicity of His life. The charge of open heresies had broken down, from the total absence of supporting testimony. The problem before them was to convert the ecclesiastical charge of constructive blasphemy into a civil charge of constructive treason. But how could this be done? Not half the members of the Sanhedrin had been present at the hurried, nocturnal, and therefore illegal, session in the house of Caiaphas; yet if they were all to condemn him by a formal sentence, they must all hear something on which to found their vote. In answer to the adjuration of Caiaphas, He had solemnly admitted that He was the Messiah and the Son of God. The latter declaration would have been meaningless as a charge against Him before the tribunal of the Romans; but if He would repeat the former, they might twist it into something politically seditious. But He would not repeat it, in spite of their insistence, because He knew that it was open to their wilful misinterpretation, and because they were evidently acting in flagrant violation of their own express rules and traditions, which demanded that every arraigned criminal should be regarded and treated as innocent until his guilt was actually proved." (Farrar, pp. 654-56.)

Thus Caiaphas, now before the whole council, demanded: "Art thou the Christ? tell us." Perhaps he would say something that the Romans would interpret as being seditious. After all, the Jewish concept of a Messiah was one of a Deliverer, a Deliverer from all alien yokes, Rome included. But Jesus: "If I tell you, ye will not believe." "How sad and how true! Gospel truth is taught by testimony: the spiritually alive, believe; the spiritually sick, question; the spiritually dead, deny and reject. And here stands the Lord Omnipotent, the being by whose hands things are, the being through whom salvation comes, ready to testify again of his divine Sonship with full knowledge that his testimony will avail his hearers nothing." (Commentary 1:796.)

Jesus continued: "And if I also ask you, ye will not answer me, nor let me go. Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God." Thus was the foundation laid for the question of the whole council: "Art thou then the Son of God?" To this Jesus replied: "Ye say that I am," which they all understood to mean: 'It is as ye have said, I am.' Then as Caiaphas had done earlier, they all cried out, "What need we any further witnesses? for we ourselves have heard of his own mouth." This man was a blasphemer worthy of death!

"And the whole council condemned him, and bound him," Mark said, "and carried him away, and delivered him to Pilate."

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man of whom I know has written so consistently and so well-in such shining English prose-about the dramatic and miraculous happenings in the life of our Lord as has Canon Farrar, whose words I have freely quoted from time to time in this work. It is my observation that when either I, or Elder Talmage, or Edersheim, or other authors-and all of us have done it-when any of us put the thoughts of Farrar in our own words, however excellent our expression may be, it loses much of the incisive and pungent appeal found in the language of our British friend from the Church of England. With this realization in mind, and because it seems a shame not to preserve the best literary craftsmanship available, to portray the greatest events in the most wondrous life ever lived, I shall feel free in this and the remaining chapters of this work to draw more heavily than otherwise upon the genius of Farrar. In the instant chapter, unless otherwise indicated by footnotes, all of the quoted material is from pages 661 to 672 of his work. By way of addendum may I express the hope-nay, offer the prayer-that both Farrar and Edersheim, and others who had faith and believed in the Messiah, according to the best light and knowledge they had, now that they are in the world of spirits where Elder Talmage continues his apostolic ministry, may have received added light and knowledge and will have pursued that strait and narrow course that will make them inheritors of the fulness of our Father's kingdom. Truly they were Eliases of a greater day and harbingers of a greater light.
[^2] Pilate's reaction was like that of Gallio when the Jews haled Paul before him with the charge: "This fellow persuadeth men to worship God contrary to the law." Gallio responded: "If it were a matter of wrong or wicked lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would that I should bear with you: but if it be a question of words and names, and of your law, look ye to it; for I will be no judge of such matters." (Acts 18:12-16.)
[^3] And truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (D&C 93:24.)
