Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 105

The First Two Roman Trials

He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not. . . . We did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. . . . He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. . . . Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief. (Isa. 53:3-10.)

Jesus before Pilate

(John 18:28-38; Matthew 27:2, 11-14; JST Matthew 27:12, 15; Mark 15:2-5; JST Mark 15:4; Luke 23:2-5; JST Luke 23:3)

Jesus who is called Christ—the same whom all Israel had for ages worshipped as the Lord Jehovah, the one Holy Being who was incapable of falsely ascribing divinity to himself—has now been convicted by the Great Sanhedrin of that very blasphemous offense, and by them condemned, according to Jewish law, to pay the supreme penalty; this Man of Galilee, bound and with a cord around his neck (Matthew says: "When they had bound him, they led him away"), is led, like a common criminal, to Pontius Pilate, the Roman Procurator. It would surprise us if Annas and Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin did not lead the tumultuous Jewish mob as the temple guards delivered their Jewish prisoner to the Gentile ruler. By these Jewish leaders the prisoner was taken to the magnificent palace of Herod, occupied at Passover time by Pilate, whose normal residence was Caesarea Palestina.

Pontius Pilate—into whose hands the Lord of Life is being delivered, that the penalty of death decreed by the Sanhedrin may be ratified—this ignoble Roman governor was, as were all the Gentile overlords of the day, a murderous, evil despot who ruled with the sword and was a master at political intrigue. He was neither better nor worse than others of his ilk, but his name is engraved forever in Christian memory because he sent the Son of God to the cross. This act of infamy on his part required preparation. No ruler—however supreme and autocratic; however subject to the political pressures and passions of the populace; however prejudiced toward a race and a people—no ruler knowingly and willfully sends an innocent man to death unless prior sins have seared his conscience, tied his hands, and buried his instinct to deal justly. Through all his length of days, Pilate had been and then was an evil man, inured to blood and hardened against violence.

"What manner of man was this in whose hands were placed, by power from above, the final destinies of the Saviour's life? . . . In Judea he had acted with all the haughty violence and insolent cruelty of a typical Roman governor. Scarcely had he been installed as Procurator, when, allowing his soldiers to bring with them by night the silver eagles and other insignia of the legions from Caesarea to the Holy City, he excited a furious outburst of Jewish feeling against an act which they regarded as idolatrous profanation. For five days and nights—often lying prostrate on the bare ground—they surrounded and almost stormed his residence at Caesarea with tumultuous and threatening entreaties, and could not be made to desist on the sixth, even by the peril of immediate and indiscriminate massacre at the hands of soldiers whom he sent to surround them. He had then sullenly given way, and this foretaste of the undaunted and fanatical resolution of the people with whom he had to deal, went far to embitter his whole administration with a sense of overpowering disgust." [^1]

On another occasion, to build an aqueduct to bring water from the Pools of Solomon, Pilate confiscated money from their sacred treasury. "The people rose in furious myriads to resent this secular appropriation of their sacred fund. Stung by their insults and reproaches, Pilate disguised a number of his soldiers in Jewish costume, and sent them among the mob, with staves and daggers concealed under their garments, to punish the ringleaders. Upon the refusal of the Jews to separate quietly, a signal was given, and the soldiers carried out their instructions with such hearty good-will, that they wounded and beat to death not a few both of the guilty and the innocent, and created so violent a tumult that many perished by being trodden to death under the feet of the terrified and surging mob."

And on yet another occasion, a "seditious tumult" arose which "must still more have embittered the disgust of the Roman Governor for his subjects, by showing him how impossible it was to live among such a people—even in a conciliatory spirit—without outraging some of their sensitive prejudices. In the Herodian palace at Jerusalem, which he occupied during the festivals, he had hung some gilt shields dedicated to Tiberius." Whether this was done out of wanton malice or as part of a harmless work or ornamentation is not clear. But he felt he could not remove them "without some danger of offending the gloomy and suspicious Emperor to whose honour they were dedicated. Since he would not give way, the chief men of the nation wrote a letter of complaint to Tiberius himself. It was a part of Tiberius's policy to keep the provinces contented, and his masculine intellect despised the obstinacy which would risk an insurrection rather than sacrifice a whim. He therefore reprimanded Pilate, and ordered the obnoxious shields to be transferred from Jerusalem to the Temple of Augustus at Caesarea. . . .

"Besides these three outbreaks, we hear in the Gospels of some wild sedition in which Pilate had mingled the blood of the Galileans with their sacrifices. [Luke 13:1.] . . . Such was Pontius Pilate, whom the pomps and perils of the great yearly festival had summoned from his usual residence at Caesarea Phillipi to the capital of the nation which he detested, and the head-quarters of a fanaticism which he despised."

And yet—be it noted—"of all the civil and ecclesiastical rulers before whom Jesus was brought to judgment, Pilate was the least guilty of malice and hatred, the most anxious, if not to spare His agony, at least to save His life." It is to the conspiratorial evils of this day of judgment and of crucifixion to which we now turn our attention.

After a dread and evil night—whenever was there such a night as this, a night when God himself was spit upon and cursed and smitten?—Jesus is led by his captors into the Hall of Judgment of the palace of Herod. It is a Gentile house where there might be some crust of unleavened bread. Hence: "The great Jewish hierarchs, shrinking from ceremonial pollution, though not from moral guilt—afraid of leaven, though not afraid of innocent blood—refused to enter the Gentile's hall, lest they should be polluted, and should consequently be unable that night" to continue their Paschal celebration. Pilate, no doubt annoyed and condescending, but willing for the moment to placate their superstitions, thus went out to them. An experienced ruler, and probably having personally authorized Jesus' arrest the night before, the Roman Procurator asked, abruptly: "What accusation bring ye against this man?"

Taken by surprise—they had come to receive a ratifying approval of their already imposed death penalty; they had come to gain Roman approval for Jesus' death, so that none of his friends could raise a tumult; they had come to arrange a Roman crucifixion, which was more demeaning than a Jewish stoning; they had come to gain a license to kill, an approval to perform a judicial murder—thus, taken by surprise at Pilate's apparent intent to assume original jurisdiction and hold a Roman trial, they responded: "If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee." 'We have found him guilty; he has broken our law; he should be punished.'

"But Pilate's Roman knowledge of law, his Roman instinct of justice, his Roman contempt for their murderous fanaticism, made him not choose to act upon a charge so entirely vague, nor give the sanction of his tribunal to their dark disorderly decrees. He would not deign to be an executioner where he had not been a judge." Accordingly, Pilate said: 'Take ye him, and judge him according to your law." [^2] Their response: "It is not lawful for us to put any man to death." This reply, John says, was given, "That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spake, signifying what death he should die." And thus, "they are forced to the humiliating confession that, having been deprived of the 'right of the sword,' they cannot inflict the death which alone will satisfy them; for indeed it stood written in the eternal councils that Christ was to die, not by Jewish stoning or strangulation, but by that Roman form of execution which inspired the Jews with a nameless horror, even by crucifixion; that He was to reign from His cross—to die by that most fearfully significant and typical of deaths—public, slow, conscious, accursed, agonizing—worse even than burning—the worst type of all possible deaths, and the worst result of that curse which He was to remove for ever."

Caiaphas and his conspiring confederates—though they had hoped it might be otherwise—dropped the charge of blasphemy and raised the cry of sedition and treason. Under Roman law all the gods of all the nations of all the earth were revered and accepted; even the emperors deified themselves that they might be worshipped; any charge of blasphemy against this Jewish Jehovah would have been as empty nothingness, to Pilate. And so new charges were hurled. They said—Caiaphas, as we suppose, being voice—"We found this fellow perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying that he himself is Christ a King."

As to any perverting of the nation, Pilate could not care less; the Jews were already a benighted mob of religious fanatics in his view—let them be what they were. As to giving tribute to Caesar, that charge was idle rhetoric; grasping publicans and Roman steel saw to the taxes of the day. But a would-be king, that was another matter. Thereupon Pilate went into the Judgment Hall, called Jesus, and asked: "Art thou the King of the Jews?" "Thou poor, friendless, wasted man, in thy poor peasant garments, with thy tied hands, and the foul traces of the insults of thine enemies on thy face, and on thy robes—thou, so unlike the fierce magnificent Herod, whom this multitude which thirsts for thy blood acknowledged as their sovereign—art thou the King of the Jews?"

Jesus' answer will depend on what Pilate means. Is he speaking temporally or spiritually? Yes, this Suffering Servant is the king of the Universe; before him every knee shall one day bow, while every tongue acclaims him Lord of all. No, he is not the temporal Messiah, the Deliverer of Jewish expectation, the kind of a king who would lead an armed assault against a Roman fortress. "Sayest thou this thing of thyself," Jesus asks, "or did others tell it thee of me?"

Pilate's response is disdainful. "Am I a Jew?" he says. "Thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered thee unto me." As with the priests, so with the people; the derision, declaiming, and denunciation of Christ is not an isolated act of a few rabid partisans; the nation and its leaders have delivered him up to their Gentile overlord. Even without hearing Jesus' answer, it is hard for Pilate to envision him as a temporal ruler, and so he asks: "What hast thou done?" What indeed! 'I have preached the gospel to the poor, proclaimed liberty to the captives, and opened the prison door to those who were bound. I have opened blind eyes, unstopped deaf ears, and given strength to lame legs; I have cast out devils and called back rotting corpses from their graves; I have fed multitudes, stilled storms, walked on raging waves; I have been and am the manifestation among men of the Father who is in heaven. I am his Son.'

My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence.

His was no Jewish Messianic kingdom; no political dominion ruled from palaces with floors of agate and lazuli; no kingdom that wages war with its neighbors and makes slaves of the conquered. His kingdom was not of this world; not one comprised of carnal, sensual, and devilish souls; not a kingdom of revelry and lust and wickedness. Rather, his kingdom on earth was made up of the saints of the Most High; and his kingdom in heaven was the everlasting kingdom of his Eternal Father. His royalty was the royalty of holiness, of righteousness, of eternal life. "Art thou a king then?" Pilate marvels. 'Can one who speaks of ruling in spiritual realms, as you do, really be a king!' Jesus answered:

Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.

Or, as Matthew has it, "Thou sayest truly; for thus it is written of me." 'And not only am I an eternal king, but my kingly mission is to proclaim the truth—the truth that makes men free; the truth that saves and exalts eternally; the truth which brings peace to the souls of men in my earthly kingdom, and then assures them of eternal life in my eternal kingdom. Everyone who seeks truth and loves righteousness believes my words.'

"Yes!" Jesus was a king, "but a king not in this region of falsities and shadows, but one born to bear witness unto the truth, and one whom all who were of the truth should hear. 'Truth,' said Pilate impatiently, 'what is truth?' [^3] What had he—a busy, practical Roman governor—to do with such dim abstractions? what bearing had they on the question of life and death? what unpractical hallucination, what fairyland of dreaming phantasy was this? Yet, though he contemptuously put the discussion aside, he was touched and moved. A judicial mind, a forensic training, familiarity with human nature which had given him some insight into the characters of men, showed him that Jesus was not only wholly innocent, but infinitely nobler and better than His raving sanctimonious accusers. He wholly set aside the floating idea of an unearthly royalty; he saw in the prisoner before his tribunal an innocent and high-souled dreamer, nothing more. And so, leaving Jesus there, he went out again to the Jews, and pronounced his first emphatic and unhesitating acquittal: 'I FIND IN HIM NO FAULT AT ALL.'

"But this public decided acquittal only kindled the fury of His enemies into yet fiercer flame. After all that they had hazarded, after all that they had inflicted, after the sleepless night of their plots, adjurations, insults, was their purpose to be foiled after all by the intervention of the very Gentiles on whom they had relied for its bitter consummation? Should this victim, whom they had thus clutched in their deadly grasp, be rescued from High Priests and rulers by the contempt or the pity of an insolent heathen? It was too intolerable! Their voices rose in wilder tumult."

Unable to raise the cry of blasphemy, and their charges of sedition and treason having failed, they now burst forth in a panic of pathetic charges. Mark says "the chief priests accused him of many things." But Jesus "answered nothing." Having been "brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth." (Isa. 53:7.) So fierce were the charges, so vile the things named against him, that, to Pilate, it was unbelievable that Jesus would not respond. "Answerest thou nothing?" he said, "behold how many things they witness against thee." And even to the procurator's words, Jesus remained silent, "so that Pilate marvelled."

Then, amid the babble and tumult, a loud voice acclaimed: "He stirreth up the people, teaching throughout all Jewry, beginning from Galilee to this place." Pilate heard these words; he knew that Galilee had been the scene of most of Jesus' works, and instantaneously a plan was formulated in his mind. "Eager for a chance of dismissing a business of which he was best pleased to be free, he proposed, by a master-stroke of astute policy, to get rid of an embarrassing prisoner, to save himself from a disagreeable decision, and to do an unexpected complaisance to the unfriendly Galilean tetrarch, who, as usual, had come to Jerusalem—nominally to keep the Passover, really to please his subjects, and to enjoy the sensations and festivities offered at that season by the densely-crowded capital. Accordingly Pilate, secretly glad to wash his hands of a detestable responsibility, sent Jesus to Herod Antipas, who was probably occupying the old Asmonean palace, which had been the royal residence at Jerusalem until it had been surpassed by the more splendid one which the prodigal tyrant, his father, had built. And so, through the thronged and narrow streets, amid the jeering, raging, multitudes, the weary Sufferer was dragged once more."

Jesus before Herod

(Luke 23:6-12)

"Herod will kill thee." (Luke 13:31-33.) Such were the words of warning spoken to Jesus in an earlier day with reference to the designs and intentions of Herod Antipas; now, with Jesus before him in bonds, and with the chief priests and the people all crying for his blood, what an opportunity to decree a judicial murder! This same Antipas, the tetrarch of Galilee and Perea, is the one who ordered the head of John the Baptist brought in before his reveling courtiers on a charger. He is the one who flaunted both incest and adultery before the nation and to whom one or many murders meant no more than did the slaughter of the Innocents in Bethlehem to his evil father, Herod the Great. And yet even he, after a mocking and deriding trial, found in Jesus "nothing worthy of death" (Luke 23:14-15), and acquitted him publicly for the second time.

Words almost fail us in setting forth the dire and despicable and degenerate state of Herod Antipas, whom the people in fawning flattery called king, though Rome had conferred no such title upon him. "If ever there was a man who richly deserved contempt, it was the paltry, perjured princeling—false to his religion, false to his nation, false to his friends, false to his brethren, false to his wife—to whom Jesus gave the name of 'this fox.' The inhuman vices which the Caesars displayed on the vast theatre of their absolutism—the lust, the cruelty, the autocratic insolence, the ruinous extravagance—these were seen in pale reflex in these little Neros and Caligulas of the provinces—these local tyrants, half Idumean, half Samaritan, who aped the worst degradations of the Imperialism to which they owed their very existence. Judea might well under the odious and petty despotism of these hybrid Herodians—Jackals who fawned about the feet of the Caesarean lions. Respect for 'the powers that be' can hardly, as has well been said, involve respect for all the impotences and imbecilities." (Farrar, pp. 449-50.)

"We have caught glimpses of this Herod Antipas before, and I do not know that all History, in its gallery of portraits, contains a much more despicable figure than this wretched, dissolute Idumean Sadducee—this petty princeling drowned in debauchery and blood."

At one time Herod had feared that Jesus was John the Baptist risen from the dead to plague him. The mental madness that stirred his soul after the Baptist's murder, however, seems to have subsided; now his interest in Jesus is that of a superstitious simpleton who wants to see some great miracle performed in his kingly presence. Thus we find him questioning Jesus "in many words," taunting, deriding, challenging, all to no avail. Jesus remained silent. "As far as we know, Herod is further distinguished as the only being who saw Christ face to face and spoke to Him, yet never heard his voice. For penitent sinners, weeping women, prattling children, for the scribes, the Pharisees, the Sadducees, the rabbis, for the perjured high priest and his obsequious and insolent underling, and for Pilate the pagan, Christ had words—of comfort or instruction, of warning or rebuke, of protest or denunciation—yet for Herod the fox He had but disdainful and kingly silence." (Talmage, p. 636.)

In his trial before Herod, Jesus was vehemently accused by the chief priests and scribes. In this court, before a Jewish king with Roman power, the accusations made would have included both blasphemy and treason, none of which Herod deigned to consider seriously. Then "Herod with his men of war set him at nought, and mocked him, and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate." Thus Antipas, though finding no fault in Jesus, and though a just judge is morally obligated to release an innocent man from his bonds, yet sent him back to another court, can it be other than with the hope that another judge will find reason to have this friend of the Baptist put to death as the chief priests and scribes so devoutly desire?

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] As explained in note 40 of the previous chapter, we are continuing our practice of quoting Farrar; the quotations in this chapter are from pages 673-87.
[^2] These same "revenges of history" are summarized by Edersheim in these words: "Some thirty years later, and on that very spot, was judgment pronounced against some of the best in Jerusalem; and among the 3600 victims of the Governor's fury, of whom not a few were scourged and crucified right over against the Praetorium, were many of the noblest of the citizens of Jerusalem. A few years more, and hundreds of crosses bore Jewish mangled bodies within sight of Jerusalem. And still have these wanderers seemed to bear, from century to century, and from land to land, that burden of blood; and still does it seem to weigh 'on us and our children.'" (Edersheim 2:578.)
[^3] The student of history will be reminded of the persecutions and slaughter of the Jews, since the day of Farrar, as these have been seen in Russia, Germany, and other nations, particularly those decreed by the evil hand of Hitler during World War II, to say nothing of the Islamic ill will toward their fellow descendants of Abraham. That these national and racial hatreds will yet play a great part in the wars and turmoil leading up to the Second Coming of the Son of Man is known to all students of the scriptures.
