Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 106

The Final Roman Trial

The Jews . . . shall crucify him, . . . and there is none other nation on earth that would crucify their God. For should the mighty miracles be wrought among other nations they would repent, and know that he be their God. But because of priestcrafts and iniquities, they at Jerusalem will stiffen their necks against him, that he be crucified. (2 Ne. 10:3-5.)

Jesus Again before Pilate

(Matthew 27:15-23; JST Matthew 27:20; Mark 15:6-14; JST Mark 15:8-10, 13, 15; Luke 23:13-23; John 18:39-40)

Bound, mocked, derided, smitten, spat upon, wearing the gorgeous white robe in which he had been scornfully draped by Herod's men of war, the Judge of all the earth is now back in the Hall of Judgment to be judged and condemned by wicked men. Pilate has "called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people," those by whose mouths the charges of sedition and treason had been hurled with such vile venom and hatred. Assembling with them are great hosts from all parts of Jerusalem. Word of Jesus' arrest has swept like a tidal wave through the streets and into the homes of the people; and, also, this is the day when the idle and the curious come to see the Governor make the Passover release of an infamous prisoner. Will it be this foul felon Bar-Abbas who, under the shallow cover of political aspirations, led an insurrection and committed murder, but for whose revolutionary zeal there was great public sympathy?

Pilate speaks: "Ye have brought this man unto me, as one that perverteth the people," and who forbids the paying of tribute to Caesar, and who claims that he himself is a king, "and, behold, I, having examined him before you, have found no fault in this man touching those things whereof ye accuse him"—'He is innocent; as I said unto you before, I find in him no fault at all'—"No, nor yet Herod: for I sent you to him; and, lo, nothing worthy of death is done unto Him." So spoke Pilate the Procurator; so spoke Herod the king. There was, then, only one just thing to do: Release the Innocent Man; and further, if need be, protect him from the anger and hatred of the wailing mobs.

Thus "came the golden opportunity for him to vindicate the grandeur of his country's imperial justice, and, as he had pronounced Him absolutely innocent, to set Him absolutely free. But exactly at that point he wavered and temporised. The dread of another insurrection haunted him like a nightmare. He was willing to go half-way to please these dangerous sectaries. To justify them, as it were, in their accusation, he would chastise Jesus—scourge Him publicly, as though to render His pretensions ridiculous—disgrace and ruin Him—'make Him seem vile in their eyes'—and then set Him free." [^1] These were Pilate's words: "I will therefore chastise him, and release him."

This attempt at compromise and appeasement failed; the hunger-maddened pack of ravening wolves would be satisfied with nothing but the blood of the Lamb; their cry was for blood, and blood it must be. Knowing and sensing their refusal—perhaps also it was spoken to him—Pilate felt unable to temporize. But there was another possibility. Because "it was common at the feast, for Pilate to release unto them one prisoner, whomsoever they desired," the Procurator then said: "Ye have a custom, that I should release unto you one at the passover: will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews?" That is: 'Though he is innocent, I will find him guilty and then release him as a convicted criminal.' He offered, therefore, to make the release of Jesus, not an act of "imperious justice, but of artificial grace."

There were those in the multitude who wanted Jesus freed. He had healed their sick, raised their dead, and spoken sweet words of comfort to their sorrowing souls. "And the multitude, crying aloud," Mark tells us, "began to desire him to deliver Jesus unto them." Heartened by this vocal sentiment, Pilate asked: "Will ye that I release unto you the King of the Jews?" Others, however, cried out for the release of Bar-Abbas, and Pilate yet asked: "Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ?" Though the people might be divided on the issue, the chief priests were not, and, as Pilate knew, they "had delivered him for envy."

The issue was thus squarely put; the choice lay with the people; it was theirs, not Pilate's; such was their custom; and if any prisoner was to be freed, it must be by their voice. Nor could two more divergent extremes than Jesus and Bar-Abbas have been offered to them. One was guilty, the other innocent; one was a murderer, the other brought life where there had been death; one led an insurrection, the other had proclaimed peace; one was guilty of sedition and treason, the other had commanded the people to render unto Caesar the things that were his; one was named Jesus Bar-Abbas, which means Jesus the Son of the Father, the other was the Son of the living God. Do we state it too strongly when we say one was Christ, the other antichrist? The Jewish choice that day was to be made between their Messiah and a murderer; rejecting their King, they would be denied entrance into his kingdom, and accepting Bar-Abbas (an antichrist), they would themselves be murdered and cursed for generations yet to come.

But before the choice was made, and while "the chief priests and elders" moved among the mob and "persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus," the trial was interrupted. Claudia Procula, the wife of Pilate, who either then or later may have been a proselyte to the true faith, sent a dire warning to her husband. "Have thou nothing to do with that just man," she said, "for I have suffered many things this day in a vision because of him."

There are times—not a few in the course of a life—when men would do well to give heed to the wise counsel of their wives. If ever there was such a time in the life of Pilate, this was it. The Lord in his goodness to her—and also, for his own purposes, that another witness might be borne of his Son—had revealed to this woman that Jesus was Lord of all and that calamity and sorrow awaited those who opposed him. Nor was Pilate unsympathetic to her message; in reality it but confirmed his own feelings and desires.

"Gladly, most gladly, would Pilate have yielded to his own presentiments—have gratified his pity and his justice—have obeyed the prohibition conveyed by this mysterious omen. Gladly even would he have yielded to the worse and baser instinct of asserting his power, and thwarting these envious and hated fanatics, whom he knew to be ravening for innocent blood. That they—to many of whom sedition was as the breath of life—should be sincere in charging Jesus with sedition was, as he well knew, absurd. Their utterly transparent hypocrisy in this matter only added to his undisguised contempt. If he could have dared to show his real feelings, he would have driven them from his tribunal with all the haughty insouciance of a Gallio. But Pilate was guilty, and guilt is cowardice, and cowardice is weakness. His own past cruelties, recoiling in kind on his own head, forced him to crush the impulse of pity, and to add to his many cruelties another more heinous still.

"He knew that serious complaints hung over him. Those Samaritans whom he had insulted and attacked—those Jews whom he had stabbed promiscuously in the crowd by the hand of his disguised and secret emissaries—those Galileans whose blood he had mingled with their sacrifices—was not their blood crying for vengeance? Was not an embassy of complaint against him imminent even now? Would it not be dangerously precipitated if, in so dubious a matter as a charge of claiming a kingdom, he raised a tumult among a people in whose case it was the best interest of the Romans that they should hug their chains? Dare he stand the chance of stirring up a new and apparently terrible rebellion rather than condescend to a simple concession, which was rapidly assuming the aspect of a politic, and even necessary compromise? His tortuous policy sprang back upon himself, and rendered impossible his own wishes. The Nemesis of his past wrong-doing was that he could no longer do right."

"Willing to release Jesus," Pilate asked: "Whether of the twain will ye that I release unto you?" The chief priests and elders had done their work well; sentiment among the people had crystallized. "Not this man, but Barabbas," they said. "What shall I do then with Jesus which is called Christ?" To this the cry came back—from them all—"Let him be crucified." Pilate said: "Why, what evil hath he done? I have found no cause of death in Him: I will therefore chastise him, and let him go." But they cried out the more, "Deliver him unto us to be crucified. Away with him. Crucify him." "And the voices of them and of the chief priests prevailed."

"Hounded on by the Priests and Sanhedrists, the people impetuously claimed the Paschal boon of which he had reminded them; but in doing so they unmasked still more decidedly the sinister nature of their hatred against their Redeemer. For while they were professing to rage against the asserted seditiousness of One who was wholly obedient and peaceful, they shouted for the liberation of a man whose notorious revolt had been also stained by brigandage and murder. Loathing the innocent, they loved the guilty, and claimed the Procurator's grace on behalf, not of Jesus of Nazareth, but of a man who, in the fearful irony of circumstance, was also called Jesus—Jesus Bar-Abbas—who not only was what they falsely said of Christ, a leader of sedition, but also a robber and an assassin. It was fitting that they, who had preferred an abject Sadducee to their True Priest, and an incestuous Idumean to their Lord and King, should deliberately prefer a murderer to their Messiah.

"It may be that Bar-Abbas had been brought forth, and that thus Jesus the scowling murderer and Jesus the innocent Redeemer stood together on that high tribunal side by side. The people, persuaded by their priests, clamoured for the liberation of the rebel and the robber. To him every hand was pointed; for him every voice was raised. For the Holy, the Harmless, the Undefiled—for Him whom a thousand Hosannas had greeted but five days before—no word of pity or of pleading found an utterance. 'He was despised and rejected of men.' "

Jesus Is Scourged and Prepared for the Crucifiers

(Matthew 27:24-30; JST Matthew 27:26-27; Mark 15:15-19; John 19:1-3)

Pilate next did that which has made all the more terrible the guilt of these blathering, frustrated fiends whose cries, "Crucify him, crucify him," pierced his ears and scourged his soul. He performed in their presence the two symbolical acts which certified to the innocence of the accused—one a Gentile witness, the other a Jewish. First, having declared innocence of Jesus in plain words, he rose from the judgment seat, signifying he would impose no sentence; that there would be no judicial murder and no shedding of innocent blood; that he would free himself from the blood of the Innocent One. Having in mind the judicial tendency among all peoples, to preserve the rights of the accused, such an act—a Gentile symbol of innocence, if you will—should have freed Jesus without more. But it was not to be so. The legal court was Gentile; the real court was Jewish. The Roman sentence had already been imposed in the Jewish mind, and nothing must hinder the on-rolling momentum of that evil cause which was taking their Christ to his cross.

Knowing and sensing all this, Pilate, with a keen and intuitive insight into the Jewish mind, performed before them their own rite, the Jewish rite that symbolized innocence and freed the soul from innocent blood. According to their law, for instance, if an unsolved murder had been committed, the elders of the city were required to slay a heifer, "wash their hands over the heifer," and say: "Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it. Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel, whom thou hast redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy people." Thus they were "forgiven," and thus they "put away the guilt of innocent blood" from among them, provided they did that which was "right in the sight of the Lord." (Deut. 21:1-9; Ps. 26:6; 73:13.)

Accordingly, on this dread morning, "When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person; see that ye do nothing unto him." No longer is he saying, "Take ye him, and judge him according to your law," as it was at the first; now Pilate has stood in the Divine Presence; now he knows Jesus is innocent of both Jewish and Roman offenses; in justice the prisoner must be freed; neither the Jew nor the Gentile must do anything to him.

No one will contend that by these acts Pilate freed himself from the awful guilt of sending a God to the cross. Every man is accountable for his own sins, and those of Pilate were deep and red and evil. But we must credit the Procurator with trying to free his prisoner; his instinctive allegiance to justice was right; the spirit was willing but the flesh was weak. Further, this symbolic washing came before the decree to scourge and to crucify, and was, in fact, an attempt to free the man so that both Pilate and the Jews might "put away the guilt of innocent blood" because they did the thing—in releasing Jesus—which was "right in the sight of the Lord."

But whatever his intent and whatever his purpose—no matter whether his course was right or wrong—he was no longer an agent unto himself. The truth had not made him free; he was in bondage to the sins of his past. Whatever his purpose, it "was instantly drowned in a yell, the most awful, the most hideous, the most memorable that History records." "His blood come upon us" and—God help us!—upon "our children."

"And now mark, for one moment, the revenges of History. [^2] Has not His blood been on them, and on their children? [^3] Has it not fallen most of all on those most nearly concerned in that deep tragedy? Before the dread sacrifice consummated, Judas died in the horrors of a loathsome suicide. Caiaphas was deposed the year following. Herod died in infamy and exile. Stripped of his Procuratorship very shortly afterwards, on the very charges he had tried by a wicked concession to avoid, Pilate, wearied out with misfortunes, died in suicide and banishment, leaving behind him an execrated name. [^4] The house of Annas was destroyed a generation later by an infuriated mob, and his son was dragged through the streets, and scourged and beaten to his place of murder. Some of those who shared in and witnessed the scenes of that day—and thousands of their children—also shared in and witnessed the long horrors of that siege of Jerusalem which stands unparalleled in history for its unutterable fearfulness. 'It seems,' says Renan, 'as though the whole race had appointed a rendezvous for extermination.'

"They had shouted, 'We have no king but Caesar!' and they had no king but Caesar; and leaving only for a time the fantastic shadow of a local and contemptible royalty, Caesar after Caesar outraged, and tyrannized, and pillaged, and oppressed them, till at last they rose in wild revolt against the Caesar whom they had claimed, and a Caesar slaked in the blood of its best defenders the red ashes of their burnt and desecrated Temple. They had forced the Romans to crucify their Christ, and though they regarded this punishment with especial horror, they and their children were themselves crucified in myriads by the Romans outside their own walls, till room was wanting and wood failed, and the soldiers had to ransack a fertile inventiveness of cruelty for fresh methods of inflicting this insulting form of death. [^5]

"They had given thirty pieces of silver for their Saviour's blood, and they were themselves sold in thousands for yet smaller sums. They had chosen Bar-Abbas in preference to their Messiah, and for them there has been no Messiah more, while a murderer's dagger swayed the last counsels of their dying nationality. They had accepted the guilt of blood, and the last pages of their history were glued together with the rivers of their blood, and that blood continued to be shed in wanton cruelties from age to age.

"They who will, may see in incidents like these the mere unmeaning chances of History; but there is in History nothing unmeaning to one who regards it as the Voice of God speaking among the destinies of men; and whether a man sees any significance or not in events like these, he must be blind indeed who does not see that when the murder of Christ was consummated, the axe was laid at the root of the barren tree of Jewish nationality. Since that day Jerusalem and its environs, with their 'ever-extending miles of grave-stones and ever-lengthening pavement of tombs and sepulchers,' have become little more than one vast cemetery—an Aceldama, a field of blood, a potter's field to bury strangers in. Like the mark of Cain, which clung to the murderer, the guilt of that blood seemed to cling to them—as it ever must until that same blood effaceth it. For, by God's mercy, that blood was shed for them also who made it flow; the voice which they strove to quench in death was uplifted in its last prayer for pity on His murderers. May that blood be efficacious! may that prayer be heard!" [^6]

Pilate, having thus announced Jesus' innocence; having risen from the judgment seat; having washed his hands—for himself and for all Israel, that all might remain free from innocent blood—yet, in weakness, unable to withstand the pressures of the Jewish mob, freed Bar-Abbas and had Jesus scourged. "This scourging was the ordinary preliminary to crucifixion and other forms of capital punishment. It was a punishment so truly fearful, that the mind revolts at it; and it has long been abolished by that compassion of mankind which has been so greatly intensified, and in some degree even created, by the gradual comprehension of Christian truth. The unhappy sufferer was publicly stripped, was tied by the hands in a bent position to a pillar, and then, on the tense quivering nerves of the naked back, the blows were inflicted with leathern thongs, weighted with jagged edges of bone and lead; sometimes even the blows fell by accident—sometimes, with terrible barbarity, were purposely struck—on the face and eyes. It was a punishment so hideous that, under its lacerating agony, the victim generally fainted, often died; still more frequently a man was sent away to perish under the mortification and nervous exhaustion which ensued."

After the scourging came the derision. After he had borne so great a burden—in Gethsemane, before Pilate and Herod, by means of the lead and leather of the flagellum—Pilate placed him in the hands of those coarse and brutal warriors whose mission it was to wound and kill, and whose chief delight was to gloat over the agonies and pains of their foes. These men of war took the Man of Peace; these scarred and war-trained veterans of many a tumultuous fray took the Prince of Heaven; these cursing, jeering foes of all that is decent in the world took the Son of God—they took him, in bonds, with the approval of Pilate, to do with him according to their evil desires. "The low vile soldiery of the Praetorium—not Romans, who might have had more sense of the inborn dignity of the silent sufferer, but mostly the mere mercenary scum and dregs of the provinces—led Him into their barrack-room, and there mocked, in their savage hatred, the King whom they had tortured. It added keenness to their enjoyment to have in their power One who was of Jewish birth, of innocent life, of majestic bearing. The opportunity broke so agreeably the coarse monotony of their life, that they summoned all of the cohort who were disengaged to witness their brutal sport. In sight of those hardened ruffians"—and Pilate himself may well have been among the observers—"they went through the whole ceremony of mock coronation, a mock investiture, a mock homage. Around the brows of Jesus, in wanton mimicry of the Emperor's laurel, they twisted a green wreath of thorny leaves; in His tied and trembling hands they placed a reed for a sceptre; from His torn and bleeding shoulders they stripped the white robe with which Herod had mocked Him—which must now have been all soaked with blood—and flung on Him an old scarlot paludament—some cast-off war cloak, with its purple laticlave, from the Praetorian wardrobe. This, with feigned solemnity, they buckled over His right shoulder, with its glittering fibula; and then—each with his derisive homage of bended knee—each with his infamous spitting—each with the blow over the head from the reed sceptre, which His bound hands could not hold—they kept passing before Him with their mock salutation of 'Hail, King of the Jews!' "

Pilate Sends Jesus to the Cross

(John 19:4-16; Luke 23:24-25)

After the great derision, Pilate went forth from the Praetorium where the soldiers had made sport of the King of kings and said to the Jewish multitude: "Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I FIND NO FAULT IN HIM." "Even now, even yet, Pilate wished, hoped, even strove to save Him. He might represent this frightful scourging, not as the preliminary to crucifixion, but as an inquiry by torture, which had failed to elicit any further confession. And as Jesus came forth—as He stood beside him, with that martyr-form on the beautiful mosaic of the tribunal—the spots of blood upon His green wreath of torture, the mark of blows and spitting on His countenance, the weariness of His deathful agony upon the sleepless eyes, the sagum of faded scarlet, darkened by the weals of His lacerated back, and dropping, it may be, its stains of crimson upon the tessellated floor—even then, even so, in that hour of His extremest humiliation—yet, as He stood in the grandeur of His holy calm on that lofty tribunal above the yelling crowd, there shone all over Him so Godlike a pre-eminence, so divine a nobleness, that Pilate broke forth with that involuntary exclamation which has thrilled with emotion so many million hearts—

"'BEHOLD THE MAN!'

"But his appeal only woke a fierce outbreak of the scream, 'Crucify! crucify!' The mere sight of Him, even in this His unspeakable shame and sorrow, seemed to add fresh fuel to their hate. In vain the heathen soldier appeals for humanity to the Jewish priest; no heart throbbed with responsive pity; no voice of compassion broke that monotonous yell of 'Crucify!'—the howling refrain of their wild 'liturgy of death.' The Roman who had shed blood like water, on the field of battle, in open massacre, in secret assassination, might well be supposed to have an icy and a stony heart; but yet icier and stonier was the heart of those scrupulous hypocrites and worldly priests."

With roll on roll of thunderous hate the storm of Sadducean evil has reached its peak; priestcraft is in control; Pilate can no longer delay the dread sentence: "Take ye him, and crucify him: FOR I FIND NO FAULT IN HIM." 'Let him die; let it be by your hand; he has committed no crime worthy of death; there is no sedition or treason here; Rome faces no peril; he is innocent; but if this wild tumult, this insensate hate, this vile outpouring of vengeance, if all this cannot be stayed in any other way, I will bend to your will. Let him be crucified!' Roman law bows to Jewish priestcraft, and the Jewish Jesus is sent to his death by Roman hands.

Has the issue now at last been decided? Not so; far from it. "What the Jews want—what the Jews will have—is not tacit connivance, but absolute sanction. They see their power. They see that this blood-stained Governor dares not hold out against them; they know that the Roman statecraft is tolerant of concessions to local superstition. Boldly, therefore, they fling to the winds all question of a political offense, and with all their hypocritical pretenses calcined by the heat of their passion, they shout, 'We have a law, and by our law He ought to die, because He made Himself a Son of God.' "

Was there any question in their minds as to the teachings of this Galilean? He said he was the Son of God! Was there any doubt as to the charge they hurled against him, as to the reason they thirsted for his blood? It was his claim to Messianic divinity! They had kept it from Pilate until death by crucifixion was approved; now let the world know; let them and their children be in opposition to Christ forever. They have succeeded in their conspiracy; he is to die; and how little they know that his death and resurrection will prove forever his divine Sonship. His death will be but the seed from which his message will sprout; and that seed, growing into his glorious resurrection, will soon become a great vine which covers the whole earth. Yes, let him die, but through death he shall live again; and because he lives, all men shall rise again in mortality.

At this new declaration, Pilate was startled, fearful. Heathen and pagan superstition surpasses that of any other people. The Son of God! What there was about this man that pulled at his heart strings, he did not know. Were his long felt presentiments bringing him a message that he had not yet understood? And the vision and warning of his wife—what of them? Pilate, accordingly, went again into the Judgment Hall and asked Jesus: "Whence art thou?"

Jesus did not deign to answer. Pilate, in anger, demanded: "Speakest thou not unto me? knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee?" To kill or to let live? To scourge and to crucify? Can Pilate save a soul, speak peace to an aching heart, or raise a worthy man in immortal glory? Eternal power rests with the Man of Sorrows, and even such profane power as a worldly despot may exercise is only by the grace of Him in whom all things center. And Pilate—does he dare affront Annas or offend Tiberius by freeing this innocent man? "And Jesus pitied the hopeless bewilderment of this man, whom guilt had changed from a ruler into a slave." Then he who could not look upon any sin with the least degree of allowance spoke first of the sins of Pilate and then of those of Judas and Annas and Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin and the Jewish nation. "Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above"—'My Father is permitting all this that I may now be lifted up upon the cross, as the Messianic word requires'—"therefore he that delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin."

"In the very depths of his inmost soul Pilate felt the truth of the words—silently acknowledged the superiority of his bound and lacerated victim. . . . All of his soul that was not eaten away by pride and cruelty thrilled back an unwonted echo to these few calm words of the Son of God. Jesus had condemned his sin, and so far from being offended, the judgment only deepened his awe of this mysterious Being, whose utter impotence seemed grander and more awful than the loftiest power. From that time Pilate was even yet more anxious to save him." But his attempts were futile. Back from the satanic mob came the cry: "If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend: whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar."

Then Pilate, the sin-bound ruler of Judea, led Jesus, the thong-bound ruler of the earth, forth into "a place that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha." Pilate "sat down in the judgment seat." It was Friday, April 7, A.D. 30. The Roman trials had begun about 6 A.M. and it was now some three hours later. To the Jews Pilate said: "BEHOLD YOUR KING!"

Their cries increased; their shrieking wails pierced the Judean air; their faces were as flint, their hearts as stone. There was no mercy here—only hate and envy and a lust for vengeance. Lucifer was their Lord. "Away with him, away with him," they screamed, "crucify him." To this Pilate said: "SHALL I CRUCIFY YOUR KING?" Their answer: "We have no king but Caesar." [^7] "At that dark terrible name of Caesar, Pilate trembled. It was a name to conjure with. It mastered him. He thought of that terrible implement of tyranny, the accusation of laesa majestas, into which all other charges merged, which had made confiscation and torture so common, and had caused blood to flow like water in the streets of Rome. He thought of Tiberius, the aged gloomy Emperor, then hiding at Caprea his ulcerous features, his poisonous suspicions, his sick infamies, his desperate revenge. At this very time he had been maddened into a yet more sanguinary and misanthropic ferocity by the detected falsity and treason of his only friend and minister, Sejanus, and it was to Sejanus himself that Pilate is said to have owed his position. There might be secret delators in that very mob. Panic-stricken, the unjust judge, in obedience to his own terrors, consciously betrayed the innocent victim to the anguish of death. He who had so often prostituted justice, was now unable to achieve the one act of justice which he desired. He who had so often murdered pity, was now forbidden to taste the sweetness of a pity for which he longed. He who had so often abused authority, was now rendered impotent to exercise it, for once, on the side of right. Truly for him, sin had become its own Erinnys, and his pleasant vices had been converted into the instrument of his punishment!"

"And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required."

"He delivered Jesus to their will."

"Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified."

Judas Iscariot Commits Suicide

(Matthew 27:3-10; JST Matthew 27:5-6, 10; Acts 1:15-21)

As an addendum to this night's evil deeds, we inscribe in our record the death of a devil—not a demon from hell, for such never die; they are doomed to Gnolom, to dwell in hell worlds without end—but a mortal devil, one into whom Satan had entered; one who conspired to put his Lord to death; one who sold his soul for thirty pieces of silver; one who led a cohort of armed men into the seclusion of Gethsemane; one who betrayed the Son of Man with an effusive outpouring of seeming love and respect that was, in fact, jealousy and hate. He was Judas of Kerioth—Judas Iscariot—the only Judean among the Twelve.

We do not know when Judas took his own life—only that he seems to have preceded his Lord in death. As the full impact of his traitorous deed began to dawn upon his sin-sick soul, it ignited within him the fires of Gehenna; a near madness possessed his being. "Terribly soon did the Nemesis fall on the main actor in the lower stages of this [night's] iniquity. Doubtless through all those hours Judas had been a secure spectator of all that had occurred, and when the morning dawned upon that chilly night, and he knew the decision of the Priests and of the Sanhedrin, and saw that Jesus was now given over for crucifixion to the Roman Governor, then he began fully to realize all that he had done. There is in a great crime an awfully illuminating power. It lights up the theatre of the conscience with an unnatural glare, and, expelling the twilight glamour of self-interest, shows the actions and motives in their full and true aspect. In Judas, as in so many thousands before and since, this opening of the eyes which follows the consummation of an awful sin to which many other sins have led, drove him from remorse to despair, from despair to madness, from madness to suicide." (Farrar, p. 659.)

Matthew says that when Judas saw that Jesus "was condemned"—probably by Pilate to be crucified—he "repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders." Repented? Only in the sense that he had remorse of conscience and wished that he had not lifted up his heel against his own familiar Friend, whose bread he ate—not repentance in the true Godly sense. True repentance is a gift of God that grows out of faith in Christ and carries with it a firm determination to love and serve the Lord. Judas regretted what he had done, but he was still a thief at heart, still a traitor, and still destined to suffer the wrath of God in Sheol until death and hell deliver up the dead which are in them. And yet he had the good grace to say: "I have betrayed the innocent blood."

That much at least he knew. The sorrows of the damned were already welling up within him. "The road, the streets, the people's faces—all seemed now to bear witness against him and for Jesus. He read it everywhere; he felt it always; he imagined it, till his whole being was on flame. What had been; what was; what would be! Heaven and earth receded from him; there were voices in the air, and pangs in the soul—and no escape, help, counsel, or hope anywhere." (Edersheim 2:574.) And yet this much he knew: "I have betrayed the innocent blood." 'This Man is innocent; he ought to go free.'

Their reply, like a dagger thrust into the heart of a fleeing man, both stunned and cursed him: "What is that to us?" they said. "See thou to it; thy sins be upon thee." And thus it ever is: conspirators and traitors forsake each other and the devil sustaineth not his own. Judas "must get rid of these thirty pieces of silver, which, like thirty serpents, coiled round his soul with [the] terrible hissing of death." (Edersheim 2:574.) His infamy was his own. "He felt that he was of no importance any longer; that in guilt there is no possibility of mutual respect, no basis for any feeling but mutual abhorrence. His paltry thirty pieces of silver were all that he would get. For these he had sold his soul; and these he should no more enjoy than Achan enjoyed the gold he buried, or Ahab the garden he had seized. Flinging them wildly down upon the pavement into the holy place where the priests sat, and into which he might not enter, he hurried out into the despairing solitude from which he was not destined to emerge alive." (Farrar, p. 659.)

Judas is about to die by his own hand and become not only the father of traitors but the father of suicides from henceforth. But he is going to die in a particular manner, at an appointed place, to fulfill the divine word—a word uttered more than a thousand years before by David, more than six hundred years before by Jeremiah, and nearly six hundred years before by Zechariah. It was David who, as Peter expressed it, said of Judas: "Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell therein: and his bishoprick let another take." [^8] It was Jeremiah who was commanded to take a potter's vessel out into the potter's field—into the Valley of Hinnom; the Valley of Slaughter; the place called Tophet; the place called Gehenna in Jesus' day; the place where apostate Israel had burned their children to Baal; the place which was filled with the blood of innocents. There, in that vile and evil setting, while the leaders of the people listened, Jeremiah was commanded to break the potter's vessel and to prophesy that even so would it be with Judah and Jerusalem. "Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Even so will I break this people and this city, as one breaketh a potter's vessel, that cannot be made whole again: and they shall bury them in Tophet, till there be no place to bury." (Jer. 19.) And then it was Zechariah who prophesied that the chief priests and rulers would weigh, for the price of the Lord, thirty pieces of silver and that they would then be cast "to the potter in the house of the Lord." (Zech. 11:12-13.)

And so, now, in fulfillment of all this, Judas is to do his evil deed. "And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple," Matthew says, "and departed, and went, and hanged himself on a tree. And straightway he fell down, and his bowels gushed out, and he died." "Out he rushed from the Temple, out of Jerusalem, into solitude. Whither shall it be? Down into the horrible solitude of the Valley of Hinnom, the 'Tophet' of old, with its ghastly memories, the Gehenna of the future, with its ghostly associations. But it was not solitude, for it seemed now peopled with figures, faces, sounds. Across the Valley, and up the steep sides of the mountain! We are now on 'the potter's field' of Jeremiah—somewhat to the west above where the Kidron and Hinnom valleys merge. It is cold, soft clayey soil, where the footsteps slip, or are held in clammy bonds. Here jagged rocks rise perpendicularly: perhaps there was some gnarled, bent, stunted tree. Up there he climbed to the top of that rock. Now slowly and deliberately he unwound the long girdle that held his garment. It was the girdle in which he had carried those thirty pieces of silver. He was now quite calm and collected. With that girdle he will hang himself on that tree close by, and when he has fastened it, he will throw himself off from that jagged rock.

"It is done; but as, unconscious, not yet dead perhaps, he swung heavily on that branch, under the unwonted burden the girdle gave way, or perhaps the knot, which his trembling hands had made, unloosed, and he fell heavily forward among the jagged rock beneath, and perished in the manner of which St. Peter reminded his fellow disciples in the days before Pentecost." (Edersheim 2:575.)

Then "the chief priests took the silver pieces" and said: "It is not lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood." After counseling together, they—the chief priests!—bought with them the potter's field, to bury strangers in." Peter says that Judas "purchased a field with the reward of iniquity," and that it was called "Aceldama, . . . The field of blood." Of this whole episode, Edersheim says: "It was not lawful to take into the Temple-treasury, for the purchase of sacred things, money that had been unlawfully gained. In such cases the Jewish Law provided that the money was to be restored to the donor, and, if he insisted on giving it, that he should be induced to spend it for something for the public weal. This explains the apparent discrepancy between the accounts in the Book of Acts and by St. Matthew. By a fiction of law the money was still considered to be Judas', and to have been applied by him in the purchase of the well-known 'potter's field,' for the charitable purpose of burying in it strangers.

"But from henceforth the old name of 'potter's field' became popularly changed into that of 'field of blood.' And yet it was the act of Israel through its leaders: 'they took the thirty pieces of silver—the price of him that was valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value, and gave them for the potter's field!' It was all theirs, though they would have fain made it all Judas': the valuing, the selling, and the purchasing. And the 'potter's field'—the very spot on which Jeremiah had been Divinely directed to prophesy against Jerusalem and against Israel: how was it now all fulfilled in the light of the completed sin and apostasy of the people, as prophetically described by Zechariah! This Tophet of Jeremiah, now that they had valued and sold at thirty shekel Israel's Messiah-Shepherd—truly a Tophet, and become a field of blood! Surely, not an accidental coincidence this, that it should be the place of Jeremy's announcement of judgment: not accidental, but veritably a fulfilment of his prophecy! And so St. Matthew, targuming this prophecy in form as in its spirit, and in true Jewish manner stringing to it the prophetic description furnished by Zechariah, sets the event before us as the fulfilment of Jeremy's prophecy." (Edersheim 2:575-76.)

Judas, guilty, thus paid the first installment on the punishment decreed; Judas, guilty, yet added to his guilt by taking that which only God can give; Judas, guilty, thus carried his guilt to hell, where it will remain until he, having paid the uttermost farthing and been beaten with many stripes, bows the knee to Him whom he betrayed, truly repents, and comes forth to receive his place in the realms of Him who is merciful and gracious to all men.

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] Quotations in this chapter that are not otherwise footnoted are from pages 688-99 of Farrar.
[^2] "If Israel's oppressors could do what was then in process to the 'Green Tree,' who bore the leafage of freedom and truth and offered the priceless fruit of life eternal, what would the powers of evil not do to the withered branches and dried trunk of apostate Judaism?" (Talmage, p. 654.) Farrar gives the traditional interpretation of Jesus' statement thus: "If, in the fulfillment of God's purposes, I the Holy and the Innocent must suffer thus-if the green tree be thus blasted-how shall the dry tree of a wicked life, with its abominable branches, be consumed to the uttermost burning?" With reference to the martyrdom of the Prophet and the Patriarch of this dispensation, the inspired account contains this expression: "If the fire can scathe a green tree for the glory of God, how easy it will burn up the dry trees to purify the vineyard of corruption." (D&C 135:6.)
[^3] "Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that be of heavy hearts." (Prov. 31:6.)
[^4] The spiritually enlightened will envision, in this connection, the fulfillment of Isaiah's Messianic word concerning "the nail that is fastened in the sure place." (Isa. 22:21-25.)
[^5] Near the close of a long sermon on mercy and justice, Alma says: "Justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God." (Alma 42:24-25.) Alma's reasoning, thus, is that unless God conformed to his eternal laws he would not be God, for it is his total and complete conformity to law that makes him God. Jesus, thus, could not abandon the whole system of law and forgive and save the thieves who were far from being penitent and obedient as of the time they hung with him on their crosses.
[^6] Edersheim suggests a somewhat different modus operandi with reference to the crucifixion of Jesus. "Avowedly, the punishment was invented to make death as painful and as lingering as the power of human endurance. First, the upright wood was planted in the ground. It was not high, and probably the Feet of the Sufferer were not above one or two feet from the ground. Thus could the communication described in the Gospels take place between Him and others; thus, also, might His Sacred Lips be moistened with the sponge attached to a short stalk of hyssop. Next, the transverse wood was placed on the ground, and the Sufferer laid on it, when His Arms were extended, drawn up, and bound to it. Then (this not in Egypt, but in Carthage and Rome) a strong, sharp nail was driven, first into the Right, then into the Left Hand. Next, the Sufferer was drawn up by means of ropes, perhaps ladders; the transverse either bound or nailed to the upright, and a rest or support for the Body fastened on it. Lastly, the Feet were extended, and either one nail hammered into each, or a larger piece of iron through the two. We have already expressed our belief that the indignity of exposure was not offered at such a Jewish execution. And so might the crucified hang for hours, even days, in the unutterable anguish of suffering, till consciousness at last failed." (Edersheim 2:589.)
[^7] "We have no king but Caesar." "With this cry Judaism was, in the person of its representatives, guilty of denial of God, of blasphemy, of apostasy. It committed suicide; and, ever since, has its dead body been carried in show from land to land, and from century to century: to be dead, and to remain dead, till He come a second time, Who is the Resurrection and the Life!" (Edersheim 2:581.)
[^8] Psalms 69 and 109, which are the source of Peter's declaration, abound in Messianic phrases that speak both of Jesus and of Judas.
