Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 107

The Crucifixion

He was lifted up upon the cross and slain for the sins of the world. (1 Ne. 11:33.)

They shall consider him a man, . . . and shall crucify him. (Mosiah 3:9.)

From Gabbatha to Golgotha

(Matthew 27:31-33; JST Matthew 27:35; Mark 15:20-22; JST Mark 15:25; Luke 23:26-32; JST Luke 23:31-32; John 19:16-17; JST John 19:17)

As we come now to that awful hour when a Roman mallet drives rough nails into sinless hands—the hour when a God dies—we are faced with the awesome task of setting forth how he died and by whom he was crucified. True it is that a Roman hammer drove the sharp ferrous spikes into his quivering and aching hands; true, that a Roman arm hurled the steel-headed spear into his suffering side; true, that a Roman Procurator profaned the Holy One by turning the Sanhedrist shriek, "Crucify him," into a Roman decree. But how can the life of a God be taken? How can the Great Jehovah, who made heaven and earth and the sea and the fountains of waters—and all things that in them are—how can the Lord Omnipotent, the Creator of all things from the beginning, how can he die? And at whose door is the demonish deed laid?

The Messianic word identifies his murderers as "the Jews"—as a people and as a "nation"—and ascribes their heinous course to "priestcrafts and iniquities." (2 Ne. 10:3-5.) And around his cross, mingling with the gaping crowds who gained vicarious pleasure from his agonies, we find the Sanhedrists and chief priests inciting the people to mock and revile and defy the one who had been lifted up and whose blood then watered the dusty soil of Calvary. As to the dire deeds of this dread day, they happened on this wise:

While seated on the Roman judgment seat in Gabbatha, the sinful and proud Procurator asked if he, Pilate, should crucify their Jewish King Jesus. Cursing themselves with their own words, and dooming their own race out of their own mouths, the chief priests and Sanhedrists said they have no king but Caesar. Then Pilate delivered Jesus to them, the Jews, to be crucified. So it is written by John. Matthew and Mark tell us that before the death procession started for Golgotha, Jesus was taken by the soldiers into Praetorium where—clothed in purple, pained with a crown of thorns, mocked and smitten by the rude soldiery—he was hailed as the demeaned king of a damned race. After these degrading acts of demonish sport, the men of war and of the world took off the purple robe, reclothed him in his own raiment, and led him away to crucify him. Caesar, their adopted king, would that day do for the Jews what they could not do for themselves—crucify their true King. Among the seed of Jacob the death penalty could only be imposed by strangulation, beheading, burning, or stoning. So it is written in the Mishnah. But Jesus, according to the eternal providences, must suffer the opprobrium of a non-Jewish crucifixion. The Romans must do the deed for the Jews. And this is the day; the appointed hour is upon them.

Now it was the custom among them for a condemned man to carry his cross. We do not know the kind and type of cross upon which Jesus was lifted up. Three types were in common usage, one shaped like an "X," another like a "T," and the third in the traditional Latin form. Probably this latter was used as it would have provided a place for the superscription. It consisted of two parts, an eight- or nine-foot pole and a movable crosspiece or patibulum. Ordinarily the patibulum consisted of two parallel beams fastened together between which, as he carried his heavy burden, the neck of the criminal was placed. "The cross was not, and could not have been, the massive and lofty structure with which such hundreds of pictures have made us familiar. Crucifixion was among the Romans a very common punishment, and it is clear that they would not waste any trouble in constructing the instrument of shame and torture. It would undoubtedly be made of the very commonest wood that came to hand, perhaps olive or sycamore, and knocked together in the very rudest fashion." [^1]

And so Jesus, bearing his cross, was led along the dolorous way to a place of burial, of skulls, of death. Four Roman soldiers went beside him. It was the purpose and intent to attract attention, to demean the criminal, and to frighten others so they would not themselves come to a like end. A sign, either hanging around his neck or carried by one of the soldiers, announced the crimes of the crucifee. Two condemned criminals, each bearing his cross and each attended by four soldiers, followed Jesus to the place of agony and death.

"To support the body of a man, a cross would require to be of a certain size and weight; and to one enfeebled by the horrible severity of the previous scourging, the carrying of such a burden would be an additional misery. But Jesus was enfeebled not only by this cruelty, but by previous days of violent struggle and agitation, by an evening of deep and overwhelming emotion, by a night of sleepless anxiety and suffering, by the mental agony of the garden"—and this suffering in Gethsemane, when great drops of blood oozed from every pore, bore in more heavily upon him than all else combined—"by three trials and three sentences of death before the Jews, by the long and exhausting scenes in the Praetorium, by the examination before Herod, and by the brutal and painful derisions which He had undergone, first at the hands of the Sanhedrin and their servants, then from Herod's body-guard, and lastly from the Roman cohort. All these, superadded to the sickening lacerations of the scourging, had utterly broken down His bodily powers. His tottering footsteps, if not His actual falls under that fearful load, made it evident that He lacked the physical strength to carry it from the Praetorium to Golgotha."

Shortly after the parade of death began, certainly by the time the melancholy marchers reached the gates of the city, Jesus was no longer able to bear the burden of the cross. Thereupon the soldiers laid hold upon Simon of Cyrene, who chanced—or was it an instance of an intervening providence—to be coming in from the country; him they compelled to bear the cross of Jesus. Mark identifies him as "the father of Alexander and Rufus," showing that at a later date at least the members of his family were disciples of renown whose names were familiar to the saints. It is pleasant to suppose that even as Jesus kept the Feast of the Passover in the home of a devout disciple, so a Divine Providence provided for him at this hour another believing soul who would rejoice in days to come that he had been privileged to lift some of the fatiguing burden from him whose burdens were greater than mortal man can bear.

It is clear that the Roman-Jewish design to herald the crucifixion of Jesus from the housetops surpassed their wildest dreams. Such crowds as had listened to him in the temple were present. A marvelous moving multitude marched with the death party. These were the ten thousands of Judea and the thousands of Galilee, both men and women. As far as the record recites, none of the men in that mighty mass came to his defense, but with the women it was otherwise. "From the men in that moving crowd He does not appear to have received one word of pity or of sympathy. Some there must surely have been who had seen His miracles, who had heard His words; some of those who had been almost, if not utterly, convinced of His Messiahship, as they hung upon His lips while He uttered His great discourses in the Temple; some of the eager crowd who had accompanied Him from Bethany five days before with shouted hosannas and waving palms. Yet if so, a faithless timidity or a deep misgiving—perhaps even a boundless sorrow—kept them dumb. But these women, more quick to pity, less susceptible to controlling influences, could not and would not conceal the grief and amazement with which this spectacle filled them. They beat upon their breasts and rent the air with their lamentations, till Jesus Himself hushed their shrill cries with words of solemn warning. Turning to them—which He could not have done had He still been staggering under the burden of His cross—He said to them":

Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children.

For, behold, the days are coming, in the which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck. . . .

For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry? [^2]

To this expression relative to the green tree and the dry tree, Luke says: "This he spake, signifying the scattering of Israel, and the desolation of the heathen, or in other words, the Gentiles," meaning the Israelitish scattering that took place at the destruction of Jerusalem, and meaning the desolations that would fall upon all men in the latter days, the days of wickedness and vengeance that should precede his Second Coming.

"Many of them, and the majority of their children, would live to see such rivers of bloodshed, such complications of agony, as the world had never known before—days which would seem to overpass the capacities of human suffering, and would make men seek to hide themselves, if it might be, under the very roots of the hill on which their city stood. The fig-tree of their nation's life was still green: if such deeds of darkness were possible now, what should be done when that tree was withered and blasted, and ready for the burning?—if in the days of hope and decency they could execrate their blameless Deliverer, what would happen in the days of blasphemy and madness and despair? If, under the full light of day, Priests and Scribes could crucify the Innocent, what would be done in the midnight orgies and blood-stained bacchanalia of Zealots and Murderers? This was a day of crime; that would be a day when crime had become her own avenging fury.

"The solemn warning, the last sermon of Christ on earth"—unless he made some unrecorded statements from the cross—"was meant primarily for those who heard it; but, like all the words of Christ, it has deeper and wider meaning for all mankind. These words warn every child of man that the day of careless pleasure and blasphemous disbelief will be followed by the crack of doom; they warn each human being who lives in pleasure on the earth, and eats, and drinks, and is drunken, that though the patience of God waits, and His silence is unbroken, yet the days shall come when He shall speak in thunder, and His wrath shall burn like fire."

They Crucify Their King

(Matthew 27:34-38; JST Matthew 27:39-42; Mark 15:23-28; JST Mark 15:26, 28-31; Luke 23:33-34, 38; JST Luke 23:35; John 19:18-24)

At about 9 A.M. the dread procession arrived at Golgotha, which is Calvary—"a place of burial." There the final preparations for crucifixion were performed. So horrible was death on the cross that custom permitted an act that lessened the pain and agony. "Utterly brutal and revolting as was the punishment of crucifixion, which has now for fifteen hundred years been abolished by the common pity and abhorrence of mankind, there was one custom in Judea, and [also] one occasionally practised by the Romans, which reveal some touch of passing humanity. The latter consisted in giving to the sufferer a blow under the arm-pit, which, without causing death, yet hastened its approach. Of this I need not speak, because, for whatever reason, it was not practised on this occasion." We cannot believe other than that a Divine Providence—which guided in the minutest detail all that this day transpired—so controlled events as to prevent its happening, and that for the very reasons involved in the other proffered act of mercy that Jesus himself voluntarily prevented.

"The former [act of mercy], which seems to have been due to the milder nature of Judaism, and which was derived from a happy piece of Rabbinic exegesis on Proverbs 31:6, consisted in giving to the condemned, immediately before his execution, a draught of wine medicated with some powerful opiate. [^3] It had been the custom of wealthy ladies in Jerusalem to provide this stupefying potion at their own expense, and they did so quite irrespectively of their sympathy for any individual criminal. It was probably taken freely by the two malefactors, but when they offered it to Jesus He would not drink it. The refusal was an act of sublimest heroism. The effect of the draught was to dull the nerves, to cloud the intellect, to provide an anesthetic against some part, at least, of the lingering agonies of that dreadful death. But He, whom some modern skeptics have been base enough to accuse of feminine feebleness and cowardly despair, preferred rather 'to look Death in the face'—to meet the king of terrors without striving to deaden the force of one agonizing anticipation, or to still the throbbing of one lacerated nerve."

This, then, is the awful hour. They crucify him. The scene probably was acted out somewhat along this line: "The three crosses were laid on the ground—that of Jesus, which was doubtless taller than the other two, being placed in bitter scorn in the midst. Perhaps the cross-beam was now nailed to the upright, and certainly the title, which had either been borne by Jesus fastened round His neck, or carried by one of the soldiers in front of Him, was now nailed to the summit of His cross. Then He was stripped of His clothes, and then followed the most awful moment of all. He was laid down upon the implement of torture. His arms were stretched along the cross-beams; and at the centre of the open palms, the point of a huge iron nail was placed, which, by the blow of a mallet, was driven home into the wood. Then through either foot separately, or possibly through both together as they were placed one over the other, another huge nail tore its way through the quivering flesh. Whether the sufferer was also bound to the cross we do not know; but, to prevent the hands and feet being torn away by the weight of the body, which could not 'rest upon nothing but four great wounds,' there was, about the centre of the cross, a wooden projection strong enough to support, at least in part, a human body which soon became a mass of agony." [^4]

We are wont to speak of seven words or utterances made by Jesus from the cross. It was probably at this point that he made the first of these: "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." The reference, of course, is to "the soldiers who crucified him," not to Judas or Annas or Caiaphas or the chief priests or the Sanhedrin or Pilate or Herod or Lucifer or any who have rebelled against him and chosen to walk in darkness at noonday. All these are left in the hands of Divine Justice, and mercy cannot rob justice, else God would cease to be God. [^5]

Jesus is speaking, rather, of the Roman soldiers who have no choice but to do the will of Pilate and those whose minions they are. And he is not asking the Father to forgive them of their sins and to prepare them, thus, to dwell with clean and pure persons in celestial rest. He is simply asking that the deed of crucifixion be not laid at their door; let the responsibility rest with the Jews and with the Procurator of Rome, not with these who are doing—albeit in a gross and cruel manner—no more than they have been commanded to do. Had his concern been the remission of their sins, he could have acted on his own, for, as his ministry amply attests, the Son of Man had power to forgive sins on earth. And, further, if these Roman robots are to receive forgiveness of sins and the salvation that flows therefrom, it must be on the same basis as with all others who cleanse themselves from sin. The course is one of faith, repentance, baptism, and the receipt of that baptism of fire which burns dross and evil out of a human soul as though by fire. Yet the mercy and majesty and might of Him who conquered all is manifest in his petition. As pains beyond compare wrack his tortured body, his concern and interest centers in the spiritual well-being of these ruffians of the baser sort who are the creators of much of the agony.

But back now to the modus operandi of the crucifixion. As the cross lay on the ground, Jesus was nailed thereto. "And then the accursed tree—with its living human burden hanging upon it in helpless torment, and suffering fresh tortures as every movement irritated the fresh rents in hands and feet—was slowly heaved up by strong arms, and the end of it fixed firmly in a hole dug deep in the ground for that purpose. The feet were but a little raised above the earth. The victim was in full reach of every hand that might choose to strike, in close proximity to every gesture of rage and hatred. He might hang for hours to be abused, insulted, even struck, by the ever-moving multitude who, with that desire to see what is horrible which always characterizes the coarsest hearts, had thronged to gaze upon a sight which should rather have made them weep tears of blood.

"And there, in tortures which grew ever more insupportable, ever more maddening as time flowed on, the unhappy victims might linger in pain so cruelly intolerable, that often they were driven to entreat and implore the spectators, or the executioners, for dear pity's sake, to put an end to anguish too awful for man to bear—conscious to the last, and often, with tears of abject misery, beseeching from their enemies the priceless boon of death. [^6]

"For indeed a death by crucifixion seems to include all that pain and death can have of [the] horrible and [the] ghastly—dizziness, cramp, thirst, starvation, sleeplessness, traumatic fever, tetanus, publicity of shame, long continuance of torment, horror of anticipation, mortification of untended wounds—all intensified just up to the point at which they can be endured at all, but all stopping just short of the point which would give to the sufferer the relief of unconsciousness. The unnatural position made every movement painful; the lacerated veins and crushed tendons throbbed with incessant anguish; the wounds, inflamed by exposure, gradually gangrened; the arteries—especially of the head—became swollen and oppressed with surcharged blood; and while each variety of misery went on gradually increasing, there was added to them the intolerable pang of a burning and raging thirst; and all these physical complications caused an internal excitement and anxiety, which made the prospect of death itself—of death, the awful unknown enemy, at whose approach man usually shudders most—bear the aspect of a delicious and exquisite release."

Lest there be any question in any mind as to the identity of the one on the chief of the three crosses—for Jerusalem was full of Passover pilgrims, assembled from all Palestine and from Jewish settlements in distant lands—Pilate wrote "a title," "a superscription," "his accusation," and put it upon the cross. The words were recorded in the official Latin, in the current Greek, and in the vernacular Aramaic. The message read: "JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS."

"When the cross was uplifted, the leading Jews, for the first time, prominently noticed the deadly insult in which Pilate had vented his indignation. Before, in their blind rage, they had imagined that the manner of His crucifixion was an insult aimed at Jesus; but now that they saw Him hanging between the two robbers, on a cross yet loftier, it suddenly flashed upon them that it was a public scorn inflicted upon them. . . . With the passionate ill-humour of the Roman governor there probably blended a vein of seriousness. While he was delighted to revenge himself on his detested subjects by an act of public insolence, he probably meant, or half meant, to imply that this was, in one sense, the King of the Jews—the greatest, the noblest, the truest of His race, whom therefore His race had crucified. The King was not unworthy of His kingdom, but the kingdom of the King. There was something loftier even than royalty in the glazing eyes which never ceased to look with sorrow on the City of Righteousness, which had now become a city of murderers. The Jews felt the intensity of the scorn with which Pilate had treated them. It so completely poisoned their hour of triumph, that they sent their chief priests in deputation, begging the Governor to alter the obnoxious title."

"It should be written and set up over his head," they said to Pilate, "his [own] accusation, This is he that said he was Jesus, the King of the Jews." To their importuning plea, Pilate answered curtly: "What I have written, I have written; let it alone." And the superscription remained to testify to them and to all men that here indeed was he of whom Moses and the prophets spake—the one who came to deliver, to redeem, and to save: their Messiah, their King, their Lord and their God.

Strange as it may seem to the carnal mind, the hidden hand of Him who governs in the affairs of men did not let so much as a jot or a tittle of the Messianic word fall. Mark testifies that with him were crucified two thieves, "the one on his right hand, and the other on his left," that Isaiah's word might be fulfilled, "And he was numbered with the transgressors." (Isa. 53:12.) And when he was crucified, the four soldiers ordered to guard the cross—lest a half-dead person be taken down by his friends and revived—both divided and cast lots for his garments. His headgear, the outer cloaklike garment, the girdle, and the sandals, differing little in value, were easily divided among them. But for the seamless woven inner garment, an article of appreciable worth, they cast lots, "that the scripture might fulfilled, which saith, They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they did cast lots." (Ps. 22:18.)

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] The common sectarian heresy that Jesus went to Hades while his body lay in the tomb has at least a grain of truth in it. He did go to a world of departed spirits, where he "preached unto the spirits in prison" (1 Pet. 3:18-20), to those who considered the long separation of their bodies from their spirits as a prison. (D&C 138.)
[^2] Farrar, p. 704.
[^3] "Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that be of heavy hearts." (Prov. 31:6.)
[^4] The spiritually enlightened will envision, in this connection, the fulfillment of Isaiah's Messianic word concerning "the nail that is fastened in the sure place." (Isa. 22:21-25.)
[^5] Near the close of a long sermon on mercy and justice, Alma says: "Justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God." (Alma 42:24-25.) Alma's reasoning, thus, is that unless God conformed to his eternal laws he would not be God, for it is his total and complete conformity to law that makes him God. Jesus, thus, could not abandon the whole system of law and forgive and save the thieves who were far from being penitent and obedient as of the time they hung with him on their crosses.
[^6] Edersheim suggests a somewhat different modus operandi with reference to the crucifixion of Jesus. "Avowedly, the punishment was invented to make death as painful and as lingering as the power of human endurance. First, the upright wood was planted in the ground. It was not high, and probably the Feet of the Sufferer were not above one or two feet from the ground. Thus could the communication described in the Gospels take place between Him and others; thus, also, might His Sacred Lips be moistened with the sponge attached to a short stalk of hyssop. Next, the transverse wood was placed on the ground, and the Sufferer laid on it, when His Arms were extended, drawn up, and bound to it. Then (this not in Egypt, but in Carthage and Rome) a strong, sharp nail was driven, first into the Right, then into the Left Hand. Next, the Sufferer was drawn up by means of ropes, perhaps ladders; the transverse either bound or nailed to the upright, and a rest or support for the Body fastened on it. Lastly, the Feet were extended, and either one nail hammered into each, or a larger piece of iron through the two. We have already expressed our belief that the indignity of exposure was not offered at such a Jewish execution. And so might the crucified hang for hours, even days, in the unutterable anguish of suffering, till consciousness at last failed." (Edersheim 2:589.)
