Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 108

On the Cross of Calvary

My Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil— And for this cause have I been lifted up; therefore, according to the power of the Father I will draw all men unto me, that they may be judged according to their works. (3 Ne. 27:14-15.)

The Sanhedrists Incite Mockery and Derision against Him

(Matthew 27:39-43; JST Matthew 27:46; Mark 15:29-32; Luke 23:35-37)

With Jesus nailed to the cross, with the nails driven in a sure place, with an agonizing death assured, the floodgates of derision and hatred and venom are opened upon him. All of the vile passions and evil powers that framed the cry, "Crucify him, for we have no king but Caesar," are now hurled at him in the base challenge to prove his claimed divinity by saving himself and ascending an earthly throne.

The Roman soldiers have done their cruel deed and done it well. While Jesus hangs in agony they have naught to do but keep the peace and protect the cross, lest any of his friends steal the body of the Suffering One. They seat themselves before the instrument of death which they have raised; they begin to eat and drink and make merry. They quaff the cheap wine of the countryside and drink pledges to the Jewish King, and even offer him some of their vinegar-like liquor so that he can toast them. Theirs, we should note, is no special hatred toward him as a person; to them he is just another Jew, another member of a hated and despised race, another religious fanatic whose zeal has brought him to a deserved death. Their derision comes forth against him in his representative capacity, against him as a symbol of the benighted people who are so repulsive to them, against him as a supposed king. "If thou be the king of the Jews, save thyself," they say.

But it was not of a quarterion of coarse and brutal Gentile warriors that the Messianic word spake. The Jewish Messiah, whose hands and feet had been pierced, whose garments had been parted among them, and for whose vesture they had cast lots, said of himself, by the mouth of David: "All they that see me laugh me to scorn: . . . They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring lion." (Ps. 22:7, 13.) It was a nation and a people and their priestly rulers who crucified their King, not simply a few alien men of war; and it was a nation and a people and their priestly rulers who mocked and scoffed before his cross. We have seen how incensed the chief priests were over the mocking superscription nailed to the summit of the cross; this wound was deepened by the raillery of the soldiers that ascribed Jewish kingship to their mortal enemy. To turn these Roman taunts away from the Jews and to this Jesus of Galilee, we see the rulers and the chief priests and the scribes and the elders both mocking him and inciting the people to go and do likewise. The same satanic souls who had orchestrated the calls for crucifixion now led the same chorus of voices in chanting a derisive hymn of hate and vengeance against the one who had been crucified.

Their taunting cries assailed the whole ministry and work of Jesus among them. If they had planned and labored for long hours in their secret chambers to formulate their derisive charges, they could not have done better than they did in reciting those which Lucifer put into their minds almost without forethought. Their jeers cast contempt upon him in these respects:

He had announced that the Mosaic law was no longer binding upon them; that their temple-centered sacrificial system of salvation was now to cease; that they would be saved through the temple of his body; and that the destruction of that bodily temple and its resurrection in three days would be the only sign given them of his divine Sonship. Now, as they passed by and reviled and wagged their heads, they taunted him with the cry: "Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, Save thyself, and come down from the cross." 'If salvation centers in thee, and not in Moses' law, come down now from thy cross and save thyself first and us later.'

He had testified that God was his Father; that he and the Father were one; that no man came unto the Father but by the Son; and that he was the Son of God. Now they taunt: "If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross." What are these words but an echo, by the mouths of the Jews, of those spoken in the wilderness by the devil: "If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread," or 'Cast thyself down from the pinnacle of the Temple' (Matt. 4:1-11), to prove it. Whether by his own voice or by the voice of his servants, Lucifer's word is the same!

Jesus had saved others from all manner of disease and perils; he had calmed storms and fed multitudes; he had even raised rotting corpses from stench-filled tombs—all in similitude of the spiritual healings and salvation found in his words. Miracles were a way of life with him. Now they challenge him to save himself. "He saved others; himself he cannot save." "He saved others; let him save himself, if he be Christ, the chosen of God." Such were their words.

He had proclaimed himself as their King, their Deliverer, their Messiah. He came to reign in the hearts of the righteous. His kingdom, though not of this world, was as real as any realm ever inhabited by any people. Now they tempted him with these words: "If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him." "Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that we may see and believe." Believe? Yes, as they did when he opened the eyes of one who was blind from birth, or when he cast evil spirits from a Gadarene demoniac, or when he raised a man from Bethany from death!

As though to put an eternal seal on Him whom they derided, the Sanhedrists said—quoting, wittingly or otherwise, the Messianic word: "He trusted on the Lord that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him" (Ps. 22:8)—the Sanhedrists said: "He trusted in God; let him deliver him now; if he will save him, let him save him; for he said, I am the Son of God." Thus bore they testimony against themselves. He trusted in God! They knew he had lived a righteous life!

Jesus Ministers from His Cross

(Matthew 27:44; JST Matthew 27:47-48; Mark 15:32; JST Mark 15:37; Luke 23:39-43; JST Luke 23:40; John 19:25-27)

Our Lord's earthly mission to the wicked and ungodly among men ceased when he implored his Father to forgive the Roman soldiers who drove the sharp nails into his quivering flesh. Thereafter, through all the taunts and insults, as the heads of the wicked wagged and the jeering of the ungodly bespoke its satanic source, he maintained a kingly silence. The blasphemous bleatings of the black sheep of Israel no longer concerned him. He had delivered his Father's word to them in days past; he had raised the warning voice with power and conviction; now their sins were upon their own heads; his garments were clean. But to those who sought him, and those who yet relied on the strength of his eternal arm, he still had words of comfort and counsel. One of these was the so-called penitent thief; another was his mother, the Blessed Virgin.

One of the malefactors who was crucified with him joined the general chorus of hate and satanism; he cast into Jesus' teeth the same blasphemous cries as did those beneath the cross. "If thou art the Christ, save thyself and us," he taunted, knowing within himself that Jesus was not the Christ and that there was no hope of salvation. But the other one rebuked his fellow criminal. "Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this man hath done nothing amiss." It is pleasant to suppose that this partially penitent prisoner-on-his-cross may have had some prior contact with the Chief Prisoner on the Cross of Calvary. Perhaps it was on a mountain in Galilee when Jesus said, "Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted" (Matt. 5:4), or near Bethany when the brother of the beloved sisters came forth from his tomb, still enwrapped in the clothes of death—but no matter, there was in any event some spark of spirituality in his darkened soul. "As a flame sometimes leaps up among dying embers, so amid the white ashes of a sinful life which lay so thick upon his heart, the flame of love towards his God and his Saviour was not quite quenched." He was not yet prepared to join such voices as still felt to sing songs of redeeming love to Him who had been lifted up, but at least he would not curse and defame the Innocent One.

"Under the hellish outcries which had broken loose around the cross of Jesus, there had lain a deep misgiving. Half of them seemed to have been instigated by doubt and fear. Even in the self-congratulations of the priests we catch an undertone of dread. Suppose that even now some imposing miracle should be wrought? Suppose that even now that martyr-form should burst indeed into Messianic splendour, and the King, who seemed to be in the slow misery of death, should suddenly with a great choice summon His legions of angels, and springing from His cross upon the rolling clouds of heaven, come in flaming fire to take vengeance upon His enemies? And the air seemed to be full of signs. There was a gloom of gathering darkness in the sky, a thrill and tremor in the solid earth, a haunting presence as of ghostly visitants who chilled the heart and hovered in awful witness above that scene." (Farrar, p. 702.)

Whatever the feelings of the more wicked of the malefactors, the other's heart was touched with remorse and pity—remorse that he had led a life of sin, pity for the suffering of one who had done no sin. "This man is just, and hath not sinned," he said. Then, "he cried unto the Lord that he would save him. "Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom," he pleaded. If this plea came from a Jewish heart, which envisioned only that temporal Messianic kingdom for which they all so fervently prayed, the penitent thief must have thought that Jesus was the Messiah—in spite of the cross—and that he would yet reign in the promised kingdom. But we would rather hope that the one in whose heart the fires of remorse and repentance were beginning to burn knew something of another kingdom, a kingdom that is not of this world, a kingdom into which the righteous will go, and where they will serve their Eternal King forever. Pleased that here was one, even in death, who would seek him and desire blessings, Jesus uttered the marvelous, though hidden and enigmatic statement, "THIS DAY THOU SHALT BE WITH ME IN PARADISE." This is the second utterance from the cross.

Paradise—the abode of righteous spirits, as they await the day of their resurrection; paradise—a place of peace and rest where the sorrows and trials of his life have been shuffled off, and where the saints continue to prepare for a celestial heaven; paradise—not the Lord's eternal kingdom, but a way station along the course leading to eternal life, a place where the final preparation is made for that fulness of joy which comes only when body and spirit are inseparably connected in immortal glory! Thither Jesus this day is going. And in that general realm—the realm of departed spirits—so also will the so-called penitent thief find himself. He will not this day sit down on a throne on the right side of the Lord; even James and John were denied an assurance of such a reward. He will not stand in the congregation of the righteous when Jesus meets with Adam and Noah and Abraham and all the righteous dead; but he will be in the realm of the departed where he can learn from the Lord's legal administrators all that he must do to work out his salvation. If we had the most accurate possible translation, one that conveyed Jesus' real intent, his words to his fellow crucifee would convey this thought: 'This day shalt thou be with me in the world of spirits. There you can learn of me and my gospel; there you can begin to work out your salvation with fear and trembling before me.'

The issue is not deathbed repentance, as it were, under which a dying soul by simply saying,"I believe," or, "I repent," is immediately, without more, ready for the same eternal reward reserved for Peter and Paul, who fought good fights and laid their all upon the altar of service and sacrifice. The issue is that there is a possibility of repentance and conversion and progress after death and in the realm of the departed. There Jesus went when he left his life; there he met the righteous of all ages who had preceded him in death; there he taught the gospel; there he organized his work so that penitent thieves and repentant sinners—those who would have believed and obeyed had the fulness of truth been offered to them in this life—may yet become heirs of eternal salvation. [^1] Thus it is written: "For this cause was the gospel preached also to them that dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." (1 Pet. 4:6.)

And in all this the Messianic word is fulfilled. Isaiah foretold: "When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed." (Isa. 53:10.) And in his death our Lord visited his seed in the spirit world. He visited those who had taken upon themselves his name; those who had been adopted into his family; those who had become his sons and his daughters by faith. (D&C 138.)

Jesus' attention is now turned to a scene of sorrow and despair. By the cross stands his mother, the Virgin of Galilee, the one chosen of God to bear his Son, the one who had suckled and cradled and reared Israel's Messiah. With her are three other faithful women—her sister, Salome, the wife of Zebedee and the mother of James and John (who thus were cousins of Jesus); Mary the wife of Cleophas; and Mary Magdalene. On the resurrection morn Jesus will pay to Mary Magdalene one of the greatest compliments ever given a mortal being: he will appear to her first, even ahead of Peter and the Twelve. But now his concern is his mother. A sword is piercing her soul as the saintly Simeon had prophesied that day in the temple. How the mother must have suffered to see her Son bear the infinite burden placed upon him!

With these four sisters was the Beloved John, the one who leaned on Jesus' breast and for whom the Master had greater love than for any other. It is clear that Joseph, the husband of Mary, had passed on; it appears also that Mary's other sons had not yet joined the household of faith and accepted Jesus, their brother, as the Son of God; and we are led to believe that the apostle John had a home in Jerusalem. Clearly, Mary's future lot must be cast with the Twelve and the Church and the apostolic witnesses whom Jesus will soon command to carry his message to all the world. Thus to his mother he says: "Woman, behold thy son!" And to John the word is given: "Behold thy mother!" These words comprise the third utterance from the cross. "And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home."

Atonement Completed on the Cross

(Matthew 27:45-51; JST Matthew 27:54; Mark 15:33-38; JST Mark 15:41; Luke 23:44-46; John 19:28-30; JST John 19:29; 3 Ne. 8:5-25)

That which began in Gethsemane was finished on the cross and crowned in the resurrection. Jesus took upon himself the sins of all men when he suffered and sweat great drops of blood from every pore in Gethsemane. It was then that his suffering caused himself, even God, to suffer both body and spirit in a way which is totally beyond mortal comprehension. Then again on the cross—in addition to all the physical pain of that horrifying ordeal—he felt the spiritual agonies of the sins of others, as we shall see. How the resurrection ties in to the atonement, we do not know and cannot tell, only that the scriptures testify that the effects of the resurrection of Christ passed upon all men so that, because he rose from death, all are raised in immortality. In some way, incomprehensible to us, Gethsemane, the cross, and the empty tomb join into one grand and eternal drama, in the course of which Jesus abolishes death, and out of which comes immortality for all and eternal life for the righteous.

Jesus has now been hanging in agony on the accursed tree for about three hours, from somewhere near 9 A.M. to noon. He will continue to suffer the curses of crucifixion for another three hours, until around 3 P.M. when he voluntarily gives up the ghost. Of these coming hours, Matthew and Mark say only that it was a period when there was darkness over all the land; Luke extends this turning of day into night to cover a greater area. "There was a darkness over all the earth," he says, "and the sun was darkened." The fact of the darkness, for which there is no known scientific explanation, is known to us, but its purpose and what happened during those three seemingly endless hours remain outside the bounds of our understanding. Could it be that this was the period of his greatest trial, or that during it the agonies of Gethsemane recurred and even intensified?

That this darkness did cover the whole earth we surmise from the Book of Mormon account. The Nephite prophets had spoken, Messianically, of three days of darkness that would be a sign unto them of the crucifixion of Christ. At that time the rocks would rend and there would be such upheavals in nature that those on the isles of the sea would say, "The God of nature suffers." (1 Ne. 19:10-12; Hel. 14:20-24.) The Nephite record tells of the fulfillment of these prophecies; of the darkness and storms and destructions that then occurred; of cities sinking into the seas; of mountains and valleys being created; of the rocks rending and the whole face of the earth being deformed. It is of more than passing import that the storms and tempests and earthquakes lasted "for about the space of three hours," and then "there was darkness upon the face of the land." It was a "thick darkness," and the people could "feel the vapor of darkness. And there could be no light, because of the darkness, neither candles, neither torches; neither could there be fire kindled with their fine and exceedingly dry wood, so that there could not be any light at all; And there was not any light seen, neither fire, nor glimmer, neither the sun, nor the moon, nor the stars, for so great were the mists of darkness which were upon the face of the land."

Among the Nephites, where the darkness was accompanied with destructions, "there was great mourning and howling and weeping among all the people." If the darkness in the Old World was like that in the Americas, we can suppose that the hearts of those around the cross were filled with deep misgivings. Emotions of dread and horror must have filled the hearts of the guilty and the innocent. "Of the incidents of those last three hours we are told nothing, and that awful obscuration of the noonday sun may well have overawed every heart into an inaction respecting which there was nothing to relate. What Jesus suffered then for us men and our salvation we cannot know, for during those hours He hung upon His cross in silence and darkness; or, if He spoke, there were none there to record His words. But towards the close of that time His anguish culminated, and—emptied to the very uttermost of that glory which He had since the world began—drinking to the very deepest dregs the cup of humiliation and bitterness—enduring, not only to have taken upon Him the form of a servant, but also to suffer the last infamy which human hatred could impose on perfect helplessness—He uttered that mysterious cry, of which the full significance will never be fathomed by man." [^2]

"Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?" That is: "My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me?"

Spoken with a loud voice, these words, quoted from David's Messianic prophecies, are the fourth utterance from the cross. "What mind of man can fathom the significance of that awful cry? It seems, that in addition to the fearful suffering incident to crucifixion, the agony of Gethsemane had recurred, intensified beyond human power to endure. In that bitterest hour the dying Christ was alone, alone in most terrible reality. That the supreme sacrifice of the Son might be consummated in all its fulness, the Father seems to have withdrawn the support of His immediate Presence, leaving to the Savior of men the glory of complete victory over the forces of sin and death." (Talmage, p. 661.)

Some of those who stood by said, "Behold, he calleth for Elias," whose name was associated in their legends with the coming and work and ministry of the Messiah. "The readiness with which they seized this false impression is another proof of the wild state of excitement and terror—the involuntary dread of something great, and unforeseen, and terrible—to which they had been reduced from their former savage insolence. For Elijah, the great prophet of the Old Covenant, was inextricably mingled with all the Jewish expectations of a Messiah, and these expectations were full of wrath. The coming of Elijah would be the coming of a day of fire, in which the sun should be turned into blackness and the moon into blood, and the powers of heaven should be shaken. Already the noonday sun was shrouded in unnatural eclipse: might not some awful form at any moment rend the heavens and come down, touch the mountains and they should smoke? The vague anticipation of conscious guilt was unfulfilled." (Farrar, p. 705.)

The infinite and eternal atonement has now been wrought. Jesus has gained the victory; he has done all that his Father sent him to do; now he faces only the physical agonies of the cross, and he can think of his own bodily needs. He calls out, "I thirst," and these are the fifth words from the cross. "It is probable that a few hours before, the cry would have only provoked a roar of frantic mockery; but now the lookers-on were reduced by awe to a readier humanity. Near the cross there lay on the ground the large earthen vessel containing the posca, which was the ordinary drink of the Roman soldiers. The mouth of it was filled with a piece of sponge, which served as a cork. Instantly some one—we know not whether he was friend or enemy, or merely one who was there out of idle curiosity—took out the sponge and dipped it in the posca to give it to Jesus. But low as was the elevation of the cross, the head of the Sufferer, as it rested on the horizontal beam of the accursed tree, was just beyond the man's reach: and therefore he put the sponge at the end of a stalk of hyssop—about a foot long—and held it up to the parched and dying lips." (Farrar, pp. 706-7.) Jesus drank what was offered, thus fulfilling the Messianic prophecy: "They gave me also gall for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink." (Ps. 69:21.)

As he drank, the heartless among them called out: "Let him alone; let us see whether Elias will come to take him down." At Jesus' behest Elijah and twelve legions of angels would have attended the cross at any time; at his word heaven and earth would pass away; by his voice nothing was impossible—and yet there was no divine intervention. Our Pattern, our Prototype, our Exemplar marked the path for all men. He endured to the end. [^3] Would God that it may be so for all of us!

Thereupon Jesus made his final earthly report to the one who had sent him. 'Father, it is finished, thy will is done,' he said; and this is the sixth utterance from the cross. How, then, does a God die? It is a voluntary act; no man taketh his life from him; he lays it down of himself; he has power to lay it down and power to take it again. Jesus makes his seventh utterance from the cross. He says simply: "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit," quoting thus, as was his wont, the Messianic word concerning himself. (Ps. 31:5.) "And having said thus, he gave up the ghost." He did not taste of death, for it was sweet unto him. As he, with the Eleven, had sung in the Hallel the night before: "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints." (Ps. 116:15.)

As Jesus passed through the door from mortality to the spirit world; as his eternal spirit divested itself of its tenement of clay; as he left his mortal remains to be cared for by the loving persons whose friend he was—two portentous events marked his glorious victory. For one, "the earth did quake, and the rocks rent"; and, for another, "the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom."

As to the earthquake, it came in fulfillment of Enoch's word. He, among others of the ancients, had seen "the Son of Man lifted up on the cross, after the manner of men; And he heard a loud voice; and the heavens were veiled; and all the creations of God mourned; and the earth groaned; and the rocks were rent." (Moses 7:55-56.) Had the earthquake among the Jews been as it was among the Nephites, Jerusalem itself would have scarcely survived.

As to the rending of the veil of the temple, it was the one thing that would symbolize, in power, the end of the old Jewish dispensation and the beginning of the new Christian day. The veil itself—shielding the Holy of Holies from the gaze of any but the high priest, and from him except once a year, on the day of atonement, when he entered the sacred portal to atone for the sins of the people—the veil is said to have been sixty feet long, thirty feet wide, "of the thickness of the palm of the hand, and wrought in 72 squares, which were joined together." It was so heavy that it took hundreds of priests to manipulate it. "If the Veil was at all such as is described in the Talmud, it could not have been rent in twain by a mere earthquake or the fall of the lintel, although its composition in squares fastened together might explain, how the rent might be as described in the Gospel.

"Indeed, everything seems to indicate that, although the earthquake might furnish the physical basis, the rent of the Temple-Veil was—with reverence be it said—really made by the Hand of God. As we compute, it may just have been the time when, at the Evening-Sacrifice, the officiating Priesthood entered the Holy Place, either to burn the incense or to do other sacred service there. To see before them, not as the aged Zacharias at the beginning of this history the Angel Gabriel, but the Veil of the Holy Place rent from top to bottom—that beyond it they could scarcely have seen—and hanging in two parts from its fastenings above and at the side, was, indeed, a terrible portent, which would soon become generally known, and must, in some form or other, have been preserved in tradition. And they all must have understood, that it meant that God's Own Hand had rent the Veil, and for ever deserted and thrown open that Most Holy Place where He had so long dwelt in the mysterious gloom, only lit up once a year by the glow of the censer of him, who made atonement for the sins of the people." (Edersheim 2:611-12.)

Thus did Jesus, the Atoning One, through whose blood all men may freely pass through the veil into the presence of the Lord, thus did he, by the rending of the veil of the old temple, signify that its ordinances of atonement and forgiveness were done away in him. Thus did he, making his own body a new temple, as it were, signify that his atonement, and the forgiveness of sins made possible thereby, shall admit all true believers into his eternal Holy of Holies. "For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us. (Heb. 9:24.)

And as every true believer ponders upon the wonder and glory of it all—as he contemplates the atonement wrought in the garden and on the cross; as he meditates about the immortality and eternal life that come through Christ—he marvels at what God has done for him. "He sees in the cross of Christ"—and the cross is used in the prophetic word as a symbol for the atonement—"He sees in the cross of Christ something which far transcends its historical significance. He sees in it the fulfillment of all prophecy as well as the consummation of all history; he sees in it the explanation of the mystery of birth, and the conquest over the mystery of the grave. In that life he finds a perfect example; in that death an infinite redemption. As he contemplates the Incarnation and the Crucifixion, he no longer feels that God is far away, and that this earth is but a disregarded speck in the infinite azure, and he himself but an insignificant atom chance-thrown amid the thousand million living souls of an innumerable race, but he exclaims in faith and hope and love, 'Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men; yea, He will be their God, and they shall be His people.' 'Ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them.'" (Farrar, p. 711; Ezek. 37:27; 2 Cor. 6:16.)

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] The common sectarian heresy that Jesus went to Hades while his body lay in the tomb has at least a grain of truth in it. He did go to a world of departed spirits, where he "preached unto the spirits in prison" (1 Pet. 3:18-20), to those who considered the long separation of their bodies from their spirits as a prison. (D&C 138.)
[^2] Farrar, p. 704.
[^3] "Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that be of heavy hearts." (Prov. 31:6.)
