Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 109

In the Arimathean's Tomb

Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. . . . Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice. (John 5:25-29.)

The Roman Spear Pierces His Side

(John 19:31-37; Matthew 27:54-56; JST Matthew 27:59; Mark 15:39-41; JST Mark 15:45; Luke 23:47-49)

Never was there such a crucifixion as this one. Scourging was always or often a prelude to the cross. Nails had been pounded into hands and feet by the thousands. To insult and demean dying sufferers was the common sport of the coarse ruffians who gaped on the mangled bodies. Perhaps others had been crowned with plaited thorns. But whenever did the rocks rend, and the earth shake, and a dire and deep darkness envelop the whole land for three long hours? And when else did the dying one, yet having strength and vigor in his whipped and beaten body, shout with a loud voice and seem to end his mortality of his own will and in full control of his faculties?

To all this the centurion and his soldiers were witnesses, and when they saw it all, they greatly feared and said: "Truly this was the Son of God." And the centurion himself glorified God—perhaps in praise and prayer—and said: "Certainly this was a righteous man." [^1] Nor were the centurion and his soldiers alone in their fearful and awe-filled feelings. A congregation of the friends and acquaintances and disciples of Jesus had now gathered at the cross, many of them being Galileans. They "smote their breasts," and were sorrowful. Particular mention is made of "the women that followed from Galilee." They had come to minister unto him "for his burial," and among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James the younger and Joses, and Salome the wife of Zebedee and the mother of James and John. The Blessed Virgin is not mentioned, leaving us to suppose that John has by now taken her to his home so she will no longer be a personal witness of the agonies of her Son. Since Jesus' friends were there, we take the liberty of assuming this included the Eleven; surely all of them, scattered at Gethsemane, would have long since rallied again round his side.

But now, "the sun was westering as the darkness rolled away from the completed sacrifice. They who had not thought it a pollution to inaugurate their feast by the murder of their Messiah, were seriously alarmed lest the sanctity of the following day—which began at sunset—should be compromised by the hanging of the corpses on the cross. And, horrible to relate, the crucified often lived for many hours—nay, even for two or three days—in their torture." (Farrar, pp. 711-12.) According to their law the body of an executed criminal could not be left hanging overnight lest the land be defiled. (Deut. 21:22-23.) And, further, in this instance the coming day was doubly sacred; it was both a Sabbath and the second Paschal day, the one on which the wavesheaf was offered to the Lord. Hence the Jews besought Pilate to have the legs of the three crucified persons broken. "Sometimes there was added to the punishment of crucifixion that of breaking the bones (crurifragium) by means of a club or hammer. This would not itself bring death, but the breaking of the bones was always followed by a coup de grace, by sword, lance, or stroke, which immediately put an end to what remained of life. Thus the 'breaking of the bones' was a sort of increase of punishment, by way of compensation for its shortening by the final stroke that followed." (Edersheim 2:613.)

Pilate acceded to their pleas; the soldiers broke the legs and then killed the two malefactors with the sword. Finding Jesus already dead, "they brake not his legs," that it might be fulfilled which was written concerning him as the Paschal Lamb ("Neither shall ye break a bone thereof"), and concerning him as the Suffering Servant ("He keepeth all his bones: not one of them is broken"). (Ex. 12:46; Num. 9:12; Ps. 34:20.) However, one of the soldiers, perhaps to make sure that Jesus was dead, hurled his spear into his side, in the region of the heart, this, again, happening that the prophetic word might come to pass. Zechariah, speaking of the millennial day when "the spirit of grace and of supplication" shall be poured out upon the Jews "and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem," foretold that their Messiah would then say: "They shall look upon me whom they have pierced." This, our inspired New Testament author tells us, shall come to pass because of the wound then gashed into Jesus' side. And we might add, as Zechariah promises, that in that future day the Jews will say to Jesus: "What are these wounds in thine hands?" and he will answer: "Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends." (Zech. 12:10; 13:6.) Or, more perfectly, as the account is found in latter-day revelation: "What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?" Of this question the Wounded One says: "Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God. And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king." (D&C 45:51-53.)

But there is more. From the spear wound—and it was of major proportion, as witness Jesus' statement to the Nephites, "Thrust your hands into my side" (3 Ne. 11:14)—from the spear wound, "forthwith came there out blood and water." Of this unusual occurrence, John testifies: "And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true: and he knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe."

"Why does John, as though he were recording some great miracle, tell us that both blood and water flowed from Christ's pierced side, and then add his solemn certification that he spoke the truth in so stating? It appears that the Beloved Disciple was showing how one of the great doctrines of revealed religion, that of being born again, rests upon and is efficacious because of the atonement. As the inspired record recites, men are 'born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit' thereby becoming mortal souls. To gain salvation they must thereafter 'be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood,' meaning the blood of Christ. Thus when men see birth into this world, they are reminded of what is required for birth into the kingdom of heaven.

"Since this spiritual rebirth and consequent salvation in the kingdom of heaven are available because of the atonement, how fitting it is that the elements present in that infinite sacrifice are also water, blood, and spirit. Accordingly, when men think of the crucifixion of Christ, they are reminded of what they must do to be born again and gain that full salvation which comes because of his atonement.

"John, who was eye witness to the water and blood gushing from Jesus' side after his spirit had left his body, later wrote of being 'born of God' through the atonement in these words: 'Whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world. . . . Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God? This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth. . . . And there are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, and the water, and the blood.' (1 John 5:1-8.)" (Commentary 1:834-35.)

Jesus' Body Is Claimed, Buried, Guarded

(Matthew 27:57-66; JST Matthew 27:65; Mark 15:42-47; JST Mark 15:47-48; Luke 23:50-56; JST Luke 23:51-52; John 19:38-42)

Those three corpses, hanging on their accursed crosses, must be disposed of before the setting sun ushers in the Sabbath. "The Jews had taken every precaution to prevent the ceremonial pollution of a day so sacred, and were anxious that immediately after the death of the victims had been secured, their bodies should be taken from the cross. About the sepulture they did not trouble themselves, leaving it to the chance good offices of friends and relatives to huddle the malefactors into their nameless graves. The dead body of Jesus was left hanging till the last, because a person who could not easily be slighted had gone to obtain leave from Pilate to dispose of it as he wished." (Farrar, p. 716.) Without this aid—shall we not say there was a divine hand in it?—and as far as the chief priests were concerned, the body of Jesus might have been dumped with the refuse in the Valley of Hinnom, there to rot and decay and be burned by the everlasting fires of Gehenna. Perhaps this is what happened to the bodies of the two thieves.

All four of the Gospel authors speak in laudatory tones of Joseph of Arimathea. They identify him as a rich man, an honorable counselor, one who waited for the kingdom of God, a good man and a just one, and a disciple (although John says he kept his discipleship secret, "for fear of the Jews"). So they speak of the man in whose new tomb the body of the Lord Jesus was to lie for a few brief hours. "This was Joseph of Arimathea, a rich man, of high character and blameless life, and a distinguished member of the Sanhedrin. Although timidity of disposition, or weakness of faith, had hitherto prevented him from openly declaring his belief in Jesus, yet he had abstained from sharing in the vote of the Sanhedrin, or countenancing their crime. And now sorrow and indignation inspired him with courage. Since it was too late to declare his sympathy for Jesus as a living Prophet, he would at least give a sign of his devotion to Him as the martyred victim of a wicked conspiracy. Flinging secrecy and caution to the winds, he no sooner saw that the cross on Golgotha now bore a lifeless burden, than he went to Pilate on the very evening of the crucifixion, and begged that the dead body might be given him. Although the Romans left their crucified slaves to be devoured by dogs and ravens, Pilate had no difficulty in sanctioning the more humane and reverent custom of the Jews, which required, even in extreme cases, the burial of the dead." (Farrar, pp. 716-17.)

Pilate marveled at the report of such an early death, apparently not yet knowing that in the case of the two thieves death had been hastened by the crurifragium. First, Pilate asked the Arimathean if Jesus "were already dead," and then, "calling the centurion, he asked him, If he had been any while dead." Receiving the sure witness of his own military commander—and with what severity and finality divine providence is proving His death, as a prelude to proving his resurrection—receiving this assurance, Pilate gave the body to Joseph.

Then the cross was lowered and laid upon the ground; from the mangled hands and bloody feet the Roman nails were drawn out; and the body was washed and cleaned and taken to a new tomb, hewn but recently from the rock. "At the entrance to the tomb—and within the rock—there was a court, nine feet square, where ordinarily the bier was deposited, and its bearers gathered to do the last offices for the Dead. Thither we suppose Joseph to have carried the Sacred Body." (Edersheim 2:617.) At some time, probably when the cross was lowered or else in the court of the tomb, Joseph was joined by Nicodemus, who had come to Jesus by night three years before at the First Passover. "If, as seems extremely probable, he be identical with the Nakdimon Ben Gorion of the Talmud, he was a man of enormous wealth; and however much he had held back during the life of Jesus, now, on the evening of His death, his heart was filled with a gush of compassion and remorse, and he hurried to His cross and burial with an offering of truly royal munificence. The faith which had once required the curtain of darkness can now venture at least into the light of sunset, and [be] brightened finally into noonday confidence. Thanks to this glow of kindling sorrow and compassion in the hearts of these two noble and wealthy disciples, He who died as a malefactor was buried as a king. 'He made His grave with the wicked, and with the rich in His death.' The fine linen which Joseph had purchased was richly spread with the hundred litras of myrrh and perfumed aloe-wood which Nicodemus had brought, and the lacerated body—whose divinely-human spirit was now in the calm of its Sabbath rest in the Paradise of God—was thus carried to its loved and peaceful grave. . . .

"The preparations had to be hurried, because when the sun had set the Sabbath would have begun. All that they could do, therefore, was to wash the corpse, to lay it amid the spices, to wrap the head in a white napkin, to roll the fine linen round and round the wounded limbs, and to lay the body reverently in the rocky niche. Then they rolled a golal, or great stone, to the horizontal aperture; and scarcely had they accomplished this when, as the sun sank behind the hills of Jerusalem, the new Sabbath dawned.

"Mary of Magdala, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, had seated themselves in the garden to mark well the place of sepulture, and other Galilean women had also noticed the spot, and hurried home to prepare fresh spices and ointments before the Sabbath began, that they might hasten back early on the morning of Sunday, and complete that embalming of the body which Joseph and Nicodemus had only hastily begun. They spent in quiet that miserable Sabbath, which, for the broken hearts of all who loved Jesus, was a Sabbath of anguish and despair.

"But the enemies of Christ were not so inactive. The awful misgiving of guilty consciences was not removed even by His death upon the cross. They recalled, with dreadful reminiscence, the rumored prophecies of His resurrection—the sign of the prophet Jonah, which He had said would alone be given them—the great utterance about the destroyed Temple, which He would in three days raise up; and these intimations, which were but dim to a crushed and wavering faith, were read, like fiery letters upon the wall, by the illuminating glare of an uneasy guilt. Pretending, therefore, to be afraid lest His body should be stolen by His disciples for the purposes of imposture, they begged that, until the third day, the tomb might be securely guarded. Pilate gave them a brief and haughty permission to do anything they liked; for—apparently in the evening, when the great Paschal Sabbath was over—they sent their guard to seal the golal, and to watch the sepulchre." (Farrar, pp. 717-19.)

In the Realm of Disembodied Spirits

(D&C 138)

"And he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost." (John 19:30.) Between life and death there is only the twinkling of an eye, only a breath of air in the lungs of a man, only an eternal spirit in its tenement of clay. The spirit steps out of the body, to live in another realm, and we call it death. Jesus died—voluntarily, for he had the power of immortality, and no man could take his life from him—he died of his own will and choice; his spirit laid down its temporal body of flesh and blood and chose to live in an unembodied state in the realm of the departed. Jesus gave up the ghost and entered the paradise of God. He was as other men in that his spirit went to live in a spirit world to await the day of his resurrection, the day when the eternal spirit would be reunited with its body, thereafter to live eternally in immortal glory, having a body of flesh and bones.

When Jesus died—that very moment—his mortal ministry ended and his ministry among the spirits in prison began. Then it was, according to the Messianic word, that he began to "proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound" (Isa. 61:1); then the work commenced "to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house" (Isa. 42:7); then it was that he who had now suffered for our sins, the Just for the unjust, having been put to death in the flesh but continuing to live in the spirit, "went and preached unto the spirits in prison" (1 Pet. 3:18-20).

How marvelous are the dealings of God with man! How infinite is his mercy, how glorious his grace! He provideth a way whereby all his children—either in mortality or in the spirit world, awaiting their resurrection—may hear the gospel of salvation. All shall stand before his eternal bar to be judged according to their works. All "shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead." And "for this cause"—that the living and the dead shall all be judged by the same gospel standard—is "the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." (1 Pet. 4:5-6.)

From Adam to Christ, through four thousand years of births and deaths, unnumbered millions died without a knowledge of Christ and the salvation which is in him. And yet his is the only name given under heaven—now or ever, in time or in eternity—whereby men can be saved. His gospel is the one plan of salvation; it charts the one course to celestial rest; no man cometh unto the Father but by him and his law. From righteous Abel to Zacharias the son of Barachias who was slain for the testimony of the truth, all the righteous dead had gone to the paradise of peace and beauty, there to await the day of their coming forth in the resurrection of the just. Even they considered the long separation of their bodies and spirits as a prison. During the same long millenniums of rebellion and war and disease and death, millions died without a knowledge of the truth and went to hell, an abode of darkness and suffering and sorrow, there to await the resurrection of the unjust. In their benighted state they were without hope, not even knowing whether there would be a resurrection and an eventual reward for them in one of the kingdoms of their Father. Truly, if ever spirits were in prison, these were they. And so the Messianic word proclaims: "And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be visited." (Isa. 24:22.)

With the death of Jesus, the day of their visitation is at hand. He goes to the spirit world to preach the gospel, which is the plan of salvation; if they believe its laws and desire to obey its ordinances, they may be heirs of salvation. For them, the living will perform the vicarious ordinances needed for their salvation. And when the day comes for "death and hell" to deliver up the dead which are in them, then all shall be judged by gospel standards. (Rev. 20:12-15.) Even David's soul will not always be left "in hell." (Ps. 16:10.) Those who lived in the days of Noah shall again hear the truth, for they, too, are among "the spirits of men kept in prison, whom the Son visited, and preached the gospel unto them, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh; Who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards received it." (D&C 76:71-80.) Theirs, however, shall be a terrestrial inheritance, and not a celestial, because they rejected the gospel in this life and then received it in the spirit world.

As the body of Jesus lies in its borrowed grave, what, then, do we see in the spirit world? We see a great host assembled to greet the Son of God. We see Joseph the husband of Mary; we see some of the shepherds who heard the angelic choir sing glory to God in the highest and peace and goodwill to men on earth; we see the saintly Simeon and the blessed Anna, who testified of Him in the temple; we see Zacharias and Elisabeth and John the Baptist; we see the faithful of all the ages—all assembled to hear the voice of Him in whom they trusted.

And there were gathered together in one place an innumerable company of the spirits of the just, who had been faithful in the testimony of Jesus while they lived in mortality; And who had offered sacrifice in the similitude of the great sacrifice of the Son of God, and had suffered tribulation in their Redeemer's name. . . .

I beheld that they were filled with joy and gladness, and were rejoicing together because the day of their deliverance was at hand. They were assembled awaiting the advent of the Son of God into the spirit world, to declare their redemption from the bands of death. . . .

While this vast multitude waited and conversed, rejoicing in the hour of their deliverance from the chains of death, the Son of God appeared, declaring liberty to the captives who had been faithful; And there he preached to them the everlasting gospel, the doctrine of the resurrection and the redemption of mankind from the fall, and from individual sins on conditions of repentance. . . .

And the saints rejoiced in their redemption, and bowed the knee and acknowledged the Son of God as their Redeemer and Deliverer from death and the chains of hell. Their countenances shone, and the radiance from the presence of the Lord rested upon them, and they sang praises unto his holy name.

Then, as he ministered in the world of spirits, Jesus "organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to the dead." And what a glorious day it was! Adam, Seth, and Enos; Abel, Noah, and Shem; Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel; Nephi, Alma, and Abinadi; Helaman, Mormon, and Moroni—all the prophets! all the saints! all the righteous! of all past ages!—all assembled to bow the knee, and hear the voice, and cry hosanna.

In his mortal ministry, Jesus the King, as a mortal, had spoken such words as never before man spake; yet they were addressed to weak and faltering and oftentimes rebellious mortals, none of whose hearts had yet begun to burn with the fires of the Spirit. Now in the paradise of God, among the righteous, who already knew the doctrines of salvation; who already had a hope of eternal life; and, above all, whose souls were already afire with the Holy Spirit of God—what wonders of divine truth he must have spoken as he prepared them for their not-distant resurrection! We assume he ministered and spoke almost continuously from the hour of his death to the hour of his resurrection, for, among them, there was no need to rest; none would grow weary or become inattentive. The weaknesses of the flesh were no longer theirs. Perhaps, also, he opened their minds and quickened their understandings so that they saw in vision the wonders of eternity. That we have not yet learned by revelation what was said and done there simply means that our weak and fragile spiritual stature does not as yet qualify us to know and understand what others more worthy and more qualified have received.

These righteous dead "had looked upon the long absence of their spirits from their bodies as a bondage." And all "these the Lord taught"—there in the quiet peace and perfect serenity of a paradisiacal Eden—"and gave them power to come forth, after his resurrection from the dead, to enter into his Father's kingdom, there to be crowned with immortality and eternal life, And continue thenceforth their labor as had been promised by the Lord, and be partakers of all blessings which were held in reserve for them that love him."

Jesus, As a Spirit, Speaks to the Nephites

(3 Nephi 9:1-22; 10:1-8)

After the great destructions in the Americas that took place during the three hours of darkness, and while Jesus' body lay in the Arimathean's tomb, his voice was raised among the Nephites. He did not then appear and his face was not seen among them. But "there was a voice heard among all the inhabitants of the earth, upon all the face of this land." The first spoken words were:

Wo, wo, wo unto this people; wo unto the inhabitants of the whole earth except they shall repent; for the devil laugheth, and his angels rejoice, because of the slain of the fair sons and daughters of my people.

A day of destruction and desolation shall surely come upon all the wicked and rebellious. When their cup of iniquity is full, they are always swept from the face of the earth. Fire and brimstone consumed those in Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities of the plains; the floods swept those in Noah's day to a watery grave; the Jaredite and Nephite nations fell by the sword; Titus turned Jerusalem into a dung heap; and at the Second Coming the wicked and ungodly shall be as stubble. During the three hours of darkness, sixteen cities in the Americas, together with their inhabitants, were utterly destroyed. All this the voice announced, saying repetitiously that it was done "to hide their wickedness and abominations from before my face, that the blood of the prophets and the saints should not come up any more unto me against them." Those who had been spared were identified as the more righteous and were called upon to repent and be converted that Jesus might heal them.

Yea, verily I say unto you, if ye will come unto me ye shall have eternal life. Behold, mine arm of mercy is extended towards you, and whosoever will come, him will I receive; and blessed are those who come unto me.

Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. I was with the Father from the beginning. I am in the Father, and the Father in me; and in me hath the Father glorified his name.

I came unto my own, and my own received me not. And the scriptures concerning my coming are fulfilled.

And as many as have received me, to them have I given to become the sons of God; and even so will I to as many as shall believe on my name, for behold, by me redemption cometh, and in me is the law of Moses fulfilled.

I am the light and the life of the world. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end.

And ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood; yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away, for I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt offerings.

And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit. And whoso cometh unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, him will I baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost. . . .

Behold, I have come unto the world to bring redemption unto the world, to save the world from sin.

Therefore, whoso repenteth and cometh unto me as a little child, him will I receive, for of such is the kingdom of God. Behold, for such I have laid down my life, and have taken it up again; therefore repent, and come unto me ye ends of the earth, and be saved.

So the voice spoke to the Nephites; and nowhere in the whole New Testament account, where the same doctrines are taught, is there such a plain and sweet and simple summary of the glorious mission of Jesus the Messiah as these words contain. They stand by themselves, scarcely needing further exposition, though in fact the shining truths they set forth have been explained in this work in their various New Testament contexts. For clarity's sake we need only add that the climax of this sermon, which speaks of Jesus having laid down his life and having taken it up again, is merely reciting what is to be as though it were already accomplished; just so surely would his almost-then resurrection come to pass.

The voice ceased, and "there was silence in the land for the space of many hours." And the people "did cease lamenting and howling for the loss of their kindred which had been slain." Then the voice came again, uttering words applicable to them, and to the Jews in Jerusalem, and to all the house of Israel, no matter when or where they lived.

O ye people of these great cities which have fallen, who are descendants of Jacob, yea, who are of the house of Israel, how oft have I gathered you as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and have nourished you.

And again, how oft would I have gathered you as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, yea, O ye people of the house of Israel, who have fallen; yea, O ye people of the house of Israel, ye that dwell at Jerusalem, as ye that have fallen; yea, how oft would I have gathered you as a hen gathereth her chickens, and ye would not.

O ye house of Israel whom I have spared, how oft will I gather you as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, if ye will repent and return unto me with full purpose of heart.

But if not, O house of Israel, the places of your dwellings shall become desolate until the time of the fulfilling of the covenant to your fathers.

With these words our knowledge of the disembodied ministry of Jesus ends. The next time we hear the voice it will be housed in its celestial body, and the words will let us know that the redemption has been brought to pass and that though a man dies, yet shall he live again.

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] The common sectarian heresy that Jesus went to Hades while his body lay in the tomb has at least a grain of truth in it. He did go to a world of departed spirits, where he "preached unto the spirits in prison" (1 Pet. 3:18-20), to those who considered the long separation of their bodies from their spirits as a prison. (D&C 138.)
