Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Section 13

Footnotes

He Riseth; He Ministereth; He Ascendeth

I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. (Matt. 28:5-6.)

Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here. (Mark 16:6.)

Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen. (Luke 24:5-6.)

Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. (Luke 24:39.)

Death is swallowed up in victory; Jesus comes forth from the tomb; he is the firstfruits of them that slept. Though a man dies, yet shall he live again.

He appears to Mary Magdalene, of eternal fame and renown, and she is the first mortal to see a resurrected soul. She is restrained from embracing him.

He appears to the other women, who hold him by the feet.

Next, as we suppose, he appears to Simon Peter, and then to Cleopas and Luke on the Emmaus road, to whom he expounds the Messianic prophecies.

Then in the upper room, to a group of disciples, including ten of the Twelve, he appears, invites them to feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet, and before them he eats a piece of broiled fish and of an honeycomb.

One week later he appears to Thomas and the others of the Twelve, again in the upper room, and invites his doubting friend to reach forth his finger and feel the prints of the nails and to thrust his hand into the spear wound.

Next he appears at the Sea of Tiberias to seven of the Twelve, who had fished all night and caught nothing. He fills their net with fish and they eat fish and bread which he has prepared. Peter is commanded, thrice, to feed the flock of God.

Then on a mountain in Galilee to more than five hundred brethren at once (and, as we suppose, to women and children also) he comes, ministers, and sends his messengers forth to proclaim his gospel in all the world.

At some unspecified time he appears to his own blood brother James, and then upon the Mount of Olives he ascends up to his Father with the promise that he shall come again to reign personally upon the earth.

Thereafter came the Nephite ministry during which thousands upon thousands (we suppose tens and scores of thousands) heard his voice, felt the nail marks in his hands and feet, thrust their hands into his side, and (many of them) wet his feet with their tears.

Among the Nephites he preached the gospel, wrought miracles, called Twelve Disciples, perfected his work among the seed of Joseph, and left a witness of his holy name that exceeds that which is preserved in the Bible itself.

He also visited the Lost Tribes of the house of Israel and did for them, as we suppose, what he had done for others.

Among the Nephites his doctrine, his miracles, and the outpouring of the Holy Ghost exceeded anything manifest among the Jews. Among them he expounded all the scriptures from the beginning and taught that the coming forth of the Book of Mormon would be the sign whereby all men might know that the work of the Father had commenced in the latter days unto the fulfilling of the covenant made with the house of Israel.

1981 Deseret Book Co.
