Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 110

Christ Is Risen

He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces; . . . And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God. (Isa. 25:8-9.)

Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. . . . Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. . . . The earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain. (Isa. 26:4, 19, 21.)

There is no saviour beside me. . . . I will be thy king. . . . I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from death: O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction. (Hosea 13:4, 10, 14.)

"Death Is Swallowed Up in Victory"

And now the dawn!

After the midnight of starlit darkness comes the rising of the morning sun. After the sorrow and scourging of mortality come the joy and peace of immortality. After the darkness of death comes the light of a new day of life. After the pain and blood and burden of Gethsemane and Golgotha come the joy and peace and glory of the resurrection. Once there was mangled flesh and spilt blood; now there is glorious immortality in a state where sorrow and pain fade away into nothingness. Once the creature was earth-bound, limited, an inhabitant of a few dusty feet of earth-soil; now the Creature comes forth with power to traverse the sidereal heavens and to receive, inherit, and possess worlds without number.

There is a death and there is a resurrection; there is an earth-bound body and a heaven-healed body; there is flesh and blood and there is flesh and bones; there is a temporary tenement for the spirit man, and there is an eternal and perfected palace in which the Son of the Father shall dwell everlastingly. "It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption: It is sown in dishonour; it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power: It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body."

And, be it known, "The first man Adam"—Adam in the generic sense, Adam as the name for all mankind—"The first man Adam was made a living soul." We are all mortal; we all live in an earthy sphere; we are all living souls, mortal souls. But, "the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. . . . The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption."

But glory be to God who is the Father, and praise be to God who is the Son, the earthy shall become heavenly, and the mortal shall live again in immortality. "And the dead shall be raised incorruptible, . . . For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" (1 Cor. 15:42-55.)

And so the dawn. This is resurrection morn. Christ the firstfruits rises from the tomb; his is the first immortal flesh; his body is now like that of his Father's. "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also." (D&C 130:22.) And as Jesus rose from the dead, as he burst the bands of death, as he came forth in immortal glory, so shall it be with all men; all shall come forth from the prison of the grave; all shall live again; all shall become immortal. Death and hell shall deliver up the dead which are in them, "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.) We know not how it is done any more than we know how creation commenced or how Gods began to be. Suffice it to say, man is; and suffice it to say, he shall live again. "For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfill the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection." (2 Ne. 9:6.) And Christ is the resurrection and the life; immortality and eternal life come by him. He "hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel." (2 Tim. 1:10.)

We speak thus as a prelude to proclaiming the rising from the grave of the Son of God; as a prelude to hearing the testimonies of those who saw and felt and handled his immortal body; as a prelude to gaining a renewed witness from the Holy Spirit of God that the Risen Lord is our Lord, our God, and our King. For, be it known, the resurrection proves the divine Sonship. If Jesus rose from the dead, he is God's Son; if he is divine, his gospel and his alone can save men. Thus Paul speaks of "the gospel of God, (Which he had promised afore by his prophets in the holy scriptures,) Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh." And how shall we know that Jesus is the Son of God? Paul gives answer: He is "declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead." (Rom. 1:1-4. Italics added.) The resurrection proves the divine Sonship.

Thus also, Peter, in meeting with Cornelius and his friends, told them "how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power," and how this same Jesus "went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with him." Then came this mighty testimony—the testimony which contains the sure knowledge of the divinity of the Son and, therefore, of the saving power of his gospel. "And we are witnesses of all things which he did," Peter says, "both in the land of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; whom they slew and hanged on a tree: Him God raised up the third day, and shewed him openly; Not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God, even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead. To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins." (Acts 10:34-43.)

We repeat: The resurrection proves the divinity of the gospel cause. And so, with Paul, we say: "If there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen: And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain. Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; because we have testified of God that he raised up Christ: whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not. For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised: And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins. Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept." (1 Cor. 15:13-20.)

"At the moment when Christ died, nothing could have seemed more abjectly weak, more pitifully hopeless, more absolutely doomed to scorn, and extinction, and despair, than the Church which He had founded. It numbered but a handful of weak followers, of whom the boldest had denied his Lord with blasphemy, and the most devoted had forsaken Him and fled. They were poor, they were ignorant, they were helpless. They could not claim a single synagogue or a single sword. If they spoke their own language, it betrayed them by its mongrel dialect; if they spoke the current Greek, it was despised as a miserable patois. So feeble were they and insignificant, that it would have looked like foolish partiality to prophesy for them the limited existence of a Galilean sect. How was it that these dull and ignorant men, with their cross of wood, triumphed over the deadly fascinations of sensual mythologies, conquered kings and their armies, and overcame the world? What was it that thus caused strength to be made perfect out of abject weakness? There is one, and one only possible answer—the resurrection from the dead. All this vast revolution was due to the power of Christ's resurrection." (Farrar, pp. 715-16.)

Jesus Appears to Mary Magdalene

(John 20:1-8; JST John 20:1, 17; Matthew 28:2-4; JST Matthew 28:2-3; Mark 16:9-11; Luke 24:12; JST Luke 24:11; 3 Ne. 10:9-17)

Jesus appeared first to Mary Magdalene and then to certain other women, speaking peace to their troubled souls. Then he came to the Brethren, at various times and places, giving them counsel and direction concerning their own salvation and the administration of the affairs of his earthly kingdom. The sequence of events, insofar as they can be determined, and the transcendent wonders attending these appearances of the First Immortal One to various of his friends and loved ones, we shall attempt, reverentially, to recount. There is a certain awe and an infinite spiritual depth where visitations from the unseen world are concerned that few can be plumb. Let us, then, rely on such accounts as have been preserved for us; let us ponder them in our hearts; and let us seek the Spirit as we strive to know and to feel what is here involved. Perhaps our hearts, too, shall burn with living fire as did the hearts of those of old who saw and felt and knew and testified.

It is now the first Easter day. In the Americas the darkness has dispersed from off the face of the land, the rocks have ceased to rend, and the earth is cleaving together again. The mourning and lamentations of the people have ended, and they are now united in songs of praise and hymns of thanksgiving "unto the Lord Jesus Christ, their Redeemer. . . . And it was the more righteous part of the people who were saved, and it was they who received the prophets and stoned them not; and it was they who had not shed the blood of the saints, who were spared"—spared from all the natural desolations that swept from one end of the land to the other. They, in their isolated land, are coming to know that he who is their Messiah also has worked out the infinite and eternal atonement. Later in the year he will minister personally among them, and their joy will be full. Then they will see him and feel the nail marks in his hands and in his feet; then they will thrust their hands into the great gaping wound in his side; and then will they become personal witnesses of his resurrection.

But the setting of our present story is laid in Palestine. There the body of Jesus, anointed and wrapped in choice linen, but only partially cared for—for he was buried in haste—lies in Joseph's tomb; his Spirit is nearby in Paradise where he has now finished his ministrations among the just. How and in what way it was done we know not, but at the appointed moment, the infinitely great Spirit Being entered again into the body which was his—the body conceived in the womb of Mary; the body which was begotten of the Father; the body from which that Spirit had departed when his mortal work was finished—and that Spirit, now housed in its eternal home, now inseparably connected with its body in immortal glory, that Spirit, together with the reanimated dust of the earth, became the first immortal soul. Christ is risen; immortality is assured; the victory has been won; death is abolished.

Thereupon, or at least in immediate connection therewith, perhaps after the resurrection itself, "two angels of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it." Their heaven-created power caused "a great earthquake, . . . And their countenance was like lightning, and their raiment white as snow; and for fear of them the keepers did shake, and became as though they were dead." So much for the guards set by the chief priests, lest, as they pretended to suppose, Jesus' disciples might steal the dead body and fabricate a story that he has risen on the third day as he said. But now, as the angelic visitants stood by, the open tomb itself testified of the Risen Lord; its solid rocks wept for joy, and all eternity joined the great Hallelujah chorus: He is risen; he is risen; Christ the Lord is risen today!

It is now Sunday, April 9, A.D. 30—the 17th of Nisan—the day of the resurrection. It is the first day of the week—"according to Jewish reckoning the third day from His Death." According to Jewish tradition, "the soul hovered round the body till the third day, when it finally parted from its earthly tabernacle," and it was on that day that "corruption was supposed to begin." Up to that time relatives and friends were in the habit of "going to the grave, . . . so as to make sure that those laid there were really dead." (Edersheim 2:630-31.) These Rabbinical concepts grew out of Hosea's statement, "in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight." (Hosea 6:2.)

We cannot suppose that Mary Magdalene had any of this in mind when very early—"when it was yet dark," John says—she went to the sepulchre. Hers was a mission of pure love and proper honor to Him who had healed her and with whom, along with the Twelve, she had traveled on many missionary journeys. Indeed, no female name plays a more prominent part in the gospel accounts than that of the convert from Magdala, save only the Blessed Virgin herself. Arriving at the garden tomb, the Magdalene found "the stone taken away from the sepulchre, and two angels sitting thereon." Without question she looked in and found an empty tomb. Immediately she ran to Peter and to John—the inference is that they abode at separate places—and announced to them: "They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid him."

"What a picture John has left us of this unique moment in history. Fear fills the hearts of Peter and John; wicked men must have stolen the body of their Lord. They race to the tomb. John, younger and more fleet, arrives first, stoops down, looks in, but does not enter, hesitating as it were to desecrate the sacred spot even by his presence. But Peter, impetuous, bold, a dynamic leader, an apostle who wielded the sword against Malchus and stood as mouthpiece for them all in bearing testimony, rushes in. John follows. Together they view the grave-clothes-linen strips that have not been unwrapped, but through which a resurrected body has passed. And then, upon John, reflective and mystic by nature, the reality dawns first. It is true! They had not known before; now they do. It is the third day! Christ is risen! 'Death is swallowed up in victory.'" (Commentary 1:841-42.)

Then the two apostles went again to their homes. But Mary Magdalene, having returned, "stood without at the sepulchre weeping." She stooped down and looked in and saw "two angels in white sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain." Presumably they are the same two whom she had already seen sitting on the stone that had blocked the door. If they were present when Peter and John entered the tomb—and certainly they would have been—the spiritual eyes of these apostles were not opened so as to see them.

"Woman, why weepest thou?" the angelic visitants asked. "Because they have taken away my Lord," she replied, "and I know not where they have laid him." As much as she knew about the doctrine of the resurrection; as frequently as she had heard Jesus tell that he would be crucified and rise again the third day; as great as was her faith in him and in his word—yet in the dawning light of this Easter day, the full import of the open tomb had not yet dawned within her soul.

It was then that she turned away from the tomb and "saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus." He asked: "Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou?" In her anxiety, concerned only with her own sorrow, having neither interest in nor concern about others at that moment, she supposed the speaker was the gardener. The garden tomb was empty; who but the gardener would have carried away the body of her Lord? "Sir, if thou have borne him hence," she pleaded, "tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away." Though none others were available to help, yet she would do all that a mortal can to reverence a departed loved one.

Jesus said simply: "Mary." Mary, his beloved; he spoke her name, nothing more. It was as when the still small voice sank into the soul of Elijah; it was as though the heavens had been rent and the very throne of God set forth before men; it was as though angelic choirs had sung her name—MARY! The recognition was instantaneous. Her river of tears became a sea of joy. It is He; he has risen; he lives; I love him as of old. With soul-filled exuberance she cried, "Rabboni"—'Oh, my Master!'—and would have embraced him as she had done so many times before in earlier days. His gentle word:

Hold me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren, and say to them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God.

We cannot believe that the caution which withheld from Jesus the embrace of Mary was anything more than the building of a proper wall of reserve between intimates who are now on two sides of the veil. If a resurrected brother appeared to a mortal brother, or if a resurrected husband appeared to a mortal wife, would they be free to embrace each other on the same terms of intimacy as had prevailed when both were mortals? But perhaps there was more in Jesus' statement than Mary related or than John recorded, for in a very short time we shall see a group of faithful women hold Jesus by his feet as they worship him. [^1] The seeming refusal of Jesus to permit Mary to touch him, followed almost immediately by the appearance in which the other women were permitted to hold his feet, has always been the source of some interpretative concern. The King James Version quotes Jesus as saying "Touch me not." The Joseph Smith Translation reads "Hold me not." Various translations from the Greek render the passage as "Do not cling to me" or "Do not hold me." Some give the meaning as "Do not cling to me any longer," or "Do not hold me any longer." Some speak of ceasing to hold him or cling to him, leaving the inference that Mary was already holding him. There is valid reason for supposing that the thought conveyed to Mary by the Risen Lord was to this effect: "You cannot hold me here, for I am going to ascend to my Father." But the great message that was preserved for us is Jesus' eternal relationship to his Father. "My" Father and "your" Father—Elohim is the Father of all men in the spirit, and of the Lord Jesus in an added and special sense. He is the Father of both Jesus' spirit and his body. "My" God and "your" God—and again Elohim is the God of all men, but in Jesus' case, though he himself is a God and has all power, though he is a member of the very Godhead itself, yet is he everlastingly in subjection to the same God who is our Father.

After these things Mary Magdalene, as he had directed, went to the Twelve, told them all that happened, and bore to them this testimony: 'I have seen the Lord!'

Jesus Appears to the Other Women

(Matthew 28:1, 5-10; JST Matthew 28:1, 4; Mark 16:1-8; JST Mark 16:3-6; Luke 24:1-11; JST Luke 24:1-4)

For reasons of his own, the Risen Lord singled out Mary Magdalene to be the first witness, in point of time, of his resurrection. She was the first mortal of all mortals ever to see a resurrected person. She saw his face and heard his voice, and she was commanded to tell the Twelve of the appearance and of the coming ascension when he would report to Him whose he was. [^2] Then, still in his own infinite wisdom, Jesus chose to appear to and be handled by a group of other women—all before he came even to Peter and the rest of the Twelve, all before his appearances to the hundreds of brethren who were privileged to see him before that day on the Mount of Olives when he ascended to reign on the right hand of Everlasting Power forever.

These other women included Mary the mother of Joses; Joanna, evidently the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward (Luke 8:3); and Salome, the mother of James and John. Among them were women who had been with Jesus in Galilee. Certainly the beloved sisters from Bethany were there; and, in general, the group would have been made up of the same ones who had hovered in sorrow around the cross. Their total number may well have been in the dozens or scores. We know that women in general are more spiritual than men, and certainly their instincts and desires to render compassionate service exceed those of their male counterparts. And these sisters came "bringing the spices which they had prepared" to anoint the body of their Lord.

It was very early, just as the Sunday dawn began to pierce the darkness of the night. They said among themselves: "Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the sepulchre?" But when they came to the sepulchre, they found the stone already rolled away, though it was very great, "and two angels sitting thereon, clothed in long white garments; and they were affrighted." When they entered the tomb, they "found not the body of the Lord Jesus," and "they were much perplexed." At this point the angels delivered their message, but the accounts vary as to what was said, quite possibly because more than one group of devout sisters was involved, or because they could only crowd into or around the sepulchre in small groups. It seems evident that each account, though partial, is true and accurate as far as it goes. As recorded by Matthew the angels said:

Fear not ye; for we know that ye seek Jesus who was crucified.

He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay.

And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him: lo, I [or, rather, we] have told you.

The message is one of peace for themselves; of crucifixion; of resurrection; of linen death-cloths lying unwound with the head-napkin by itself; of the sisters announcing the glorious message to the brethren; and of Jesus preceding them into Galilee, where the Twelve and the other brethren shall see him. The women "departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great joy; and did run to bring his disciples word."

Jesus met them with a cry of "All hail." The recognition was immediate; they knew their Lord; in awe and reverence "they came and held him by the feet, and worshipped him." What tears of joy they must have shed as they kissed his feet, felt the nail marks therein, and bathed them with their tears. We do not know what words of comfort and assurance he spoke to the group, or to individuals among them; the inspired authors pass over the holy words and holy feelings of the holy occasion in reverent silence. This only of what he said has come down to us:

Be not afraid: go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me.

He thus confirms the angelic word and sends the women to give the word to the Brethren. Certainly among those faithful sisters there were some or all of the wives of the apostles; perhaps also there were sisters or even daughters. But whoever they were, Jesus is using them and the fact of his resurrection to show the unity and oneness and equality of the man and the woman. "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Cor. 11:11.) Together they form an eternal family unit; together they serve in the earthly kingdom; together they gain the spiritual stature to see visions and converse with those who abide beyond the veil. To such of the women as heard what Mark records, the angelic word was:

Be not affrighted: Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the place where they laid him.

But go your way, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you into Galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.

Again there is the calm counsel to banish fear; the reminder of the crucifixion; the divine pronouncement that he has risen; and the invitation to see where he had lain and how the burial clothes were placed. But this time the instruction is to tell both Peter and the disciples that He goeth before them into Galilee where they shall see him. This use of Peter's name leaves an added witness that he was called to preside over the Twelve and the church and was expected to lead out in governing the affairs of the earthly kingdom; it also leaves us to assume that some woman with a special relationship to Peter was in the group hearing these particular angelic words. And this time the meeting in Galilee is described as one of which the Brethren already know; on the night of his betrayal and arrest, he had said unto them: "After I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee." (Matt. 26:32.) The meeting itself took place when Jesus manifested himself to more than five hundred brethren at once on a mountain in Galilee and there gave his great and eternal commission to the Twelve.

To his account Mark adds that the women, "entering into the sepulchre, saw the place where they laid Jesus," thus becoming eye witnesses that his body was gone and that the burial clothes were left in such a way as to show that his resurrected body had passed through their folds and strands without the need of unwinding the strips or untying the napkin. Then the account says "they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they trembled and the were amazed: neither said they any thing to any man; for they were afraid"—this latter meaning that they did not, at that time, speak to any except those to whom they had been sent.

And now as to Luke's account, it gives us yet another view and some added understanding of the glorious drama that was then unfolding. He tells us how the women, arriving very early with their spices, "found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre, and two angels standing by it in shining garments. And they entered into the sepulchre, and not finding the body of the Lord Jesus, they were much perplexed thereabout; And were affrighted, and bowed down their faces to the earth. But behold the angels said unto them":

Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen: remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee, Saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again.

These are women who were with Jesus in Galilee. There they heard him say: "The Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men: And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again." (Matt. 17:22-23; Mark 9:30-32; Luke 9:44-45.) Matthew tells us that from the time of Peter's confession in the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, Jesus had begun to reveal these things to his disciples; and it seems clear that he must have done so in extenso. (Matt. 16:21.) Now the angelic voices bring these teachings to their remembrance, lest they think the death-dealing deeds of Annas and the Jews, and of Pilate and his soldiers, had thwarted the designs and purposes of Divine Providence. Again, it is worthy of note that among those who heard the word in Galilee were these very women who now in faith and sorrow sought their Lord in a sepulchre. It is just as important to preach the gospel to a woman as to a man, for the souls of all are equally precious in the sight of Him whose we all are.

Then these women returned from the sepulchre, told what they had seen and heard to the apostles and all the rest, "and their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not." But soon they shall believe, for they too shall hear and see and feel and know. The Risen Lord has manifest himself to the faithful women of his kingdom, for their spiritual insight warranted such precedence; soon the same witness shall be given to the Brethren.

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] If, as is generally believed, the unnamed disciple was our Gospel author Luke, then, interestingly, "each of the Gospels would, like a picture, bear in some dim corner the indication of its author: the first, that of the publican; that by St. Mark, that of the young man, who, in the night of the Betrayal, had fled from his captors; that of St. Luke in the companion of Cleopas; and that of St. John, in the disciple whom Jesus loved." (Edersheim 2:638.)
[^2] "I gave unto you a commandment that you should build a house," the Lord said to his Latter-day Saints, "in the which house I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high; For this is the promise of the Father unto you; therefore I command you to tarry, even as mine apostles at Jerusalem." (D&C 95:8-9; 105:11-12, 18, 33.)
