Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 111

Jesus' Resurrected Ministry

Jesus began both to do and teach, Until the day in which he was taken up, after that he through the Holy Ghost had given commandments unto the apostles whom he had chosen: To whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God. (Acts 1:1-3.)

Peter and Others Learn of His Resurrection

(Matthew 27:52-53; 28:11-15; JST Matthew 27:56; Luke 24:34)

He is risen; he has gained the victory over the grave; he hath abolished death; life and immortality are available to all; these glad tidings of great joy have commenced to go forth; already faithful women are bearing witness that he lives again; and he now has begun his resurrected ministry among mortals. Let God be praised for the wonder of it all!

Now his work must be organized, and his apostles must be sent forth to bear witness of his holy name and to build up and regulate all the affairs of his kingdom in all the world, first unto the Jews and then unto the Gentiles. What then is his next step? It must needs be that he appear to Peter—to Peter the rock; to Peter the seer; to Peter the chief apostle; to Peter to whom he has already given the keys of his earthly kingdom. Peter must now step forward and preside and govern during the absence of his Lord. He is the senior apostle of God on earth. As long as he lives—and he too, according to Jesus' word, will suffer death upon the cross—he will teach and preach and govern, and the gospel net will begin to gather in fish of all kinds.

That Jesus did appear to Peter we know; that this appearance came after that to Mary Magdala, and after that to the other women, we also know—thus making it, as we suppose, his third appearance. But we do not know where or under what circumstances he came, or what words of comfort and counsel and direction he gave. In the upper room, with Peter present, the apostolic witness was borne: "The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon"; and Paul says, "he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve." (1 Cor. 15:5.)

No longer are the words of the women "as idle tales"; the chief apostle has himself seen and heard and, we suppose, felt the nail marks in the mangled hands and in the bruised feet. Neither Peter nor any of the inspired authors, except Luke and Paul, make mention of this appearance, but we feel free to suppose it was one in which the tears of Peter's denial in the court of Caiaphas were dried; one in which he was assured that though Satan desired to sift him as wheat, yet because Jesus had prayed for him, the noble Peter would yet come off triumphant; one in which a blessed bond of unity, of love, and of peace was established between the Master and his servant. As we have indicated with so many other things, there will surely be a day—when we are worthy to receive the enlightenment involved—when we, by revelation, shall learn in full of that holy appearance of the Lord to his chief apostle on the very day he came forth from the grave.

In this connection, and in this time frame, some events transpired involving great numbers of people, all of which stand as an everlasting witness of the raising of Jesus from death. Be it remembered that when Jesus ministered in the spirit world, he preached to "an innumerable company of the spirits of the just." With reference to all of these the holy word says: "Their sleeping dust was to be restored unto its perfect frame, bone to his bone, and the sinews and the flesh upon them, the spirit and the body to be united never again to be divided, that they might receive a fulness of joy." And also: "These the Lord taught, and gave them power to come forth, after his resurrection from the dead, to enter into his Father's kingdom, there to be crowned with immortality and eternal life." (D&C 138:12, 17, 51.)

Matthew tells us that these righteous spirits exercised the power given them. "And the graves were opened," he says, "and the bodies of the saints which slept, arose, who were many, And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many." Similar manifestations were poured out among the Nephites in the New World at this same time. Samuel the Lamanite had prophesied that in the day when the Father glorified his own name by raising his Son Jesus from the grave, then "there were many saints who should arise from the dead, and should appear unto many, and should minister unto them"—all of which came to pass. (3 Ne. 23:9-13.) And all of this—on both continents—bore record that Jesus had risen from the dead, thereby making possible the resurrection of all men, each in his own order.

And we cannot doubt that the chief witness borne by each resurrected saint, as he ministered to a mortal friend or relative, would be to testify that the Son of God had himself come forth from the grave, and that the effects of his resurrection were now passing upon others. Our knowledge of the resurrection is such that we can envision these righteous dead coming forth, each in his own order, each at the appointed moment, each prepared to enter into that eternal glory which is prepared for those who love and serve their Lord. Indeed, it was to be with them as it was with their Lord. They were to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, to go no more out.

Thus did the proclamation of the resurrection go forth among the righteous, to be carried by them to all men. But among the wicked and ungodly it was an entirely different thing. The chief priests learned of it from the guards whose mission it had been to keep the tomb sealed. "It was useless for the guards to stay beside an empty grave. With fear for the consequences, and horror at all that they had seen, they fled to the members of the Sanhedrin who had given them their secret commission. To these hardened hearts belief and investigation were alike out of the question. Their only refuge seemed to be in lies. They instantly tried to hush up the whole matter. They suggested to the soldiers that they must have slept, and that while they did so the disciples had stolen the body of Jesus. But such a tale was too infamous for credence, and too ridiculous for publicity. If it became known, nothing could have saved these soldiers, supposing them to have been Romans, from disgrace and execution. The Sadducees therefore bribed the men to consult their common interests by burying the whole matter in secrecy and silence. It was only gradually and later, and to the initiated, that the base calumny was uttered. Within six weeks of the resurrection, that great event was the unshaken faith of every Christian; within a few years of the event the palpable historic proofs of it and the numerous testimonies of its reality—strengthened by a memorable vision vouchsafed to himself—had won assent from the acute and noble intellect of a young Pharisaic zealot and persecutor whose name was Saul. But it was only in posthumous and subterranean whispers that the dark falsehood was disseminated which was intended to counteract this overwhelming evidence. St. Matthew says that when he wrote his Gospel it was still commonly bruited among the Jews. It continued to be received among them for centuries, and is one of the blaspheming follies repeated and amplified twelve centuries afterwards in the Toldoth Jeshu." (Farrar, pp. 722-23.)

Jesus Appears on the Emmaus Road

(Luke 24:13-32; Mark 16:12-13)

Jesus now chooses to appear, first, on the Emmaus road, and then in the upper room, under circumstances that prove he has risen from the grave and that also teach the literal and corporeal nature of a resurrected body. During all his mortal ministry he had chosen the perfect teaching moments and brought forth the ideal illustrations to teach his doctrines and present his message in a way none other had ever done. Nor will he depart from that practice now. None but he could have done what he is now commencing. The two appearances, which are part of the same sermon in stone, as it were, comprise the only way in which both the fact and the nature of the resurrection could be taught in perfection.

It is the afternoon of the day of his resurrection. Two disciples not of the Twelve, one called Cleopas, the other undoubtedly Luke, [^1] who recorded the events, are walking the some eight miles from Jerusalem to Emmaus. They can think and ponder and speak of only one thing—the Lord Jesus and his death and the reports relative to his resurrection. There is a sense of anxiety and perplexity and wonder in their words as they commune and reason together. There has never been such a Passover as this one, never such a trial and crucifixion as Jesus suffered, never such a day of wonder and rumor as this day, no, not from the beginning of time until now. Their minds are not at rest, and their spirits are stirred and anxious within them.

A stranger, Jesus himself, seemingly but another Passover pilgrim, draws nigh and walks with them. They feel some irritation, perhaps are a little peevish, that this unknown one should intrude himself on a conversation that is both personal and sacred. It suits his purpose not to be recognized, and so their eyes are covered with a veil, as it were, and the stranger is an unknown one. He asks: "What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad?"

There is surprise and skepticism in the voice of Cleopas as he turns to speak to the uninvited intruder. How could anyone have been in Jerusalem this week and been unaware of the tumult and trials and crucifixion of the most renowned person in all Palestine? He asks: "Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these days?" Jesus said: "What things?"

Both of the disciples responded with a fluent outpouring of words that stir the soul. Luke digests their response: "Concerning Jesus of Nazareth," they said, "which was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people." There is no doubt here, no equivocation; they knew the wonder of his words, the depth of his deeds, the might of his ministry. "And how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to death," they continued, "and have crucified him." Herein lay their sorrow; their Friend had suffered, died, and was buried. All his promises and teachings seemed vague and uncertain in their minds.

"But we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel: and beside all this, to day is the third day since these things were done." The third day! Had he not promised to rise again the third day? But where was he? Had their Redeemer's work failed? "Yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonished, which were early at the sepulchre," they continued, "And when they found not his body, they came, saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels, which said that he was alive." This we cannot understand, they say, "And certain of them which were with us went to the sepulchre, and found it even so as the women had said: but him they saw not." Peter and John had checked the "idle tales" of the women, but Jesus was not to be found. (Apparently Cleopas and Luke had not yet heard the clear witness of Mary Magdalene and of the other women that they had seen the Lord.) Having let them lay the foundation for his words, Jesus then said:

O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken:

Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?

Having so spoken, Jesus quoted from Moses and all the prophets and expounded to them from all of the scriptures "the things concerning himself." How marvelous it would be if we knew what he said. They may have walked together for as long a time as two hours. And all the while to have the Son of God interpret for them the Messianic word! Are there meanings in the Messianic words of Moses and David and Isaiah, and "all the prophets," that so far have escaped us? Perhaps some day the conversations of this Emmaus walk will be revealed. But our Lord had a purpose over and above that of interpreting the Messianic word—he could leave that to Peter and Paul and the others, as they were enlightened by the power of the Holy Spirit; his mission was to show them what a resurrected person is like, and so far he has seemed so much like any mortal that his identity has remained hidden.

Nearing Emmaus, Jesus acted as though he would travel on. They constrained him to stay with them. "Abide with us: for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent," they said. Having heard his scriptural explanations, all feelings of anxiety and resentment vanished; now they sought his continuing company. He consented. And as they sat at meat, "he took bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them." It was as though he removed the veil from their eyes; the sweet words of blessing, the passing of the bread, the loving demeanor of their Lord—it was all familiar to them. He was doing what he had done before, a rite that identified him in their minds. The covering—first imposed, but now removed, all by divine power—was no more. "They knew him; and he was taken up out of their sight."

Then they said—and the feelings thus described are the conclusive witness of the divine Sonship—they said: "Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?" Cleopas and Luke now knew for themselves that He had risen. They must tell the others, and so they returned immediately to Jerusalem.

Jesus Appears in the Upper Room

(Luke 24:33-49; JST Luke 24:34, 40; Mark 16:14; John 20:19-23)

As "it becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor" (D&C 88:81); as every person who has received the gospel is duty-bound to carry the same glad tidings to our Father's other children; as living witnesses of the truth and divinity of the Lord's work have become such, among other reasons, so they can bear their witness to their fellowmen—so Cleopas and Luke hastened to Jerusalem to testify to their fellow disciples that they had seen the Lord. They knew the trysting place and went directly there. We believe it was an upper room—perhaps the same room, in the home of John Mark, where Jesus and the Twelve celebrated the Feast of the Passover. A large group of disciples was present, including all of the eleven except Thomas. Certainly it was not a meeting for men only. Many faithful women were there and possibly even children. The whole group was eating an evening meal and, in effect, holding a testimony meeting as they ate. What each had seen and heard and knew of that day's happenings was recited and particularly the account of the appearance of the Lord to Peter. No doubt the Chief Apostle told them freely all that had transpired on that holy occasion.

Into this dinner meeting—this assemblage where both temporal and spiritual food was being freely dispensed—came the two who had walked and conversed with Jesus on the Emmaus road. They heard the account of Jesus' appearance to Peter—"The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon," someone said—and as one testimony builds upon another, they were thus encouraged to testify on their own. "And they told what things they saw and heard in the way, and how he was known to them, in breaking of bread." How the believing souls there assembled must have rejoiced in the description of the stranger; in the Messianic interpretations he gave of the words of Moses and David and all the prophets; in the reminder they heard of his known practice of blessing and breaking bread; in the hearing about the flaming fires of testimonial surety that burned in the hearts of Cleopas and Luke as the Master Teacher had interpreted for them the scriptures!

Just at this moment, as the ones from Emmaus concluded their testimony, as though materializing from the midst of eternity, "Jesus himself stood in the midst of them." The doors were closed and locked; there was no window through which a man could enter; these friends of Jesus were guarding themselves "for fear of the Jews." His first words were the familiar "Peace be unto you." Mark tells us he "upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them"—Mary Magdalene and the other women—"which had seen him after he was risen." The inference is that they have believed the witness of Peter, but that they felt that the sisters had seen not a resurrected person, but some ghostly spectre, some spirit, some ethereal impression of wispy nothingness from another sphere. And even now, Luke records, "they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit." How else, they thought, could this seeming man have entered the room? Jesus spoke:

Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

He stood there as a man; a spirit is a man; this they knew. He had been a spirit before his birth. "This body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; . . . and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh" (Ether 3:16), he had said to the brother of Jared in days gone by. He had been a spirit when he preached to the other spirits in paradise. But now he had a body—not of flesh and blood as do mortals, but of flesh and bones as do those whose bodies and spirits are inseparably joined in immortality. Flesh and bones is tangible; it can be felt and handled. He is continuing his "living sermon"; he is teaching them the reality and corporeity of the resurrection; though he had come through the enclosed room, yet he was a tangible being.

Then "he shewed them his hands and his feet." They felt the nail marks therein. What a marvel it is for mortal flesh to handle immortal flesh. "And while they yet wondered and believed not for joy, he said unto them, Have ye here any meat?" Their meal included broiled fish and honeycomb. These were handed to Jesus, and—marvel of marvels—he took them and ate them. A resurrected person eats and digests food; the body, though immortal, is tangible and real. If ever there was a "living sermon," such is being seen and believed and understood by the favored faithful in the upper room this night! Then he said:

These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me.

The Messianic prophecies! Every jot, every tittle have been fulfilled; not one word in the Psalms, not a single prophetic utterance, not one sacrificial similitude has been overlooked—all things have been fulfilled in Christ. He gave the word, he fulfilled the word, and the work is now accomplished. "Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures." The miraculous nature of this gift should not be overlooked. They had not yet received the companionship of the Holy Ghost, but, nonetheless, their understandings are being quickened, though the total fulfillment of this will not be theirs until after Pentecost. Jesus continued:

Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day:

And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

And ye are witnesses of these things.

Christ came; he was crucified, died, and rose again the third day; he worked out the infinite and eternal atonement, all with but one end in view: to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man, to enable men to repent and be baptized and gain eternal life. That message is now to go to "all nations," not to the Jews only, but to every nation and kindred and tongue and people. And it is to be carried by testimony. The disciples are to teach the gospel and seal their teachings with the witness that God has revealed to them that Jesus rose from the dead, that as a consequence his gospel is true, and that to gain salvation men must believe and obey.

And, behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high.

Herein we see a dual promise: one, that the disciples shall receive that sacred endowment which is given in holy places, [^2] and the other, that they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, which is itself an endowment from on high. They are already under instructions to go to Galilee and there meet the Lord on a mountain. This they will do shortly, and they will then return to Jerusalem, where they will tarry until Pentecost, when they will receive the Holy Ghost. We suppose they tarried in Jerusalem for the other sacred endowment and received it before they went to Galilee; otherwise Jesus' instruction loses its plain meaning.

Peace be unto you: as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you.

Those to whom Jesus thus spoke had been called, ordained, given priesthood and keys and authority, and promised the companionship of the Holy Ghost, and now they are being sent forth to do among men as they have seen their Master do. They are to preach, ordain, and work miracles. They are legal administrators who represent the Lord Jesus, saying and doing what he wants said and done, even as he acted in a like capacity for his Father.

Then, as John expressed it, Jesus "breathed on them"—which in the very nature of things must be taken as a figure of speech—and said:

Receive ye the Holy Ghost:

Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.

As to the receipt of the Holy Ghost, we know from many revelations exactly what is involved. The Holy Ghost is a personage of spirit, a spirit man, a member of the Godhead. Because he is a spirit person he has power to reveal truth to our spirits, to sanctify our souls, and to dwell in us in a figurative sense. We do not know how the eternal laws involved operate, only that they do. The gift of the Holy Ghost is the right to the constant companionship of this member of the Godhead based on faithfulness. This gift is given by the laying on of hands after baptism. It is reserved for members of the Church. These members may or may not actually receive the companionship of the Spirit; those who are clean and pure and worthy do; others do not. Jesus here tells his disciples to receive the Holy Ghost, meaning the gift of the Holy Ghost. In the very nature of things this means that he either conferred the gift upon them by the laying on of hands, or he confirmed verbally that he had theretofore given them that gift by the laying on of hands. The gift itself came on the day of Pentecost.

As to remitting and retaining sins, this is something that is implicit in the gospel system. The gospel is the plan of salvation; by obedience to its laws and ordinances men have power to free themselves from sin; their sins are washed away in the waters of baptism; and sin and evil are burned out of their souls as though by fire when they are baptized by the Holy Spirit. Thus the legal administrators who preach the gospel have power to remit the sins of men in the waters of baptism, and they have power to retain the sins of those who do not repent and are not baptized for the remission of sins.

And further: Those to whom power is given to bind on earth and seal in heaven have power to remit the sins of the saints on conditions of repentance or to retain them if they do not repent. In the ultimate sense, God alone forgives sins; but he can and does use his servants to speak for him in this as in many things, and whether by his own voice or by the voice of his servants, the result is the same. Needless to say, this, the Lord's system of forgiveness, operates only in the Church and kingdom of God on earth; only legal administrators who have been endowed with power from on high can either remit or retain sins; and they must be guided by the power of the Holy Ghost in all that they do, or their acts will not be binding on earth and sealed everlastingly in the heavens. [^3]

Jesus Appears to Thomas and the Disciples

(John 20:24-29)

Once again it is Sunday, [^4] the first weekly anniversary of the first resurrection. The disciples, beginning the practice of worshipping on Sunday rather than on the Jewish Sabbath, and coming together to commemorate the rising of Jesus from death, are again in the upper room. The doors are shut, probably guarded. No mention is made of food, but the worshipful group may have been eating, and certainly they were conversing about the resurrection and reciting the accounts of His appearances. So far there have been five of which we know—to Mary Magdalene, to the other women, to Peter, to Cleopas and Luke on the Emmaus road, and to a small congregation of saints in the upper room.

During the week the disciples had said to Thomas, "We have seen the Lord," and, 'We felt the nail marks in his hands and in his feet: we gave him a piece of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb, both of which he ate before us. And he told us such and such things about himself and about our commission to testify of him in all nations.' Thomas had believed in the resurrection, but not in the literal corporeity of His body, not in the fact that Jesus now ate food, not in the fact that the nail marks remained in his flesh and bones. He had said: "Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe."

Thomas is now present with the others, and of a sudden, as on the week afore, Jesus "stood in the midst." Again he utters the familiar greeting: "Peace be unto you." Then to Thomas came the command:

Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless, but believing.

Thomas complied; he would not have dared to do otherwise. He now felt and handled as the others had done; he was a living, personal witness of the corporeity of the body of the Lord Jesus. Whether Jesus called for food and ate again is not recorded. Such would not have been necessary, because Thomas, feeling the nail prints and the spear wound, could not do other than believe the account about the broiled fish and the honeycomb. From the lips of the now believing apostle, we suppose as he knelt to touch the marks in Jesus' feet, came the worshipful cry: "My Lord and my God." Thereupon Jesus said:

Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

Thomas, who once offered to go with Jesus to Bethany, there to die with him, saw and believed—believed in the literal nature of the resurrection and that Jesus after death lived again as a man. Ever since he has been called, somewhat unkindly, Doubting Thomas. Whatever they may have been, his doubts were of a passing and transitory nature. He became and remained a believer in the full sense. Rather than point the finger of scorn at his supposed disbelief, would it not be better to be fearful of the fate of the ten thousand times ten thousand, plus unnumbered more, of the Doubting Thomases in a doubting Christendom where none believe that the Lord Jesus now reigns with his Father in eternal glory—both of them glorying in their exalted bodies of flesh and bones?

Thus we know that resurrected beings, containing their glory within themselves, can walk as mortals do on earth; that they can converse and reason and teach as they once did in mortality; that they can both withhold and manifest their true identities; that they can pass with corporeal bodies through solid walls; that they have bodies of flesh and bones that can be felt and handled; that, if need be, and at special times, they can retain the scars and wounds of the flesh; that they can eat and digest food; that they can vanish from mortal eyes and transport themselves by means unknown to us.

How glorious it has been to hear the living sermon preached by the greatest Preacher of all time as he ministered on the Emmaus road and in the upper room!

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] "Respecting this appearance to James we know nothing further, unless there be any basis of true tradition in the story preserved to us in the Gospel of the Hebrews. We are there told that James, the first Bishop of Jerusalem, and the Lord's brother, had, after the Last Supper, taken a solemn vow that he would neither eat nor drink until he had seen Jesus risen from the dead. Early, therefore, after His resurrection, Jesus, when He had given the sindon to the servant of the priest, had a table with bread brought out, blessed the bread, and gave it to James, with the words, 'Eat thy bread now, my brother, since the Son of Man has risen from the dead.'" (Farrar, p. 731.)
[^2] "I gave unto you a commandment that you should build a house," the Lord said to his Latter-day Saints, "in the which house I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high; For this is the promise of the Father unto you; therefore I command you to tarry, even as mine apostles at Jerusalem." (D&C 95:8-9; 105:11-12, 18, 33.)
[^3] "I have conferred upon you the keys and power of the priesthood," the Lord said to Joseph Smith, "and whosesoever sins you remit on earth shall be remitted eternally in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you retain on earth shall be retained in heaven." (D&C 132:45-46.)
[^4] John, speaking after the Jewish pattern, says "after eight days," meaning, to us, seven days later. Their measurement of Jesus' tenure in the tomb is also counted this same way.
