Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 112

The Galilean Appearances

Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world. And it came to pass that the multitude went forth, and thrust their hands into his side, and did feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet; and this they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth, and did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come. And when they had all gone forth and had witnessed for themselves, they did cry out with one accord, saying: Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High God! And they did fall down at the feet of Jesus, and did worship him. (3 Ne. 11:14-17.)

Jesus Appears at the Sea of Tiberias

(John 21:1-24)

After Jesus rose from the dead, our apostolic friends received two commands—one, to go to Galilee and meet Jesus on a mountain according to a prior appointment; the other, to tarry in Jerusalem until he sent the promise of the Father upon them and they were endowed with power from on high. Apparently they have been endowed in the initial sense of the word—though an additional heavenly endowment of divine power will come, in Jerusalem, on the day of Pentecost—for they have now left the Holy City and traveled to their native Galilee. It will be remembered that all of the Twelve, save Judas, were Galileans, and that most of their apostolic training, as well as their ministerial service, had been in their beloved homeland. Their appointment to meet the Lord was a definite one to which more than five hundred brethren had been invited. As they awaited the day, and having need to supply their families with this world's goods, Peter said: "I go a fishing." Six of the eleven were with him—James, John, Thomas, Nathanael, and two who are not named but probably were Andrew and Philip, since those two had been engaged with Peter and the others in like ventures in earlier days. This group said to Peter: "We also go with thee."

They all went forth into a ship and spent the whole night fishing in the Sea of Galilee, also known as the Sea of Tiberias and as the Lake of Gennesaret. They caught nothing. In the morning Jesus stood on the shore, "but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus." Apparently he withheld his identity as he had done to the two who walked with him on the Emmaus road. He called out: "Children, have ye any meat?" They answered, "No." He said, "Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find." They did so, and immediately the net was so full "they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes." Perhaps the three—Peter, James, and John—remembered that other occasion when they had toiled all night on the same lake, had caught nothing, and then, casting again at His word, had filled their net until it brake. In any event, John, who seems to have been more spiritually sensitive than the rest, said to Peter: "It is the Lord." Peter, who was naked, "girt his fisher's coat unto him," jumped from the ship, and swam to shore to meet the Master. The others changed into a small ship and dragged the net and the fish about a hundred yards to the shore.

When they came to shore they found a fire of coals with fish broiling and a supply of bread. Jesus said: "Bring of the fish which ye have now caught." Peter waded into the shallow water, pulled the net to shore, and the fish were counted—a hundred and fifty-three in all, so many that the record marvels that the net was not broken. Jesus said: "Come and dine." John says none of the disciples dared ask him, "Who art thou?" because they knew "it was the Lord." Jesus then gave them bread and fish to eat, and although the account does not so state, he himself must also have eaten, for, as in the upper room, such would have been one of the main purposes of providing the food. John says this was "the third time that Jesus shewed himself to his disciples"—meaning to them as a group—"after that he was risen from the dead."

"So when they"—meaning, as we suppose, both Jesus and the apostles—"had dined," Jesus said to Simon Peter: "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?" More than these fish, more than the things of this world, more than all else, even life itself! 'Lovest thou me above all? If so, Keep my commandments.' To Peter—who but a short while before had said, "Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both into prison, and to death," and who, as Jesus foretold, had then thrice denied that he even knew Christ, and that before the cock crew twice (Luke 22:32-34)—to Peter, the Chief Apostle, Jesus was asking for a new and unshakable avowal of allegiance. Peter said: "Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee." Jesus said: "Feed my lambs." Once near this spot Jesus had said to Peter and Andrew, "Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men." (Matt. 4:18-22.) That call was still in force, but to it now was added the commission to feed the flock of God.

Jesus asked a second time: "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me?" Again came the answer: "Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee." To this Jesus said: "Feed my sheep." Then again, for the third time, came the question: "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me?" Peter, grieved at the repetition, responded: "Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee." Again came the test of love and of true discipleship: "Feed my sheep." He who had thrice denied, now thrice affirmed; he who with an oath had said, "I know not this man of whom ye speak" (Mark 14:66-72), now pledged, in the presence of his brethren, to love his Lord with all his heart; he who had said he would die for Christ, now is committed to live for him.

Lovest thou me! Jesus had asked and Peter had answered; thrice was the question put and thrice the answer came. Lovest thou me! Ah, Peter, truly hast thou testified of thy love for thy Lord. And how shall that love be measured? In service to thy fellowmen ("Feed my sheep") and in obedience to the holy law ("If ye love me, keep my commandments" [John 14:15])—in these two ways while thou livest. But there is more. Thy love for me shall be perfected and sanctified by thy death. ("Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends." [John 15:13.]) And so Jesus, still singling out the leader among the apostolic witnesses, said to his servant: "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not." Of this John said: "This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God," meaning that Peter would lay down his life for his Chief Friend, lay it down upon a cruel cross, lay it down even as that Friend had laid down his life for his friends. "I will lay down my life for thy sake," Peter had said. "Thou shalt follow me" in death, was Jesus' assurance to him. (John 13:36-38.) "How literally the Master then spoke, and how fully Peter is to do as he offered, he now learns. He is to be crucified, a thing which John in this passage assumes to be known to his readers. Peter's arms are to be stretched forth upon the cross, the executioner shall gird him with the loin-cloth which criminals wear when crucified, and he shall be carried where he would not, that is to his execution." (Commentary 1:863-64.)

Having so spoken, Jesus said to Peter, "Follow me"—follow me apart from the others; follow me in ministerial service; follow me in faith and obedience and righteousness; follow me in all things. And as they walked, Peter, "turning about," saw John, his closest colleague and most intimate mortal friend, and asked Jesus: "Lord, and what shall this man do?" Shall he also have his arms stretched forth upon the cross? Will he too be girded and bound upon the inhuman instrument of torture? Shall it be with him, as thou hast said of me? Jesus said: "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me."

Perhaps it was at this time that John, joining Jesus and Peter as they walked, was asked by the Lord: "John, my beloved, what desirest thou? For if you shall ask what you will, it shall be granted unto you." In John's reply we see the measure of the man; the apostolic witness he desired to bear; the works he desired to do; the souls he desired to save: "Lord, give unto me power over death," he asked, "that I may live and bring souls unto thee." Such a request, aside from the perfect faith that knows that such a plea can be granted, is a manifestation of missionary zeal scarce known among men. To preach the gospel and save souls until the Son of Man comes in his glory—what a wondrous work! And Jesus replied:

Verily, verily I say unto thee, because thou desirest this thou shalt tarry until I come in my glory, and shalt prophesy before nations, kindreds, tongues and people.

In writing of this promise John gives a more amplified account of the conversation there on the shores of Gennesaret. Not only did Jesus say to Peter, "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?" but also: "He desired of me that he might bring souls unto me, but thou desiredst that thou mightest speedily come unto me in my kingdom. I say unto thee, Peter, this was a good desire; but my beloved has desired that he might do more, or a greater work yet among men than what he has before done. Yea, he has undertaken a greater work; therefore I will make him as a flaming fire and a ministering angel; he shall minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation who dwell on the earth. And I will make thee to minister for him and for thy brother James; and unto you three I will give this power and the keys of this ministry until I come. Verily I say unto you, ye shall both have according to your desires, for ye both joy in that which ye have desired." (D&C 7:1-8.)

And thus endeth such knowledge as we have of the words of him who is Lord of all as he spoke them this wondrous morning in the calm setting of a Galilean lake where he and his hearers had spent so many pleasant hours together. Without doubt he then told them many other things. Oh, how little we know of all that he said! How little we have seen of all that he did! And how seldom do we get in tune with the Infinite so that we can both know and feel even that which has been preserved for us! We suppose, however, that he confirmed with them the time and the place of their coming meeting on a Galilean mountain, for it is there we shall see them next.

Jesus Appears on a Mountain in Galilee

(Matthew 28:16-20; Mark 16:15-18; 3 Nephi 11)

We come now to the greatest of all the appearances of the Risen Lord to and among his disciples in Palestine—to his appearance on a mountain in Galilee. What happened at this appearance is not even mentioned by John or Luke; and Matthew uses only five verses to recount its wonders, and Mark only four. But in all of this there was a divine purpose; in it all there was a reason of surpassing import why more was not preserved in the New Testament—which purpose and reason we shall hereafter set forth.

First, however, we must give to this Galilean appearance such a setting and such a New Testament background as the sacred record does provide. Jesus himself was a Galilean; he lived as a child in Nazareth, and his boyish feet trod the Galilean hills. The eleven were all Galileans; most of his ministry and most of theirs had been in the cities and villages of that rustic, rugged, rural part of Palestine. There was more believing blood and less priestcraft, more pure worship and less rebellion, more of the love of the Lord and less of the worship of worldliness, in Galilee than in Judea. The spies that dogged his footsteps came from Jerusalem; the scribes and Rabbinical schools were centered in the Holy City. The proud Sadducees and the haughty Sanhedrists made the temple their headquarters. Pharisaic sophistry and priestly ritualism centered in Judea, not in Galilee. What would have been more natural than that the thoughts and hearts of the apostles would have turned to their beloved homeland in the trials of these days? And how compassionate and tender was their Friend in choosing to take them back to their own land to manifest himself to them and to renew with them in glory the experiences they had once had with him there in the days of their trials? Would their thoughts have been as the words of our hymn?

Each cooing dove and sighing bough That makes the eve so blest to me Has something far diviner now It bears me back to Galilee. Each flow'ry glen and mossy dell Where happy birds in song agree Thro' sunny morn the praises tell Of sights and sounds in Galilee. And when I read the thrilling lore Of Him who walked upon the sea I long, oh, how I long once more To follow Him in Galilee. O Galilee! sweet Galilee! Where Jesus loved so much to be; O Galilee! blue Galilee! Come, sing thy song again to me. —Hymns, no. 38

And so that night in the upper room, at the Paschal feast, having quoted the Messianic word that the Shepherd will be smitten and the sheep scattered, Jesus said: "But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee." (Matt. 26:32.) And so, lest they forget, at the open tomb the angelic ministrants told the faithful women: "Go your way, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you into Galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you." (Mark 16:7.) And even the Risen Lord himself said to these same women: "Go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me." (Matt. 28:10.) The import, glory, and grandeur of this Galilean meeting could not have been impressed more strongly upon them. Nor can we doubt that the word went out—repetitiously—to all who were invited and that elaborate preparations were made. This was to be no small and insignificant thing; many of them had already seen the Risen Lord, but all that had gone before was but a shadow and a foretaste of what was to be.

Paul recounted some of the resurrected appearances. He reminded the Corinthians that he had preached to them the gospel by which salvation comes. "For I delivered unto you first of all," he said, "that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures"—and these things are what comprise the gospel—"And that he was seen of Cephas." Peter saw him, as was announced that night in the upper room. Then he was seen "of the twelve," meaning in the upper room when Cleopas and Luke made their report, and again a week later in that same place by the same group with Thomas also being present. "After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep." This is the appearance on the Galilean mountain of which we are about to speak. "After that, he was seen of James." This is understood to be an appearance to James the brother of the Lord, who became one of the Twelve and a mighty pillar of strength and righteousness in due course. Of it the scriptures say nothing except the words here quoted from Paul. [^1] Then he was seen, Paul continues, "of all the apostles," having reference to the time of his ascension on the Mount of Olivet. "And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time," our apostolic friend records, identifying himself as one abortively added to the apostolic family. (1 Cor. 15:1-8.)

Paul's recitation is not intended in any sense to be complete. He says nothing about the appearance—the first of all others—to Mary Magdalene; nor to the other women; nor to the two disciples on the Emmaus road; nor to seven of the Twelve on the shore of the sea of Tiberias; nor does he mention, as Luke does, that when Jesus first came to the upper room there were others present in addition to the apostles. Indeed, all of the inspired authors record only fragments and slivers of the full story. Matthew mentions the "eleven disciples" only as being present on the mountain in Galilee, and Mark strings together the appearance in the upper room and the commission, given in Galilee, to go into all the world, as though they both occurred at the same time and place. Providentially we can take a sliver from here and a sliver from there and construct a large board. And having thus learned how the accounts must be interpreted, we can reach reasonable conclusions as to what happened. Thus when Paul speaks of more than five hundred brethren being present on one occasion, we have every reason to believe there may have been five hundred or a thousand women in the same congregation and perhaps an unnumbered host of children. We know how and under what circumstances the Lord ministered among the Nephites and have every reason to believe that he followed the same pattern in Palestine. The Nephites were a select group of saints because the wicked among them had been destroyed during the period of darkness at the crucifixion, and the group that assembled on the mountain in Galilee was one called from the midst of the wicked in the land so that they might receive on a mountain sanctuary the mysteries of the kingdom.

We must not leave this part of our discussion without recording that, without question, there were many unmentioned appearances. We know He was with them, from time to time, for forty days; and it is unthinkable to assume that he did not appear to the Blessed Virgin whose Son he was, to Lazarus whom he called forth from four days of death, to Mary and Martha whom he loved, and to hosts of others whose names were written in the Lamb's Book of Life, never to be blotted out. It is true that various of these may have been with the "other women" at the tomb, with the apostles in the upper room, or with the great congregation on the Galilean mountain. But it is not the time or the place that matters; rather, it is the reality of the appearances and the fact that it was clearly his purpose to manifest himself to all who had prepared themselves to stand in the Divine Presence. It is written of Jared's brother that "because of the knowledge of this man, . . . he could not be kept from within the veil; therefore he saw Jesus; and he did minister unto him." (Ether 3:19-20.) And so it was with the faithful among whom Jesus had ministered before his death. They too had a perfect knowledge that he was the Son of God; they knew he had fulfilled his promise and risen from the dead; they knew he had appeared to Peter and to others; and they knew he would appear to them also if they sought him with all their hearts. Further: He desired to appear to them, to give comfort and consolation in their sorrow, and to wipe away all tears from their crying eyes; he wanted them to grow in faith and to bear witness to the world of his resurrection and of the resurrection of all men; and, we may rest assured, by obedience to the laws involved the veil was rent and they saw and felt and handled and worshipped.

But now, as to the appearance on the mountain Galilee, it is pleasant to suppose it happened at the same site on which he preached the Sermon on the Mount, for that was the ordination sermon of the Twelve, and he now designs to give those same apostolic witnesses their great commission to carry the gospel into all the world. What would be more fitting than to have the great commission to take the gospel to all the world come forth at the same sacred spot whence they received their first apostolic commission, from the mountain which had become to them a holy temple? It is also pleasant to suppose that after the invited disciples were all assembled, awaiting his appearance in reverential awe, perhaps seated, at the direction of Peter and the Twelve, on the greening slopes in prayer and meditation, at such a moment he appeared, and that his first words to them paralleled those to be spoken later to his Nephite disciples:

Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning.

When Jesus spoke these words among the Nephites, "the whole multitude," in a spontaneous act of reverential worship, "fell to the earth," even as Thomas had done when he was invited to feel the nail prints and thrust his hand into the side of the Risen One. Then Jesus invited these New World Hebrews—these Nephite Jews whose fathers had come forth from Jerusalem—to themselves come forth and thrust their hands into his side and feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet, and learn for themselves that he was the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and that he had been slain for the sins of the world. This they did, worshipping Jesus and rending the air with cries of Hosanna. And we do not suppose that the divine scene was much different on the Galilean mountain. Of it Matthew says, "when they saw him, they worshipped him," adding, sadly we suppose, "but some doubted," meaning that among the multitude there were those who had not yet come to know—as all of the apostles then knew—of the tangible nature of his body of flesh and bones. That this doubt, as with Thomas, blossomed into glorious faith we cannot doubt as soon as they—as it had been with Thomas and all of the Twelve—had felt and handled the once mangled and now glorified body of their Lord. How marvelous it is that Jesus welcomes those of all lands and nations, and that, from his standpoint, there cannot be too many who are worthy to see and touch and handle and know for themselves that he is the Redeemer of the world and the Savior of all who come unto him with full purpose of heart.

In this setting of worship and adoration, Jesus bore to his Galilean friends this testimony of himself: "ALL POWER IS GIVEN UNTO ME IN HEAVEN AND IN EARTH." Even for a God, this is a new day of power and might and dominion! A resurrected body adds eternal blessings that cannot be gained in any other way. Even a God must be resurrected to inherit, possess, and receive all things. Thus saith Jehovah: "My dead body shall . . . arise." (Isa. 26:19.) Jesus, who is Jehovah, was God before the world was. Speaking to good king Benjamin, the angelic ministrant called him "the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity." (Mosiah 3:5.) To Isaiah he was "The mighty God, The everlasting Father" (Isa. 9:6), and to Abinadi he was "God himself" who should "come down among the children of men" and "redeem his people" (Mosiah 15:1.) He was the Lord God Almighty before he was ever born, because he was "like unto God" (Abr. 3:24), and he was, under the Father, the Creator of worlds without number. There are no words to describe, no language to convey, no tongue which can tell, his greatness and glory as it was even before the foundations of the world were laid. And yet, even he came to earth to be "added upon" (Abr. 3:26), to undergo the trials and test of mortality, and to come forth in the resurrection with a body of flesh and bones like that of his Father. The Spirit Jehovah, thus clothed in immortal glory, became an inheritor of eternal life in the full and unlimited sense. In the resurrection "he received a fulness of the glory of the Father; And he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him." (D&C 93:16-17.)

Jesus has thus finished his mortal labors; now he is eternal; from henceforth he shall reign on the right hand of the Majesty on High; others, who are yet mortal, must carry forward the work of salvation among men on earth. And so he says to his apostles:

Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:

Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world.

Thus the Twelve are commissioned anew. Apostolic power came to them on the Mount of Beatitudes when they were ordained to the holy apostleship; they received the keys of the kingdom of God on earth after Jesus was transfigured on the heights of Holy Hermon; they were recalled to ministerial service when he appeared to them in the upper room and again at the sea of Tiberias; now they are to go to all nations and take the message of salvation to all men. Once they were sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; now all our Father's children, of all nations and kindreds, are to hear the divine word. The gospel must be taught; baptism is for all; salvation is available to all on conditions of obedience. All that Jesus has taught them is to be taught to all men as rapidly as they are able to bear it, and he will be with the faithful in all nations always.

Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned.

Thus saith thy God. The gospel is for all; baptism is for all; salvation is for all—for all who will believe and obey. The residue of men, and they are many, shall be damned. Men must first be baptized, then they must "observe all things"—meaning, keep the commandments—and thus, having endured to the end, they shall be saved with an everlasting salvation.

Nor were these eternal truths taught in Galilee any different from those presented among the Nephites. After that branch of the house of Israel had gained their witness of the divine Sonship of Jesus and had felt and handled the flesh and bones he then possessed, he called Nephi the Disciple to come forth. Nephi "bowed himself before the Lord and did kiss his feet," and Jesus said to him: "I give unto you power that ye shall baptize this people when I am again ascended into heaven." Others were called forth and given like power. That these disciples were already performing authoritative baptisms we know; but it was now to be with them as with their Old World counterparts. They are receiving a new commission as part of a new dispensation. What we have come to call—somewhat inaccurately—the Christian era was beginning among them. Their commission, however, was to administer salvation to the Nephites in the Americas as contrasted with that of the Old World Twelve who were sent to all nations. To his Nephite disciples Jesus then said, as in all likelihood he did to his Galilean followers:

On this wise shall ye baptize; and there shall be no disputations among you. Verily I say unto you, that whoso repenteth of his sins through your words and desireth to be baptized in my name, on this wise shall ye baptize them—Behold, ye shall go down and stand in the water, and in my name shall ye baptize them.

And now behold, these are the words which ye shall say, calling them by name, saying: Having authority given me of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

And then shall ye immerse them in the water, and come forth again out of the water. And after this manner shall ye baptize in my name; for behold, verily I say unto you, that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one; and I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one.

That all of this had been taught to and was in operation among the Twelve of Jerusalem is not open to question; but so also was it the case among the Nephites. They too had been taught true principles and were practicing true ordinances. And yet Jesus now renews and clarifies these policies and procedures among them, as we suppose he did also in Galilee. There must be no divergence of belief or practice on matters of such eternal import.

And according as I have commanded you thus shall ye baptize. And there shall be no disputations among you, as there have hitherto been; neither shall there be disputations among you concerning the points of my doctrine, as there have hitherto been.

For verily, verily I say unto you, he that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another.

Behold, this is not my doctrine, to stir up the hearts of men with anger, one against another; but this is my doctrine, that such things should be done away.

O that the blaspheming self-exulters of Christendom, who contend from their pulpits and before the microphones of their so-called radio ministries, O that they knew what the Lord thinks of contention!

O that those who say, Lo here is Christ and lo there, who say, Believe this or believe that in order to be saved, O that they knew he reveals himself, not in the midst of debate, but in the sanctuary of peace!

O that those in the Church who are more concerned with defending their prejudices and upholding their private interpretations than they are in seeking the truth, O that they would shun contention and seek for unity with the Lord's earthly standard bearers and with those whom he hath appointed to interpret and define his doctrines for the children of men!

Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, I will declare unto you my doctrine. And this is my doctrine, and it is the doctrine which the Father hath given unto me; and I bear record of the Father, and the Father beareth record of me, and the Holy Ghost beareth record of the Father and me; and I bear record that the Father commandeth all men, everywhere, to repent and believe in me.

Even Jesus has no doctrine of his own; even he receives his doctrine from the Father; and it is the doctrine of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that all men must believe in Christ, repent of their sins, and live his laws to be saved. Men choose what they believe and what they do at the peril of their own salvation. Ought we not to learn and know what Deity thinks about a doctrine, rather than seems, for one reason or another, to be desirable to us?

And whoso believeth in me, and is baptized, the same shall be saved; and they are they who shall inherit the kingdom of God.

And whoso believeth not in me, and is not baptized, shall be damned.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my doctrine, and I bear record of it from the Father; and whoso believeth in me believeth in the Father also; and unto him will the Father bear record of me, for he will visit him with fire and with the Holy Ghost.

And thus will the Father bear record of me, and the Holy Ghost will bear record unto him of the Father and me; for the Father, and I, and the Holy Ghost are one.

Jesus' words, thus spoken, are so plain, so easy, so simple, that none need err with reference to them. The course is clearly marked. And if any, reading what he here says, do not have their bosoms burn as did those of Cleopas and Luke on the Emmaus road, they may know thereby that they are not the Lord's sheep, and that they need to repent and get in tune with the Holy Spirit so they can believe and understand the witness of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, which is one God everlasting.

And again I say unto you, ye must repent, and become as a little child, and be baptized in my name, or ye can in nowise receive these things.

And again I say unto you, ye must repent, and be baptized in my name, and become as a little child, or ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my doctrine, and whoso buildeth upon this buildeth upon my rock, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against them.

And whoso shall declare more or less than this, and establish it for my doctrine, the same cometh of evil, and is not built upon my rock; but he buildeth upon a sandy foundation, and the gates of hell stand open to receive such when the floods come and the winds beat upon them.

Therefore, go forth unto this people, and declare the words which I have spoken, unto the ends of the earth.

None who are enlightened by the power of the Spirit need further commentary on these glorious words—words that testify of the goodness and grace of Jesus and of the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, because they have come forth in our day through his instrumentality. Let us, rather, turn to the remainder of the New Testament account of the greatest of all the appearances of the Risen Lord:

And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.

These words were spoken almost verbatim by Jesus to the Nephite disciples, and to them he then added: "And whosoever shall believe in my name, doubting nothing, unto him will I confirm all my words, even unto the ends of the earth." (Morm. 9:22-25.) And thus it is in all ages and at all times and among all people: signs and miracles abound where faith is found. As gravity pulls down the raindrops from the sky, so faith brings forth signs and miracles; as law operates in the natural field, so it does in the spiritual; and so when faith is exercised, miracles are wrought. As God is our witness, we testify that whenever and wherever there is faith, there the gifts of the Spirit will be manifest. Signs always have, do now, and always will follow those who believe. If there are none of the gifts, there is no faith, men have not believed the true gospel, and they do not have a hope of salvation. Faith is power; and if a people do not have power to open blind eyes, and unstop deaf ears, and loose dumb tongues, and raise dead corpses, how can they have power to save a soul? So it has always been, so it is now, and so it will ever be. Signs follow those who believe.

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] The words he spoke and the deeds he did among the Nephites are a crowning capstone to his earthly ministry. Many of the passages far excel anything in the biblical accounts; they reveal his grandeur and greatness in a way not otherwise known, and they round out our knowledge of the nature and kind of life that he lived among men.
