Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 113

The Nephite Ministry

I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. (John 10:15-16.)

Ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. (3 Ne. 15:21.)

There is one God and one Shepherd over all the earth. (1 Ne. 13:41.)

Appearances to the Other Sheep

(3 Nephi 11-15; 16:1-3)

The Nephites adjusted their calendar so as to begin a new dating era with the birth of Jesus; and according to their chronology, the storms and the darkness and the crucifixion came to pass on the fourth day of the first month of the thirty-fourth year. (3 Ne. 8.) Then "in the ending" of that year (3 Ne. 10:18-19), several months after the Ascension on Olivet, Jesus ministered personally among the Nephites for many hours on many days. He came as "a man descending out of heaven"; introduced himself as the God of Israel; permitted the multitude to feel the prints of the nails in his hands and feet and to thrust their hands into his side; called a quorum of twelve; gave them keys and powers and authorities; healed the Nephite sick and introduced the sacramental ordinance in the Western Hemisphere; taught the people in plainness and with an excellence surpassing much that was done in his Palestinian ministry; gave them the gift of the Holy Ghost; and ascended to his Father.

Third Nephi is often called the fifth Gospel because it preserves for us so much that was said and so much that was done among the Nephites that parallels what he said and did among the Jews. Many of these teachings and ministerial acts we have considered in their "Jewish-Nephite" contexts. There remain, however, some matters of transcendent glory and wonder to which we must now refer for these reasons:

And so, as the account attests, after Jesus came and was known to the Nephites; after he preached the sermon on baptism, which we have equated with his similar teachings in Galilee; and after he had called the Nephite Twelve, then he delivered the Sermon on the Mount, as it were. And, may we say, it is found in a more excellent form in Third Nephi, chapters 12, 13, and 14, than it is in Matthew, chapters 5, 6, and 7. We have already considered in their contexts the many teachings of this sermon. Having respoken its wondrous truths for his Nephite sheep, Jesus said:

Behold, ye have heard the things which I taught before I ascended to my Father; therefore, whoso remembereth these sayings of mine and doeth them, him will I raise up at the last day.

Salvation comes by living the doctrines proclaimed in the Sermon on the Mount! That sermon—properly understood—is far more than a recitation of ethical principles; rather, it summarizes the Christian way of life, and it charts the course true saints must pursue to become even as He is.

In the Nephite version of the Sermon on the Mount, as he had done among the Jews, Jesus made the contrasts between the law of Moses and the gospel standard, saying that various things which Moses had approved were done away and that now men should live by a higher law. These included the commandments about murder, adultery, divorce, the taking of oaths, the requirement of an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth, and the like. But having so spoken to the Nephites, he added these words, which could not, properly, have been said to the Jews at the beginning of his ministry:

Therefore those things which were of old time, which were under the law, in me are all fulfilled. Old things are done away, and all things have become new.

When he spoke on the Mount of Beatitudes, the law was not yet fulfilled; now that he had eaten the Last Supper and introduced the sacrament; now that he had suffered in the garden and on the cross; now that he had come forth in immortality—the law was fulfilled. It would appear, however, that many among the Nephites, during these transitional months, had not fully envisioned that the lesser law of Moses had been supplanted by the higher law of Christ. And so now Jesus "perceived that there were some among them who marveled, and wondered what he would concerning the law of Moses; for they understood not the saying that old things had passed away, and that all things had become new." He said:

Marvel not that I said unto you that old things had passed away, and that all things had become new. Behold, I say unto you that the law is fulfilled that was given unto Moses.

Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for I have come to fulfil the law; therefore it hath an end.

'I am the Lord Jehovah. Moses spake my word; at my command he gave the law. And the whole purpose of the law was to prepare men for my coming; its ordinances and performances prefigured my atoning sacrifice. Now I have come; the atonement hath been wrought; that which the sacrifices of your fathers prefigured has been accomplished; and the law in me is fulfilled.'

Behold, I do not destroy the prophets, for as many as have not been fulfilled in me, verily I say unto you, shall all be fulfilled.

And because I said unto you that old things have passed away, I do not destroy that which hath been spoken concerning things which are to come.

For behold, the covenant which I have made with my people is not all fulfilled; but the law which was given unto Moses hath an end in me.

O if only all the saints among the Jews had known and understood these things! As Paul said, "The law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster." (Gal. 3:24-25.) The law was fulfilled, but the prophetic promises pertaining to the future remained! Also: The covenant Jehovah made with Abraham and all the righteous saints in all dispensations remained! The gospel promises and the gospel covenants—which were before the law—were still in force, and all the prophetic recounting of what was yet to be would surely come to pass.

Behold, I am the law, and the light. Look unto me, and endure to the end, and ye shall live; for unto him that endureth to the end will I give eternal life.

Behold, I have given unto you the commandments; therefore keep my commandments. And this is the law and the prophets, for they truly testified of me.

'Look no more to Moses, except insofar as he testified of me. I am the light; salvation comes by my law; turn ye to my everlasting gospel; I am the law. Believe in me; keep my commandments; endure to the end; and I will give you eternal life, for I am God and the atonement comes by me. In this way you shall honor Moses, for he was my witness. If ye keep my commandments ye thereby fulfill both the law and the prophets, for they testify of me.'

Then to the Nephite Twelve Jesus spake these words, which affirmed the place and status of the Nephites in the house of Israel:

Ye are my disciples; and ye are a light unto this people, who are a remnant of the house of Joseph. And behold, this is the land of your inheritance; and the Father hath given it unto you.

As Jesus is the Light of the world, so his ministers, reflecting his light, are lights to those to whom they are sent. The Americas are the land of Joseph—the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, the land of the Nephites, the land of the Ephraimites who are gathering in the latter days.

And not at any time hath the Father given me commandment that I should tell it unto your brethren at Jerusalem. Neither at any time hath the Father given me commandment that I should tell unto them concerning the other tribes of the house of Israel, whom the Father hath led away out of the land.

This much did the Father command me, that I should tell unto them: That other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

And now, because of stiff-neckedness and unbelief they understood not my word; therefore I was commanded to say no more of the Father concerning this thing unto them.

But, verily, I say unto you that the Father hath commanded me, and I tell it unto you, that ye were separated from among them because of their iniquity; therefore it is because of their iniquity that they know not of you.

And verily, I say unto you again that the other tribes hath the Father separated from them; and it is because of their iniquity that they know not of them.

And where, we might even now ask, are the lost tribes of Israel? And why is it that we do not know about them? Is it because of our stiffneckedness and unbelief? And how many other things might we know if we were faithful and true in all things?

And verily I say unto you, that ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

And they understood me not, for they supposed it had been the Gentiles; for they understood not that the Gentiles should be converted through their preaching.

And they understood me not that I said they shall hear my voice; and they understood me not that the Gentiles should not at any time hear my voice—that I should not manifest myself unto them save it were by the Holy Ghost.

But behold, ye have both heard my voice, and seen me; and ye are my sheep, and ye are numbered among those whom the Father hath given me.

Is not the soul of a Jew in the Americas as precious in the sight of the Lord as the soul of a Jew in Jerusalem? Or the soul of any of the lost tribes of the house of Israel? Will not the Lord Jehovah treat all Israel on the same basis, if their erring members repent and come unto him? And if one branch of the house of Jacob is entitled to hear his voice and see his face, does not every other branch have the same right? Let the message go by the power of the Holy Ghost to the Gentiles; but Israel—the Israel of God—they are the chosen seed; and Jesus will fulfill in them the covenants made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that in them and in their seed—the literal seed of the body—should all the nations of the earth be blessed.

And verily, verily, I say unto you that I have other sheep which are not of this land, neither of the land of Jerusalem, neither in any parts of that land round about whither I have been to minister.

For they of whom I speak are they who have not as yet heard my voice; neither have I at any time manifested myself unto them.

But I have received a commandment of the Father that I shall go unto them, and that they shall hear my voice, and shall be numbered among my sheep, that there may be one fold and one shepherd; therefore I go to show myself unto them.

Jesus Promises the Gospel to the Gentiles

(3 Nephi 16:4-20)

Even as on the mountain in Galilee, when Jesus commanded his Jewish apostles to go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature—to go beyond the borders of Israel, out among the Gentiles—so now among Nephites he teaches the same doctrine, the doctrine of a Gentile harvest of souls. And the Book of Mormon—a volume of holy scripture, a new witness for Christ, an inspired account containing the fulness of the everlasting gospel—the Book of Mormon will be the means of gathering in the remnants of scattered Israel and of proclaiming the gospel of salvation among the Gentiles in the last days. After announcing that he would visit the lost tribes of Israel, even as he was then visiting the "other sheep" who were Nephites, he said:

And I command you that ye shall write these sayings after I am gone, that if it so be that my people at Jerusalem, they who have seen me and been with me in my ministry, do not ask the Father in my name, that they may receive a knowledge of you by the Holy Ghost, and also of the other tribes whom they know not of, that these sayings which ye shall write shall be kept and shall be manifested unto the Gentiles, that through the fulness of the Gentiles, the remnant of their seed, who shall be scattered forth upon the face of the earth because of their unbelief, may be brought in, or may be brought to a knowledge of me, their Redeemer.

This matter of identifying the Jews, Gentiles, and those who are of Israel is an extremely complex and difficult problem, primarily because the words are used in varying and even contradictory senses. They are used by the prophets and in holy writ to mean one thing in one age and another at a different time. To the Nephites, the Jews were the nationals of the kingdom of Judah whence they came, and all other peoples and nations were aliens or Gentiles, including those among them who were remnants of the various tribes of Israel. Gentiles were aliens, citizens of other nations, nations who served other gods than the Lord Jehovah.

To the Nephites, the Jews were the Jewish nationals in Jerusalem and elsewhere who rejected their Deliverer and crucified their King when he ministered among them as the Mortal Messiah. Tribal descent was not the issue; among them were those of Judah and Gad and Benjamin and other tribes, but all these were Jews and Jewish and all others were Gentiles, including the members of the lost tribes who were scattered among them. To the Nephites, they themselves were Jews because they came out from the nation of the Jews, brought with them the worship of the Jewish Jehovah, and kept the law of Moses as had their fathers. (2 Ne. 33:8.)

Thus the fulness of the gospel as restored to and through Joseph Smith was given by the Lord "unto the Gentiles." (1 Ne. 15:13.) Joseph Smith and his associates were considered by the Nephites to be Gentiles—for they were not Jewish nationals—even though they were of the pure blood of Israel. Thus the Book of Mormon came forth by way of the Gentiles though it is the Stick of Joseph in the hands of Ephraim. Thus the United States is a nation of the Gentiles; and thus all the nations of the earth are Gentile nations, even though the people in them who accept the gospel are blood descendants of Father Jacob.

Having this perspective, then, we can envision what Jesus here said to the Nephites. His words have been fulfilled in that (1) the Jews at Jerusalem did not ask the Father in his name for a knowledge of their Nephite kinsmen; (2) nor did they learn of the lost tribes of Israel; (3) hence, the sayings of Jesus, recorded and preserved in the Book of Mormon, were manifest to the Gentiles (meaning to us); (4) and, when the fulness of the Gentiles comes in (meaning the appointed period or times when the gospel goes preferentially to us Gentiles), (5) then it will go to the remnant of the seed of the Jews who lived at Jerusalem, which remnant will then be scattered "upon all the face of the earth because of their unbelief"; (6) and then shall the Jews (as here defined and as now generally known in the world) "be brought to a knowledge of me, their Redeemer."

And then will I gather them in from the four quarters of the earth; and then will I fulfill the covenant which the Father hath made unto all the people of the house of Israel.

Two things are here promised: (1) When the fulness of the Gentiles is come in, then the remnant of the Jews will be gathered in from the ends of the earth—gathered into the true fold and be numbered with their Shepherd's sheep, gathered to the land of their fathers; and (2) the covenant to save all the tribes of Israel, though they be lost and unknown and scattered, will be fulfilled.

And blessed are the Gentiles, because of their belief in me, in and of the Holy Ghost, which witnesses unto them of me and of the Father.

Those of us Israelites who are here deemed to be Gentiles shall in the last days be blessed because we believe in Christ, as he is manifest by the power of the Holy Ghost, in contrast to his personal appearances among the Jews of Jerusalem and the Jews in the Americas.

Behold, because of their belief in me, saith the Father, and because of the unbelief of you, O house of Israel, in the latter day shall the truth come unto the Gentiles, that the fulness of these things shall be made known unto them.

Israel of old forsook the Lord Jehovah, and their nation and kingdom went into oblivion. Because they rejected Christ they were scattered and persecuted. But—O glorious promise!—in the latter days those among the Gentiles who believe shall receive the fulness of the gospel and the fulness of the blessings that flow therefrom.

But wo, saith the Father, unto the unbelieving of the Gentiles—for notwithstanding they have come forth upon the face of this land, and have scattered my people who are of the house of Israel; and my people who are of the house of Israel have been cast out from among them, and have been trodden under feet by them;

And because of the mercies of the Father unto the Gentiles, and also the judgments of the Father upon my people who are of the house of Israel, verily, verily, I say unto you, that after all this, and I have caused my people who are of the house of Israel to be smitten, and to be afflicted, and to be slain, and to be cast out from among them, and to become hated by them, and to become a hiss and a byword among them—

And thus commandeth the Father that I should say unto you: At that day when the Gentiles shall sin against my gospel, and shall be lifted up in the pride of their hearts above all nations, and above all the people of the whole earth, and shall be filled with all manner of lyings, and of deceits, and of mischiefs, and all manner of hypocrisy, and murders, and priestcrafts, and whoredoms, and of secret abominations; and if they shall do all those things, and shall reject the fulness of my gospel, behold, saith the Father, I will bring the fulness of my gospel from among them.

How plainly Jesus foretells what is to be in the day of restoration: (1) The unbelieving among the Gentiles who are assembled in the Americas shall scatter the house of Israel; (2) Lehi's seed, in both North and South America, shall be cast out and trodden under foot by the Gentiles; (3) these things shall come to pass because of the mercies of the Father upon the Gentiles and because of his judgments upon his Israelitish people; (4) but then, the Gentiles in the New World—meaning the generality of them—shall reject the gospel and pursue an evil and ungodly course; (5) so that the gospel will be taken from among them.

And then will I remember my covenant which I have made unto my people, O house of Israel, and I will bring my gospel unto them.

And I will show unto thee, O house of Israel, that the Gentiles shall not have power over you; but I will remember my covenant unto you, O house of Israel, and ye shall come unto the knowledge of the fulness of my gospel.

Jehovah's covenant with his people is that through Abraham and his seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; it is that the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob shall have a right to the gospel and the priesthood; it is that they shall bear his priesthood and be his ministers to take his gospel to all people; it is that the house of Israel shall be saved with an everlasting salvation in the kingdom of the Father. (Abr. 2:8-11.) And after the gospel has been restored in a Gentile nation, those of scattered Israel in all nations shall begin to believe, and they shall come into the latter-day kingdom and be blessed according to the promises.

But if the Gentiles will repent and return unto me, saith the Father, behold they shall be numbered among my people, O house of Israel.

This shall come to pass according to the promise made by Jehovah to his friend Abraham: "As many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father." (Abr. 2:10.) For, as Nephi said: "All are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile." (2 Ne. 26:33.)

And I will not suffer my people, who are of the house of Israel, to go through among them, and tread them down, saith the Father.

But if they will not turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, I will suffer them, yea, I will suffer my people, O house of Israel, that they shall go through among them, and shall tread them down, and they shall be as salt that hath lost its savor, which is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of my people, O house of Israel.

These things lie ahead; they are pre-millennial; as the great destructions and wars unfold that shall usher in that reign of peace, then we shall learn how and in what manner they shall be fulfilled. Our feelings are that the Gentiles will not repent and that there will be a day when Israel shall triumph over her ancient enemies according to the promises.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, thus hath the Father commanded me—that I should give unto this people this land for their inheritance.

And then the words of the prophet Isaiah shall be fulfilled, which say: Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing, for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord shall bring again Zion.

Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem; for the Lord hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem.

The Lord hath made bare his holy arm in the eye of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of God.

These words are millennial. They exult in the final glory and triumph of Israel—after her warfare with the Gentiles, after the days of her sorrows and suffering, after she has been a hiss and a byword among all people. Israel—Jacob's seed!—shall come off triumphant, and those Gentiles who join with her shall be as she is, and be accounted the seed of him who fathered Israel in the flesh, and Him also whose house it is.

1981 Deseret Book Co.
