Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 114

Still among the American Jews

We are made alive in Christ because of our faith. . . . And we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins. . . . The right way is to believe in Christ and deny him not; for by denying him ye also deny the prophets and the law. . . . Christ is the Holy One of Israel; wherefore ye must bow down before him, and worship him with all your might, mind, and strength, and your whole soul; and if ye do this ye shall in nowise be cast out. (2 Ne. 25:25-29.)

A Ministry of Miracles and Angelic Ministrations

(3 Nephi 17:1-25)

What a blessed day this is, a day when the Blessed One—resurrected and glorified—ministers among his people!

They have now heard the announcement of the atonement; felt the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet; been instructed as to baptism and the witness that both the Father and the Holy Ghost bear of him; heard the calling of his American apostolic witnesses; rejoiced in the wondrous words of the Sermon on the Mount; learned of the fulfillment of the law of Moses; been identified as the Lord's "other sheep"; and heard the glad tidings of the restoration of the gospel, of its proclamation among the Gentiles, of the latter-day gathering of Israel and the final triumph of the chosen seed. Hours have elapsed. How can any congregation absorb more of the Lord's word at one time than this? And so we hear him say:

Behold, my time is at hand. I perceive that ye are weak, that ye cannot understand all my words which I am commanded of the Father to speak unto you at this time.

Therefore, go ye unto your homes, and ponder upon the things which I have said, and ask of the Father, in my name, that ye may understand, and prepare your minds for the morrow, and I come unto you again.

But now I go unto the Father, and also to show myself unto the lost tribes of Israel, for they are not lost unto the Father, for he knoweth whither he hath taken them.

Such is the perfect pattern for hearing the word of the Lord. Let the speaker speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; let the hearers hear by that same power; then let the hearers ponder and pray and seek to know—by revelation—the full meaning of the spoken word; and then let them join again in the assembly of the saints to hear more of the eternal saving word. But in this instance the multitude is in tears; the unspoken pleas of their heart are that Jesus will tarry longer and teach more, and their faith prevails.

Behold, my bowels are filled with compassion towards you. Have ye any that are sick among you? Bring them hither. Have ye any that are lame, or blind, or halt, or maimed, or leprous, or that are withered, or that are deaf, or that are afflicted in any manner? Bring them hither and I will heal them, for I have compassion upon you; my bowels are filled with mercy.

For I perceive that ye desire that I should show unto you what I have done unto your brethren at Jerusalem, for I see that your faith is sufficient that I should heal you.

All those who were sick—their lame, their blind, and their dumb, and those with any manner of affliction—all were brought, and one by one he healed them. Then they who were whole and they who were healed bowed down at his feet and worshipped him, and "they did bathe his feet with their tears." Jesus then asked them to bring their little children, which they did, and "he commanded the multitude that they should kneel down upon the ground." Then Jesus, standing in the midst of them, said: "Father, I am troubled because of the wickedness of the people of the house of Israel." At this point "he himself also knelt upon the earth; and behold he prayed unto the Father, and the things which he prayed cannot be written."

There are things that it is "not lawful for man to utter; Neither is man capable to make them known, for they are only to be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those who love him, and purify themselves before him." (D&C 76:115-16.) Such was it on this occasion. As to what Jesus said in his prayer we know not, only that the multitude testified: "The eye hath never seen, neither hath the ear heard, before, so great and marvelous things as we saw and heard Jesus speak unto the Father; And no tongue can speak, neither can there be written by any man, neither can the hearts of men conceive so great and marvelous things as we both saw and heard Jesus speak; and no one can conceive of the joy which filled our souls at the time we heard him pray for us unto the Father." Indeed, "so great was the joy of the multitude that they were overcome," and they could not arise until Jesus bade them to do so. "Blessed are ye because of your faith," he said unto them. "And now behold, my joy is full."

Then he wept, and "took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them." Then he wept again and said: "Behold your little ones." Then came the miracle that testifies of the purity and perfection of innocent children, children who have but recently left the presence of the Father, children whose lives are not yet tainted with sin, children who, should they die in their innocence, shall return in purity to the Father and there inherit eternal life. And so, as the multitude "looked to behold they cast their eyes towards heaven, and they saw the heavens open, and they saw angels descending out of heaven as it were in the midst of fire; and they came down and encircled those little ones about, and they were encircled about with fire; and the angels did minister unto them." And of this the multitude—all twenty-five hundred of them—did bear record.

The Nephites Receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost

(3 Nephi 18:1-39; 19:1-36; 20:8-9)

Our Blessed Lord then had bread and wine brought, which he gave to them to eat and drink in remembrance of his broken flesh and spilt blood. Of these Nephite ministrations we have written in connection with the same ordinance as administered among those in Jerusalem. As the sacramental ordinance was concluded Jesus said to the Twelve:

Blessed are ye if ye shall keep my commandments, which the Father hath commanded me that I should give unto you.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and pray always, lest ye be tempted by the devil, and ye be led away captive by him.

And as I have prayed among you even so shall ye pray in my church, among my people who do repent and are baptized in my name. Behold I am the light; I have set an example for you.

Above all others Satan seeks to ensnare the shepherds of the Lord's flock, thereby preparing the way for the scattering of the sheep. Church officers are to live and pray as Jesus lived and prayed, that they may be lights to the saints. Then to the multitude Jesus said:

Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and pray always lest ye enter into temptation; for Satan desireth to have you, that he may sift you as wheat.

Therefore ye must always pray unto the Father in my name; And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you.

Pray in your families unto the Father, always in my name, that your wives and your children may be blessed.

Never has it been stated better. Unless the saints watch their conduct and keep it in harmony with the divine will, and unless they pray to the Father in the name of Christ, with all the energy of their souls, Satan—not the Lord—will harvest their souls. The grim reaper of death and destruction will cut them down, and they will be stored with the wicked in the granaries of despair. But—O glorious promise!—all of the righteous desires of the faithful saints shall be granted. Anything they ask for that is right shall be given them! And for whom shall they pray with more fervor and faith than for themselves and their wives and their children? God be praised for the power of prayer!

And behold, ye shall meet together oft; and ye shall not forbid any man from coming unto you when ye shall meet together, but suffer them that they may come unto you and forbid them not;

But ye shall pray for them, and shall not cast them out; and if it so be that they come unto you oft ye shall pray for them unto the Father, in my name.

As the body needs bread, so also must the soul be fed. Man does not live by bread alone; unless the soul is fed, man dies spiritually. There must be frequent gospel banquets; the soul of man must be offered every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God. And we must pray for those who come to our meetings desiring to feast upon the good word of God, but whose souls as yet can only digest the milk and not the meat of the word.

Therefore, hold up your light that it may shine unto the world. Behold I am the light which ye shall hold up—that which ye have seen me do. Behold ye see that I have prayed unto the Father, and ye all have witnessed.

And ye see that I have commanded that none of you should go away, but rather have commanded that ye should come unto me, that ye might feel and see; even so shall ye do unto the world; and whosoever breaketh this commandment suffereth himself to be led into temptation.

Jesus is the light; his example is perfect; all who do as be did shall be as he is; and such places them on the course leading to eternal life. And having so taught them, Jesus said to the Twelve: "Behold verily, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you another commandment, and then I must go unto my Father that I may fulfill other commandments which he hath given me." The other commandment was that they, as his administrators and representatives on earth, should not suffer anyone knowingly to partake of his flesh and blood in unworthiness. All such, he said, would eat and drink damnation to their own souls. All this we have considered in its Jewish context in the Jerusalem account. To it Jesus appended the commandment that they should not cast such persons out of their synagogues, but should pray for them, plead with them to repent, offer them the blessings of baptism, and guide them in all things toward that salvation which the gospel promises. If they pursued such a course they would not be condemned by the Father. This counsel was given to them, he said, because of prior disputations among them. "And blessed are ye if ye have no disputations among you," he said. Then he announced he must go to the Father, and he touched each of the Twelve and "gave them power to give the Holy Ghost," after which a cloud overshadowed the multitude so they could not see Jesus, but the Twelve saw and bore record that "he ascended again into heaven."

For the rest of that day, and for all the night long, messengers carried forth the word of Jesus' ministry among them and of his promise to return on the morrow; and "an exceeding great number, did labor exceedingly all that night" so as to be at the appointed place on the next day. Their number was so great—surely there must have been scores of thousands—that the Twelve divided them into twelve bodies so as to teach them. They all—the disciples and the multitude—knelt and prayed to the Father in the name of Jesus. Then the Twelve—and the pattern thus set is perfect—"ministered those same words which Jesus had spoken—nothing varying from the words which Jesus had spoken." All the multitude thus received a verbatim account of all that was said and done by the Lord of Life to the smaller congregation of twenty-five hundred on the previous day. Then the disciples knelt and prayed again. "And they did pray for that which they most desired; and they desired that the Holy Ghost should be given unto them."

Then they went down to the water's edge; Nephi and the rest of the Twelve were baptized, and "the Holy Ghost did fall upon them, and they were filled with the Holy Ghost and with fire." It was the New World Pentecost! Cloven tongues of fire, and more, rested upon them! "And behold, they were encircled about as if it were by fire; and it came down from heaven, and the multitude did witness it, and did bear record; and angels did come down out of heaven and did minister unto them."

While the heavens were thus open; while angels ministered and holy fire cleansed their souls from sin; while righteousness was falling as the gentle dew from heaven—"Jesus came and stood in the midst and ministered unto them." He commanded them all, both the disciples and the multitude, to kneel and pray, "and they did pray unto Jesus, calling him their Lord and their God." Jesus separated himself from the group, bowed himself to the earth, and prayed:

Father, I thank thee that thou hast given the Holy Ghost unto these whom I have chosen; and it is because of their belief in me that I have chosen them out of the world.

Father, I pray thee that thou wilt give the Holy Ghost unto all them that shall believe in their words.

Father, thou hast given them the Holy Ghost because they believe in me; and thou seest that they believe in me because thou hearest them, and they pray unto me; and they pray unto me because I am with them.

And now Father, I pray unto thee for them, and also for all those who shall believe on their words, that they may believe in me, that I may be in them as thou, Father, art in me, that we may be one.

By the power of the Holy Ghost the saints are one—they in Christ, and he in them; the Father in them, and they in him; and all the saints in each other—for they are one. This we have already seen in our consideration of the Intercessory Prayer. Having so spoken, Jesus came to the disciples who continued to pray, "and they did not multiply many words, for it was given unto them what they should pray, and they were filled with desire." Thereupon, "Jesus blessed them as they did pray unto him; and his countenance did smile upon them, and the light of his countenance did shine upon them, and behold they were as white as the countenance and also the garments of Jesus; and behold the whiteness thereof did exceed all the whiteness, yea, even there could be nothing upon earth so white as the whiteness thereof." Jesus told them to continue to pray, and he went a little way off, bowed himself to the earth, and prayed again:

Father, I thank thee that thou hast purified those whom I have chosen, because of their faith, and I pray for them, and also for them who shall believe on their words, that they may be purified in me, through faith on their words, even as they are purified in me.

Father, I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou hast given me out of the world, because of their faith, that they may be purified in me, that I may be in them as thou, Father, art in me, that we may be one, that I may be glorified in them.

These concepts, though not expressed as well as in this Book of Mormon account, we heard in the Intercessory Prayer. Having here spoken them, Jesus returned to the Twelve, smiled upon them as they continued to pray—"and behold they were white, even as Jesus"—and then "went again a little way off and prayed unto the Father." Of what then transpired the inspired record recites: "And tongue cannot speak the words which he prayed, neither can be written by man the words which he prayed." But the multitude heard and bore record, "and their hearts were open and they did understand in their hearts the words which he prayed. Nevertheless, so great and marvelous were the words which he prayed that they cannot be written, neither can they be uttered by man." After his prayer, Jesus said:

So great faith have I never seen among all the Jews; wherefore I could not show unto them so great miracles, because of their unbelief.

Verily I say unto you, there are none of them that have seen so great things as ye have seen; neither have they heard so great things as ye have heard.

In our view, these marvelous happenings—when the Holy Ghost fell mightily upon the people; when the sanctifying power of the Holy Spirit of God cleansed their souls; when mortal men were quickened by the Spirit until their countenances shone (as did that of Moses after he was with the Lord for forty days in the holy mount); when Jesus spoke words that could not be written and could only be understood by the power of the Spirit—these marvelous events were the high point of Jesus' ministry among his "other sheep." Seldom, if ever, has there been such a scene on planet earth. Perhaps in the Zion of Enoch, when the Lord came and dwelt with his people; perhaps at Adam-ondi-Ahman, in the assembly of high priests, when the Lord appeared and ministered comfort unto Adam, and the Ancient of Days predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation; perhaps on the Mount of Transfiguration, when only Peter, James, and John were present—perhaps there have been other like outpourings of God's goodness and grace, of which we have no knowledge, but nowhere do our scriptures preserve in such detail such wondrous events as are here recorded. Truly they are a sample and an illustration of what shall be in that great millennial day when He whose we are reigns personally among those who remain on earth after the wicked and ungodly have been burned as stubble.

After the events of this hour had been savored to the full, Jesus commanded the multitude to cease their vocal prayers but to continue to pray in their hearts. Then as a seal on the spiritual experience they had enjoyed, he provided bread and wine miraculously, blessed the sacred emblems, and distributed them to the Twelve. At his direction they in turn brake bread and passed it and the wine to the multitude. Then Jesus said, as we have heretofore quoted in connection with the Old World sacramental performances, what is probably the greatest one sentence pronouncement on the sacrament of the Lord's Supper which is found in all holy writ:

He that eateth this bread eateth of my body to his soul; and he that drinketh of this wine drinketh of my blood to his soul; and his soul shall never hunger nor thirst, but shall be filled.

And as a perfect account of the blessings which are poured out upon those who partake worthily of the emblems representing the broken flesh and spilt blood, the Nephite scripture says: "Now, when the multitude had all eaten and drunk, behold, they were filled with the Spirit; and they did cry out with one voice, and gave glory to Jesus, whom they both saw and heard."

And thus are these glorious things recorded in that holy book, the Book of Mormon, which causes us to marvel greatly and wonder why it is that all who call themselves Christians do not accept and believe this volume of American scripture as readily as they suppose they believe the scriptural accounts originating in the Old World. Surely a tree is known by its fruits.

1981 Deseret Book Co.
