Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 115

The Restoration of the Kingdom to Israel

For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, But with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer. . . . For the mountains shall depart and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my people be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee. . . . And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children. In righteousness shalt thou be established; thou shalt be far from oppression for thou shalt not fear, and from terror for it shall not come near thee. (3 Ne. 22:7-8, 10, 13-14.)

Israel Shall Be Gathered

(3 Nephi 20:10-24)

Soon we shall hear the Twelve in Jerusalem ask the Resurrected One: "Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?" and we will observe with great interest the answer he gives them. But before we turn back to that scene on Olivet, just before he ascends to his Father, it is our privilege to learn about the restoration of the kingdom to Israel, as he expounded the glorious truths involved to his Nephite-Jews in the Americas.

Israel the chosen seed; Israel the Lord's people; Israel the only nation since Abraham that had worshipped Jehovah; Israel the children of the prophets; Israel who had been cursed and scattered for her sins; Israel in whose veins believing blood flows—the Israel of God shall be gathered, and fed, and nurtured, and saved, in the last days! Let there be no misunderstanding about this; salvation is of the Jews, and if there are believing Gentiles, they will be adopted into the believing family and inherit with the chosen seed. "And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob: For this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins." (Rom. 11:26-27.) But sadly: "They are not all Israel, which are of Israel" (Rom. 9:6), and only those who turn to their God and accept him as the Promised Messiah shall inherit with the chosen seed either in time or in eternity.

While his Nephite sheep were filled with the Spirit, and were singing praises to his holy name—and blessed be that glorious name forever!—Jesus said: "Behold now I finish the commandment which the Father hath commanded me concerning this people, who are a remnant of the house of Israel." He then began to preach unto them the doctrine that his Father—the Father of us all—desired them (and us!) to hear:

Ye remember that I spake unto you, and said that when the words of Isaiah should be fulfilled—behold they are written, ye have them before you, therefore search them—

And verily, verily, I say unto you, that when they shall be fulfilled then is the fulfilling of the covenant which the Father hath made unto his people, O house of Israel.

Be it recalled also that when we recorded what Jesus quoted from Isaiah—how the watchmen should see eye to eye when the Lord brought again Zion; how the Lord would comfort his people and redeem Jerusalem; how he would make bare his arm in the eyes of all nations, so that all the ends of the earth should see the salvation of God—when we recorded these words, we identified them as being millennial. That is, they shall come to pass when the Son of Man comes to dwell and reign on earth. To this we now add that certain initial fulfillment will commence before that dread yet glorious day of his coming. As we shall now see, when the gospel is restored, preparatory to the establishment of the Zion and the Jerusalem of old, men shall begin to see eye to eye, and the message of salvation shall begin to go forth to the nations of the earth. The gathering of Israel must needs begin before Zion is fully established so there will be a people to build the city and man the walls and serve in the watchtowers.

And then shall the remnants, which shall be scattered abroad upon the face of the earth, be gathered in from the east and from the west, and from the south and from the north; and they shall be brought to the knowledge of the Lord their God, who hath redeemed them.

The gathering of Israel is twofold: it is both spiritual and temporal. It is (1) into the Church and kingdom of God on earth; into the true fold where the true faith is found; into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which is the kingdom of God on earth, and which administers the gospel, which is the plan of salvation; and (2) unto those portions of the earth's surface which are appointed by revelation as places of gathering, so there may be congregations that can worship together, whose members can strengthen each other, and where all the blessings of the house of the Lord may be gained. In our day the gathering of Israel is in all the nations of the earth; in all the places where stakes of Zion are being established; in the lands where houses of the Lord are being built; in "all the nations," so that "all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of God." To these Nephites, however, Jesus said:

And the Father hath commanded me that I should give unto you this land, for your inheritance.

America is the land of Joseph. The Nephites are of the house of Joseph; and they, along with us, who also have that tribal ancestry, are destined to inherit these lands which are choice above all other lands.

And I say unto you, that if the Gentiles do not repent after the blessing which they shall receive, after they have scattered my people—

Then shall ye, who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, go forth among them; and ye shall be in the midst of them who shall be many; and ye shall be among them as a lion among the beasts of the forest, and as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he goeth through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver.

Thy hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off.

This is millennial; it refers to the Second Coming of Christ. It is not a war that a few Lamanites or any remnant of Israel shall wage against Gentile oppressors; the Lord does not operate in that manner. When he comes the wicked shall be destroyed and the righteous preserved; those who have not hearkened to the prophets shall be cut off from among the people; thus, the "enemies" of Israel "shall be cut off." And it shall be with power, as though a young lion went forth rending and tearing in pieces a helpless flock of sheep. And so, if the Gentiles do not repent and believe in Christ after the gospel is restored among them, then, when the Lord comes, they will be destroyed and the triumph of Israel—because they kept the commandments and did receive the gospel—that triumph will be complete.

And I will gather my people together as a man gathereth his sheaves into the floor.

In all this Jesus is but quoting and paraphrasing what the Lord revealed to Micah concerning the whole house of Israel. After that ancient prophet foretold the establishment of the house of the Lord in the tops of the mountains in the last days, and spoke of all nations flowing unto it; after he prophesied about the Second Coming and the day when men would beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks; after he spoke of the whole earth being at peace and of the Lord reigning in Mount Zion forever, then he told about the destruction of the Gentile nations in that day. "Now also many nations are gathered against thee"—meaning against Israel—"that say, Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion." To this there is an answer; it comes from the Lord; he says: "But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his counsel: for he shall gather them as the sheaves into the floor." Israel shall be gathered out of the Babylonish nations; she shall return to the true fold. "Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion: for I will make thine horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass: and thou shalt beat in pieces many people: and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth." (Micah 4:1-13.) Or, as Jesus now says it to the Nephites:

For I will make my people with whom the Father hath covenanted, yea, I will make thy horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass. And thou shalt beat in pieces many people; and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth. And behold, I am he who doeth it.

And it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that the sword of my justice shall hang over them at that day; and except they repent it shall fall upon them, saith the Father, yea, even upon all the nations of the Gentiles.

Again the message is the triumph of his people in the day of his coming. It is the destruction of all the wicked in all nations among all the Gentiles in that great and dreadful day. Here the reference is broader than to the Nephite remnants of Israel; it is to all those of Israel with whom the covenant has been made; it is to all the house of Israel. It is speaking of the sword of justice falling "upon all the nations of the Gentiles," not alone on those Gentile nations which scattered and persecuted the seed of Lehi.

And it shall come to pass that I will establish my people, O house of Israel.

The Lord's people—Israel—scattered in all the nations of the earth shall, wherever they are, be gathered into the true fold of Christ in their nations; then the Lord will come and destroy the wicked, who are their enemies, and then they will triumph to the full. But as to the Nephites, Jesus continued:

And behold, this people will I establish in this land, unto the fulfilling of the covenant which I made with your father Jacob; and it shall be a New Jerusalem. And the powers of heaven shall be in the midst of this people; yea, even I will be in the midst of you.

As to the house of Joseph, their inheritance is in the Americas, even as Father Jacob promised in the blessing given to Joseph, that he should be "a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall," and that the blessings of Joseph should prevail above those of all the other tribes and extend "unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills." (Gen. 49:22, 26.) All this shall find total fulfillment only in that day when the Lord reigns in the midst of men. Then, still having in mind the destruction of the Gentile nations who have opposed his people, and who are their enemies and his enemies, Jesus reminded the Nephites of the words of Moses concerning their Messiah:

Behold, I am he of whom Moses spake, saying: A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass that every soul who will not hear that prophet shall be cut off from among the people.

Verily I say unto you, yea, and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have testified of me.

Those who will not hear the voice of the Lord, as proclaimed by his servants the prophets, shall be cut off from among the people when he comes again, comes, as Paul expresses it, "in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ." (2 Thes. 1:8.) This is the promise that "all thine enemies shall be cut off." There ought not be any confusion or misunderstanding on these points.

"Ye Are the Children of the Covenant"

(3 Nephi 20:25-46)

Why is the Lord gathering Israel in these last days? It is to fulfil the covenant made with Abraham and renewed with Isaac and Jacob and others. What is that covenant? It is not the gathering of Israel per se, but something far more important than the mere assembling of a people in Jerusalem or on Mount Zion or at any designated place. It is not the allocation of Palestine for the seed of Abraham, or the designation of the Americas as the inheritance of Joseph, though each of these arrangements has a bearing on the fulfillment of the covenant. The gathering of Israel, at whatever place Deity specifies, is a necessary condition precedent, something that makes possible the fulfilling of the ancient covenant. What, then, is the covenant itself?

Jehovah promised—covenanted with—his friend Abraham that in him and in his seed, meaning the literal seed of his body, should "all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal." (Abr. 2:8-11.)

Jehovah promised—covenanted with—his friend Abraham that his seed after him, again meaning the literal seed of his body, should have the right to the priesthood and the gospel, and should be the Lord's ministers to carry these blessings to all nations and kindreds.

Jehovah promised—covenanted with—his friend Abraham that he and his seed after him should have the ordinance of celestial marriage, which opens the door to a continuation of the family unit in eternity, which is what constitutes eternal life in our Father's kingdom.

Jehovah promised—covenanted with—his friend Abraham that his seed, the fruit of his loins, should continue eternally, "both in the world and out of the world should they continue as innumerable as the stars; or, if ye were to count the sand upon the seashore ye could not number them." (D&C 132:29-32.)

These same promises were made to Isaac and to Jacob and to their posterity after him. They are "the promises made to the fathers," which, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, have been planted in "the hearts of the children." (D&C 2:1-3.) These are the promises that make us "the children of the covenant," the covenant made with our fathers, the covenant into which we are privileged to enter, the covenant of eternal life, of eternal lives, of a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. And in order to fulfill this covenant, Jehovah promised to gather Israel; he promised to bring them into the fold of Christ, so they could strengthen each other in the holy faith; he promised to prepare them for the ordinances of his holy house, through which the blessings of eternal life come. And so now Jesus says to the remnant of Jacob that he has gathered around him in the land of the Nephites in the meridian of time:

And behold, ye are the children of the prophets; and ye are of the house of Israel; and ye are of the covenant which the Father made with your fathers, saying unto Abraham: And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.

The Father having raised me up unto you first, and sent me to bless you in turning away every one of you from his iniquities; and this because ye are the children of the covenant.

These American Israelites were natural heirs according to the flesh of all the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. It was their right to receive, inherit, and possess the fulness of the Father's kingdom through the continuation of the family unit in eternity. It was their privilege to have a continuation of the seeds forever and ever, to have posterity in eternity as numerous as the stars in the heavens or as the sand upon the seashore. And all of this shall have efficacy, virtue, and force because Jesus atoned for the sins of the world, because he took upon himself the sins of all men on conditions of repentance, because he turned away every obedient man "from his iniquities."

And after that ye were blessed then fulfilleth the Father the covenant which he made with Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed—unto the pouring out of the Holy Ghost through me upon the Gentiles, which blessing upon the Gentiles shall make them mighty above all, unto the scattering of my people, O house of Israel.

Not only shall the seed of Abraham be blessed through the covenant made with their father, but all the kindreds of the earth, even the Gentile nations, may be blessed in like manner, if they will believe in Christ and receive the Holy Ghost and keep the commandments, for, as Jehovah said to Abraham, "as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father." (Abr. 2:10.) Then, speaking of the American Gentiles and their dealings with the seed of Lehi, Jesus said:

And they shall be a scourge unto the people of this land. Nevertheless, when they shall have received the fulness of my gospel, then if they shall harden their hearts against me I will return their iniquities upon their own heads, saith the Father.

Neither Jew nor Gentile shall be cleansed from sin through the gospel, by the Holy Ghost, except on conditions of repentance and obedience. The iniquities of the rebellious shall return upon their own heads. Having thus spoken of the American-Israelites and the American-Gentiles, Jesus turns to his ancient covenant people, the Jews, who are scattered in all nations.

And I will remember the covenant which I have made with my people; and I have covenanted with them that I would gather them together in mine own due time, that I would give unto them again the land of their fathers for their inheritance, which is the land of Jerusalem, which is the promised land unto them forever, saith the Father.

The covenants are for all the house of Israel; all are entitled to the blessings of the priesthood and the gospel and that eternal life which consists of the continuation of the family unit in the celestial kingdom. But all shall not gather to the same lands; all shall not be taught in the same synagogues; all shall not receive their blessings in the same temples. The Jews of Palestine shall return to the land of Jerusalem, there to be blessed from on high.

And it shall come to pass that the time cometh, when the fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them; And they shall believe in me, that I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and shall pray unto the Father in my name.

When the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled, the times of the Jews will commence. The gospel will then go to the Jewish seed of Abraham, and they shall believe; and, except for a limited few, the great day of Jewish conversion will be in the millennial day, after they have seen him whom they crucified and have heard him attest that the wounds in his hands and in his feet are those with which he was wounded in the house of his friends. Of that millennial day, Jesus continues:

Then shall their watchmen lift up their voice, and with the voice together shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye. Then will the Father gather them together again, and give unto them Jerusalem for the land of their inheritance.

Then shall they break forth into joy—Sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem; for the Father hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem.

The Father hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of the Father; and the Father and I are one.

Such is Jesus' interpreting paraphrase of the words of Isaiah—a Nephite targum, if you will—that he had before quoted to them. It is the setting forth of the millennial glory of the Jews, the glory that will be theirs when they accept their Messiah and become heirs of all the promises made to Abraham their father. "And then," Jesus continues—meaning in the day when the kingdom has been restored in all its fulness to Israel; in the day when Zion has been redeemed; in the day when He rules whose right it is—"then shall be brought to pass that which is written" (and what he quotes is an improved version of Isaiah):

Awake, awake again, and put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city, for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.

Shake thyself from the dust; arise, sit down, O Jerusalem; loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion. For thus saith the Lord: Ye have sold yourselves for naught, and ye shall be redeemed without money.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, that my people shall know my name; yea, in that day they shall know that I am he that doth speak. [^1]

Jerusalem—Jerusalem of the Jews—David's ancient city shall become holy; no more shall Gentile dogs defile its holy streets with their uncircumcised hearts. No longer will the Jews boast that salvation is theirs simply because of the Abrahamic token cut in their flesh, for then it will come to pass, as the apostle has written: "He is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter; whose praise is not of men, but of God." (Rom. 2:25-29.) In that blessed day, those who walk the streets of the Holy City shall be clean, clean because they have "come forth out of the waters of Judah, or out of the waters of baptism." (1 Ne. 20:1.)

Jerusalem—Jerusalem of the Jews—she who sold herself for naught and went into captivity for her sins, she shall arise from the dust and sit down with the mighty. Her captive daughters will loose the bands of darkness with which they have been bound and return unto the Lord who will reveal himself to them. In that day they shall know their King, their Messiah, their Lord. And he is Christ. He it is that shall then speak to them.

And then shall they say: How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings unto them, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings unto them of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion: Thy God reigneth! [^2]

Surely in this day, as never before, shall the hearts of the Jews—for the Lord will give them a new heart and a new spirit—surely in this day shall the Jews, having a new heart, acclaim the beauty of the feet of those who brought them the gospel. How glorious are the messengers who bring us the gospel of peace! Who has expressed it better than Abinadi? "And these are they who have published peace," he said, "who have brought good tidings of good, who have published salvation; and said unto Zion: The God reigneth! And O how beautiful upon the mountains were their feet! And again, how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those that are still publishing peace! And again, how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those who shall hereafter publish peace, yea, from this time henceforth and forever! And behold, I say unto you, this is not all. For O how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that is the founder of peace, yea, even the Lord, who has redeemed his people; yea, him who has granted salvation unto his people; For were it not for the redemption which he hath made for his people, which was prepared from the foundation of the world, I say unto you, were it not for this, all mankind must have perished." (Mosiah 15:14-19.)

It is here that Isaiah, in his discourse, speaks of the watchmen who shall see eye to eye when the Lord brings again Zion, of Jerusalem being redeemed, and of all the ends of the earth seeing the salvation of God. As Jesus has twice already quoted these words to the Nephites, he now passes them by and picks up Isaiah's account by saying: "And then shall a cry go forth":

Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch not that which is unclean; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord.

For you shall not go out with haste nor go by flight; for the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel shall be your rearward. [^3]

When the kingdom is restored to Israel and the redemption of Zion begins, then the Jews who are scattered in all nations must flee from their Babylonish habitats and return unto their God. That this should now commence is our witness, for already the ecclesiastical kingdom has been set up; already the pure in heart—who are Zion—are beginning to build up again the Zion of God, and the millennial day is not far off. Then the political kingdom will be restored to Israel and Jerusalem will become a world capital whence the word of the Lord shall go to all nations.

At this point the subject seems to change, and what Jesus continues to quote is Messianic. The words are Isaiah's introduction to his great prophecy about the Suffering Servant:

Behold, my servant shall deal prudently; he shall be exalted and extolled and be very high.

As many were astonished at thee—his visage was so marred, more than any man, and his form more than the sons of men—

So shall he sprinkle many nations; the kings shall shut their mouths at him, for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that which they had not heard shall they consider.

In these words we see a triumphant millennial Christ—one whose visage was marred and whose form was mangled when he dwelt among men—we see him in glory and dominion, in whose presence kings remain silent and before whom their mouths are shut. We see his cleansing blood sprinkle all nations, with devout men everywhere turning to the saving truths that they have not before heard and to the words of truth that they have not theretofore considered. And having finished, for the moment, his quotations, Jesus said:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, all these things shall surely come, even as the Father hath commanded me. Then shall this covenant which the Father hath covenanted with his people be fulfilled; and then shall Jerusalem be inhabited again with my people, and it shall be the land of their inheritance.

Then shall the children of the covenant inherit, receive, and possess—equally and fully—with their fathers of old! Then shall the Lamanites flourish in the Americas; then shall the Jews prosper in Jerusalem; then shall Ephraim—the Lord's firstborn!—confer on all the tribes their eternal blessings; and then shall all the promises relative to Israel and Zion be fulfilled.

The Lord be praised for what lies ahead for his people!

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] Compare Isaiah 52:1-3, 6. In this connection, and by way of question and answer, the inspired word says: "What is meant by the command in Isaiah, 52d chapter, 1st verse, which saith: Put on thy strength, O Zion-and what people had Isaiah reference to? He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost. What are we to understand by Zion loosing herself from the bands of her neck; 2d verse? We are to understand that the scattered remnants are exhorted to return to the Lord from whence they have fallen; which if they do, the promise of the Lord is that he will speak to them, or give them revelation. See the 6th, 7th, and 8th verses. The bands of her neck are the curses of God upon her, or the remnants of Israel in their scattered condition among the Gentiles." (D&C 113:7, 10.)
[^2] Compare Isaiah 52:7.
[^3] These words and those that follow have their root in Isa. 52:11-15, though as the astute student will observe, Jesus here gives them in a more perfect form.
