Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 116

The Building Up of Zion

The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. . . . And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the highest himself shall establish her. (Ps. 87:2-5.)

Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favour her, yea, the set time, is come. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof. So the heathen shall fear the name of the Lord, and all the kings of the earth thy glory. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer. This shall be written for the generation to come: and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord. (Ps. 102:13-18.)

Reading the Signs of the Times

(3 Nephi 21:1-13)

When, O when, will all these things come to pass? When will the Lord restore again the kingdom to Israel? When will Jerusalem become holy and Zion be redeemed? The promises are so wondrous, the glories so grand, the triumph so splendid, that every believing heart cries out—When, O Lord, will it be? And every prayerful voice pleads that it may be in his day. In a great chorus of worship and desire, the prayers of the saints ascend to the Great God: "Thy kingdom come. The will be done in earth, as it is in heaven," they say. (Matt. 6:10.) 'Even so come Lord Jesus that we, the children of the covenant, may receive that which was promised to Abraham and his seed; that in us and in our seed all generations may be blessed; that we may have a continuation of the seeds forever and ever; that our posterity also may be as numerous as the sands upon the seashore or the stars in the broad expanse of heaven. Let the gospel be restored; let Israel be gathered; let Jerusalem be redeemed; let Zion be established; let the Lord Jesus reign in peace and glory on earth for a thousand years.'

That the times and the seasons might be known; that his ancient covenant people might know when and under what circumstances the glorious promises would be fulfilled; but, more particularly, that his covenant people in the last days might know and believe and prepare for the wonders that are to be, Jesus said to his Nephite saints:

And verily I say unto you, I give unto you a sign, that ye may know the time when these things shall be about to take place—that I shall gather in, from their long dispersion, my people, O house of Israel, and shall establish again among them my Zion.

The restoration of the gospel, the gathering of Israel, and the establishment of Zion are one and the same thing; or, at least, they are so inseparably intertwined as one that they cannot be separated—for it is the Lord who gives the gospel, and it is the gospel that gathers Israel, and it is Israel that builds Zion. Now it is not the Lord's plan to hide his purposes from those who seek him. True, the day and the hour of his Second Coming is between him and his Father. It is wisdom in them to let the saints in successive ages look forward with expectancy, in the spirit of watchfulness and prayer, for that great day. But the times and the seasons in which the great events associated with that coming are to transpire—wherein the gospel is to be restored, Israel gathered, and Zion established—these are to be known, so that men in those days will be more watchful and more prayerful as they await the wonders that are to be.

And behold, this is the thing which I will give unto you for a sign—for verily I say unto you that when these things which I declare unto you, and which I shall declare unto you hereafter of myself, and by the power of the Holy Ghost which shall be given unto you of the Father, shall be made known unto the Gentiles that they may know concerning this people who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, and concerning this my people who shall be scattered by them.

(For clarity's sake we must interject our commentary into Jesus' sermon, even before he finishes his thoughts, for his presentation is so complex and his expressions are so broad that we might otherwise fail to envision their full meaning.) Thus, the promised sign is to include (1) the things Jesus now speaks, (2) those he shall thereafter speak to them, and (3) those he shall later reveal by the power of the Holy Ghost—when all these things shall be made known to the Gentiles in the latter days (through the coming forth of the Book of Mormon), so that the Gentiles learn of the ancient Nephites, and also of the latter-day Lamanites whom they have scattered.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, when these things shall be made known unto them of the Father, and shall come forth of the Father, from them unto you;

That is, when all the doctrine and all the witness of truth found in the Book of Mormon shall come forth by the power of God, and shall go from the Gentiles to the seed of Lehi.

For it is wisdom in the Father that they should be established in this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that these things might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel;

That is, in the eternal providences of Him who governs in the affairs of men; who raises up nations and casts down thrones; who gives one nation, and then another, a rulership for a season—according to his eternal purposes a great nation (the United States of America) shall be set up, with constitutional guarantees of freedom, by the power of God, so that the gospel may be restored, the Book of Mormon come forth, its message go to the American remnant of Jacob, all to the end that the eternal covenants of the Lord with his people might be fulfilled.

Therefore, when these works and the works which shall be wrought among you hereafter shall come forth from the Gentiles, unto your seed which shall dwindle in unbelief because of iniquity;

That is, when all that was then done and that should thereafter be done among the Nephites, should come forth in the Book of Mormon and go from the Gentiles unto Father Lehi's children, who by then would have dwindled in unbelief because of their sins.

For thus it behooveth the Father that it should come forth from the Gentiles, that he may show forth his power unto the Gentiles, for this cause that the Gentiles, if they will not harden their hearts, that they may repent and come unto me and be baptized in my name and know of the true points of my doctrine, that they may be numbered among my people, O house of Israel;

That is: It is the Father's good pleasure that the Book of Mormon shall come forth by way of the Gentiles, that they too may know his power, receive revelation, and learn the wonders of eternity, all to the end that the Gentiles, if they will, may repent and come unto Christ, and be baptized, and learn the doctrines of salvation, and be numbered with the house of Israel.

And when these things come to pass that thy seed shall begin to know these things—it shall be a sign unto them, that they may know that the work of the Father hath already commenced unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the people who are of the house of Israel.

What wonders the Lord has in store for his people! How glorious is his plan; how marvelous are his purposes; what great things he has reserved for the latter days! Israel—his chosen ones—shall be gathered in from their long dispersion; though they have been scattered in all the nations of the earth, yet they shall come out of darkness into the marvelous light of Christ when the Lord raises an ensign to the nations. "Ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel . . . and shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem." (Isa. 27:12-13.)

Zion—the Holy City, the pure in heart, the people of the Most High—Zion shall be established "on the mountains of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and on the plains of Olaha Shinehah, or the land where Adam dwelt." (D&C 117:8.) A New Jerusalem shall arise in the tops of the mountains and in the land of Missouri; Jerusalem of old shall shine forth in the waste places long trodden down of the Gentiles; and the Lord's people shall be redeemed in all the nations of the earth. The Lord Jehovah "shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root: Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit." (Isa. 27:6.)

The longings and desires, the prayers and the pleadings of all the prophets have been that Israel would come off triumphant; that she would tread on the necks of her foes; that a remnant would be among the Gentiles as a young lion among the flocks of sheep; that the Lord would make the horn of his people iron and their hoofs brass; that they would shine forth as a nation, "fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners" (Song. 6:10); and, in fine, that all Israel would be saved. All the prophets looked forward to the day when the ancient covenant would be renewed with the seed of Abraham; when the Lord would make anew the old covenant; when men again would know that in them and in their seed all generations should be blessed; when they would rejoice again in the prophetic promise that their seed—"out of the world"—would be as the stars and the sands. Or in other words: All of the prophets and all of the saints of olden times looked forward to the restitution of all things, to the restoration of the fulness of the everlasting gospel. All of them looked forward to the day when those who did not give heed to the words of the apostles and prophets then sent among them would, as Moses said, be cut off from among the people.

The great issue was not what the Lord designed to do in the latter days, but when it should come to pass. What was the sign and when should it be given? And now Jesus has given the answer, an answer that is plain and clear to us. The promised sign is the Book of Mormon. When that volume of holy scripture comes forth, then all men may know that the Lord has already commenced his work.

It is the Book of Mormon that gathers Israel. When the Stick of Judah and the Stick of Joseph, in the hands of Ephraim, become one in the hands of his people, then the Lord God will gather them; then will they come forth from among the heathen and receive the gospel; then shall they come into their own land according to the covenant. And "Thus saith the Lord God: . . . Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions: but I will save them out of all their dwelling places, wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so shall they be my people, and I will be their God." (Ezek. 37:20-23.)

We cannot state it too plainly; we cannot affirm it too positively; we cannot proclaim it with too great a fervor—the Book of Mormon is the sign given of God to herald the fulfillment of the covenants made of old. And now that holy volume is going forth to Lehi's seed and to all men, that all may know that the work of the Lord has commenced anew and that all that was promised will soon come to pass. That holy book has come forth, "Proving to the world that the holy scriptures are true, and that God does inspire men and call them to his holy work in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old; Thereby showing that he is the same God yesterday, today, and forever." (D&C 20:11-12.) It has come forth "to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations." (Title Page, Book of Mormon.) It has come forth as a new witness of Christ; as a witness that the everlasting gospel has been restored; as a witness that Joseph Smith and his successors wear the prophetic mantle; as a witness that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth; as a witness that the Lord has raised his latter-day ensign to the nations; as a witness that the covenant made with Abraham of old is now being fulfilled.

And when that day shall come, it shall come to pass that kings shall shut their mouths; for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that which they had not heard shall they consider.

Jesus now begins to speak of the things that shall come to pass after the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, after the restoration of the gospel. What he says is not a chronological listing of successive events, but simply an announcement of and a commentary on various things that are to be. We are left—as wisdom dictates should be the case—to interpret and apply his inspired utterances, the first being that the great and mighty shall be so amazed at the Lord's latter-day work that they shall not know what to say and shall feel impelled to consider the wondrous work which rolls before their eyes. So far there has been a small amount of this; what the future holds is limitless.

For in that day, for my sake shall the Father work a work, which shall be a great and a marvelous work among them; and there shall be among them those who will not believe it, although a man shall declare it unto them.

The restoration of the gospel, including all that appertains to it, is a marvelous work and a wonder. How men ought to marvel at the wonders that have already come in these the latter days! What can compare with the appearance of the Father and the Son to a young lad in his fifteenth year; or to the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, which contains a record of God's dealings with a people who had the fulness of the everlasting gospel; or to the ministry of Moroni, and John the Baptist, and Peter and James and other resurrected beings again on earth; or to the setting up of the true church and kingdom of God again on earth; or to the gathering of millions of our Father's children out of Babylon into the True Fold? And all of this is but the beginning; the marvels and wonders that lie ahead are beyond the capacities of us mortals to comprehend or conceive.

"I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people," the Lord said by the mouth of Isaiah, "even a marvelous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." (Isa. 29:14.) Then, as our dispensation dawned, the Lord repeatedly said such things as: "A great and marvelous work is about to come forth unto the children of men," and that "the field is white already to harvest; therefore, whoso desireth to reap, let him thrust in his sickle with his might, and reap while the day lasts, that he may treasure up for his soul everlasting salvation in the kingdom of God." (D&C 6:1-4.) And also: "By your hands I will work a marvelous work among the children of men, unto the convincing of many of their sins, that they may come unto repentance, and that they may come unto the kingdom of my Father." (D&C 18:44.)

Implicit in all this, as Jesus has just stated to the Nephites, is the fact that many will not believe the latter-day message of salvation, though it be declared unto them by the man whom God hath sent to reveal his word. It shall be among us as it was when He whose gospel it is ministered personally on earth, of which ministry the Messianic word asks: "Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?" (Isa. 53:1.)

But behold, the life of my servant shall be in my hand; therefore they shall not hurt him, although he shall be marred because of them. Yet I will heal him, for I will show unto them that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil.

Isaiah's prophecy about the marred servant is clearly Messianic and applies to Jesus who was crucified and rose from the dead to sprinkle the saving power of his blood in all nations. It is of him that kings shall shut their mouths as they ponder the marvel of his resurrection and all that he did. (Isa. 52:13-15.) But in this whole discourse Jesus is applying the prophetic word to the latter days, meaning that, as with many prophecies, the divine word has a dual fulfillment. In this setting we may properly say that Joseph Smith—whose voice declared the word for this dispensation—was marred, as his Lord had been, and yet should be healed, in the eternal sense, as was his Lord. And it may yet well be that there will be other latter-day servants to whom also it will apply. All of the Lord's servants who are marred or hurt or persecuted in this life—and who remain faithful—shall have all their sorrows made up to them in manifold measure in the resurrection.

Therefore it shall come to pass that whosoever will not believe in my words, who am Jesus Christ, which the Father shall cause him to bring forth unto the Gentiles, and shall give unto him power that he shall bring them forth unto the Gentiles, (it shall be done even as Moses said) they shall be cut off from among my people who are of the covenant.

Those who do not believe the restored gospel; who reject the messengers of salvation who are sent to them; and who continue to live after the manner of the world—they shall be cut off from among the people who are of the covenant. This we have already noted. It refers to the return of the Son of Man; to the day when every corruptible thing shall be destroyed; to the day when the wicked shall be burned as stubble; to the day when the vineyard shall be burned and none shall remain except those who are able to abide the day. It is then, and in this way, that the Lord's people will triumph over their enemies.

And my people who are a remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles, yea, in the midst of them as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he go through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver.

Their hand shall be lifted up upon their adversaries, and all their enemies shall be cut off.

Building the New Jerusalem

(3 Nephi 21:14-29)

Having spoken of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon; having announced the restoration of the gospel in the latter days; having promised that Israel would be gathered again into the fold of the True Shepherd; having assured his people that the Great Jehovah would renew with their seed the covenant made with their fathers—Jesus now turns to building a New Jerusalem. Zion, as a place and as a city, is to be established, so that Zion, as a people and as the pure in heart, may have a capital whence the law may go forth. The building of the New Jerusalem grows out of these other things that he has taught them, and we must take care to study his words in the setting he gave them.

Jesus has made repeated references—both quoting and paraphrasing, as best suited his purposes—to the words of Micah. That ancient prophet said: "And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people as a dew from the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men." That is, the Lord's people will be everywhere, scattered in all nations, and their presence will seem as natural as the settling of the dew and the falling of the rains; their influence will be to give life and strength to the nations, even as the moisture from heaven gives life and growth to the crops of the earth.

"And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many people as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep: who, if he go through, both treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver. Thine hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off." These concepts, including most of the very words themselves, Jesus has quoted, and he has explained that their fulfillment will be in the day when the wicked are cut off as Moses promised. After Micah gave them, he said: "And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that I will" do such and such, referring to certain conditions that will prevail during the Millennium and after the destruction of the wicked at the Second Coming of the Son of Man. (Micah 5:7-15.) After Jesus said the same things, he also, using most of the very words of Micah, spoke of these millennial events:

Yea, wo be unto the Gentiles except they repent; for it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Father, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots; And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy strongholds.

When the Lord comes and Israel triumphs, the armies of the Gentile nations will be destroyed, their fortifications thrown down, and their cities cease to be. Every corruptible thing—including the wicked Jew and the evil Gentile—shall be destroyed.

And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy land, and thou shalt have no more soothsayers; Thy graven images I will also cut off, and thy standing images out of the midst of thee, and thou shalt no more worship the works of thy hands; And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee; so will I destroy thy cities.

False doctrine, false ordinances, false worship, false religion—all shall cease. The images and idols, in their churches and in their hearts, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. The groves where Baal of old was worshipped, and the cathedrals where Baal of the latter days was adored, shall be as when the walls and buildings of Jericho fell.

And it shall come to pass that all lyings, and deceivings, and envyings, and strifes, and priestcrafts, and whoredoms, shall be done away.

For it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that at that day whosoever will not repent and come unto my Beloved Son, them will I cut off from among my people, O house of Israel.

These words are not in Micah's account; Jesus here inserts them to give depth and understanding to the Old Testament account from which he is quoting. They tell of that day when wickedness, as we know it, ceases, the day when men have beaten their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks, the day when peace prevails and the Prince of Peace is Lord over all the earth. And in that day wo unto those who do not repent and believe in the Beloved Son. Of them the divine word is:

And I will execute vengeance and fury upon them, even as upon the heathen, such as they have not heard.

With these words the quotations from Micah cease, at least as far as our Bible preserves his words for us. The meaning is, of course, self-evident and accords with Zechariah's word that those families and nations—after the Second Coming—who go not up to Jerusalem to keep the Feast of Tabernacles, upon them no rain shall fall and they shall be smitten with a plague. (Zech. 14:16-19.)

But if they will repent and hearken unto my words, and harden not their hearts, I will establish my church among them, and they shall come in unto the covenant and be numbered among this the remnant of Jacob, unto whom I have given this land for their inheritance;

And they shall assist my people, the remnant of Jacob, and also as many of the house of Israel as shall come, that they may build a city, which shall be called the New Jerusalem.

Both Jew and Gentile shall build the New Jerusalem. The remnant of Jacob in the Americas (meaning the Lamanites), and the gathered remnants of the whole house of Israel—indeed, all people from all nations who are righteous and pure and believing, all who keep the commandments—all shall join in building the Holy City. And the Jews (other than the Lamanite Jews) who believe and repent and purify themselves shall build up anew the Jerusalem of old. All this is set forth by Moroni, as he wrote of Ether, in these words: "Behold, Ether saw the days of Christ, and he spake concerning a New Jerusalem upon this land. And he spake also concerning the house of Israel, and the Jerusalem from whence Lehi should come—after it should be destroyed it should be built up again, a holy city unto the Lord; wherefore, it could not be a new Jerusalem for it had been in a time of old; but it should be built up again, and become a holy city of the Lord; and it should be built unto the house of Israel. And that a New Jerusalem should be built upon this land, unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph, for which things there has been a type. For as Joseph brought his father down into the land of Egypt, even so he died there; wherefore, the Lord brought a remnant of the seed of Joseph out of the land of Jerusalem, that he might be merciful unto the seed of Joseph that they should perish not, even as he was merciful unto the father of Joseph that he should perish not. Wherefore, the remnant of the house of Joseph shall be built upon this land; and it shall be a land of their inheritance; and they shall build up a holy city unto the Lord, like unto the Jerusalem of old; and they shall no more be confounded, until the end come when the earth shall pass away.

"And there shall be a new heaven and a new earth; and they shall be like unto the old save the old have passed away, and all things have become new. And then cometh the New Jerusalem; and blessed are they who dwell therein, for it is they whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who are numbered among the remnant of the seed of Joseph, who were of the house of Israel. And then also cometh the Jerusalem of old; and the inhabitants thereof, blessed are they, for they have been washed in the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who were scattered and gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, and from the north countries, and are partakers of the fulfilling of the covenant which God made with their father, Abraham." (Ether 13:4-11.) And of this day when Zion, the New Jerusalem, is established on the American continent, Jesus said:

And then shall they assist my people that they may be gathered in, who are scattered upon all the face of the land, in unto the New Jerusalem. And then shall the power of heaven come down among them; and I also will be in the midst.

The prophecies relative to the gathering of Israel will be fulfilled both before and after the Second Coming. The remnants shall first assemble, set up the ecclesiastical kingdom, and build up Zion. Then the Lord will come and the final glorious gathering and triumph of Israel will come to pass. It will be in the day when the Lord is in the midst of men. Having so taught, Jesus returns to general commentary about the sign whereby men may know that his strange and wondrous work—the marvelous work and a wonder of latter days—has commenced again on earth.

And then shall the work of the Father commence at that day, even when this gospel shall be preached among the remnant of this people. Verily I say unto you, at that day shall the work of the Father commence among all the dispersed of my people, yea, even the tribes which have been lost, which the Father hath led away out of Jerusalem.

Yea, the work shall commence among all the dispersed of my people, with the Father, to prepare the way whereby they may come unto me, that they may call on the Father in my name.

Yea, and then shall the work commence, with the Father, among all nations, in preparing the way whereby his people may be gathered home to the land of their inheritance.

And they shall go out from all nations; and they shall not go out in haste, nor go by flight, for I will go before them, saith the Father, and I will be their rearward.

In this summary we are reminded: (1) that when the gospel goes to the Lamanites, it will be a sign that the great latter-day work has begun; (2) that in that day the gospel will go to all the dispersed of Israel, including the lost tribes; (3) that its purpose will be to bring Israel unto Christ so they can call upon the Father in his name; (4) that the work will go forward in all nations so that the chosen seed may be gathered to the lands of their inheritances; and (5) that they shall go out, not as escapees from oppression or for political reasons, but in glory and beauty and truth—the Lord himself going before and preparing the way and being also their rearward.

Let God be praised for the wonders that now are and for the even greater wonders that are to be!

1981 Deseret Book Co.
