Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 117

Expounding the Scriptures

Search the scriptures; for . . . they are they which testify of me. (John 5:39.)

The holy scriptures . . . are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. And all scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. (JST 2 Tim. 3:15-17.)

And whoso treasureth up my word, shall not be deceived. (JS-M 1:37.)

Searching the Scriptures

(3 Nephi 22:1-17; 23:1-5)

Jesus' teachings among the Nephite Jews rose to far greater heights than did his teachings among the Palestinian Jews. At least the biblical accounts do not compare in doctrinal beauty and scriptural exposition with those in the Book of Mormon. Jesus gave no parables to the Nephites, for he had no occasion to hide his doctrines or conceal his concepts as far as they were concerned. He spent no time contending with them about their traditions and false beliefs, and he was not at any time faced with a spirit of disbelief or rebellion among them. Such things as the Sermon on the Mount, the Intercessory Prayer, and the doctrine relative to the sacrament were given in plainness on both continents. But many doctrinal concepts were given to the Nephites of which there is no New Testament account. It is true, of course, that on the mountain in Galilee or in other private gatherings Jesus gave the Jews more than is recorded in the New Testament. But in the very nature of things—the wicked and ungodly among the Nephites having been destroyed—there is a higher tone and a more pleasing feel to what he told the Nephites than to what he gave the people in the Old World. And one of the things he did among his New World saints was to quote extensively from the prophets, and to do it in such a way as to endorse and to show the true meaning and intent of the prophetic word.

And so, having presented his doctrine relative to the restoration of the gospel, the gathering of Israel, and the establishment of Zion—all in the latter days—Jesus said: "And then shall that which is written come to pass," at which point he quoted, with minor improvements, the whole fifty-fourth chapter of Isaiah. In poetic language, using figures of speech common in his day, Isaiah proclaimed that Israel—scattered, barren, without seed born under the covenant—would again break forth into singing; that Zion would enlarge her borders, strengthen her stakes, break forth on the right hand and on the left, and build up the ancient and desolate cities; and that the saints of latter days would no longer be ashamed, nor remember the reproach of their scattered days nor the sorrows of their widowhood.

He announced that Jehovah was their Bridegroom, their Husband, their Maker, their Redeemer, and that he was the God of Israel and of the whole earth. He told how Israel had been forsaken for a small moment but would be gathered with great mercies; and how in a little wrath the Lord had hidden his face from her, but with everlasting kindness would shower mercy upon her children. He gave the Lord's promise (1) that as the flood of Noah was assuaged, never to return, so Jehovah's wrath against Israel would cease, and (2) that though the mountains and hills should depart, yet the Lord would not break his covenant to show mercy upon Israel. Her children—"afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted"—would be gathered in peace into Zion.

The Holy City would be built with riches and jewels, and all her children would be taught of the Lord who reigned among them. The saints would then dwell in peace, and righteousness would prevail; oppression would cease, terror flee away, and all who opposed them would fall. No weapon formed against the Lord's people should prosper, and every tongue that spoke against them should be condemned. Such, said Isaiah, "is the heritage of the servants of the Lord," for their righteousness is of him. And when Jesus had quoted all these words, he said:

And now, behold, I say unto you, that ye ought to search these things. Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah.

For surely he spake as touching all things concerning my people which are of the house of Israel; therefore it must needs be that he must speak also to the Gentiles.

Scripturalists are wont to refer to Isaiah as the Messianic prophet because of his many prophecies about the birth and ministry and death and resurrection of the Lord Jehovah. And truly he was; no Old Testament seer has left us a greater wealth of words about the Eternal Word than this son of Amoz, who prophesied in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, all kings of Judah, and who, according to tradition, was sawn asunder for the counsel he gave and the testimony of Jesus he bore. But what is of equal or even greater import is that Isaiah's Messianic word shines forth far beyond time's meridian; he is the great prophet of the restoration. It is his voice that speaks of the restoration of the gospel in the last days, of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, of the raising of an ensign to the nations, of the gathering of Israel, of the building of the house of the Lord in the tops of the mountains, of the conversion of many Gentiles, of the building of Zion, of the Second Coming of the Son of Man, and of the millennial era of peace and righteousness. Truly, "great are the words of Isaiah."

And all things that he spake have been and shall be, even according to the words which he spake.

Therefore give heed to my words; write the things which I have told you; and according to the time and the will of the Father they shall go forth unto the Gentiles.

And whosoever will hearken unto my words and repenteth and is baptized, the same shall be saved. Search the prophets, for many there be that testify of these things.

When the words of Isaiah go forth unto the Gentiles—and are understood by them—they will believe in Christ, repent of their sins, be baptized by the legal administrators sent of God in this day, and become members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. And with this all the prophetic word accords.

Adding to the Scriptures

(3 Nephi 23:6-14; 24:1-18; 25:1-6; 26:1-2)

Jesus now did something among the Nephites that he had never done, as far as we know, among the Jews. He "expounded all the scriptures unto them which they had received." What a wondrous thing this must have been! On the Emmaus road he expounded to Cleopas and Luke "in all the scriptures the things concerning himself." (Luke 24:27.) But here to thousands upon thousands of saints who had received the gift of the Holy Ghost and were prepared to receive the mysteries of the kingdom, he expounded all that was written in their holy books. They had the brass plates, which contain the five books of Moses, and the prophecies of the prophets down to the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah, including many prophecies and covenants of the Lord that have been lost from our Old Testament. They had the plates of Nephi and other records telling what the Lord had revealed to their fathers during the 634 years since Lehi left Jerusalem. And, above all, they had the Jaredite scriptures, those inspired accounts which are in the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon. When we think that all these things were expounded unto them by Him who gave the holy word and whose scriptures they were, it makes us feel somewhat insignificant spiritually. When we compare the small stream of revelation we have received with the mighty rivers of revealed truth that flowed to those of old, we long for the day when the Lord will come and reveal all things to us so that we will know what our counterparts of old knew in their days.

Then Jesus said to the people, "Behold, other scriptures I would that ye should write, that ye have not." To Nephi he commanded: "Bring forth the record which ye have kept," which they did. Finding it did not contain the prophecy of Samuel the Lamanite, that many saints would come forth from their graves after the resurrection of Christ, he said: "How be it that ye have not written this thing, that many saints did arise and appear unto many and did minister unto them?" Samuel's prophetic words were then duly recorded, and Jesus "expounded all the scriptures in one," and "commanded them that they should teach the things which he had expounded unto them."

After the Jews returned from Babylon, and after the days of Ezra and Nehemiah and the building of the walls of Jerusalem, the Lord sent the great prophet Malachi to give his word to the chosen seed. That the seed of those who had escaped from the Holy City before Nebuchadnezzar took their fathers into captivity, that the seed of Joseph that bad been separated from their brethren might rejoice in the words of so great a one as Malachi, whose words close our Old Testament, Jesus first gave many of them to his American saints, and then expounded to them their deep and wondrous meanings. All we know of what then happened is that he gave them chapters 3 and 4 in almost the verbatim language of our Bible.

Malachi's prophetic words here involved speak of the messenger who should prepare the way before the face of the Lord, in a sense for his mortal ministry, but primarily in that great millennial day when the wicked will be destroyed and the sons of Levi serve again in their priestly roles. They tell us that Judah and Jerusalem shall be restored to their ancient glory, and that their Lord—who is Jehovah—coming to reign on earth will destroy the wicked: the sorcerers, adulterers, false swearers, those who oppress their fellowmen and who do not fear the Lord.

They speak of robbing God and being cursed therefor, through failure to pay tithes and offerings, and of the temporal and spiritual blessings reserved for tithe payers. Those who walk mournfully before the Lord are promised great reward in due time, though the proud and the wicked seem to enjoy greater rewards in this life. Those who serve the Lord shall be his when he comes to make up his jewels; he will spare them in that day, and then shall all discern between the righteous and the wicked.

Malachi foretells the day of the Second Coming when the proud and the wicked shall be burned as stubble; when the Son of Righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings; when Israel shall grow up as calves in the stall with all their needs cared for; and when they shall tread down the wicked—their enemies—as ashes under the soles of their feet. And then, as a fitting climax, Malachi speaks of the return of Elijah the prophet to reveal the priesthood before the great and dreadful day of the Lord and to plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, lest the whole earth be utterly wasted in that day. Then Jesus said:

These scriptures, which ye had not with you, the Father commanded that I should give unto you; for it was wisdom in him that they should be given unto future generations.

They are primarily for our benefit. We live in the day of which they speak; we are the children in whose hearts the promises have been planted; we are the ones who are striving so to live that we will abide the day of His coming. And it is in our day that Elijah has come, according to the promises, bringing again the sealing power so that legal administrators may bind on earth and have it sealed eternally in the heavens—for all of which the Lord be praised.

Seeking More Scriptures

(3 Nephi 26:3-21; Ether 4:1-19)

Who has seen such marvelous things as Jesus did among the Nephites? And who has heard such wondrous words of divine wisdom as fell from his lips on the American continent? To our shame we know only the hundredth part. Our friend Mormon—the prophet-historian who has given us such as we do have—at this point in his inspired writing said of the teachings of the Blessed One, which he so freely gave to the spiritually attuned ears in the New World: Jesus "did expound all things, even from the beginning until the time that he should come in his glory—yea, even all things which should come upon the face of the earth, even until the elements should melt with fervent heat, and the earth should be wrapt together as a scroll, and the heavens and the earth should pass away; And even unto the great and last day, when all people, and all kindreds, and all nations and tongues shall stand before God, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil—If they be good, to the resurrection of everlasting life; and if they be evil, to the resurrection of damnation; being on a parallel, the one on the one hand and the other on the other hand, according to the mercy, and the justice, and the holiness which is in Christ, who was before the world began."

In the providences of the Lord, we have slivers and fragments of what Jesus gave the Nephites. Sections 29, 45, 63, 76, 77, 88, 93, 101, 107, 132, 133, and 138 in the Doctrine and Covenants, and the books of Moses and Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price, all contain truths of transcendent worth about the doings of Deity from the beginning to the end. But what we have is only the milk of the present, which prepares us for the meat of the future. We do not have what he told the Nephites, and we do not have what he revealed to the brother of Jared, nor will we until the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon comes forth. "There cannot be written in this book even a hundredth part of the things which Jesus did truly teach unto the people," Mormon says. The plates of Nephi do contain the more part of his teachings, but with reference to the lesser part that has come to us, Mormon says: "I have written them to the intent that they may be brought again unto this people, from the Gentiles, according to the words which Jesus hath spoken." Then Mormon gives us this concept of infinite worth:

And when they shall have received this, which is expedient that they should have first, to try their faith, and if it shall so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater things be made manifest unto them.

And if it so be that they will not believe these things, then shall the greater things be withheld from them, unto their condemnation.

Behold, I was about to write them, all which were engraven upon the plates of Nephi, but the Lord forbade it, saying: I will try the faith of my people.

Along with the teachings given by Jesus in that day, the Nephites had also the inspired writings of the brother of Jared. These accounts had been sealed up for some two millenniums, so they would not "come unto the children of men until after" Jesus had been "lifted up upon the cross." During the golden era of Nephite worship they were opened before all the people. But when these Israelites, after some two centuries of true worship, again dwindled in unbelief, these sacred words were again sealed up and their glories withheld from men. They are now found in the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon, and of them Moroni said: "There never were greater things made manifest than those which were made manifest unto the brother of Jared." And with respect to them, the Lord said:

They shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord.

And in that day that they shall exercise faith in me, saith the Lord, even as the brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of the heavens and of the earth, and all things that in them are.

It is with the writings of Jareditish Moriancumer even as it is with most of the Nephite teachings of Jesus. They are reserved for the faithful, they can be understood only by the power of the Spirit, and they have not been revealed as yet to us. Though the milk of the word, as found in the translated portion of the Book of Mormon, has been given to prepare us for the meat of the word, as found in the sealed portion of that holy book, it is clear that our faith is not yet great enough to enable us to receive the hidden mysteries of the kingdom.

And he that will contend against the word of the Lord, let him be accursed; and he that shall deny these things, let him be accursed; for unto them will I show no greater things, saith Jesus Christ; for I am he who speaketh.

And at my command the heavens are opened and are shut; and at my word the earth shall shake; and at my command the inhabitants thereof shall pass away, even so as by fire.

How can those who do not believe and obey the law already given ever expect to receive more revelation from on high? If men will not believe the Book of Mormon, they shut out of their lives the other revelations that have come in this dispensation. And if they do not believe all that God has now revealed, what justification would there be for him to reveal other great and important things pertaining to his earthly affairs and his heavenly kingdom?

And he that believeth not my words believeth not my disciples; and if it so be that I do not speak, judge ye; for ye shall know that it is I that speaketh, at the last day.

But he that believeth these things which I have spoken, him will I visit with the manifestations of my Spirit, and he shall know and bear record. For because of my Spirit he shall know that these things are true; for it persuadeth men to do good.

And whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do good is of me; for good cometh of none save it be of me. I am the same that leadeth men to all good; he that will not believe my words will not believe me—that I am; and he that will not believe me will not believe the Father who sent me. For behold, I am the Father, I am the light, and the life, and the truth of the world.

How wondrous are the words of Christ! Their plainness, the reasoning and logic they set forth, the self-evident witness they bear of their divine origin—where else in all that is written are there words like these? Truly he that does not believe these words and others like them does not believe in Christ, and he that does believe shall receive the manifestations of the Holy Spirit and shall prepare himself for ever greater revelations. And so the cry goes forth among us:

Come unto me, O ye Gentiles, and I will show unto you the greater things, the knowledge which is hid up because of unbelief.

Come unto me, O ye house of Israel, and it shall be made manifest unto you how great things the Father hath laid up for you, from the foundation of the world; and it hath not come unto you, because of unbelief.

The call is unto us; the call is unto the Jews; the call is unto the Gentiles; the call is unto all men: Come, believe, obey, and prepare for the greater revelation that is promised!

Behold, when ye shall rend that veil of unbelief which doth cause you to remain in your awful state of wickedness, and hardness of heart, and blindness of mind, then shall the great and marvelous things which have been hid up from the foundation of the world from you—yea, when ye shall call upon the Father in my name, with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, then shall ye know that the Father hath remembered the covenant which he made unto your fathers, O house of Israel.

O that we might rend the heavens and know all that the ancients knew! O that we might pierce the veil and see all that our forebears saw! O that we might see and know and feel what the elect among the Jaredites and among the Nephites saw and heard and felt! He who is no respecter of persons calls us with his own voice; if we will but attune our ears we shall hear his words!

And then shall my revelations which I have caused to be written by my servant John be unfolded in the eyes of all the people. Remember, when ye see these things, ye shall know that the time is at hand that they shall be made manifest in very deed.

Therefore, when ye shall receive this record ye may know that the work of the Father has commenced upon all the face of the land.

Soon the apocalypse of John shall appear before men in plainness, for the same truths are found on the sealed plates. And we know that the work of the Father has already commenced among men.

Therefore, repent all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me, and believe in my gospel, and be baptized in my name; for he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned; and signs shall follow them that believe in my name.

And blessed is he that is found faithful unto my name at the last day, for he shall be lifted up to dwell in the kingdom prepared for him from the foundation of the world. And behold it is I that hath spoken it. Amen.

As we recount these Nephite teachings, and as we learn thereby why Jesus has withheld from the generality of men those great and wondrous things given to an elect few in days gone by, we know exactly why our New Testament friends did not record more of what happened on the mountain in Galilee. What there transpired was for those then present. Such truths as found their way into the biblical accounts were to prepare the way for the greater truths yet to come. The Lord is testing our faith. When we believe the Bible and the Book of Mormon and the other things he has revealed in our day, then will the greater things be manifest unto us.

For the moment, however, we can at least rejoice that Jesus did minister so gloriously among our Nephite brethren. As Mormon sets forth, the Lord taught the people for three days and thereafter showed himself to them often, "and did break bread oft, and bless it, and give it unto them." We know that he performed healings of every sort among them and that he raised a man from the dead. We know that he taught their children and loosed their tongues so that "they did speak unto their fathers great and marvelous things, even greater than he had revealed unto the people," and that "even babes did open their mouths and utter marvelous things; and the things which they did utter were forbidden that there should not any man write them."

We know also that the disciples went forth preaching, baptizing, and conferring the Holy Ghost. "And many of them saw and heard unspeakable things, which are not lawful to be written." In that day "they had all things common among them, every man dealing justly, one with another." They were saints of God indeed and were worthy of their membership in Christ's Church.

1981 Deseret Book Co.
