Bruce R. McConkie, Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981)

Chapter 118

The Holy Gospel

The gospel of God, . . . Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh; And declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead: By whom we have received grace and apostleship. . . . For it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; . . . For therein is the righteousness of God revealed. (Rom. 1:1-5, 16-17.)

What Is the Name of the True Church?

(3 Nephi 27:1-12)

Jesus, name of wondrous glory!

Jesus, blessed name, holy name, the name above all names!

Salvation is in Christ—how often have we said it! His is the only name given under heaven whereby man may be saved!

He "made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father." (Philip. 2:7-11.)

We are commanded to repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore.

We take upon ourselves his name in the waters of baptism and again when we partake of the emblems of his suffering and death.

Whatsoever we ask the Father, in his name, that is right and good, in faith believing that we shall receive, it is granted.

In his name the lame walk, the blind see, the deaf hear. His name raises the dead, parts the Red Sea, quenches the violence of fire, closes the mouths of lions. His name rends the heavens, sends angels to earth, pours out revelation upon the faithful, sends visions to the seers.

In his name death is abolished and life and immortality reign. Through him the Father brings to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

The gospel of God is also his gospel—his everlasting gospel—the plan of salvation revealed in all dispensations to all the holy prophets.

He is our King, our Lawgiver, our Lord, and our God.

How then and in what name shall his Church be called? Is there any name, other than his, that can identify the saving truths administered by the Church and kingdom of God on earth?

From our vantage point it is difficult to understand why there should have been any question about this either among the Nephites, among the early Christians in the Old World, or among the early Latter-day Saints in this dispensation. It is his Church; all things are done in his name; and therefore the Church should bear his name. True, his names are many and his manners of manifesting himself to men are numerous; one name emphasizes one aspect of his mission and work, and another name singles out some other aspect of these. He is the Creator because he created, the Redeemer because he redeemed, the Savior because he saves, the Son of God because God is his Father. A knowledge of his many names helps us to envision the majesty and extent of his doings.

There might be a legitimate question as to which names to select, or as to what combination of them to use, but there can be no question as to whose name the Church should bear. There is no record that this question was resolved in perfection in the Old World—though we must assume it was; indeed, it could not have been otherwise—but the Nephite record does preserve both the reasoning and the inspiration underlying the name by which the Lord's people should be called.

Mormon's account tells us that "they who were baptized in the name of Jesus were called the church of Christ." (3 Ne. 26:21.) Then he recounts how their knowledge on this point came to them. The Twelve were out in their ministry, journeying, preaching, and baptizing in the name of Jesus. And as they "were gathered together and were united in mighty prayer and fasting," Jesus again appeared. "What will ye that I shall give unto you?" he asked. They said: "Lord, we will that thou wouldst tell us the name whereby we shall call this church; for there are disputations among the people concerning this matter." Jesus replied:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, why is it that the people should murmur and dispute because of this thing?

Have they not read the scriptures, which say ye must take upon you the name of Christ, which is my name? For by this name shall ye be called at the last day; And whoso taketh upon him my name, and endureth to the end, the same shall be saved at the last day.

Men cannot be saved unless they take upon themselves the name of Christ. The saints are adopted into his family; they become his sons and his daughters; they are born again; they have a new Father; and they bear the name of their Father, who is Christ. "Take upon you the name of Christ," King Benjamin said to his people, "And it shall come to pass that whosoever doeth this shall be found at the right hand of God, for he shall know the name by which he is called; for he shall be called by the name of Christ." [^1] And those who honor their new name and retain membership in their new family shall dwell with their Father in the heavenly home he has prepared for all those who bear his name. They shall be called by the name of Christ here and now and shall continue to bear that sacred name in eternity. And if all individuals who are baptized into his Church, and are thus born again, if they all bear the name of Christ, then the Church is the family of Christ, or in other words it is the Church of Christ.

Therefore, whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call upon the Father in my name that he will bless the church for my sake.

In every age from Adam to the present, and from this hour until time is no more, the family of Christ is the Church of Christ. We today—as with our fellow believers in days of old—are members of "the Church of Christ." (D&C 20:1.) And wherever the true Church is found, there also is revelation; and so the Lord reveals to his people the specific and formal words by which his Church shall be known at any given time. We were known as "the Church of Christ" from April 6, 1830, to April 26, 1838, when the Lord announced the formal title, "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." (D&C 115:3-4.)

And how be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel.

If a church is Moses' church, it can offer any rewards Moses is able to give; and salvation does not come by the law of Moses, but through the atonement of Him who was Moses' Lord. If a church is that of a man, it can offer any rewards that a man has power to create; and no man can resurrect himself or create a celestial realm where saved beings may dwell, for salvation is in Christ and in him only. If a church is the church of the devil, it can offer such rewards as Lucifer has prepared for those who walk in carnal paths and worship him, and his great reward is a place in the kingdom of the devil. And if a church pretends to be the Church of Christ and to bear that name, but is not so in reality and in fact, the name alone adds nothing. Thus it is written of those who shall go to a telestial kingdom: "For these are they who are of Paul, and of Apollos, and of Cephas. These are they who say they are some of one and some of another—some of Christ and some of John, and some of Moses, and some of Elias, and some of Esaias, and some of Isaiah, and some of Enoch; But [they] received not the gospel, neither the testimony of Jesus, neither the prophets, neither the everlasting covenant." (D&C 76:99-101.)

Verily I say unto you, that ye are built upon my gospel; therefore ye shall call whatsoever things ye do call, in my name; therefore if ye call upon the Father, for the church, if it be in my name the Father will hear you;

And if it so be that the church is built upon my gospel then will the Father show forth his own works in it.

The ultimate test of the truth and divinity of any church is its fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles? Signs shall follow them that believe. Those who belong to the true Church—which is built upon the true gospel—increase in righteousness; they acquire the attributes of godliness; virtue and integrity and morality shine in their faces; they heal the sick and raise the dead, for they are the Lord's people.

But if it be not built upon my gospel, and is built upon the works of men, or upon the works of the devil, verily I say unto you they have joy in their works for a season, and by and by the end cometh, and they are hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence there is no return.

For their works do follow them, for it is because of their works that they are hewn down; therefore remember the things that I have told you.

Those portions of Jesus' words that Mormon was permitted to record, in the account destined to come forth in our day, contain the directions and counsel needed in today's world. Let the world, learning these things, take heed, lest those who are in the world cleave unto those churches which allow men to perform works of unrighteousness, which works lead not to heaven, but to hell.

What Is the Gospel of Salvation?

(3 Nephi 27:13-22)

How glorious is the gospel; how wondrous is the word; how marvelous are its messengers; how blessed is the Lord!

The gospel is the plan of salvation—the eternal plan of the Eternal Father. It is the laws and truths and powers by conformity to which the spirit children of the Father (Christ included) can advance and progress and become like him. It includes the creation and peopling of the earth, the testing processes of mortality, and death, the resurrection, and eternal judgment. It is founded and grounded upon the atoning sacrifice of Christ and is operative because he laid down his life for all men.

Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have given unto you—that I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me.

It is the gospel of God; the plan originated with the Father; it is his gospel. It concerns Jesus Christ our Lord because he was chosen to come into this world as the Son of God, to work out the infinite and eternal atonement, and to put into full force all of the terms and conditions of the Father's plan. The Son does the will of the Father; the Son did not devise a plan and suggest it to the Father; the Son obeyed and conformed and adopted. He espoused and championed the cause of his Father.

And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil—

And for this cause have I been lifted up; therefore, according to the power of the Father I will draw all men unto me, that they may be judged according to their works.

Jesus came to die—to die upon the cross. He came to ransom men from the temporal and spiritual death brought into the world by the fall of Adam; he came to abolish death, both temporal and spiritual; he came to bring immortality to all men and eternal life to all who believe and obey. Through his atoning sacrifice, begun in Gethsemane and completed on the cross, he has power to draw all men unto him, to bring them from the grave, to arraign them before his bar, to judge them according to their works. Annas engineered his death; Caiaphas issued the decree of the Sanhedrin that he was worthy of death; Pilate sent him to the cross; and the elders and chief priests rejoiced in his death. All these shall stand before his bar. He died for them and for all men; he died for the Jews and for the Gentiles; he is the Redeemer of the world.

And it shall come to pass, that whoso repenteth and is baptized in my name shall be filled; and if he endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that day when I shall stand to judge the world.

And he that endureth not unto the end, the same is he that is also hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence they can no more return, because of the justice of the Father.

And this is the word which he hath given unto the children of men. And for this cause he fulfilleth the words which he hath given, and he lieth not, but fulfilleth all his words.

Repent, be baptized, be filled with the Holy Ghost, endure to the end, and be saved. Jesus shall judge the world. Those who have entered in at the gate of repentance and baptism, those who are members of the Church, those who have started out on the strait and narrow path leading to eternal life—all such who do not endure to the end shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. They shall be damned. Such is according to the justice of the Father; it is part of his eternal plan.

And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end.

Fallen men are carnal, sensual, and devilish by nature; they are unclean; they are worldly. To be saved they must become clean; God himself is clean and pure, and only those who become as he is can dwell in his presence. None others are saved. Of the saints John said: "If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin." (1 Jn. 1:7.) This is the doctrine of blood atonement.

Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day.

How can men become clean and pure? How can they be sanctified? What power can burn dross and evil out of a human soul as though by fire? To be saved men must be born again; they must be sanctified by the Spirit; they must receive the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost; they must become clean and spotless by obedience to law. The Holy Ghost is a sanctifier; no man can be saved unless he receives the gift of the Holy Ghost. Men humble themselves and are baptized by legal administrators sent of God so that, following the laying on of hands, they may receive the companionship of the Holy Spirit of God.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and ye know the things that ye must do in my church; for the works which ye have seen me do that shall ye also do; for that which ye have seen me do even that shall ye do; Therefore, if ye do these things blessed are ye, for ye shall be lifted up at the last day.

This is my gospel! As Jesus began his ministry so he ended it: "preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, And saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel." (Mark 1:14-15.) The gospel, the everlasting gospel, the gospel of God! Jesus calls it "my gospel," and so it is, for he has adopted it; and the Father—that all men might honor the Son even as they honor the Father—has called his own gospel after the name of his Son: The Gospel of Jesus Christ. His part in the eternal plan was to work out the infinite and eternal atonement. Man's part is to believe and obey; as far as any act on our part is concerned, the gospel is faith, repentance, baptism, the receipt of the Holy Ghost, and enduring in righteousness all our days. Such is the message Jesus gave to the Nephites; and such—we cannot doubt—is the same message, stated with the same clarity, that he gave to worthy persons in his own Galilee.

By Whom Shall Men Be Judged?

(3 Nephi 27:23-33)

How glorious is the Judge of all the earth! And—if we may paraphrase Isaiah's words about the messengers who preach us the gospel of peace—how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of them who stand with Him to judge the nations of men. Yea, how glorious are the messengers who, first, preach the gospel, and who, then, sit in judgment at the Eternal Bar. And so Jesus continues:

Write the things which ye have seen and heard, save it be those which are forbidden.

Write the works of this people, which shall be, even as hath been written, of that which hath been.

For behold, out of the books which have been written, and which shall be written, shall this people be judged, for by them shall their works be known unto men.

And behold, all things are written by the Father; therefore out of the books which shall be written shall the world be judged.

When the judgment is set and the books are opened, all men will be judged out of that which is written in the books. They will be judged by the recitations there found of their own deeds. The tithing records will name the full tithe payers; the books on Sabbath observance will tell those who went to the house of prayer on the Lord's day to pay their devotions to the Most High. But, beyond this, the books will specify the standards that men should have met and tell the way they should have lived. Christians will be judged out of the Bible, for that holy book tells them how to live to please the Lord. People to whom the Book of Mormon comes will be judged out of it and will be accountable for rejecting the witness it bears of the Lord Jesus and of the prophet by whose instrumentality this latter-day witness of truth came forth. And, even beyond this, every man will be judged out of the book of his own life, out of the record of obedience or disobedience that is written in the flesh and sinews and soul of his own body. And however imperfect the records kept on earth may be, all things are written by the Father, into the very body and spirit of each person, so that none will be judged amiss or from an imperfect ledger.

And know ye that ye shall be judges of this people, according to the judgment which I shall give unto you, which shall be just. Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am.

Jesus is the Judge of all. The Father judgeth no man but hath committed all judgment unto the Son. But the Twelve in Jerusalem shall sit on twelve thrones judging the whole house of Israel; the Nephite Twelve, having been so judged, will in turn judge the Nephite nation; and we may well conclude that the hierarchy of judgment expands out to other legal administrators in the various dispensations. Just as the noble and great participated with the Great Creator in the creation, so those who are chosen and worthy shall participate with the Great Judge in the day of judgment. That the lesser judges must be as the Great Judge is self-evident.

And now I go unto the Father. And verily I say unto you, whatsoever things ye shall ask the Father in my name shall be given unto you.

Therefore, ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; for he that asketh, receiveth; and unto him that knocketh, it shall be opened.

How often it must be said: "Ask, and ye shall receive." How many things we might know if we would ask. How many doors might be opened if we would but knock. The Lord wants us to seek light and truth and revelation.

And now, behold, my joy is great, even unto fulness, because of you, and also this generation; yea, and even the Father rejoiceth, and also all the holy angels, because of you and this generation; for none of them are lost.

Behold, I would that ye should understand; for I mean them who are now alive of this generation; and none of them are lost; and in them I have fulness of joy.

When else was it ever thus? In Zion of Enoch, be it answered, for the saints of that day were translated and taken up into heaven; but there has been no other time of which we have knowledge when righteousness has prevailed among so many people to the degree here manifest. And what joy is found in heaven when the righteous so live as to merit eternal life.

But behold, it sorroweth me because of the fourth generation from this generation, for they are led away captive by him even as was the son of perdition; for they will sell me for silver and for gold, and for that which moth doth corrupt and which thieves can break through and steal. And in that day will I visit them, even in turning their works upon their own heads.

When men set their hearts upon the wealth of the world and the good things of the earth in preference to the things of the Spirit, they thereby sell Christ for silver and gold and lose their own souls. Hence Jesus said:

Enter ye in at the strait gate; for strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that find it; but wide is the gate, and broad the way which leads to death, and many there be that travel therein, until the night cometh, wherein no man can work.

Again the message is primarily for us. Life or death lies before us all; obedience brings life, rebellion, death; and for the rebellious, those who have rejected the gospel in this life, the night of darkness holds no hope of salvation.

Footnotes

1981 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 76:114-19. In beginning the account of the vision of his brother Alvin in the celestial kingdom, the Prophet wrote: "The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell." (D&C 137:1.)
